algebra,  branch of mathematics in which arithmetical operations and formal manipulations are applied to abstract symbols rather than specific numbers. The notion that there exists such a distinct subdiscipline of mathematics, as well as the term algebra to denote it, resulted from a slow historical development. This article presents that history, tracing the evolution over time of the concept of the equation, number systems, symbols for conveying and manipulating mathematical statements, and the modern abstract structural view of algebra. For information on specific branches of algebra, see elementary algebra, linear algebra, and modern algebra.
Perhaps the most basic notion in mathematics is the equation, a formal statement that two sides of a mathematical expression are equal—as in the simple equation x + 3 = 5—and that both sides of the equation can be simultaneously manipulated (by adding, dividing, taking roots, and so on to both sides) in order to “solve” the equation. Yet, as simple and natural as such a notion may appear today, its acceptance first required the development of numerous mathematical ideas, each of which took time to mature. In fact, it took until the late 16th century to consolidate the modern concept of an equation as a single mathematical entity.
Three main threads in the process leading to this consolidation deserve special attention:
These three threads are traced in this section, particularly as they developed in the ancient Middle East and Greece, the Islamic era, and the European Renaissance.
The earliest extant mathematical text from Egypt is the Rhind papyrus (c. 1650 bc). It and other texts attest to the ability of the ancient Egyptians to solve linear equations in one unknown. A linear equation is a first-degree equation, or one in which all the variables are only to the first power. (In today’s notation, such an equation in one unknown would be 7x + 3x = 10.) Evidence from about 300 bc indicates that the Egyptians also knew how to solve problems involving a system of two equations in two unknown quantities, including quadratic (second-degree, or squared unknowns) equations. For example, given that the perimeter of a rectangular plot of land is 100 units and its area is 600 square units, the ancient Egyptians could solve for the field’s length l and width w. (In modern notation, they could solve the pair of simultaneous equations 2w + 2l =100 and wl = 600.) However, throughout this period there was no use of symbols—problems were stated and solved verbally. The following problem is typical:
Note that except for 2/3, for which a special symbol existed, the Egyptians expressed all fractional quantities using only unit fractions, that is, fractions bearing the numerator 1. For example, 3/4 would be written as 1/2 + 1/4.
Babylonian mathematics dates from as early as 1800 bc, as indicated by cuneiform texts preserved in clay tablets. Babylonian arithmetic was based on a well-elaborated, positional sexagesimal system—that is, a system of base 60, as opposed to the modern decimal system, which is based on units of 10. The Babylonians, however, made no consistent use of zero. A great deal of their mathematics consisted of tables, such as for multiplication, reciprocals, squares (but not cubes), and square and cube roots.
In addition to tables, many Babylonian tablets contained problems that asked for the solution of some unknown number. Such problems explained a procedure to be followed for solving a specific problem, rather than proposing a general algorithm for solving similar problems. The starting point for a problem could be relations involving specific numbers and the unknown, or its square, or systems of such relations. The number sought could be the square root of a given number, the weight of a stone, or the length of the side of a triangle. Many of the questions were phrased in terms of concrete situations—such as partitioning a field among three pairs of brothers under certain constraints. Still, their artificial character made it clear that they were constructed for didactical purposes.
