analytic geometry, also called coordinate geometry,  mathematical subject in which algebraic symbolism and methods are used to represent and solve problems in geometry. The importance of analytic geometry is that it establishes a correspondence between geometric curves and algebraic equations. This correspondence makes it possible to reformulate problems in geometry as equivalent problems in algebra, and vice versa; the methods of either subject can then be used to solve problems in the other. For example, computers create animations for display in games and films by manipulating algebraic equations.
Apollonius of Perga (c. 262–190 bc), known by his contemporaries as the “Great Geometer,” foreshadowed the development of analytic geometry by more than 1,800 years with his book Conics. He defined a conic as the intersection of a cone and a plane (see figure). Using Euclid’s results on similar triangles and on secants of circles, he found a relation satisfied by the distances from any point P of a conic to two perpendicular lines, the major axis of the conic and the tangent at an endpoint of the axis. These distances correspond to coordinates of P, and the relation between these coordinates corresponds to a quadratic equation of the conic. Apollonius used this relation to deduce fundamental properties of conics. See conic section.
Further development of coordinate systems (see figure) in mathematics emerged only after algebra had matured under Islamic and Indian mathematicians. (See mathematics: The Islamic world (8th–15th centuries) and mathematics, South Asian.) At the end of the 16th century, the French mathematician François Viète introduced the first systematic algebraic notation, using letters to represent known and unknown numerical quantities, and he developed powerful general methods for working with algebraic expressions and solving algebraic equations. With the power of algebraic notation, mathematicians were no longer completely dependent upon geometric figures and geometric intuition to solve problems. The more daring began to leave behind the standard geometric way of thinking in which linear (first power) variables corresponded to lengths, squares (second power) to areas, and cubics (third power) to volumes, with higher powers lacking “physical” interpretation. Two Frenchmen, the mathematician-philosopher René Descartes and the lawyer-mathematician Pierre de Fermat, were among the first to take this daring step.
Descartes and Fermat independently founded analytic geometry in the 1630s by adapting Viète’s algebra to the study of geometric loci. They moved decisively beyond Viète by using letters to represent distances that are variable instead of fixed. Descartes used equations to study curves defined geometrically, and he stressed the need to consider general algebraic curves—graphs of polynomial equations in x and y of all degrees. He demonstrated his method on a classical problem: finding all points P such that the product of the distances from P to certain lines equals the product of the distances to other lines. See geometry: Cartesian geometry.
Fermat emphasized that any relation between x and y coordinates determines a curve (see figure). Using this idea, he recast Apollonius’s arguments in algebraic terms and restored lost work. Fermat indicated that any quadratic equation in x and y can be put into the standard form of one of the conic sections.
Fermat did not publish his work, and Descartes deliberately made his hard to read in order to discourage “dabblers.” Their ideas gained general acceptance only through the efforts of other mathematicians in the latter half of the 17th century. In particular, the Dutch mathematician Frans van Schooten translated Descartes’s writings from French to Latin. He added vital explanatory material, as did the French lawyer Florimond de Beaune, and the Dutch mathematician Johan de Witt. In England, the mathematician John Wallis popularized analytic geometry, using equations to define conics and derive their properties. He used negative coordinates freely, although it was Isaac Newton who unequivocally used two (oblique) axes to divide the plane into four quadrants, as shown in the figure.
Analytic geometry had its greatest impact on mathematics via calculus. Without access to the power of analytic geometry, classical Greek mathematicians such as Archimedes (c. 285–212/211 bc) solved special cases of the basic problems of calculus: finding tangents and extreme points (differential calculus) and arc lengths, areas, and volumes (integral calculus). Renaissance mathematicians were led back to these problems by the needs of astronomy, optics, navigation, warfare, and commerce. They naturally sought to use the power of algebra to define and analyze a growing range of curves.
Fermat developed an algebraic algorithm for finding the tangent to an algebraic curve at a point by finding a line that has a double intersection with the curve at the point—in essence, inventing differential calculus. Descartes introduced a similar but more complicated algorithm using a circle. Fermat computed areas under the curves y = axk for all rational numbers k ≠ −1 by summing areas of inscribed and circumscribed rectangles. (See exhaustion, method of.) For the rest of the 17th century, the groundwork for calculus was continued by many mathematicians, including the Frenchman Gilles Personne de Roberval, the Italian Bonaventura Cavalieri, and the Britons James Gregory, John Wallis, and Isaac Barrow.
Newton and the German Gottfried Leibniz revolutionized mathematics at the end of the 17th century by independently demonstrating the power of calculus. Both men used coordinates to develop notations that expressed the ideas of calculus in full generality and led naturally to differentiation rules and the fundamental theorem of calculus (connecting differential and integral calculus). See analysis.
Newton demonstrated the importance of analytic methods in geometry, apart from their role in calculus, when he asserted that any cubic—or, algebraic curve of degree three—has one of four standard equations,
xy2 + ey = ax3 + bx2 + cx + d,
xy = ax3 + bx2 + cx + d,
y2 = ax3 + bx2 + cx + d,
y = ax3 + bx2 + cx + d,
 for suitable coordinate axes. The Scottish mathematician James Stirling proved this assertion in 1717, possibly with Newton’s aid. Newton divided cubics into 72 species, a total later corrected to 78.
Newton also showed how to express an algebraic curve near the origin in terms of the fractional power series y = a1x1/k + a2x2/k + … for a positive integer k. Mathematicians have since used this technique to study algebraic curves of all degrees.
