arithmetic,  branch of mathematics in which numbers, relations among numbers, and observations on numbers are studied and used to solve problems.
Arithmetic (a term derived from the Greek word arithmos, “number”) refers generally to the elementary aspects of the theory of numbers, arts of mensuration (measurement), and numerical computation (that is, the processes of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, raising to powers, and extraction of roots). Its meaning, however, has not been uniform in mathematical usage. An eminent German mathematician, Carl Friedrich Gauss, in Disquisitiones Arithmeticae (1801), and certain modern-day mathematicians have used the term to include more advanced topics. The reader interested in the latter is referred to the article number theory.
In a collection (or set) of objects (or elements), the act of determining the number of objects present is called counting. The numbers thus obtained are called the counting numbers or natural numbers (1, 2, 3, …). For an empty set, no object is present, and the count yields the number 0, which, appended to the natural numbers, produces what are known as the whole numbers.
If objects from two sets can be matched in such a way that every element from each set is uniquely paired with an element from the other set, the sets are said to be equal or equivalent. The concept of equivalent sets is basic to the foundations of modern mathematics and has been introduced into primary education, notably as part of the “new math” (see the figure) that has been alternately acclaimed and decried since it appeared in the 1960s. See set theory.
Combining two sets of objects together, which contain a and b elements, a new set is formed that contains a + b = c objects. The number c is called the sum of a and b; and each of the latter is called a summand. The operation of forming the sum is called addition, the symbol + being read as “plus.” This is the simplest binary operation, where binary refers to the process of combining two objects.
From the definition of counting it is evident that the order of the summands can be changed and the order of the operation of addition can be changed, when applied to three summands, without affecting the sum. These are called the commutative law of addition and the associative law of addition, respectively.
If there exists a natural number k such that a = b + k, it is said that a is greater than b (written a > b) and that b is less than a (written b < a). If a and b are any two natural numbers, then it is the case that either a = b or a > b or a < b (the trichotomy law).
From the above laws, it is evident that a repeated sum such as 5 + 5 + 5 is independent of the way in which the summands are grouped; it can be written 3 × 5. Thus, a second binary operation called multiplication is defined. The number 5 is called the multiplicand; the number 3, which denotes the number of summands, is called the multiplier; and the result 3 × 5 is called the product. The symbol × of this operation is read “times.” If such letters as a and b are used to denote the numbers, the product a × b is often written a∙b or simply ab.
If three rows of five dots each are written, as illustrated below,

it is clear that the total number of dots in the array is 3 × 5, or 15. This same number of dots can evidently be written in five rows of three dots each, whence 5 × 3 = 15. The argument is general, leading to the law that the order of the multiplicands does not affect the product, called the commutative law of multiplication. But it is notable that this law does not apply to all mathematical entities. Indeed, much of the mathematical formulation of modern physics, for example, depends crucially on the fact that some entities do not commute.
By the use of a three-dimensional array of dots, it becomes evident that the order of multiplication when applied to three numbers does not affect the product. Such a law is called the associative law of multiplication. If the 15 dots written above are separated into two sets, as shown,

then the first set consists of three columns of three dots each, or 3 × 3 dots; the second set consists of two columns of three dots each, or 2 × 3 dots; the sum (3 × 3) + (2 × 3) consists of 3 + 2 = 5 columns of three dots each, or (3 + 2) × 3 dots. In general, one may prove that the multiplication of a sum by a number is the same as the sum of two appropriate products. Such a law is called the distributive law.
Subtraction has not been introduced for the simple reason that it can be defined as the inverse of addition. Thus, the difference a − b of two numbers a and b is defined as a solution x of the equation b + x = a. If a number system is restricted to the natural numbers, differences need not always exist, but, if they do, the five basic laws of arithmetic, as already discussed, can be used to prove that they are unique. Furthermore, the laws of operations of addition and multiplication can be extended to apply to differences. The whole numbers (including zero) can be extended to include the solution of 1 + x = 0, that is, the number −1, as well as all products of the form −1 × n, in which n is a whole number. The extended collection of numbers is called the integers, of which the positive integers are the same as the natural numbers. The numbers that are newly introduced in this way are called negative integers.
Just as a repeated sum a + a + ⋯ + a of k summands is written ka, so a repeated product a × a × ⋯ × a of k factors is written ak. The number k is called the exponent, and a the base of the power ak.
The fundamental laws of exponents follow easily from the definitions (see the table), and other laws are immediate consequences of the fundamental ones.
