automata theory,  body of physical and logical principles underlying the operation of any electromechanical device (an automaton) that converts information from one form into another according to a definite procedure. Real or hypothetical automata of varying complexity have become indispensable tools for the investigation and implementation of systems that have structures amenable to mathematical analysis.
An example of a typical automaton is a pendulum clock. In such a mechanism the gears can assume only one of a finite number of positions, or states, with each swing of the pendulum. Each state, through the operation of the escapement, determines the next succeeding state, as well as a discrete output, which is displayed as the discrete positions of the hands of the clock. As long as such a clock is wound and its operation is not interfered with, it will continue to operate unaffected by outside influences except the effect of gravity on the pendulum.
More general automata are designed to respond to changes in external conditions or to other inputs. For example, thermostats, automatic pilots of aircraft, missile guidance systems, telephone networks, and controls of certain kinds of automatic elevators are all forms of automata.
The internal states of such devices are not determined solely by their initial state, as is the case of the pendulum clock, but may be determined by an input from a human operator, from another automaton, or by an event or series of events in the environment. A thermostat, for instance, has an “on” or “off” state that depends on the temperature. The best known general automaton is the modern electronic computer, the internal states of which are determined by the data input and which operates to produce a certain output.
The components of automata consist of specific materials and devices, such as wires, transistors, levers, relays, gears, and so forth, and their operation is based on the mechanics and electronics of these parts. The principles of their operation as a sequence of discrete states can, however, be understood independently of the nature or arrangement of their components. In this way, an automaton may be considered, abstractly, as a set of physically unspecified states, inputs, outputs, and rules of operation, and the study of automata as the investigation of what can be accomplished with these. This mode of abstraction yields mathematical systems that in certain respects resemble logical systems. Thus, an automaton can be described as a logically defined entity that can be embodied in the form of a machine, with the term automaton designating both the physical and the logical constructions.
In 1936 an English mathematician, Alan Mathison Turing, in a paper published in the Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society (“On Computable Numbers with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem”), conceived a logical machine the output of which could be used to define a computable number. For the machine, time was considered to be discrete and its internal structure, at a given moment, was described simply as one of a finite set of states. It performed its functions by scanning an unbounded tape divided into squares, each of which either contained specific information in the form of one of a finite number of symbols or was blank. It could scan only one square at a time, and, if in any internal state except one called “passive,” it was capable of moving the tape forward or backward one square at a time, erasing a symbol, printing a new symbol if the square was blank, and altering its own internal state. The number it computed was determined by symbols (the “program”) provided on a finite portion of the tape and the rules of operation, which included stopping when the passive state was reached. The output number was then interpreted from the symbols remaining on the tape after the machine stopped.
Automata theory since the middle of the 20th century has been extensively refined and has often found practical application in civilian and military machines. The memory banks of modern computers can store large (though finite) amounts of information. (For further information on computers and their applications, see information processing.) The original Turing machine had no limit to the memory bank because each square on the unbounded tape could hold information. The Turing machine continues to be a standard reference point in basic discussions of automata theory, and many mathematical theorems concerning computability have been proved within the framework of Turing’s original proposal.
