Carl Jacobi, in full Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi,  (born December 10, 1804, Potsdam, Prussia [Germany]—died February 18, 1851, Berlin), German mathematician who, with Niels Henrik Abel of Norway, founded the theory of elliptic functions.
Jacobi was first tutored by an uncle, and, by the end of his first year at the Gymnasium (1816–17), he was ready to enter the University of Berlin. Because the university would not accept students younger than 16, he had to bide his time until 1821, yet, at the end of the 1823–24 academic year, he was qualified to teach mathematics, Greek, and Latin. With the submission of his doctoral dissertation and his conversion to Christianity, a position opened for him at the University of Berlin in 1825. The following year Jacobi became a professor of mathematics at the University of Königsberg. In 1844, for health reasons, he moved to Berlin, where he gave occasional lectures at the university. During the revolutionary upheavals of 1848, an injudicious speech cost Jacobi his stipend, though the University of Berlin eventually gave him a position. In 1851 Jacobi succumbed to influenza and smallpox.
Jacobi first became known through his work on elliptic functions, which gained the admiration of the Frenchman Adrien-Marie Legendre, one of the leading mathematicians of his day. Unaware of similar endeavours by the Norwegian mathematician Niels Henrik Abel, Jacobi formulated a theory of elliptic functions based on four theta functions. The quotients of the theta functions yield the three Jacobian elliptic functions: sn z, cn z, and dn z. His results in elliptic functions were published in Fundamenta Nova Theoriae Functionum Ellipticarum (1829; “New Foundations of the Theory of Elliptic Functions”). In 1832 he demonstrated that, just as elliptic functions can be obtained by inverting elliptic integrals, so too can hyperelliptic functions be obtained by inverting hyperelliptic integrals. This success led him to the formation of the theory of Abelian functions, which are complex functions of several variables.
Jacobi’s De Formatione et Proprietatibus Determinantium (1841; “Concerning the Structure and Properties of Determinants”) made pioneering contributions to the theory of determinants. He invented the functional determinant (formed from the n2 differential coefficients of n given functions with n independent variables) that bears his name and has played an important part in many analytic investigations.
Jacobi carried out important research in partial differential equations of the first order and applied them to the differential equations of dynamics. His Vorlesungenüber Dynamik (1866; “Lectures on Dynamics”) relates his work with differential equations and dynamics. The Hamilton-Jacobi equation now plays a significant role in the presentation of quantum mechanics.
