Colin Maclaurin,  (born February 1698, Kilmodan, Argyllshire, Scotland—died June 14, 1746, Edinburgh), Scottish mathematician who developed and extended Sir Isaac Newton’s work in calculus, geometry, and gravitation.
A child prodigy, he entered the University of Glasgow at age 11. At the age of 19 he was elected a professor of mathematics at Marischal College, Aberdeen, and two years later he became a fellow of the Royal Society of London. At this time he became acquainted with Newton. In his first work, Geometrica Organica; Sive Descriptio Linearum Curvarum Universalis (1720; “Organic Geometry, with the Description of the Universal Linear Curves”), Maclaurin developed several theorems similar to some in Newton’s Principia, introduced the method of generating conic sections (the circle, ellipse, hyperbola, and parabola) that bears his name, and showed that certain types of curves (of the third and fourth degree) can be described by the intersection of two movable angles.
On the recommendation of Newton, he was made a professor of mathematics at the University of Edinburgh in 1725. In 1740 he shared, with the Swiss mathematicians Leonhard Euler and Daniel Bernoulli, the prize offered by the French Academy of Sciences for an essay on tides.
His two-volume Treatise of Fluxions (1742), a defense of the Newtonian method, was written in reply to criticisms by Bishop George Berkeley of England that Newton’s calculus was based on faulty reasoning. Apart from providing a geometric framework for Newton’s method of fluxions, the treatise is notable on several counts. It contains solutions to a number of geometric problems, shows that stable figures for a homogeneous rotating fluid mass are the ellipsoids of revolution, and gives for the first time the correct theory for distinguishing between maxima and minima in general (see calculus of variations), pointing out the importance of the distinction in the theory of the multiple points of curves. It also contains a detailed discussion of infinite series, including the special case of Taylor series now named in his honour.
In 1745, when Jacobites (supporters of the Stuart king James II and his descendants) were marching on Edinburgh, Maclaurin took a prominent part in preparing trenches and barricades for the city’s defense. As soon as the rebel army captured Edinburgh, Maclaurin fled to England until it was safe to return. The ordeal of his escape ruined his health, and he died at age 48.
Maclaurin’s Account of Sir Isaac Newton’s Philosophical Discoveries was published posthumously, as was his Treatise of Algebra (1748). “De Linearum Geometricarum Proprietatibus Generalibus Tractatus” (“A Tract on the General Properties of Geometrical Lines”), noted for its elegant geometric demonstrations, was appended to his Algebra.
