Dana Scott, in full Dana Stewart Scott,  (born October 11, 1932, Berkeley, California, U.S.), American mathematician, logician, and computer scientist who was cowinner of the 1976 A.M. Turing Award, the highest honour in computer science. Scott and the Israeli American mathematician and computer scientist Michael O. Rabin were cited in the award for their early joint paper “Finite Automata and Their Decision Problem,” which introduced the idea of nondeterministic machines to the field of automata theory, and for their subsequent independent work.
Scott earned a bachelor’s degree (1954) in mathematics from the University of California, Berkeley, and a doctorate (1958) in mathematics from Princeton University. He began his academic career at the University of Chicago (1958–60), followed by the University of California, Berkeley (1960–63), Stanford University (1963–69), Princeton University (1969–72), and the University of Oxford (1972–81). In 1981 he joined the faculty at Carnegie Mellon University, where he became Hillman University Professor of Mathematical Logic, Computer Science, and Philosophy the following year. Scott retired as professor emeritus in 2003.
Scott’s last position, at Carnegie Mellon, gives some inkling of the remarkable diversity of his academic interests. In addition to contributing his seminal work on automata theory, Scott collaborated in the 1970s with the British computer scientist Christopher Strachey to lay the foundations of the mathematical (or denotational) semantics of computer programming languages. The outgrowth of that work led to Scott’s introduction of domain theory, providing, in particular, mathematical models for the λ-calculus, or lambda calculus (a formal mathematical-logical system invented in 1936 by the American logician Alonzo Church), and many other related theories. Scott was the first editor in chief of Logical Methods in Computer Science, an online open-access journal founded in 2005.
Scott was elected to the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and the U.S. National Academy of Sciences. His awards include the 1972 LeRoy P. Steele Prize from the American Mathematical Society, the 1997 Rolf Shock Prize in Logic and Philosophy from the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, and the 2009 Gold Medal from the Russian Academy of Sciences.
