Differential geometry,  branch of mathematics that studies the geometry of curves, surfaces, and manifolds (the higher-dimensional analogs of surfaces). The discipline owes its name to its use of ideas and techniques from differential calculus, though the modern subject often uses algebraic and purely geometric techniques instead. Although basic definitions, notations, and analytic descriptions vary widely, the following geometric questions prevail: How does one measure the curvature of a curve within a surface (intrinsic) versus within the encompassing space (extrinsic)? How can the curvature of a surface be measured? What is the shortest path within a surface between two points on the surface? How is the shortest path on a surface related to the concept of a straight line?
While curves had been studied since antiquity, the discovery of calculus in the 17th century opened up the study of more complicated plane curves—such as those produced by the French mathematician René Descartes (1596–1650) with his “compass” (see History of geometry: Cartesian geometry). In particular, integral calculus led to general solutions of the ancient problems of finding the arc length of plane curves and the area of plane figures. This in turn opened the stage to the investigation of curves and surfaces in space—an investigation that was the start of differential geometry.
Some of the fundamental ideas of differential geometry can be illustrated by the strake, a spiraling strip often designed by engineers to give structural support to large metal cylinders such as smokestacks. A strake can be formed by cutting an annular strip (the region between two concentric circles) from a flat sheet of steel and then bending it into a helix that spirals around the cylinder, as illustrated in the figure. What should the radius r of the annulus be to produce the best fit? Differential geometry supplies the solution to this problem by defining a precise measurement for the curvature of a curve; then r can be adjusted until the curvature of the inside edge of the annulus matches the curvature of the helix.
An important question remains: Can the annular strip be bent, without stretching, so that it forms a strake around the cylinder? In particular, this means that distances measured along the surface (intrinsic) are unchanged. Two surfaces are said to be isometric if one can be bent (or transformed) into the other without changing intrinsic distances. (For example, because a sheet of paper can be rolled into a tube without stretching, the sheet and tube are “locally” isometric—only locally because new, and possibly shorter, routes are created by connecting the two edges of the paper.) Thus, the second question becomes: Are the annular strip and the strake isometric? To answer this and similar questions, differential geometry developed the notion of the curvature of a surface.
Although mathematicians from antiquity had described some curves as curving more than others and straight lines as not curving at all, it was the German mathematician Gottfried Leibniz who, in 1686, first defined the curvature of a curve at each point in terms of the circle that best approximates the curve at that point. Leibniz named his approximating circle (as shown in the figure) the osculating circle, from the Latin osculare (“to kiss”). He then defined the curvature of the curve (and the circle) as 1/r, where r is the radius of the osculating circle. As a curve becomes straighter, a circle with a larger radius must be used to approximate it, and so the resulting curvature decreases. In the limit, a straight line is said to be equivalent to a circle of infinite radius and its curvature defined as zero everywhere. The only curves in ordinary Euclidean space with constant curvature are straight lines, circles, and helices. In practice, curvature is found with a formula that gives the rate of change, or derivative, of the tangent to the curve as one moves along the curve. This formula was discovered by Isaac Newton and Leibniz for plane curves in the 17th century and by the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler for curves in space in the 18th century. (Note that the derivative of the tangent to the curve is not the same as the second derivative studied in calculus, which is the rate of change of the tangent to the curve as one moves along the x-axis.)
With these definitions in place, it is now possible to compute the ideal inner radius r of the annular strip that goes into making the strake shown in the figure. The annular strip’s inner curvature 1/r must equal the curvature of the helix on the cylinder. If R is the radius of the cylinder and H is the height of one turn of the helix, then the curvature of the helix is 4π2R/[H2 + (2πR)2]. For example, if R = 1 metre and H = 10 metres, then r = 3.533 metres.
