Enrico Bombieri,  (born November 26, 1940, Milan, Italy), Italian mathematician who was awarded the Fields Medal in 1974 for his work in number theory. Between 1979 and 1982 Bombieri served on the executive committee of the International Mathematical Union.
Bombieri received a Ph.D. from the University of Milan in 1963. He held appointments at the University of Pisa (1966–74) and the Scuola Normale Superiore in Pisa (1974–77), and from 1984 to 2011 he was the IBM von Neumann Professor at the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey, U.S.
Bombieri was awarded the Fields Medal at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, in 1974. His work leading up to the Fields Medal spanned a wide range of mathematical fields. One of his most notable achievements was his theorem on the distribution of primes in arithmetical progressions. This work has its origin in Christian Goldbach’s famous conjecture (1742), as yet unproved, that every even integer greater than four can be written as the sum of two odd primes. The Russian mathematician Ivan Vinogradov proved in 1937 that every sufficiently large odd integer is a sum of three primes; the Chinese mathematician Jing Run Chen showed in 1967 that every sufficiently large even integer is a sum of a prime and an integer with at most two prime factors. Bombieri extended this and other work by developing a density theorem that allowed him to prove results on primes in arithmetical progressions and to treat problems like those listed above, where earlier proofs had required the assumption of the extended Riemann hypothesis or other powerful means from analytic number theory. In addition, Bombieri’s interests included quasi-crystal tilings, meromorphic maps, the theory of univalent functions, the theory of partial differential equations, algebraic geometry, minimal surfaces, combinatorics, and complexity theory. He showed that the theory of minimal surfaces is dramatically different for dimensions greater than seven, with profound implications for the theory of partial differential equations.
Bombieri’s publications included Geometric Measure Theory and Minimal Surfaces (1973), Le Grand Crible dans la théorie analytique des nombres (1974; “The Large Sieve in Analytic Number Theory”), Seminar on Minimal Submanifolds (1983), An Introduction to Minimal Currents and Parametric Variational Problems (1985), and Number Theory, Trace Formulas, and Discrete Groups (1989).
In addition to the Fields Medal, Bombieri received various other awards, including the Crafoord Prize (2020).
