Four-colour map problem,  problem in topology, originally posed in the early 1850s and not solved until 1976, that required finding the minimum number of different colours required to colour a map such that no two adjacent regions (i.e., with a common boundary segment) are of the same colour. Three colours are not enough, since one can draw a map of four regions with each region contacting the three other regions. It had been proved mathematically by the English attorney Alfred Bray Kempe in 1879 that five colours will always suffice; and no map had ever been found on which four colours would not do. As is often the case in mathematics, consideration of the problem provided the impetus for the discovery of related results in topology and combinatorics. A similar problem had been solved for the seemingly more complicated situation of a map drawn on a torus (doughnut-shaped surface), where seven colours were known to be the minimum.
The four-colour problem was solved in 1977 by a group of mathematicians at the University of Illinois, directed by Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken, after four years of unprecedented synthesis of computer search and theoretical reasoning. Appel and Haken created a catalog of 1,936 “unavoidable” configurations, at least one of which must be present in any graph, no matter how large. Then they showed how each of these configurations could be reduced to a smaller one so that, if the smaller one could be coloured with four colours, so could the original catalog configuration. Thus, if there were a map that could not be coloured with four colours, they could use their catalog to find a smaller map that also could not be four-coloured, and then a smaller one still, and so on. Eventually this reduction process would lead to a map with only three or four regions that, supposedly, could not be coloured with four colours. This absurd result, which is derived from the hypothesis that a map requiring more than four colours might exist, leads to the conclusion that no such map can exist. All maps are in fact four-colourable.
The strategy involved in this proof dates back to the 1879 paper of Kempe, who produced a short list of unavoidable configurations and then showed how to reduce each to a smaller case. Appel and Haken replaced Kempe’s brief list with their catalog of 1,936 cases, each involving up to 500,000 logical options for full analysis. Their complete proof, itself several hundred pages long, required more than 1,000 hours of computer calculations.
The fact that the proof of the four-colour problem had a substantial component that relied on a computer and that could not be verified by hand led to a considerable debate among mathematicians about whether the theorem should be considered “proved” in the usual sense. In 1997 other mathematicians reduced the number of unavoidable configurations to 633 and made some simplifications in the argument, without, however, completely eliminating the computer portion of the proof. There remains some hope for an eventual “computer-free” proof.
