Fredrik Størmer, in full Fredrik Carl Mülertz Størmer,  (born September 3, 1874, Skien, Norway—died August 13, 1957, Oslo), Norwegian geophysicist and mathematician who developed a mathematical theory of auroral phenomena.
Professor of pure mathematics at the University of Christiania (Oslo, after 1924) from 1903 to 1946, Størmer began his mathematical work with studies of series, function theory, and number theory. He produced a number of papers on pure mathematics, and many of his results are of considerable importance. In 1895 he demonstrated that there are only four nontrivial solutions for the equation m tan−1(1/x) + n tan-1(1/y) = kπ/4, in which m, n, k, x, and y are integers.
In 1903 Størmer became interested in Kristian Birkeland’s experiments with the aurora-like effect obtained by bombarding a magnetized sphere with electrons. Taking as his starting point the work of Henri Poincaré of France on the equations of motion of a charged particle in the region of a single magnetic pole, Størmer pursued a theoretical study of Birkeland’s experiments. He published the first of a series of papers on his findings in 1904. He continued his research and publication of the theory of auroral phenomena until 1950. In addition to providing valuable contributions to the formation of an explanation of auroras, his work found important application to the study of cosmic rays and their behaviour in the vicinity of Earth.
In 1909 Størmer initiated a program of auroral observation to gather data that could be compared with his theoretical findings. By using two or more well-separated sites connected by telephone, simultaneous photographs made it possible to measure accurately the position and form of auroras in the atmosphere. He later organized a permanent network of stations in Norway for the study of auroras and special types of clouds.
Størmer’s The Polar Aurora (1955) is a valuable account of his theoretical studies and observations. He was elected a foreign member of the Royal Society of London in 1951.
