Graph,   pictorial representation of statistical data or of a functional relationship between variables. Graphs have the advantage of showing general tendencies in the quantitative behaviour of data, and therefore serve a predictive function. As mere approximations, however, they can be inaccurate and sometimes misleading.
Most graphs employ two axes, in which the horizontal axis represents a group of independent variables, and the vertical axis represents a group of dependent variables. The most common graph is a broken-line graph, where the independent variable is usually a factor of time. Data points are plotted on such a grid and then connected with line segments to give an approximate curve of, for example, seasonal fluctuations in sales trends. Data points need not be connected in a broken line, however. Instead they may be simply clustered around a median line or curve, as is often the case in experimental physics or chemistry.
If the independent variable is not expressly temporal, a bar graph may be used to show discrete numerical quantities in relation to each other. To illustrate the relative populations of various nations, for example, a series of parallel columns, or bars, may be used. The length of each bar would be proportional to the size of the population of the respective country it represents. Thus, a demographer could see at a glance that China’s population is about 30 percent larger than its closest rival, India.
This same information may be expressed in a part-to-whole relationship by using a circular graph, in which a circle is divided into sections, and where the size, or angle, of each sector is directly proportional to the percentage of the whole it represents. Such a graph would show the same relative population sizes as the bar graph, but it would also illustrate that approximately one-fourth of the world’s population resides in China. This type of graph, also known as a pie chart, is most commonly used to show the breakdown of items in a budget.
In analytic geometry, graphs are used to map out functions of two variables on a Cartesian coordinate system, which is composed of a horizontal x-axis, or abscissa, and a vertical y-axis, or ordinate. Each axis is a real number line, and their intersection at the zero point of each is called the origin. A graph in this sense is the locus of all points (x,y) that satisfy a particular function.
The easiest functions to graph are linear, or first-degree, equations, the simplest of which is y = x. The graph of this equation is a straight line that traverses the lower left and upper right quadrants of the graph, passing through the origin at a 45-degree angle. Such regularly-shaped curves as parabolas, hyperbolas, circles, and ellipses are graphs of second-degree equations. These and other nonlinear functions are sometimes graphed on a logarithmic grid, where a point on an axis is not the variable itself but the logarithm of that variable. Thus, a parabola with Cartesian coordinates may become a straight line with logarithmic coordinates.
In certain cases, polar coordinates (q.v.) provide a more appropriate graphic system, whereby a series of concentric circles with straight lines through their common centre, or origin, serves to locate points on a circular plane. Both Cartesian and polar coordinates may be expanded to represent three dimensions by introducing a third variable into the respective algebraic or trigonometric functions. The inclusion of three axes results in an isometric graph for solid bodies in the former case and a graph with spherical coordinates for curved surfaces in the latter.
