Grigori Perelman,  (born 1966, U.S.S.R.), Russian mathematician who was awarded—and declined—the Fields Medal in 2006 for his work on the Poincaré conjecture and Fields medalist William Thurston’s geometrization conjecture. In 2003 Perelman had left academia and apparently had abandoned mathematics. He was the first mathematician ever to decline the Fields Medal.
Perelman earned a doctorate from St. Petersburg State University and then spent much of the 1990s in the United States, including at the University of California, Berkeley. He was still listed as a researcher at the Steklov Institute of Mathematics, St. Petersburg University, until Jan. 1, 2006.
In the 1980s Thurston won a Fields Medal for his efforts to extend the geometric classification of two-dimensional manifolds to three dimensions. Thurston’s geometrization conjecture claimed that in three dimensions there are only eight possible geometries, although a three-dimensional manifold may be made up of several regions, each with a different geometry. The conjecture implied that, in the particular case of three-dimensional manifolds modeled on the three-dimensional sphere, the Poincaré conjecture is true. In 2000 the Clay Mathematics Institute (CMI) was formed to stimulate mathematical research by offering $1 million prizes for the solution of important problems in mathematics, and the Poincaré conjecture was one of the initial seven Millennium Problems designated by CMI.
In 1982 the American mathematician Richard Hamilton took up the idea of studying how a manifold develops as its curvature is smoothed out, using what is known as a Ricci flow (after the Italian mathematician Gregorio Ricci-Curbastro). Much was achieved, but Hamilton reached an impasse when he could not show that the manifold would not snap into pieces under the flow. Perelman’s decisive contribution was to show that the Ricci flow did what was intended and that the impasse reflected the way a three-dimensional manifold is made up of pieces with different geometries. In a series of three difficult papers, published on the Internet in 2002, Perelman announced proofs of the Poincaré conjecture and the geometrization conjecture. By 2006 the consensus among mathematicians was that Perelman had resolved the Poincaré conjecture in the affirmative and likely the geometrization conjecture too. It is generally believed that the techniques he introduced will have a profound influence on other branches of geometry and analysis. In 2010 CMI offered Perelman the million-dollar reward for proving the Poincaré conjecture. As he had done with the Fields Medal, Perelman refused the prize.
