Henri-Léon Lebesgue,  (born June 28, 1875, Beauvais, France—died July 26, 1941, Paris), French mathematician whose generalization of the Riemann integral revolutionized the field of integration.
Lebesgue was maître de conférences (lecture master) at the University of Rennes from 1902 until 1906, when he went to Poitiers, first as chargé de cours (assistant lecturer) of the faculty of sciences and later as professor. In 1910 he went to the Sorbonne in Paris as maître de conférences in mathematical analysis, and in 1921 he became a professor at the Collège de France. In 1917 he was awarded the Prix Saintour, and in 1922 he was elected to the French Academy of Sciences. He was made an honorary member of the London Mathematical Society in 1924 and a foreign member of the Royal Society of London in 1930.
One of the greatest mathematicians of his day, Lebesgue made an important contribution to topology with his covering theorem (which helps define the dimension of a set). He also worked on Fourier series and potential theory, but his main work was on integration theory.
Toward the close of the 19th century, mathematical analysis was limited effectively to continuous functions, and artificial restrictions were necessary to cope with discontinuities that cropped up with greater frequency as more exotic functions were encountered. The Riemann method of integration was applicable only to continuous and a few discontinuous functions. Influenced by the work of Émile Borel, Camille Jordan, and others, Lebesgue formulated a new theory of measure and framed a new definition of the definite integral, which he presented in his doctoral thesis at the Sorbonne in 1902. The Lebesgue integral is one of the great achievements of modern real analysis, and Lebesgue integration was instrumental in greatly expanding the scope of Fourier analysis.
In addition to about 50 papers, Lebesgue wrote two major books, Leçons sur l’intégration et la recherche des fonctions primitives (1904; “Lessons on Integration and Analysis of Primitive Functions”) and Leçons sur les séries trigonométriques (1906; “Lessons on the Trigonometric Series”).
