Homomorphism,  (from Greek homoios morphe, “similar form”), a special correspondence between the members (elements) of two algebraic systems, such as two groups, two rings, or two fields. Two homomorphic systems have the same basic structure, and, while their elements and operations may appear entirely different, results on one system often apply as well to the other system. Thus, if a new system can be shown to be homomorphic to a known system, certain known features of one can be applied to the other, thereby simplifying the analysis of the new system.
In a homomorphism, corresponding elements of two systems behave very similarly in combination with other corresponding elements. For example, let G and H be groups. The elements of G are denoted g, g′,…, and they are subject to some operation ⊕. (Although the symbol may be thought of as some operation like multiplication, the symbol can just as well indicate rotation or some other nonarithmetic operation.) Similarly, the elements of H are denoted by h, h′,…, and they are subject to some operation ⊗. A homomorphism from G to H is a correspondence g → h between all elements of G and some elements of H that has the following property: if g → h and g′ → h′, then g ⊕ g′ → h ⊗ h′. In other words, the element of H corresponding to a product of elements in G is the product, in the same order, of the elements of H corresponding to the two elements in G. Expressed more compactly, the “image” of the product is the product of the images, or the correspondence preserves the operation.
A correspondence between members of two algebraic systems may be written as a function f from G to H, and one speaks of f as “mapping” G to H. The condition that f be a homomorphism of the group G to the group H may be expressed as the requirement that f(g ⊕ g′) = f(g) ⊗ f(g′).
Homomorphisms impose conditions on a mapping f: if e is the identity of G, then g ⊕ e = g, so f(g ⊕ e) = f(g). Furthermore, since f is a homomorphism, f(g ⊕ e) = f(g) ⊗ f(e), so f(g) = f(g) ⊗ f(e). By the cancellation laws for groups, this implies that f(e) is equal to the identity in H. Thus, homomorphisms map the unique identity element of one group to the unique identity element of the other group. Similarly, homomorphisms map the inverse of an element g in one group to the inverse of the element f(g). This is why homomorphisms are called structure-preserving maps.
Special types of homomorphisms have their own names. A one-to-one homomorphism from G to H is called a monomorphism, and a homomorphism that is “onto,” or covers every element of H, is called an epimorphism. An especially important homomorphism is an isomorphism, in which the homomorphism from G to H is both one-to-one and onto. In this last case, G and H are essentially the same system and differ only in the names of their elements. Thus, homomorphisms are useful in classifying and enumerating algebraic systems since they allow one to identify how closely different systems are related.
