Isaac Barrow,  (born October 1630, London, England—died May 4, 1677, London), English classical scholar, theologian, and mathematician who was the teacher of Isaac Newton. He developed a method of determining tangents that closely approached the methods of calculus, and he first recognized that what became known as the processes of integration and differentiation in calculus are inverse operations.
Barrow entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1643. There he distinguished himself as a classical scholar as well as a mathematician, earning his bachelor’s degree in 1648. He was elected a fellow of the college in 1649 and received his master’s degree in 1652. Such precociousness helped to shield him from Puritan rule, for Barrow was an outspoken Royalist and Anglican. By the mid-1650s he contemplated the publication of a full and accurate Latin edition of the Greek mathematicians, yet in a concise manner that utilized symbols for brevity. However, only Euclid’s Elements and Data appeared in 1656 and 1657, respectively, while other texts that Barrow prepared at the time—by Archimedes, Apollonius of Perga, and Theodosius of Bythnia—were not published until 1675. Barrow embarked on a European tour before the Elements was published, as the political climate in England deteriorated and the Regius professorship of Greek at the University of Oxford, to which he had been elected, was given to another. He spent four years in France, Italy, and Constantinople, returning to England with the restoration of the Stuart monarchy in 1660. On his return to England, Barrow was ordained in the Anglican Church and appointed to a Greek professorship at Cambridge. In 1662 he was also elected professor of geometry, but he resigned both positions after his election as Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge in 1663.
Barrow was instrumental in institutionalizing the study of mathematics at Cambridge. From 1664 to 1666, he delivered a set of mathematical lectures—predominantly on the foundations of mathematics—that were published posthumously as Lectiones mathematicae (1683). These lectures treated such basic concepts as number, magnitude, and proportion; delved into the relationship between the various branches of mathematics; and considered the relation between mathematics and natural philosophy—most notably the concept of space. Barrow followed these with a series of lectures on geometry, Lectiones geometricae (1669), that were far more technical and novel. In investigating the generation of curves by motion, Barrow recognized the inverse relationship between integration and differentiation and came close to enunciating the fundamental theorem of calculus. His last series of lectures, on optics, Lectiones opticae (1670), built on the work of Johannes Kepler (1571–1630), René Descartes (1596–1650), and Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679), among others. In these lectures Barrow made major contributions to determining image location after reflection or refraction; opened new vistas for the study of astigmatism and caustics (a collection of rays that, emanating from a single point, are reflected or refracted by a curved surface); and made suggestions toward a theory of light and colours.
Barrow’s tenure as mathematics professor coincided with the maturation of Newton’s mathematical studies, and scholars often debate the exact nature of their relationship. Barrow was not Newton’s official tutor, though they were both members of Trinity College. Newton attended Barrow’s lectures, and it is clear that Barrow encouraged and furthered Newton’s studies. Fully cognizant of the young man’s talents, Barrow resigned his professorship in 1669 in Newton’s favour and accepted a position as royal chaplain in London. In 1673 Barrow was appointed master of Trinity College by King Charles II.
Although Barrow was regarded by his mathematical contemporaries in England as second only to Newton, he was more widely esteemed for his sermons and other writings on behalf of the Church of England, and these were often reprinted well into the 19th century.
