Isoperimetric problem,  in mathematics, the determination of the shape of the closed plane curve having a given length and enclosing the maximum area. (In the absence of any restriction on shape, the curve is a circle.) The calculus of variations evolved from attempts to solve this problem and the brachistochrone (“least-time”) problem.
In 1638 the Italian mathematician and astronomer Galileo Galilei first considered the brachistochrone problem, although his solution was flawed. With the discovery of calculus, a new approach to the solution became available, and the Swiss mathematician Johann Bernoulli issued a challenge in 1696 to mathematicians. Isoperimetrics was made the subject of an investigation in the 1690s by Johann and his older brother Jakob Bernoulli, who found and classified many curves having maximum or minimum properties. A major step in generalization was taken by the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler, who published the rule (1744) later known as Euler’s differential equation, useful in the determination of a minimizing arc between two points on a curve having continuous second derivatives and second partial derivatives. His work was soon supplemented by that of the French mathematicians Joseph-Louis Lagrange and Adrien-Marie Legendre, among others.
Techniques of the calculus of variations are frequently applied in seeking a particular arc from some given class for which some parameter (length or other quantity dependent upon the entire arc) is minimal or maximal. Surfaces or functions of several variables may be involved. A problem in three-dimensional Euclidean space (that of finding a surface of minimal area having a given boundary) has received much attention and is called the Plateau problem. As a physical example, consider the shapes of soap bubbles and raindrops, which are determined by the surface tension and cohesive forces tending to maintain the fixed volume while decreasing the area to a minimum. Other examples may be found in mechanics, electricity, relativity, and thermodynamics.
