James Gregory, also spelled James Gregorie,  (born November 1638, Drumoak [near Aberdeen], Scotland—died October 1675, Edinburgh), Scottish mathematician and astronomer who discovered infinite series representations for a number of trigonometry functions, although he is mostly remembered for his description of the first practical reflecting telescope, now known as the Gregorian telescope.
The son of an Anglican priest, Gregory received his early education from his mother. After his father’s death in 1650, he was sent to Aberdeen, first to grammar school and then to Marischal College, graduating from the latter in 1657. (This Protestant college was combined with the Roman Catholic King’s College in 1860 to form the University of Aberdeen.)
Following graduation, Gregory traveled to London where he published Optica Promota (1663; “The Advance of Optics”). This work analyzed the refractive and reflective properties of lens and mirrors based on various conic sections and substantially developed Johannes Kepler’s theory of the telescope. In the epilogue, Gregory proposed a new telescope design with a secondary mirror in the shape of a concave ellipsoid that would collect the reflection from a primary parabolic mirror and refocus the image back through a small hole in the centre of the primary mirror to an eyepiece. In this work Gregory also introduced estimation of stellar distances by photometric methods.
In 1663 Gregory visited The Hague and Paris before settling in Padua, Italy, to study geometry, mechanics, and astronomy. While in Italy he wrote Vera Circuli et Hyperbolae Quadratura (1667; “The True Squaring of the Circle and of the Hyperbola”) and Geometriae Pars Universalis (1668; “The Universal Part of Geometry”). In the former work he used a modification of the method of exhaustion of Archimedes (287–212/211 bce) to find the areas of the circle and sections of the hyperbola. In his construction of an infinite sequence of inscribed and circumscribed geometric figures, Gregory was one of the first to distinguish between convergent and divergent infinite series. In the latter work Gregory collected the main results then known about transforming a very general class of curves into sections of known curves (hence the designation “universal”), finding the areas bounded by such curves, and calculating the volumes of their solids of revolution.
On the strength of his Italian treatises, Gregory was elected to the Royal Society on his return to London in 1668 and appointed to the University of St. Andrews, Scotland. In 1669, shortly after his return to Scotland, he married a young widow and started his own family. He visited London only once again, in 1673, to purchase supplies for what would have been Britain’s first public astronomical observatory. In 1674, however, he became dissatisfied with the University of St. Andrews and left for the University of Edinburgh.
Although Gregory did not publish any more mathematical papers after his return to Scotland, his mathematical research continued. In 1670 and 1671 he communicated to the English mathematician John Collins a number of important results on infinite series expansions of various trigonometry functions, including what is now known as Gregory’s series for the arctangent function:
arctan x = x − x3/3 +  x5/5 − x7/7 + …
  Knowing that the arctangent of 1 is equal to π/4 led to the immediate substitution of 1 for x in this equation to produce the first infinite series expansion for π. Unfortunately, this series converges too slowly to π for the practical generation of digits in its decimal expansion. Nevertheless, it encouraged the discovery of other, more rapidly convergent infinite series for π.
The extent of Gregory’s work has only been known and appreciated since the publication of James Gregory: Tercentenary Memorial Volume (ed. by H.W. Turnbull; 1939), which contains most of his letters and posthumous manuscripts.
