János Bolyai,  (born December 15, 1802, Kolozsvár, Hungary [now Cluj, Romania]—died January 27, 1860, Marosvásárhely, Hungary [now Târgu Mureş, Romania]), Hungarian mathematician and one of the founders of non-Euclidean geometry— a geometry that differs from Euclidean geometry in its definition of parallel lines. The discovery of a consistent alternative geometry that might correspond to the structure of the universe helped to free mathematicians to study abstract concepts irrespective of any possible connection with the physical world.
By the age of 13, Bolyai had mastered calculus and analytic mechanics under the tutelage of his father, the mathematician Farkas Bolyai. He also became an accomplished violinist at an early age and later was renowned as a superb swordsman. He studied at the Royal Engineering College in Vienna (1818–22) and served in the army engineering corps (1822–33).
The elder Bolyai’s preoccupation with proving Euclid’s parallel axiom infected his son, and, despite his father’s warnings, János persisted in his own search for a solution. In the early 1820s he concluded that a proof was probably impossible and began developing a geometry that did not depend on Euclid’s axiom. In 1831 he published “Appendix Scientiam Spatii Absolute Veram Exhibens” (“Appendix Explaining the Absolutely True Science of Space”), a complete and consistent system of non-Euclidean geometry as an appendix to his father’s book on geometry, Tentamen Juventutem Studiosam in Elementa Matheseos Purae Introducendi (1832; “An Attempt to Introduce Studious Youth to the Elements of Pure Mathematics”).
A copy of this work was sent to Carl Friedrich Gauss in Germany, who replied that he had discovered the main results some years before. This was a profound blow to Bolyai, even though Gauss had no claim to priority since he had never published his findings. Bolyai’s essay went unnoticed by other mathematicians. In 1848 he discovered that Nikolay Ivanovich Lobachevsky had published an account of virtually the same geometry in 1829.
Although Bolyai continued his mathematical studies, the importance of his work was unrecognized in his lifetime. In addition to work on his non-Euclidean geometry, he developed a geometric concept of complex numbers as ordered pairs of real numbers.
