Jesse Douglas,  (born July 3, 1897, New York, New York, U.S.—died October 7, 1965, New York), American mathematician who was awarded one of the first two Fields Medals in 1936 for solving the Plateau problem.
Douglas attended City College of New York and Columbia University (Ph.D., 1920). He remained at Columbia until 1926, when he was awarded a National Research Fellowship. He subsequently held appointments at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1930–36) and the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey. In 1942 he returned to New York, where he taught at Columbia (1942–54) and City College (1955–65).
Douglas was awarded one of the first two Fields Medals at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Oslo, Norway, in 1936 for work on the celebrated Plateau problem, which had first been posed by the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler and the French mathematician Joseph-Louis Lagrange in 1760. The Plateau problem is one of finding the surface with minimal area determined by a fixed boundary. Experiments (1849) by the Belgian physicist Joseph Plateau demonstrated that the minimal surface can be obtained by immersing a wire frame, representing the boundaries, into soapy water. Although mathematical solutions for specific boundaries had been obtained through the years, it was not until 1931 that Douglas (and independently the Hungarian American mathematician Tibor Radó) first proved the existence of a minimal solution for any given “simple” boundary. Furthermore, Douglas showed that the general problem of mathematically finding the surfaces could be solved by refining the classical calculus of variations. He also contributed to the study of surfaces formed by several distinct boundary curves and to more complicated types of topological surfaces.
Douglas later developed an interest in group theory, where in 1951 he made important contributions to the determination of finite groups based on two generators, a and b, with the property that every element in the group can be expressed as a combination of the generators in the form akbl, where k and l are integers. Douglas’s publications include Modern Theories of Integration (1941).
