Johann Bernoulli,  (born August 6 [July 27, Old Style], 1667, Basel, Switzerland—died January 1, 1748, Basel), major member of the Bernoulli family of Swiss mathematicians. He investigated the then new mathematical calculus, which he applied to the measurement of curves, to differential equations, and to mechanical problems.
The son of a pharmacist, Johann studied medicine and obtained a doctor’s degree in Basel in 1694, with a thesis on muscular contraction. However, he turned to mathematics despite his father’s opposition. In 1691–92 he wrote two texts, not published until later, on differential and integral calculus. In 1692 he taught calculus to the mathematician Guillaume-François-Antoine, marquis de L’Hôpital, who later agreed to pay him for mathematical discoveries. From 1695 to 1705 he taught mathematics at Groningen, Netherlands, and, on the death of his elder brother, Jakob, assumed a professorship at Basel.
Johann exceeded his brother in the number of contributions he made to mathematics. He applied calculus to the determination of lengths and areas of curves, such as the isochrone, along which a body will fall at constant speed, and the tautochrone, which was found to be important in clock construction. He also made contributions to the theory of differential equations, the mathematics of ship sails, and optics. Johann sent to L’Hôpital in Paris a method or rule for solving problems involving limits that would apparently be expressed by the ratio of zero to zero, now called L’Hôpital’s rule on indeterminate forms because it was included in L’Hôpital’s influential textbook of 1696, Analyse des infiniment petits, pour l’intelligence des lignes courbes (“Analysis of the Infinitely Small, for the Understanding of Curves”).
The Bernoulli brothers often worked on the same problems, but not without friction. In 1691 they became interested in the shape of a ship’s sail filled with wind. Jakob discovered that the curve was a catenary. Jakob wrote a letter to Johann, telling him that he had solved the problem but without revealing the solution. Johann soon solved the problem and, when publishing the solution, complained that his brother “apparently gave up.” However, Jakob had already written up his solution. This dispute was the beginning of the quarrel between them.
Their most bitter dispute concerned the isoperimetric problem—that is, determining the shape of the closed plane curve having a given length and enclosing the maximum area. In 1697 Jakob directly challenged Johann to solve the problem. Johann published a solution (without the full derivation) that was only partially correct. In response, Jakob bet Johann that he could replicate Johann’s derivation, point out its flaws, and actually solve the problem. The subsequent quarrel was the final break between the brothers.
Ardent in his friendships and keen in his resentments, Johann zealously defended the cause of G.W. Leibniz in the dispute with Isaac Newton over who had originated calculus. His text in integral calculus appeared in 1742 and his differential calculus shortly afterward. During his last years he worked mainly on the principles of mechanics. His works were published in Opera Johannis Bernoullii, 4 vol. (1742).
