John Henry Holland,  (born February 2, 1929, Fort Wayne, Indiana, U.S.—died August 9, 2015, Ann Arbor, Michigan), one of the pioneering theorists in nonlinear mathematics and the use of new mathematical techniques in understanding problems in disciplines as diverse as economics, biology, and computer science.
In 1950 Holland received a bachelor’s degree in mathematics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He then entered the graduate school in communication science at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, where he received a master’s degree in mathematics in 1954 and what was arguably the first Ph.D. in computer science, in 1959. He remained at Michigan and played an active role in the development of computer science as a department and discipline. He played a fundamental role in creating Michigan’s Center for the Study of Complex Systems, and in 1988 he became a professor of psychology as well. Outside of his Michigan activities, Holland became an active member of the Santa Fe Institute in New Mexico, a novel research institution established in 1984 to further the study of nonlinear phenomena.
Holland made his career through the study of nonlinear, or complex, systems. Unlike a linear system, which can be broken into simpler subsystems, studied, and reassembled to predict the full system’s behaviour, a nonlinear system displays behaviour that is inexplicable in terms of any of its separate subsystems. This nonlinear phenomenon is known as emergence, and Holland was among the first to realize the connection between emergence and individual and organizational adaptation. For example, beginning about 1977, Holland developed an artificial market based on a few simple rules and with competing “agents.” In addition to developing a system of payments and rewards for his agents, he “bred” them by creating the first genetic algorithms—essentially enabling his system of agents to evolve and learn from experience in a manner analogous to living systems. Holland’s views on emergence emphasized the dynamic character of complex systems and the ways such systems change over time.
Holland’s work is at one with other research in artificial intelligence and artificial life that emphasizes how lower-order activities are the building blocks out of which higher-level phenomena emerge. Just as the robotic pioneer Rodney Brooks argued that intelligence is not the result of a mind following internal rules and representations but the result of interaction with a particular environment, Holland argued that complex social and physical systems are not the product of abstract rules but the consequence of diverse agents and their interactions.
Among Holland’s published works are Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems (1975), Hidden Order: How Adaptation Builds Complexity (1995), and Emergence: From Chaos to Order (1998). The latter two were written for the lay reader.
