Li Shanlan, also known as Li Renshu or Li Qiuren,  (born January 2, 1811, Haining, Zhejiang province, China—died December 9, 1882, China), Chinese mathematician who was instrumental in combining Western mathematical and scientific knowledge and methods with traditional Chinese methods.
Li was educated by Chen Huan (1786–1863), a famous philologist, and from an early age demonstrated a remarkable talent for mathematics. In particular, Li mastered both traditional Chinese and available Western mathematical treatises at a precocious age. However, during this period in China, mathematics was not held in high esteem, and he had to find various other employments, such as tutoring. Almost all the treatises that he wrote in this period were later collected into his Zeguxizhai suanxue (1867; “Mathematics from the Zeguxi Studio”). These treatises are characterized by extensive use of infinite series expansions for trigonometric and logarithmic functions (see the table) that had been introduced to China by Jesuit missionaries in the 17th and early 18th centuries. In the West Li is best remembered for a combinatoric formula, known as the “Li Renshu identity,” that he derived using only traditional Chinese mathematical methods.
In 1852 Li traveled to Shanghai to escape the turmoil of the Taiping Rebellion. In Shanghai he met Alexander Wylie of the London Missionary Society and agreed to collaborate on the translation of Western works on mathematics and science. Along with his near contemporary Hua Hengfang (1833–1902), Li left a permanent impression on Chinese mathematical nomenclature and exposition. By following his lead, Li’s successors were able to accomplish a thorough modernization of Chinese mathematics during the first decades of the 20th century.
About 1859–60 Li joined the staff of the governor of Jiangsu province, and three years later the staff of Zeng Guofang, the general who had subdued the Taiping Rebellion and to whom Li dedicated his “Collected Works.” From 1869 Li was professor of mathematics at the Tongwen Guan college, the first Chinese person to hold such a Western-style position in mathematics.
