Marc Andreessen,  (born July 9, 1971, Cedar Falls, Iowa, U.S.), American-born software engineer who played a key role in creating the Web browser Mosaic and who cofounded Netscape Communications Corporation.
While still in grammar school, Andreessen taught himself BASIC, a programming language, so that he could write his own computer games; he later attempted to design a program that would do his math homework. He planned on becoming an electrical engineer, but that changed when he entered the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana and landed a part-time job at the school’s computer lab, the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA). There, he and a handful of his peers created Mosaic, a user-friendly browser application that integrated graphics and point-and-click simplicity to make it easier for nontechnical people to navigate the Web. Mosaic was a huge success. NCSA made it available free of charge over the Internet, and more than two million copies were downloaded within a year.
After graduating in 1993 with a bachelor’s degree in computer science, Andreessen headed to California’s Silicon Valley to work for a small company that made security products for use in electronic commerce. Soon he was contacted by James Clark, the founder and former president of Silicon Graphics, Inc. Clark was searching for an exciting new venture, and he found it with Andreessen. In April 1994 the duo founded Mosaic Communications Corporation (later rechristened Netscape Communications). Andreessen recruited the original masterminds behind Mosaic and set out to create the “monster” software, which they initially dubbed Mozilla (meaning Mosaic Killer). It was commercially launched as Netscape Navigator and, almost overnight, became the most popular browser used on the Web, taking over 75 percent of the market share by mid-1996.
Netscape’s main objective was to enable individuals and companies around the globe to exchange information. And, as vice president of technology, Andreessen earned the role of setting the company’s technical path as it prepared to ride the “bandwidth tidal wave,” which Andreessen predicted would transform the wireless communications industry.
The software company reported revenues totaling $55 million for the first quarter of 1996, and that same year Andreessen graced the cover of Time magazine. On Feb. 18, 1999, he became chief technology officer at America Online, Inc. (AOL), which had purchased Netscape the previous year. Andreessen, however, left AOL after only seven months. He then founded LoudCloud, Inc. (later called Opsware), in October 1999; it was acquired by Hewlett-Packard in 2007. In October 2004 Andreessen, along with Gina Bianchini, created Ning, which means “Peace” in Chinese. Andreessen served as chairman of the company, which allows users to create social networks to fit their interests.
