Mei Wending, Wade-Giles Mei Wenting,  (born 1633,  Xuangcheng, Anhui province, China—died 1721, China), Chinese writer on astronomy and mathematics whose work represented an association of Chinese and Western knowledge.
In 1645 China adopted a new, controversial calendar that had been prepared under the direction of the Jesuit Adam Schall von Bell. Together with his three younger brothers, Mei studied calendar design under the Daoist Ni Guanghu. A member of a loyalist family, Mei remained independent rather than join the “foreign” Manchu administration, but his fame spread far beyond the boundaries of his province. The Kangxi emperor was interested in Mei’s work, the Lixue yiwen (c. 1701; “Inquiry on Mathematical Astronomy”), and summoned him to an audience in 1705.
Mei’s comparative studies of Chinese and Western mathematics and astronomy expanded on the earlier work of Xu Guangqi (1562–1633). Mei tried to situate the new European knowledge properly within the historical framework of Chinese astronomy and mathematics. In his view, Chinese astronomical knowledge had advanced following the adoption of the new, more accurate Jesuit calendar following the reform initiated by Xu Guangqi in 1629. In his historical studies, Mei stressed that Chinese astronomy had improved from generation to generation, progressing from coarseness to accuracy. He gave precisely the same description for the development of Western astronomy. In other words, he believed that progress was a universal historical pattern. This was Mei’s historical rationale for synthesizing Western and Chinese knowledge.
In Jihe bubian (“Complements of Geometry”) Mei calculated the volumes and relative dimensions of regular and semi-regular polyhedrons by traditional Chinese methods. He reinterpreted Euclid’s Elements (c. 300 bc) in his Jihe tongjie (“Complete Explanation of Geometry”), by reference to the chapter devoted to right-angled triangles in Jiuzhang suanshu (Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Procedures), a mathematical classic completed during the Han dynasty (206 bc–ad 220). Mei helped rehabilitate traditional Chinese mathematics, and he was most widely admired by the scholars of the Qing dynasty (1644–1911), who generally assumed that the Nine Chapters included all of mathematics without exception. The comprehensive collection of Mei’s works, Lisuan quanshu, was published in 1723.
