Metric space,  in mathematics, especially topology, an abstract set with a distance function, called a metric, that specifies a nonnegative distance between any two of its points in such a way that the following properties hold: (1) the distance from the first point to the second equals zero if and only if the points are the same, (2) the distance from the first point to the second equals the distance from the second to the first, and (3) the sum of the distance from the first point to the second and the distance from the second point to a third exceeds or equals the distance from the first to the third. The last of these properties is called the triangle inequality. The French mathematician Maurice Fréchet initiated the study of metric spaces in 1905.
The usual distance function on the real number line is a metric, as is the usual distance function in Euclidean n-dimensional space. There are also more exotic examples of interest to mathematicians. Given any set of points, the discrete metric specifies that the distance from a point to itself equal 0 while the distance between any two distinct points equal 1. The so-called taxicab metric on the Euclidean plane declares the distance from a point (x, y) to a point (z, w) to be |x − z| + |y − w|. This “taxicab distance” gives the minimum length of a path from (x, y) to (z, w) constructed from horizontal and vertical line segments. In analysis there are several useful metrics on sets of bounded real-valued continuous or integrable functions.
Thus, a metric generalizes the notion of usual distance to more general settings. Moreover, a metric on a set X determines a collection of open sets, or topology, on X when a subset U of X is declared to be open if and only if for each point p of X there is a positive (possibly very small) distance r such that the set of all points of X of distance less than r from p is completely contained in U. In this way metric spaces provide important examples of topological spaces.
A metric space is said to be complete if every sequence of points in which the terms are eventually pairwise arbitrarily close to each other (a so-called Cauchy sequence) converges to a point in the metric space. The usual metric on the rational numbers is not complete since some Cauchy sequences of rational numbers do not converge to rational numbers. For example, the rational number sequence 3, 3.1, 3.14, 3.141, 3.1415, 3.14159, … converges to π, which is not a rational number. However, the usual metric on the real numbers is complete, and, moreover, every real number is the limit of a Cauchy sequence of rational numbers. In this sense, the real numbers form the completion of the rational numbers. The proof of this fact, given in 1914 by the German mathematician Felix Hausdorff, can be generalized to demonstrate that every metric space has such a completion.
