Minggantu, Chinese Ming Antu, Mongolian Minganto,  (died c. 1763), Chinese astronomer and mathematician who studied the power series expansions of trigonometric functions. See the table.
Minggantu was a Mongolian of the Plain White Banner (one of the administrative units used by the Manchu; see Banner system). His name first appeared in official Chinese records in 1712, among the Kangxi emperor’s retinue, as a shengyuan (state-subsidized student) of the Imperial Astronomical Bureau. He spent his whole career there, at a time when Jesuit missionaries were in charge of calendar reforms. In 1713 Minggantu was appointed to the newly created Office of Mathematics, where he took part in the compilation of the imperially commissioned Lüli yuanyuan (c. 1723; “Source of Mathematical Harmonics and Astronomy”), a compendium in three sections: mathematics, astronomy, and musical harmony. From 1737 to 1742 he worked with the Jesuits on the revision of its astronomical section. While retaining the general details of the solar system model of the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe already in use, they used elliptical orbits for the Sun and Moon. (Unlike the heliocentric model of Nicolaus Copernicus, Brahe’s compromise model had the planets orbiting the Sun, which in turn still orbited the Earth.) In 1751 Minggantu was made a jinshi (the highest scholar-official title in imperial China). In 1755 he was sent to Sungaria to supervise the survey of this newly conquered region, and in 1759 he became the director of the Imperial Astronomical Bureau.
Minggantu left an unfinished mathematical manuscript, the Geyuan milü jiefa (“Quick Methods for the Circle’s Division and Precise Ratio”), which his student Chen Jixin completed in 1774. The work was first published in 1839. Starting with infinite series expansions for sine, cosine, and π that had been introduced into China (without, however, knowledge of the calculus used to derive these series), Minggantu constructed proofs for these formulas and also derived series for some of the inverse trigonometric functions (arc sine and arc cosine). For this purpose, he generalized the traditional Chinese methods of division of the circle, using continued proportions (geometric sequences such as ax, ax2, ax3…) and an algebraic language based on analogy with arithmetic operations.
