Modern algebra, also called abstract algebra,  branch of mathematics concerned with the general algebraic structure of various sets (such as real numbers, complex numbers, matrices, and vector spaces), rather than rules and procedures for manipulating their individual elements.
During the second half of the 19th century, various important mathematical advances led to the study of sets in which any two elements can be added or multiplied together to give a third element of the same set. The elements of the sets concerned could be numbers, functions, or some other objects. As the techniques involved were similar, it seemed reasonable to consider the sets, rather than their elements, to be the objects of primary concern. A definitive treatise, Modern Algebra, was written in 1930 by the Dutch mathematician Bartel van der Waerden, and the subject has had a deep effect on almost every branch of mathematics.
In itself a set is not very useful, being little more than a well-defined collection of mathematical objects. However, when a set has one or more operations (such as addition and multiplication) defined for its elements, it becomes very useful. If the operations satisfy familiar arithmetic rules (such as associativity, commutativity, and distributivity) the set will have a particularly “rich” algebraic structure. Sets with the richest algebraic structure are known as fields. Familiar examples of fields are the rational numbers (fractions a/b where a and b are positive or negative whole numbers), the real numbers (rational and irrational numbers), and the complex numbers (numbers of the form a + bi where a and b are real numbers and i2 = −1). Each of these is important enough to warrant its own special symbol: ℚ for the rationals, ℝ for the reals, and ℂ for the complex numbers. The term field in its algebraic sense is quite different from its use in other contexts, such as vector fields in mathematics or magnetic fields in physics. Other languages avoid this conflict in terminology; for example, a field in the algebraic sense is called a corps in French and a Körper in German, both words meaning “body.”
In addition to the fields mentioned above, which all have infinitely many elements, there exist fields having only a finite number of elements (always some power of a prime number), and these are of great importance, particularly for discrete mathematics. In fact, finite fields motivated the early development of abstract algebra. The simplest finite field has only two elements, 0 and 1, where 1 + 1 = 0. This field has applications to coding theory and data communication.
The basic rules, or axioms, for addition and multiplication are shown in the table, and a set that satisfies all 10 of these rules is called a field. A set satisfying only axioms 1–7 is called a ring, and if it also satisfies axiom 9 it is called a ring with unity. A ring satisfying the commutative law of multiplication (axiom 8) is known as a commutative ring. When axioms 1–9 hold and there are no proper divisors of zero (i.e., whenever ab = 0 either a = 0 or b = 0), a set is called an integral domain. For example, the set of integers {…, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, …} is a commutative ring with unity, but it is not a field, because axiom 10 fails. When only axiom 8 fails, a set is known as a division ring or skew field.
The discovery of rings having noncommutative multiplication was an important stimulus in the development of modern algebra. For example, the set of n-by-n matrices is a noncommutative ring, but since there are nonzero matrices without inverses, it is not a division ring. The first example of a noncommutative division ring was the quaternions. These are numbers of the form a + bi + cj + dk, where a, b, c, and d are real numbers and their coefficients 1, i, j, and k are unit vectors that define a four-dimensional space. Quaternions were invented in 1843 by the Irish mathematician William Rowan Hamilton to extend complex numbers from the two-dimensional plane to three dimensions in order to describe physical processes mathematically. Hamilton defined the following rules for quaternion multiplication: i2 = j2 = k2 = −1, ij = k = −ji, jk = i = −kj, and ki = j = −ik. After struggling for some years to discover consistent rules for working with his higher-dimensional complex numbers, inspiration struck while he was strolling in his hometown of Dublin, and he stopped to inscribe these formulas on a nearby bridge. In working with his quaternions, Hamilton laid the foundations for the algebra of matrices and led the way to more abstract notions of numbers and operations.
