Paolo Ruffini,  (born Sept. 22, 1765, Valentano, Papal States—died May 9, 1822, Modena, Duchy of Modena), Italian mathematician and physician who made studies of equations that anticipated the algebraic theory of groups. He is regarded as the first to make a significant attempt to show that there is no algebraic solution to the general quintic equation (an equation whose highest-degree term is raised to the fifth power).
When Ruffini was still a teenager, his family moved to Reggio, near Modena, Italy. He entered the University of Modena in 1783 and while still a student taught a course there in the foundations of analysis for the 1787–88 academic year. Ruffini received degrees in philosophy, medicine, and mathematics from Modena in 1788 and in the fall obtained a permanent position there as a professor of mathematics. In 1791 he received a license to practice medicine from the Collegiate Medical Court of Modena.
Following the conquest of Modena by Napoleon Bonaparte in 1796, Ruffini found himself appointed as a representative to the Junior Council of the Cisalpine Republic (consisting of Bologna, Emilia, Lombardy, and Modena). Although he returned to his academic life early in 1798, he soon refused, for religious reasons, to take a civil oath of allegiance to the new republic and was therefore barred from teaching and public office. Unperturbed, Ruffini practiced medicine and continued his mathematical research until the defeat of Napoleon in 1814, when he returned permanently to the University of Modena as rector, in addition to holding professorships in mathematics and medicine.
Ruffini’s proof of the unsolvability of the general quintic equation, based on relations between the coefficients and permutations discovered earlier by the Italian-French mathematician Joseph-Louis Lagrange (1736–1813), was published in 1799. His first demonstration was regarded as insufficient, and he published a revised version in 1813 after discussions with several prominent mathematicians. This version also was regarded skeptically by some mathematicians, but it was approved by Augustin-Louis Cauchy, one of the leading French mathematicians of the time. In 1824 the Norwegian mathematician Niels Henrik Abel published a different proof that finally established the result with full rigour. Ruffini’s contribution to the understanding of groups provided a foundation for more extensive work by Cauchy and by the French mathematician Évariste Galois (1811–32), leading eventually to a nearly complete understanding of the conditions for solving polynomial equations.
