parametric equation,  a type of equation that employs an independent variable called a parameter (often denoted by t) and in which dependent variables are defined as continuous functions of the parameter and are not dependent on another existing variable. More than one parameter can be employed when necessary. For instance, instead of the equation y = x2, which is in Cartesian form, the same equation can be described as a pair of equations in parametric form: x = t and y = t2. This conversion to parametric form is called parameterization, which provides great efficiency when differentiating and integrating curves.
Curves described by parametric equations (also called parametric curves) can range from graphs of the most basic equations to those of the most complex. Parametric equations can be used to describe all types of curves that can be represented on a plane but are most often used in situations where curves on a Cartesian plane cannot be described by functions (e.g., when a curve crosses itself). Parametric equations are also often used in three-dimensional spaces, and they can equally be useful in spaces with more than three dimensions by implementing more parameters.
When representing graphs of curves on the Cartesian plane, equations in parametric form can provide a clearer representation than equations in Cartesian form. For instance, the equation of a circle on a plane with radius r and its centre at the origin is x2 + y2 = r2. This equation can be expressed as two different equations, x2 = r2 - y2 and y2 = r2 - x2, each one defining one of the variables (x or y) in terms of the other. However, each of these equations actually consists of two equations with opposite signs that would plot the graph of only one half of the circle on the Cartesian plane. When converted to parametric form, the x and y coordinates are defined as functions of t, which represent angles in this form: x = r cos t and y = r sin t and thus plot the entire circle. These parametric equations are called polar equations.
