Pavel Sergeevich Aleksandrov, also spelled Pavel Sergeyevich Aleksándrov or Alexandroff,  (born April 25 [May 7, New Style], 1896, Bogorodsk, Russia—died November 16, 1982, Moscow), Russian mathematician who made important contributions to topology.
In 1897 Aleksandrov moved with his family to Smolensk, where his father had accepted a position as a surgeon with the Smolensk State Hospital. His early education was supplied by his mother, who gave him French, German, and music lessons. At grammar school he soon showed an aptitude for mathematics, and on graduation in 1913 he entered Moscow State University.
Aleksandrov had his first major mathematical success in 1915, proving a fundamental theorem in set theory: Every non-denumerable Borel set contains a perfect subset. As often happens in mathematics, the novel ideas used to construct the proof—he invented a way to classify sets according to their complexity—opened new avenues of research; in this case, his ideas provided an important new tool for descriptive set theory.
After graduating in 1917, Aleksandrov moved first to Novgorod-Severskii and then Chernikov to work in the theatre. In 1919, during the Russian Revolution, he was jailed for a short time by White Russians before the Soviet Army recaptured Chernikov. He then returned home to teach at Smolensk State University in 1920 while he prepared for graduate examinations at Moscow State University. On his frequent visits to Moscow he met Pavel Uryson, another graduate student, and began a short but fruitful mathematical collaboration. After passing their graduate exams in 1921, they both became lecturers at Moscow and traveled together throughout western Europe to work with prominent mathematicians each summer from 1922 through 1924, when Uryson drowned in the Atlantic Ocean. On the basis of earlier work by the German mathematician Felix Hausdorff (1869–1942) and others, Aleksandrov and Uryson developed the subject of point-set topology, also known as general topology, which is concerned with the intrinsic properties of various topological spaces. (General topology is sometimes referred to as “rubber-sheet” geometry because it studies those properties of geometric figures or other spaces that are unaltered by twisting and stretching without tearing.) Aleksandrov collaborated with the Dutch mathematician L.E.J. Brouwer during parts of 1925 and 1926 to publish their friend’s final papers.
In the late 1920s Aleksandrov developed combinatorial topology, which constructs or characterizes topological spaces through the use of simplexes, a higher-dimensional analogy of points, lines, and triangles. He wrote about 300 mathematical books and papers in his long career, including the landmark textbook Topology (1935), which was the first and only volume of an intended multivolume collaboration with Swiss mathematician Heinz Hopf.
Aleksandrov was president of the Moscow Mathematical Society (1932–64), vice president of the International Congress of Mathematicians (1958–62), and a full member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences (from 1953). He edited several mathematical journals and received many Soviet awards, including the Stalin Prize (1943) and five Orders of Lenin.
