Peter Lax,  (born May 1, 1926, Budapest, Hung.), Hungarian-born American mathematician awarded the 2005 Abel Prize “for his groundbreaking contributions to the theory and applications of partial differential equations and to the computation of their solutions.”
With help from the local American consul, Lax’s Jewish family left Hungary in November 1941 and sailed from Lisbon for the United States on Dec. 5, 1941, two days before the Pearl Harbor attack brought the United States into World War II. Although technically enemy aliens on their arrival, the Lax family were soon settled in New York City, and the great Hungarian-born American mathematician John von Neumann took a personal interest in the mathematically talented son. Peter Lax was drafted into the U.S. Army in 1944, and, after some training at Texas A&M University, he was assigned (1945–46) to the Manhattan Project at Los Alamos, N.M. After the war, he earned a bachelor’s degree (1947) and doctorate (1949) from New York University (NYU). Lax returned to work at Los Alamos in 1950 before obtaining an assistant professorship in 1951 at NYU. He became a full professor in 1958, and, when the school’s mathematics department became the core of the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences in 1972, he became its first director. He retired in 1980.
Partial differential equations are among the fundamental ways mathematicians and scientists describe natural and mathematical processes that depend on more than one variable. In the study of hyperbolic partial differential equations, Lax showed that there are many types of equations that do admit exact solutions, and, with American mathematician James Glimm, he made a profound analysis of the behaviour of solutions to these equations over long periods of time. Together with Robert D. Richtmeyer, a fellow mathematician at the Courant Institute, Lax showed that, in a wide class of cases, methods of numerical analysis give accurate solutions to the equations, and, in work with others (including the German-born American mathematician Kurt Friedrichs and American mathematician Burton Wendroff), he introduced new numerical methods for finding solutions.
In the 1970s, Lax introduced the now-standard method of Lax pairs in the study of solitons, or isolated traveling waves, that leave particular quantities (akin to energy) invariant. He also took up the study of scattering, used by physicists to study crystal structures and by mathematicians working on the Schrödinger equation, and he developed a rich theory that has illuminated questions in number theory.
In addition to winning the Abel Prize—awarded by the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters in memory of the Norwegian mathematician Niels Henrik Abel—Lax was elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences (1972) and has been awarded a U.S. National Medal of Science (1986), a Wolf Prize for Mathematics (1987), and a Steel Prize (1992).
