Point estimation,  in statistics, the process of finding an approximate value of some parameter—such as the mean (average)—of a population from random samples of the population. The accuracy of any particular approximation is not known precisely, though probabilistic statements concerning the accuracy of such numbers as found over many experiments can be constructed. For a contrasting estimation method, see interval estimation.
It is desirable for a point estimate to be: (1) Consistent. The larger the sample size, the more accurate the estimate. (2) Unbiased. The expectation of the observed values of many samples (“average observation value”) equals the corresponding population parameter. For example, the sample mean is an unbiased estimator for the population mean. (3) Most efficient or best unbiased—of all consistent, unbiased estimates, the one possessing the smallest variance (a measure of the amount of dispersion away from the estimate). In other words, the estimator that varies least from sample to sample. This generally depends on the particular distribution of the population. For example, the mean is more efficient than the median (middle value) for the normal distribution but not for more “skewed” (asymmetrical) distributions.
Several methods are used to calculate the estimator. The most often used, the maximum likelihood method, uses differential calculus to determine the maximum of the probability function of a number of sample parameters. The moments method equates values of sample moments (functions describing the parameter) to population moments. The solution of the equation gives the desired estimate. The Bayesian method, named for the 18th-century English theologian and mathematician Thomas Bayes, differs from the traditional methods by introducing a frequency function for the parameter being estimated. The drawback to the Bayesian method is that sufficient information on the distribution of the parameter is usually not available. One advantage is that the estimation can be easily adjusted as additional information becomes available. See Bayes’s theorem.
