Qin Jiushao, Wade-Giles Ch’in Chiu-Shao,  (born c. 1202, Puzhou [modern Anyue, Sichuan province], China—died c. 1261, Meizhou [modern Meixian, Guangdong province]), Chinese mathematician who developed a method of solving simultaneous linear congruences.
In 1219 Qin joined the army as captain of a territorial volunteer unit and helped quash a local rebellion. In 1224–25 Qin studied astronomy and mathematics in the capital Lin’an (modern Hangzhou) with functionaries of the Imperial Astronomical Bureau and with an unidentified hermit. In 1233 Qin began his official mandarin (government) service. He interrupted his government career for three years beginning in 1244 because of his mother’s death; during the mourning period he wrote his only mathematical book, now known as Shushu jiuzhang (1247; “Mathematical Writings in Nine Sections”). He later rose to the position of provincial governor of Qiongzhou (in modern Hainan), but charges of corruption and bribery brought his dismissal in 1258. Contemporary authors mention his ambitious and cruel personality.
His book is divided into nine “categories,” each containing nine problems related to calendrical computations, meteorology, surveying of fields, surveying of remote objects, taxation, fortification works, construction works, military affairs, and commercial affairs. Categories concern indeterminate analysis, calculation of the areas and volumes of plane and solid figures, proportions, calculation of interest, simultaneous linear equations, progressions, and solution of higher-degree polynomial equations in one unknown. Every problem is followed by a numerical answer, a general solution, and a description of the calculations performed with counting rods.
The two most important methods found in Qin’s book are for the solution of simultaneous linear congruences N ≡ r1 (mod m1) ≡ r2 (mod m2) ≡ … ≡ rn (mod mn) and an algorithm for obtaining a numerical solution of higher-degree polynomial equations based on a process of successively better approximations. This method was rediscovered in Europe about 1802 and was known as the Ruffini-Horner method. Although Qin’s is the earliest surviving description of this algorithm, most scholars believe that it was widely known in China before this time.
