Rational root theorem, also called rational root test,  in algebra, theorem that for a polynomial equation in one variable with integer coefficients to have a solution (root) that is a rational number, the leading coefficient (the coefficient of the highest power) must be divisible by the denominator of the fraction and the constant term (the one without a variable) must be divisible by the numerator. In algebraic notation the canonical form for a polynomial equation in one variable (x) is 
anxn + an− 1xn − 1 + … + a1x1 + a0 = 0,
where a0, a1,…, an are ordinary integers. Thus, for a polynomial equation to have a rational solution p/q, q must divide an and p must divide a0. For example, consider 3x3 − 10x2 + x + 6 = 0. The only divisors of 3 are 1 and 3, and the only divisors of 6 are 1, 2, 3, and 6. Thus, if any rational roots exist, they must have a denominator of 1 or 3 and a numerator of 1, 2, 3, or 6, which limits the choices to 1/3, 2/3, 1, 2, 3, and 6 and their corresponding negative values. Plugging the 12 candidates into the equation yields the solutions −2/3, 1, and 3. In the case of higher-order polynomials, each root can be used to factor the equation, thereby simplifying the problem of finding further rational roots. In this example, the polynomial can be factored as (x − 1)(x + 2/3)(x − 3) = 0. Before computers were available to use the methods of numerical analysis, such calculations formed an essential part in the solution of most applications of mathematics to physical problems. The methods are still used in elementary courses in analytic geometry, though the techniques are superseded once students master basic calculus.
The 17th-century French philosopher and mathematician René Descartes is usually credited with devising the test, along with Descartes’s rule of signs for the number of real roots of a polynomial. The effort to find a general method of determining when an equation has a rational or real solution led to the development of group theory and modern algebra.
