Richard von Mises,  (born April 19, 1883, Lemberg, Austria-Hungary [now Lviv, Ukraine]—died July 14, 1953, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.), Austrian-born American mathematician, engineer, and positivist philosopher who notably advanced statistics and probability theory.
Von Mises’s early work centred on geometry and mechanics, especially the theory of turbines. In 1913, during his appointment at the University of Strassburg (1909–18; now the French University of Strasbourg), he gave the first German university course on aviation, and he contributed to the theory of airfoil design. In 1915–16 he constructed a 600-horsepower airplane for the Austrian army on which he served as a test pilot.
Von Mises had to leave Strasbourg after the German defeat in World War I. In 1920 he became director of the Institute for Applied Mathematics at the University of Berlin. Although a Roman Catholic by faith, von Mises was classified as Jewish by the Nazi government, and so he fled Germany in 1933 and accepted a position with the University of Istanbul. In 1939 he joined the staff of Harvard University, where he contributed notably to the study of elasticity and cofounded the series Advances in Applied Mechanics.
In 1919 von Mises developed his famous and controversial frequency approach to probability. In this regard, he developed the axiom of convergence, which holds that the relative frequency of an event converges on a limit as longer and longer sequences are drawn from some “reference class,” and the axiom of randomness, which holds that the limit for a relative frequency is independent of any particular randomly chosen infinite subsequence. He published his probabilistic work (with his positivistic interpretations) in Probability, Statistics and Truth (1928). This effort to formulate an objective definition met with certain philosophical objections. Nevertheless, the frequency approach, minus its dependence on infinite reference classes, was rehabilitated in the 1960s and continues to gain proponents. In 1939 von Mises introduced the famous “birthday problem,” which asked how many people must be gathered before the probability of two people sharing a birthday exceeds 50 percent. (The surprising answer: 23.)
Von Mises’s Positivism: A Study in Human Understanding (1951) summarizes his views on science and life. He was also a leading authority on the Austrian poet Rainer Maria Rilke.
