Richard Garriott, in full Richard Allen Garriott,  (born July 4, 1961, Cambridge, England), British-born American computer-game developer who became the sixth space tourist and the first second-generation American to go into space.
Garriott grew up in Houston the son of National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) astronaut Owen Garriott, who first flew into space on July 28, 1973, as part of the Skylab 3 mission. Many of the Garriotts’ friends and neighbours were astronauts, and Garriott developed an early interest in spaceflight.
While Garriott never abandoned his dreams of spaceflight, his interests and career path took him into the computer-gaming industry. As a teenager, Garriott began working on a fantasy role-playing game called Akalabeth (1979) for the Apple II. In the 1980s, while attending the University of Texas at Austin, he expanded on the dungeon-crawling model of Akalabeth to create Ultima 1. The Ultima series that followed established him as a major player in the computer-gaming industry, and in 1983 Garriott cofounded Origin Systems, Inc. Garriott’s in-game avatar, Lord British, ruled the kingdom of Britannia, and players engaged in quests to defeat a series of evils. With the debut of Ultima IV: Quest of the Avatar (1985), players were faced with ethical dilemmas as well as challenges of might and magic. Nonplayer characters (NPCs) could converse more realistically, and Britannia was now a fully realized world, with shifting winds and a predictable lunar cycle. In 1997 Garriott and his team created Ultima Online, a pioneer in the burgeoning genre of online computer games. Three years later he started Destination Games, which later became part of NCsoft, the world’s largest online-game developer and publisher. In November 2007 he launched the multiplayer online computer game Tabula Rasa.
Garriott became the sixth space tourist when, after training at the Yury Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Centre in Star City, Russia, he launched aboard Soyuz TMA-13 on Oct. 12, 2008, with commander Yury Lonchakov of Russia and flight engineer Edward Fincke of the United States. He arrived at the International Space Station (ISS) two days later. Garriott’s work on the ISS included communicating with students via radio signals, taking photographs for the Nature Conservancy, and conducting experiments on the physiological effects of space travel. He landed in Kazakhstan aboard Soyuz TM-12 on Oct. 23, 2008. His trip was made possible by Space Adventures, Ltd.—an American company that made space travel available to high-paying clients—in which Garriott was an investor.
