Robert Recorde,  (born c. 1510, Tenby, Pembrokeshire, Wales—died June 1558, London, England), physician, mathematician, and author of introductory mathematics textbooks.
Recorde was educated at the University of Oxford (B.A., 1531) and the University of Cambridge (M.D., 1545), and he taught mathematics at both universities before moving to London in 1547 to practice medicine. In January 1549 Recorde was appointed comptroller of the Bristol Mint, but his refusal in October to divert monies to English troops suppressing a rebellion in southwestern Britain led to an accusation of treason by William Herbert (1st earl of Pembroke after 1551). Recorde was confined at court for 60 days while the mint shut down. Although he survived this clash, he had made a powerful enemy. In 1551 Recorde became surveyor of the mines and monies in Ireland, but he failed to show a profit and was dismissed in 1553. In 1556 Recorde accused Herbert of malfeasance as commissioner of the mints—a reckless accusation to level against a favoured member of the nobility. Recorde died in debtor’s prison, to which he was committed after being unable to pay the large fine that Herbert won in his libel suit.
Recorde’s writings were all in the vernacular and assumed the form of a dialogue between teacher and pupil. He appears to have envisaged a publishing enterprise that would introduce each branch of mathematics. His first publication was The Ground of Artes (1543, enlarged 2nd ed. 1552), an effective treatise on elementary arithmetic, with a section for merchants on using the abacus. In 1551 there appeared Recorde’s textbook on elementary geometry, Pathwaie to Knowledge, a reworking of the first four books of Euclid’s Elements. The Gate of Knowledge, which dealt with measurement and use of the quadrant, is known only through references in later books. Then followed The Castle of Knowledge (1556), a treatise on the sphere and Ptolemaic astronomy—though it also made favourable mention of the heliocentric theory of Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543), promising to deal with the subject at greater length in a subsequent work. His last work, The Whetstone of Witte (1557), was an advanced treatise on arithmetic as well as an introduction to algebra and used his new symbol for equality (=).
Death prevented Recorde from publishing not only a more advanced astronomy textbook but also a series on applied mathematics, including surveying, cosmography, and the art of navigation. Recorde’s books endured lasting success and were often reprinted. They made a major contribution to the diffusion of mathematics in England and helped bridge the gap between theory and application.
