Root,  in mathematics, a solution to an equation, usually expressed as a number or an algebraic formula.
In the 9th century, Arab writers usually called one of the equal factors of a number jadhr (“root”), and their medieval European translators used the Latin word radix (from which derives the adjective radical). If a is a positive real number and n a positive integer, there exists a unique positive real number x such that xn = a. This number—the (principal) nth root of a—is written nSquare root of√ a  or a1/n. The integer n is called the index of the root. For n = 2, the root is called the square root and is written Square root of√ a . The root 3Square root of√ a  is called the cube root of a. If a is negative and n is odd, the unique negative nth root of a is termed principal. For example, the principal cube root of –27 is –3.
If a whole number (positive integer) has a rational nth root—i.e., one that can be written as a common fraction—then this root must be an integer. Thus, 5 has no rational square root because 22 is less than 5 and 32 is greater than 5. Exactly n complex numbers satisfy the equation xn = 1, and they are called the complex nth roots of unity. If a regular polygon of n sides is inscribed in a unit circle centred at the origin so that one vertex lies on the positive half of the x-axis, the radii to the vertices are the vectors representing the n complex nth roots of unity. If the root whose vector makes the smallest positive angle with the positive direction of the x-axis is denoted by the Greek letter omega, ω, then ω, ω2, ω3, …, ωn = 1 constitute all the nth roots of unity. For example, ω = −1/2 + Square root of√ −3 /2, ω2 = −1/2 − Square root of√ −3 /2, and ω3 = 1 are all the cube roots of unity. Any root, symbolized by the Greek letter epsilon, ε, that has the property that ε, ε2, …, εn = 1 give all the nth roots of unity is called primitive. Evidently the problem of finding the nth roots of unity is equivalent to the problem of inscribing a regular polygon of n sides in a circle. For every integer n, the nth roots of unity can be determined in terms of the rational numbers by means of rational operations and radicals; but they can be constructed by ruler and compasses (i.e., determined in terms of the ordinary operations of arithmetic and square roots) only if n is a product of distinct prime numbers of the form 2h + 1, or 2k times such a product, or is of the form 2k. If a is a complex number not 0, the equation xn = a has exactly n roots, and all the nth roots of a are the products of any one of these roots by the nth roots of unity.
The term root has been carried over from the equation xn = a to all polynomial equations. Thus, a solution of the equation f(x) = a0xn + a1xn − 1 + … + an − 1x + an = 0, with a0 ≠ 0, is called a root of the equation. If the coefficients lie in the complex field, an equation of the nth degree has exactly n (not necessarily distinct) complex roots. If the coefficients are real and n is odd, there is a real root. But an equation does not always have a root in its coefficient field. Thus, x2 − 5 = 0 has no rational root, although its coefficients (1 and –5) are rational numbers.
More generally, the term root may be applied to any number that satisfies any given equation, whether a polynomial equation or not. Thus π is a root of the equation x sin (x) = 0.
