Salomon Bochner,  (born August 20, 1899, Podgorze (near Kraków), Austria-Hungary [now in Poland]—died May 2, 1982, Houston, Texas, U.S.), Galician-born American mathematician who made profound contributions to harmonic analysis, probability theory, differential geometry, and other areas of mathematics.
Fearful of a Russian invasion in 1914, Bochner’s family moved to Berlin, Germany. Bochner attended the University of Berlin (Ph.D., 1921) but turned to commerce to help his family during Germany’s postwar hyperinflation. From 1924 to 1926 he was a fellow of the International Education Board (a John D. Rockefeller, Jr. foundation). He then lectured at the University of Munich, where he wrote his first book, Vorlesungen über Fouriersche Integrale (1932; trans. 1959, Lectures on Fourier Integrals). He left Germany in 1933, shortly after Adolph Hitler came to power. (He later convinced his parents and sister’s family to move to England before they could be destroyed by the Holocaust.) Receiving an invitation to join the faculty at Princeton University in New Jersey, as an assistant professor, Bochner immediately accepted and applied for U.S. citizenship, which was granted in 1938. In 1946 he became a full professor and taught at Princeton until 1969, when he reached the age of mandatory retirement. He supervised 35 doctoral dissertations, almost one-quarter of the Ph.D.s awarded in mathematics during his tenure at Princeton. In 1969 he became a professor and chairman of the mathematics department at Rice University in Houston, Texas, positions he held until his final retirement in 1976.
Bochner was one of the foremost 20th-century experts in the study of Fourier analysis, also known as harmonic analysis. In addition to directly contributing to the subject, he later applied some of the ideas he developed in the 1930s with great effectiveness to probability theory, as detailed in Harmonic Analysis and the Theory of Probability (1956). Although his interests were weighted toward harmonic analysis, he made major contributions to complex analysis, differential geometry, and many other areas.
In later years he wrote several books and papers giving his views on the historical development of mathematics, most notably The Role of Mathematics in the Rise of Science (1966).
