Seymour Papert, in full Seymour Aubrey Papert,  (born February 29, 1928, Pretoria, South Africa—died July 31, 2016, Blue Hill, Maine, U.S.), South African-born mathematician and computer scientist who was best known for his contributions to the understanding of children’s learning processes and to the ways in which technology can support learning. He invented Logo, a computer-programming language that was an educational tool.
In 1952 Papert earned a doctorate in mathematics from the University of the Witwatersrand. He then did mathematical research at the University of Cambridge, where he received another doctorate in 1958. Later that year he began working with psychologist Jean Piaget at the University of Geneva, studying the cognitive development of young children. Piaget adhered to constructivism—which asserted that learning arises from building mental models based on experience—and the theory became influential in Papert’s thinking about children and learning.
In 1963 Papert joined the faculty of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where he taught until 1996, when he became professor emeritus. While at MIT, he cowrote (with Marvin Minsky) Perceptrons: An Introduction to Computational Geometry (1969), a seminal work about artificial intelligence (AI). Papert was also instrumental in the creation of the school’s Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (1970; now the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory), which had previously been part of Project MAC, and he later helped found the MIT Media Laboratory (1985).
Although Papert was influential in the fields of AI research and mathematics, his best-known work concerned children’s learning styles. He was highly critical of traditional educational thought, in which children were cast in the role of passive recipients of knowledge rather than active participants in activity-based, creative, nonstructured learning exchanges. In addition, he criticized schools for their hierarchical organization, dependence on testing and learning by rote, commitment to uniformity, and valuing of information over knowledge. Instead, Papert developed an educational philosophy he referred to as “constructionism,” in that it focuses on the idea of mental construction. Children learn best, he argued, through tinkering, unstructured activities that resemble play, and research based on partial knowledge—by solving problems that are interesting to them, much as they do in nonschool situations.
Believing that computers had the potential to revolutionize learning, in the late 1960s Papert invented the programming language Logo, which children could use to draw pictures, direct robotlike creatures, or engage in other learning activities. He later collaborated with the company LEGO on MINDSTORMS, a line of programmable toys in which customized LEGO bricks were embedded with tiny computers. The name was derived from Papert’s influential work Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas (1980).
Papert’s other books include The Children’s Machine: Rethinking School in the Age of the Computer (1993) and The Connected Family: Bridging the Digital Generation Gap (1996). He later taught at the University of Maine and was involved with a number of organizations, including the One Laptop per Child initiative to take laptops to schoolchildren in less-developed countries.
