Simon Donaldson, in full Sir Simon Kirwan Donaldson,  (born August 20, 1957, Cambridge, England), British mathematician who was awarded the Fields Medal in 1986 for his work in topology.
Donaldson attended Pembroke College, Cambridge (B.A., 1979), and Worcester College, Oxford (Ph.D., 1983). From 1983 to 1985 he was a junior research fellow at All Souls College, Oxford, before becoming a fellow and professor at St. Anne’s College, Oxford. In 1997 Donaldson joined the faculty of Stanford University in California, U.S., and in 1999 became a professor at Imperial College London. He began teaching at Stony Brook University in New York state in 2014.
Donaldson was awarded the Fields Medal at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Berkeley, California, in 1986, as was the American mathematician Michael Freedman. Their work, taken together, suggested that there are “exotic” four-dimensional spaces—four-dimensional differential manifolds that are topologically equivalent to the standard Euclidean four-dimensional space but that are not equivalent differentiably. This is the only dimension where such exotic spaces exist. It is also an example of a rather common phenomenon in mathematics, wherein problems can be readily solved for all cases beyond a certain number, but for small integers the cases are very complicated and require subtle analysis.
Donaldson’s work is rather remarkable in its reversal of the usual direction of ideas from mathematics being applied to solve problems in physics. In particular, Donaldson used the Yang-Mills equations, which are generalizations of James Clerk Maxwell’s electromagnetic equations, to solve problems in pure mathematics. Special solutions to these equations, called instantons, had been applied to physics by earlier mathematicians, but Donaldson used instantons to look at general four-dimensional manifolds. After being awarded the Fields Medal, Donaldson continued his exploitation of ideas from physics with applications to mathematics.
Donaldson’s publications included The Geometry of Four-Manifolds (1990; written with Peter Kronheimer). In addition to the Fields Medal, Donaldson received the Breakthrough Prize in Mathematics (2015) and the Wolf Prize (2020). He was knighted in 2012.
