Slide rule,  a device consisting of graduated scales capable of relative movement, by means of which simple calculations may be carried out mechanically. Typical slide rules contain scales for multiplying, dividing, and extracting square roots, and some also contain scales for calculating trigonometric functions and logarithms. The slide rule remained an essential tool in science and engineering and was widely used in business and industry until it was superseded by the portable electronic calculator late in the 20th century.
The logarithmic slide rule is a compact device for rapidly performing calculations with limited accuracy. The invention of logarithms in 1614 by the Scottish mathematician John Napier and the computation and publication of tables of logarithms made it possible to effect multiplication and division by the simpler operations of addition and subtraction. Napier’s early conception of the importance of simplifying mathematical calculations resulted in his invention of logarithms, and this invention made possible the slide rule.
The English mathematician and inventor Edmund Gunter (1581–1626) devised the earliest known logarithmic rule, known as Gunter’s scale or the gunter, which aided seamen with nautical calculations. In 1632 another English mathematician, William Oughtred, designed the first adjustable logarithmic rule; as shown in the photograph, it was circular. Oughtred also designed the first linear slide rule, although the familiar inner sliding rule was invented by the English instrument-maker Robert Bissaker in 1654. The usefulness of the slide rule for rapid calculation was recognized, especially in England, during the 18th century, and the instrument was made in considerable numbers, with slight modifications.
Improvements in the direction of increased accuracy were initiated by Matthew Boulton and James Watt from about 1779 in connection with calculations in the design of steam engines at their works at Birmingham, England. In 1814 the English physician Peter Roget (of Roget’s Thesaurus) invented his “log-log” slide rule for calculating powers and roots of numbers. The fixed scale, instead of being divided logarithmically, is divided into lengths that are proportional to the logarithm of the logarithm of the numbers indicated on the scale; the sliding scale is divided logarithmically.
Amédée Mannheim, an officer of the French artillery, invented in 1859 what may be considered the first of the modern slide rules. This rule had scales on one face only. The Mannheim rule, which also brought into general use a cursor, or indicator, was much used in France, and after about 1880 it was imported in large numbers into other countries.
Most important of later improvements was the arrangement of the scales, trigonometric and log-log, so that they operate together while maintaining a consistent relationship to the basic scales. This arrangement gave added speed and flexibility to the solving of many problems—simple and complex alike—because it produced solutions by continuous operation instead of requiring the user to combine intermediate readings.
