Stanislav Smirnov,  (born Sept. 3, 1970, Leningrad, Russia, U.S.S.R. [now St. Petersburg, Russia]), Russian mathematician who was awarded the Fields Medal in 2010 for his work in mathematical physics.
Smirnov graduated with a degree in mathematics in 1992 from St. Petersburg State University in St. Petersburg, Russia. He received a doctorate in mathematics in 1996 from the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena. Between 1996 and 1998 he worked at Yale University in New Haven, Conn., the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton University in Princeton, N.J., and the Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in Bonn, Ger. From 1998 to 2003 Smirnov worked at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, and in 2003  he became a professor of mathematics at the University of Geneva in Switzerland.
Smirnov was awarded the Fields Medal at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Hyderabad, India, in 2010 for his work on percolation processes and on the Ising model. In percolation, a fluid flows through the spaces in a porous solid. If a material is modeled as a lattice where points have a probability for being open and allowing liquid to flow through, there is a critical probability at which a liquid can percolate across the lattice. If the distance between the lattice points decreases to zero in what is called the scaling limit, the critical probability approaches a final value. In 1992 British physicist John Cardy postulated a formula for the final value of the critical probability. In 2001 Smirnov showed that percolation in the scaling limit for a two-dimensional triangular lattice was conformally invariant—that is, was not changed if the lattice was stretched or squeezed. This result proved Cardy’s formula for the two-dimensional triangular lattice and thus was the first step toward proving the generality of Cardy’s formula.
In the Ising model, which has applications in physics, biology, and chemistry, the properties of an individual particle are affected by nearby particles. For example, in a ferromagnetic material, each atom has a magnetic moment that when it is aligned with those of its neighbours leads to a net magnetization of the material. In 2007 Smirnov showed that when the Ising model was taken to the scaling limit, it was conformally invariant.
