Stefan Banach,  (born March 30, 1892, Kraków, Austria-Hungary [now in Poland]—died August 31, 1945, Lvov, Ukrainian S.S.R. [now Lviv, Ukraine]), Polish mathematician who founded modern functional analysis and helped develop the theory of topological vector spaces.
Banach was given the surname of his mother, who was identified as Katarzyna Banach on his birth certificate, and the first name of his father, Stefan Greczek. He never knew his mother, and when still a young boy he was sent by his father to be raised by a family in Kraków. Banach apparently worked his way through the engineering school at the Lvov Technical University from 1910 to 1914. Unfit for military service because of poor eyesight, he worked on road constructions and taught at local schools during World War I.
At the end of the war several mathematical papers that Banach had worked on in his spare time were published and resulted in his being offered an assistantship at Lvov Technical University in 1920. Awarded a doctorate by the University of Lvov (now Ivan Franco National University of Lviv) in 1922, Banach began his lifelong affiliation with the university, building a school of mathematics and founding an important new mathematics journal, Studia Mathematica, in 1929. He was elected president of the Polish Mathematical Society in 1939, but his life changed with the Nazi occupation from 1941 to 1944. Under the occupation, Banach was compelled to feed lice for a German study of infectious diseases. He died of lung cancer in 1945 before he could resume his academic life with an appointment at Jagiellonian University, Kraków.
Banach contributed to the theory of orthogonal series and made innovations in the theory of measure and integration, but his most important contribution was in functional analysis. Of his published works, his Théorie des opérations linéaires (1932; “Theory of Linear Operations”) is the most important. Banach and his coworkers summarized the previously developed concepts and theorems of functional analysis and integrated them into a comprehensive system. Banach himself introduced the concept of normed linear spaces, which are now known as Banach spaces. He also proved several fundamental theorems in the field, and his applications of theory inspired much of the work in functional analysis for the next few decades.
His two-volume collected works with commentaries, Oeuvres avec des commentaires, was published in 1979.
