Zorn’s lemma, also known as Kuratowski-Zorn lemma originally called maximum principle,  statement in the language of set theory, equivalent to the axiom of choice, that is often used to prove the existence of a mathematical object when it cannot be explicitly produced.
In 1935 the German-born American mathematician Max Zorn proposed adding the maximum principle to the standard axioms of set theory (see the table). (Informally, a closed collection of sets contains a maximal member—a set that cannot be contained in any other set in the collection.) Although it is now known that Zorn was not the first to suggest the maximum principle (the Polish mathematician Kazimierz Kuratowski discovered it in 1922), he demonstrated how useful this particular formulation could be in applications, particularly in algebra and analysis. He also stated, but did not prove, that the maximum principle, the axiom of choice, and German mathematician Ernst Zermelo’s well-ordering principle were equivalent; that is, accepting any one of them enables the other two to be proved. See also set theory: Axioms for infinite and ordered sets.
A formal definition of Zorn’s lemma requires some preliminary definitions. A collection C of sets is called a chain if, for each pair of members of C (Ci and Cj), one is a subset of the other (Ci ⊆ Cj). A collection S of sets is said to be “closed under unions of chains” if whenever a chain C is included in S (i.e., C ⊆ S), then its union belongs to S (i.e., ∪ Ck ∊ S). A member of S is said to be maximal if it is not a subset of any other member of S. Zorn’s lemma is the statement: Any collection of sets closed under unions of chains contains a maximal member.
As an example of an application of Zorn’s lemma in algebra,
consider the proof that any vector space V has a basis (a linearly independent subset that spans the vector space; informally, a subset of vectors that can be combined to obtain any other element in the space). Taking S to be the collection of all linearly independent sets of vectors in V, it can be shown that S is closed under unions of chains. Then by Zorn’s lemma there exists a maximal linearly independent set of vectors, which by definition must be a basis for V. (It is known that, without the axiom of choice, it is possible for there to be a vector space without a basis.)
An informal argument for Zorn’s lemma can be given as follows: Assume that S is closed under unions of chains. Then the empty set Ø, being the union of the empty chain, is in S. If it is not a maximal member, then some other member that includes it is chosen. This last step is then iterated for a very long time (i.e., transfinitely, by using ordinal numbers to index the stages in the construction). Whenever (at limit ordinal stages) a long chain of larger and larger sets has been formed, the union of that chain is taken and used to continue. Because S is a set (and not a proper class like the class of ordinal numbers), this construction ultimately must stop with a maximal member of S.
