Marjane Satrapi,  (born 1969, Rasht, Iran), Iranian artist, director, and writer whose graphic novels explore the gaps and the junctures between East and West.
Satrapi was the only child of Westernized parents; her father was an engineer and her mother a clothing designer. She grew up in Tehrān, where she attended the Lycée Français. After the Iranian Revolution of 1979, her family’s Western way of life drew the attention of Iranian authorities, and by 1984 her parents had decided to send her to Austria to attend school. A failed relationship there exacerbated her sense of alienation and contributed to a downward spiral that left her homeless and using drugs. She returned to Tehrān at age 19, studied art, and, after a short-lived marriage, moved back to Europe in 1993. In France she earned a degree in art, and by the mid-1990s she was living permanently in Paris.
Satrapi published the books Persepolis 1 (2000) and Persepolis 2 (2001) in France; they were combined as Persepolis: The Story of a Childhood when translated into English in 2003. In Persepolis she used a stripped-down visual style that shows the influence of German Expressionism to tell the story of her childhood in Tehrān. It is a story that Western readers found at once familiar—a restive adolescent who loves Nike shoes and rock music—and foreign—she is stopped and threatened with arrest for wearing those shoes as she walks through a city damaged by bombing raids during the Iran-Iraq War (1980–88). Sometimes described as a graphic memoir, Persepolis melds the format of a graphic novel with a prose-only memoir. Satrapi adapted her book as a film, also called Persepolis (2007), which was nominated for an Academy Award for best animated feature.
Persepolis 3 and Persepolis 4 were published in France in 2002 and 2003, respectively, and were translated together into English as Persepolis 2: The Story of a Return in 2004. Persepolis 2 begins where Persepolis ends, with Satrapi living in Europe. The family friend with whom Satrapi was intended to live instead shuffles her to a boarding house, and her life gradually dissolves. She returns to her parents in Iran but feels out of place, and she eventually leaves again for Europe.
Satrapi, who wrote in French, continued to probe the boundaries between the graphic novel and the memoir with Broderies (2003; Embroideries), which consists of stories told by Satrapi’s mother, grandmother, and other female relatives and friends about their experiences as women living in Iran. Published in 2004, Poulet aux prunes (Chicken with Plums; film 2011) recounts the story of her great-uncle, a renowned tar (lute) player who resolves to die when he cannot adequately replace his broken instrument.
Satrapi created the illustrated children’s books Les Monstres n’aiment pas la lune (2001; Monsters Are Afraid of the Moon) and Le Soupir (2004; The Sigh). She also directed the English-language dark comedy The Voices (2014), which concerned a man who, having failed to take his medication, becomes a murderer. In 2019 Satrapi helmed Radioactive, a biopic about Marie Curie.
