Systems engineering,  technique of using knowledge from various branches of engineering and science to introduce technological innovations into the planning and development stages of a system.
Systems engineering is not so much a branch of engineering as it is a technique for applying knowledge from other branches of engineering and disciplines of science in effective combination to solve a multifaceted engineering problem. It is related to operations research but differs from it in that it is more a planning and design function, frequently involving technical innovation. Probably the most important aspect of systems engineering is its application to the development of new technological possibilities with the specific objective of putting them to use as rapidly as economic and technical considerations permit. In this sense it may be seen as the midwife of technological development.
The word “systems” is frequently used also in other combinations, especially when elements of technological advance are not so important. Systems analysis is an example. Systems theory, or sometimes systems science, is frequently applied to the analysis of physical dynamic systems. An example would be a complex electrical network with one or more feedback loops, in which the effects of a process return to cause changes in the source of the process.
In the development of the various engineering disciplines in the 19th and 20th centuries, considerable overlap was inevitable among the different fields; for example, chemical engineering and mechanical engineering were both concerned with heat transfer and fluid flow. Further proliferation of specializations, as in the many branches of electrical and electronic engineering, such as communications theory, cybernetics, and computer theory, led to further overlapping. Systems engineering may be seen as a logical last step in the process. Systems engineers frequently have an electronics or communications background and make extensive use of computers and communications technology. Yet systems engineering is not to be confused with these other fields. Fundamentally a point of view or a method of attack, it should not be identified with any particular substantive area. In its nature and in the nature of the problems it attacks, it is interdisciplinary, a procedure for putting separate techniques and bodies of knowledge together to achieve a prescribed goal in an effective manner.
In general, a systems engineering approach is likely to differ from a conventional design approach by exhibiting increased generality in its basic logical framework and increased concern with the fundamental objectives to be achieved. Thus, at each stage the systems engineer is likely to ask both why and how, rather than merely how.
In addition to systems engineering, it is important to define systems themselves. The systems with which a systems engineer is concerned are first of all man-made. Second, they are large and complex; their component parts interact so extensively that a change in one part is likely to affect many others. Unless there is such interaction, there is little for the systems engineer to do, at least at the systems level; he can turn immediately to the components themselves. Another important characteristic of systems is that their inputs are normally stochastic; that is, the inputs are essentially random functions of time, although they may exhibit statistical regularities. Thus, one cannot expect to foresee exactly what the system will be exposed to in actual operation, and its performance must be evaluated as a statistical average of the responses to a range of possible inputs. A calculation based on a single precisely defined input function will not do.
Systems may also vary depending on the amount of human judgment that enters into their operation. There are, of course, systems such as electrical circuits, automated production equipment, or robots that may operate in a completely determinate fashion. At the other extreme, there are management and control systems, for both business and military purposes, in which machines in a sense do most of the work but with human supervision and decision making at critical points. Clearly these mixed human-machine systems offer the greatest variety both of possibilities and problems for the systems engineer. Aspects of such systems are treated in the article human-factors engineering.
The systems approach stems from a number of sources. In a broad sense it can be regarded as simple extension of standard scientific methodology. It is a common procedure in science (and elsewhere) to list all the factors that might affect a given situation and select from the complete list those that appear critical. Mathematical modeling, perhaps the most basic tool in systems engineering, is a technique encountered in any branch of science that has become sufficiently quantitative. Thus, in this broad sense, the systems approach is simply the inheritor of a tradition that is generations, if not centuries, old.
In looking for more recent and more specific sources for the systems approach, on the other hand, there are two in particular that stand out. First is the general field of communications, particularly commercial telephony, where systems engineering first appeared as an explicit discipline in its own right. Traces of the systems approach are to be found in telephone engineering at least as far back as the beginning years of the century, and systems ideas were fairly common in telephony by the 1920s and ’30s. When Bell Telephone Laboratories, the research arm of the American Telephone & Telegraph Company, was officially incorporated in 1925, its two principal engineering divisions were called respectively Apparatus Development and Systems Development. A complete formal doctrine of the role of systems engineering, however, first emerged in the years after World War II as part of an effort to redefine the policy and structure of the research and development. This doctrine set the engineering effort on a level of logical parity with the research and development efforts and made it of almost comparable actual size, at least with research. The systems engineer had a multitude of functions, with special emphasis on effective utilization of scientific and technical advances in planning new communications systems. This particular set of ideas, of course, reflected the special needs of telephony. Nevertheless, as an example and a point of departure, it had a wide effect. It seems to be one of the reasons why so esoteric a subject as systems engineering advanced as rapidly as it did. (For a detailed discussion of the research and development aspects of systems engineering, see the article research and development.)
A second major source for systems engineering is operations research, which originated in a recognizable form in Britain during World War II and initially was concerned with the best employment of military equipment. Typical examples included determining the best employment of a given number of bombers, the best way of arranging convoys against submarine attack, and the best way of using interceptors against a bombing attack. Operations research was effective in such cases and has flourished ever since in both civilian and military contexts.
There exists a clear distinction between operations research and systems engineering. Because operations research is concerned with the best employment of existing equipment, technological uncertainties do not arise. Systems engineering, on the other hand, is normally concerned with the planning of new equipment, and such uncertainties may be important. In practice, nevertheless, systems engineering and operations research have a good deal in common. In particular, they share many of the same analytic techniques. This results in large part from the fact that a systems engineer is likely to evaluate the effectiveness of a tentative design by the same methods an operations research specialist would use with actual hardware.
Another reason for overlap is the fact that the distinction between new and existing equipment is not quite clear-cut. Newness in equipment is a relative matter. If the new equipment is sufficiently well based on existing design techniques and seems to involve few enough technical uncertainties, the issue becomes unimportant. The question is one of degree and, to an extent, of judgment.
Most of the present character of systems engineering derives historically from the early 1950s. There had been some noteworthy events in the years just after World War II, including, for example, the introduction of linear programming in 1947 and the founding of various organizations for continued development of the field in the late 1940s. On the whole, however, this was a period of consolidation of earlier advances. Thus, in the communications field the principal systems were some long-distance transmission systems that had been initiated before the war and had been interrupted by war activities.
In the 1950s the pace of growth accelerated appreciably. The first general textbook on systems engineering appeared in 1957 and was followed by a number of other works that treated both industrial and military applications. These publications proved sufficient to establish systems engineering as an accepted academic discipline, and courses in it are now taught in many universities throughout the developed countries of the world. Professional societies and journals exist in France, India, Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
The development of systems engineering after 1950 stemmed, in large part, from the impact of great advances in adjacent fields, notably communications and electronics. An automatic control system is a good example. A control system has the prime characteristic that the components interact extensively and that the system as a whole has certain properties—e.g., stability—that cannot be said to adhere to any individual component. Thus control systems furnished convenient textbook examples for systems engineering.
The development of information theory as a basic starting point for communications engineering, in the years just after World War II, was also influential in shaping the evolution of systems engineering. The various subsystems in many complete systems were found to be held together by what were, in effect, communication channels. Thus ideas of information transfer from one part of the system to another proved useful in understanding the operation of the structure as a whole.
Systems engineering also profited from the advent of computers and the subsequent development of powerful, high-level programming languages, which affected the field in two principal ways. First, they provided new tools for analyzing complex systems by means of extensive calculations or direct simulation. In the second place, they could be used to digest large amounts of data or as actual constituents of complex systems, especially those concerned largely with information transmission. This opened up the possibility of processing information as well as simply transmitting it in such systems (see also information processing).
The impact of military weapons problems on systems engineering began soon after World War II. A landmark date was 1945, when the development of Nike Ajax, a U.S. air defense missile system, was initiated.
In 1945 available rocket propulsion seemed barely sufficient to give the missile a satisfactory tactical range. It was discovered that achievable range depended on several parameters, such as the weight and size of the warhead, fineness of the missile’s aerodynamic design, degree of maneuverability provided by the control system, and shape of the trajectory and average speed along it. Thus an effective systems engineering effort was mounted in which a variety of combinations of the missile’s properties were explored, with the objective of achieving the best balance between range and other tactical characteristics.
Control and feedback questions were also important aspects of the overall systems problem. The whole system was in fact a gigantic feedback loop because the missile was controlled by orders sent it from a ground computer, and the computer input included information on what the tracking radar observed the missile to be doing. Thus there was a closed feedback loop from missile to computer and back to the missile again. There were also such subsidiary feedback loops as that of the autopilot controlling the attitude of the missile, and the dynamic response of the system was further affected by the need to process the radar signals to remove radar “jitter.” The analysis of such elaborate dynamical systems involving interlaced feedback paths has become an important special part of the general systems area.
In the 1950s and 1960s systems engineering also grew in other directions, largely as a result of weapons systems projects associated with the Cold War. Thus the Ajax study was concerned with the dynamics of a single isolated missile. On the other hand, the defense systems that grew up in the 1950s involved the coordinated operation of a large number of missiles, guns, interceptors, and radar installations scattered over a considerable area. These were all held together by a large digital computer, which thus became the central element of the system. The SAGE (semiautomatic ground environment) system in the United States is a good example.
During the same years the systems approach also became increasingly identified with management functions. Thus the phrase “systems engineering and technical direction” came into use to describe the role of a systems engineer responsible for both the initial planning of a project and its subsequent management. So-called planning, programming, and budgeting (PPB) techniques were developed to provide similar combinations of systems engineering and financial management.
In nonmilitary fields systems engineering has developed along similar though more modest lines. Early applications were likely to stress feedback control systems in large-scale automated production facilities, such as steel-rolling mills and petroleum refineries. Later applications stressed computer-based management information and control systems somewhat like those that had earlier been developed for air defense. In more recent years the systems approach has occasionally been applied to much larger civilian enterprises, such as the planning of new cities.
