Bamboo rat,  any of four Asiatic species of burrowing, slow-moving, nocturnal rodents. Bamboo rats have a robust, cylindrical body, small ears and eyes, and short, stout legs. The three species of Rhizomys are 23 to 50 cm (9.1 to 19.7 inches) long with a short and bald or sparsely haired tail (5 to 20 cm). Fur on the upperparts is soft and dense or harsh and scanty, coloured slate gray to brownish gray with a paler underside. The lesser bamboo rat (genus Cannomys) is smaller—15 to 27 cm long, excluding the 6- to 8-cm tail. Its long, dense fur ranges from chestnut brown to a bright pale gray.
The genus Rhizomys is found in bamboo-covered hills and mountains from Indochina to the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra, where the rats bear litters of three to five young. The lesser bamboo rat, on the other hand, inhabits uplands from southeastern Nepal through southern China and Myanmar (Burma) to northwestern Vietnam and Thailand; its litter size is one to two. All bamboo rats are a food source for the native peoples of these countries.
Bamboo rats dig with their incisor teeth, using the head and claws to remove loosened soil. Rhizomys species construct extensive burrow systems among roots of dense bamboo stands, where they feed primarily on bamboo roots. At night they forage above ground for fruit, seeds, and nest materials, even climbing the bamboo and cutting sections that they carry to their burrows and eat later. They have also been reported to venture onto plantations to feed on roots of sugarcane and cassava. The lesser bamboo rat digs deep tunnels in the rocky ground of mountain meadows, forests, and even gardens; its diet consists of a wide variety of plant material. It has been found on tea plantations, but the extent of the damage it causes is unknown.
In addition to the single species of lesser bamboo rat (C. badius), the three Rhizomys bamboo rats are the Chinese bamboo rat (R. sinensis), the hoary bamboo rat (R. pruinosus), and the large bamboo rat (R. sumatrensis). All bamboo rats belong to the subfamily Rhyzomyinae, which includes their closest living relatives, the African mole rats (genus Tachyoryctes). Subfamily Rhyzomyinae is classified within the family Muridae (rats and mice) of the order Rodentia. The lineage of today’s Rhizomys species can be traced to extinct genera represented by fossils found in Pakistan, India, and China dating from 10,000,000 to 500,000 years ago (late Miocene to Pleistocene Epoch).
