Blind mole rat,  (subfamily Spalacinae),  any of eight species of burrowing rodents living in the eastern Mediterranean and Black Sea regions. Among the several rodents referred to as “mole rats” (see zokor), the blind mole rat is among the most molelike in form, having a furred, cylindrical body, short limbs, and protruding incisor teeth. The feet and claws are surprisingly small for such a highly specialized burrower. Blind mole rats appear eyeless and earless, as the functioning remnants of these structures are covered by fur and are therefore not visible. The tiny eyes are hidden beneath the skin, and the external ears are reduced to slight folds. Sensory bristles extending rearward from the flattened, padded nose toward the eyes give the head a keeled, wedgelike shape. Like the eyes and ears, the animal’s minute stub of a tail is not visible externally.
Blind mole rats are medium-sized, weighing 100 to 570 grams (3.5 ounces to 1.3 pounds), with bodies about 13 to 35 cm (5.1 to 13.8 inches) long. The dense, soft fur may be pale to reddish brown or buff gray on the upperparts; underparts are grayish or buff brown. The front of the head is usually paler than the back and may exhibit white or yellow stripes, which can extend along the sides of the head or run down the middle of it from nose to forehead.
Territorial and solitary, the blind mole rat excavates a network of burrows by digging with its incisors, pushing the loosened soil beneath its belly with its forefeet, and then kicking the pile behind itself with its hind feet. When enough soil has accumulated, it turns around to pack some against the tunnel wall with its tough snout and uses its head to bulldoze any excess debris through the tunnel and onto the surface. Resulting mounds indicate tunnels 10 to 25 cm below ground in which the rodent searches for food. Their diet consists primarily of roots, tubers, and bulbs, but occasionally the animal emerges during the night to forage for seeds and green plant parts. Within the tunnels, vertical passageways connect the shallow burrows to deeper corridors where separate chambers for nesting, food storage, and excreta are constructed. During the wet autumn and winter, females build large mounds containing chambers where mating occurs and the young are reared. Gestation takes about a month, and litter size is from one to five.
Blind mole rats live in southeastern Europe, Turkey, the Middle East, and eastern North Africa near the shores of the Mediterranean Sea. Some species also range eastward to the Caspian Sea. Found at elevations from plains below sea level to high mountain clearings, these rodents prefer sandy or loamy soils of steppes, hillsides, dry brush country, woodlands, meadows, pastures, orchards, and cultivated fields in areas that receive at least 10 cm of annual rainfall. They avoid sandy or hard clay deserts.
There are two genera of blind mole rats: lesser, or Mediterranean, blind mole rats (three species in the genus Nannospalax) and greater, or Ukrainian, blind mole rats (five species in the genus Spalax). Together these genera constitute the subfamily Spalacinae of the mouse family (Muridae) within the order Rodentia. The African mole rats (genus Tachyorytes) and Central Asian mole rats are also members of the family Muridae but are not closely related, as they belong to different subfamilies. The evolutionary history of blind mole rats in the Mediterranean region is represented by fossils extending back 17 million to 19 million years to the Early Miocene Epoch (23.8 million to 16.4 million years ago).
