bongo,  (Tragelaphus eurycerus),  the largest, most colourful, and most sociable of the African forest antelopes, belonging to the spiral-horned antelope tribe Tragelaphini (family Bovidae). It is also the third heaviest antelope, after the related giant eland and common eland.
The bongo has short, sturdy legs and hindquarters that are higher and more developed than the forequarters. The bongo and eland are the only tragelaphines in which both sexes have horns. Male bongo horns are massive and make one tight spiral; the average length is 75 cm (30 inches; the maximum recorded length is 99 cm [39 inches]). Females have thinner and more parallel but equally long horns. Though short in stature (122–128 cm [48–50 inches] shoulder height), males weigh on average 300 kg (660 pounds) and up to 400 kg (880 pounds); females weigh about 240 kg (530 pounds). The bright, glossy chestnut of the back and flanks turns a darker colour on the underside and legs. Males become darker with age; indeed, male bongos in the Kenya highlands are nearly black. In both sexes, the reddish coat is vividly contrasted by white or yellow markings, which include 12 to 14 vertical stripes on the torso, bands on the edges of the huge, rounded ears, large chest and nose chevrons, cheek blotches, and banded legs. The bongo’s striking coloration is actually concealing in the forest, where the markings serve to disrupt its outline. Bongos are primarily browsers, consuming the foliage of up to 80 different kinds of trees, bushes, forbs, and vines.
Two widely separated bongo subspecies exist in increasingly fragmented populations. The larger mountain bongo (Tragelaphus eurycerus isaaci) is a relict of interglacial epochs when rainforest extended to the Indian Ocean; it occurs in pockets of protected mountain forest between 2,000 and 3,000 metres (7,000 and 10,000 feet) above sea level in the Kenya highlands. Mountain bongos frequent the bamboo and mountain heath zone in the dry season and then descend to the cloud forest, where they disperse, during the rains. Home ranges may exceed 100 square km (40 square miles). Herds of a dozen are considered large; they always include young calves and are trailed or accompanied by a bull during the mating season (October–January). Increasing human population, deforestation, poaching, ecological changes, disease, and predation by lions, hyenas, and leopards threaten the survival of the mountain bongo.
The lowland bongo (T. eurycerus eurycerus) inhabits lowland rainforests from western Africa and the Congo basin to southwestern Sudan. The lowland bongo’s habitat could be more accurately described as a forest-savanna mosaic, as it depends on openings where sunlight penetrates to the forest floor. Two herds of 10–20 animals tracked in the Central African Republic’s Dzanga-Ndoki National Park had home ranges of at least 49 and 19 square km (19 and 7 square miles); the focal points of these ranges were clearings around water holes and mineral licks created by elephants. By day the herds, composed of females and young, congregated in dense forest within a few kilometres of a lick; before dusk they often moved directly to a clearing, where they spent hours eating clay soil, drinking clayish water, foraging on lush herbs and grass, and socializing. This and other studies suggest that bongos are much rarer than previously estimated, with a mean density in good habitat of only one animal per 4 square km (2 square miles). Adult males are usually solitary and, like other tragelaphine antelopes, nonterritorial. A single calf, born after a nine-month gestation, remains hidden for the first week or more.
