Bush baby,  (family Galagidae), also spelled bushbaby, also called galago,  any of more than 20 species of small attractive arboreal primates native to sub-Saharan Africa. They are gray, brown, or reddish to yellowish brown, with large eyes and ears, long hind legs, soft, woolly fur, and long tails. Bush babies are also characterized by the long upper portion of the feet (tarsus) and by the ability to fold their ears. They are nocturnal, and they feed on fruits, insects, and even small birds, but a major component of the diet of most species is gum (tree exudate). This they extract by gouging holes in trees and scraping the bark, using their toothcombs (forward-tilted lower incisor and canine teeth). Galagos cling to and leap among the trees; the smaller forms, such as the lesser bush baby (Galago senegalensis), are extremely active and agile. When they descend to the ground, they sit upright, and they move around by jumping with their hind legs like jerboas. Gestation is about three to four months; young usually number one or two.
Before 1980 only six species were recognized, but studies since then, especially of their vocalizations, have resulted in the identification of perhaps as many as 20 species. The lesser bush baby and its relatives, which weigh 150–200 grams (5–7 ounces), live in the thornbushes and tree savannahs from Senegal in the west to Somalia in the east and southward to Kwazulu-Natal, South Africa, although one species, the dusky bush baby (G. matschiei), is restricted to the rainforests of eastern Congo (Kinshasa). They feed on gum, insects, pods, flowers, and leaves. The larger Allen’s bush baby (Sciurocheirus alleni) and its relatives live in the rainforests of west-central Africa, where they feed on fallen fruits and the insects that they find in them; they may be generically distinct.
The dwarf bush babies, with their long, slender snouts, are now placed in two separate genera, Galagoides and Paragalago. The Zanzibar bush baby (P. zanzibaricus) and Grant’s bush baby (P. granti) and their relatives live in East African coastal forests from Kenya to Mozambique and Malawi and on the islands of Zanzibar and Pemba. The tiny Prince Demidoff’s bush baby (G. demidoff), which weighs only 70 grams (2.5 ounces), is widespread and common in African rainforests from Sierra Leone to Uganda. Even smaller is the Rondo bush baby (P. rondoensis), first described in 1997, which weighs just 60 grams and is restricted to a few coastal forests in southeastern Tanzania.
The needle-clawed bush babies are classified in another genus, Euoticus. The two species live in the rainforests of west-central Africa. They feed on tree exudate, clinging upside-down to the bark of a tree by digging in their sharp-pointed clawlike nails, stabbing the bark with specialized canine and premolar teeth, and then scraping up the gum that flows out. The final genus, Otolemur, contains the largest species, the brown greater galago (O. crassicaudatus), with an average weight of 1.2 kg, though some weigh up to 1.8 kg. It lives in coastal forests and woodlands in southeastern Africa. One or two slightly smaller closely related species live in Angola and East Africa.
