Cane rat,  (genus Thryonomys),  either of two species of large, stocky African rodent. Weighing up to 7 kg (more than 15 pounds), cane rats can grow to a length of 61 cm (24 inches), not including the scantily haired tail, which measures up to 26 cm. Cane rats have blunt muzzles and small ears, and their speckled brown fur is coarse and bristly.
The greater cane rat (Thryonomys swinderianus) and the lesser cane rat (T. gregorianus) both inhabit nonforested sub-Saharan Africa except for Namibia and most of South Africa and Botswana. The two species are found together in certain regions, but they occupy different habitats. The greater cane rat lives along rivers and lakes and in swamps, reedbeds, and tall, dense grass with thick canelike stems, whereas the lesser cane rat prefers grassy ground in moist savannas and tall grass on rocky hillsides.
Cane rats are swift and agile on land and swim very well. Though primarily nocturnal, they are occasionally active during the day. Depending on the season, greater cane rats are solitary or communal. Lesser cane rats live in small family groups, usually denning in thick vegetation, although termite mounds and the abandoned burrows of aardvarks or porcupines are also used. Litters of one to eight well-developed young are born once or twice per year. Their diet consists of grass, other plants, and sometimes bark and fruits. Cane rats also eat crops and can become serious pests in regions where corn (maize), sugarcane, pineapples, cassava, and eggplant are cultivated. On the other hand, these large rodents provide a significant source of protein for Africans and are intensively hunted throughout their range.
Cane rats are the only living members of the family Thryonomyidae, and they have no close surviving relatives. The evolutionary history of Thryonomys dates back 2 million to 4 million years in Africa. However, fossils of extinct genera in the family Thryonomyidae have been found in Africa, the Mediterranean region, and Asia, and some of these remains date to the Late Eocene Epoch (37 million to 33.7 million years ago).
