Entelodont,  (family Entelodontidae),  any member of the extinct family Entelodontidae, a group of large mammals related to living pigs. Entelodonts were contemporaries of oreodonts, a unique mammalian group thought to be related to camels but sheeplike in appearance. Fossil evidence points to their emergence in the Middle Eocene (some 49 million to 37 million years ago) of Mongolia. They spread across Asia, Europe, and North America before becoming extinct sometime between 19 million and 16 million years ago during the early Miocene Epoch.
Entelodonts were medium-size to very large animals. The smallest ones grew to about 150 kg (about 330 pounds; the size of a large male white-tailed deer), whereas the largest ones, such as Dinohyus, weighed 900 kg (about 2,000 pounds; roughly the size of a Clydesdale horse). The skulls of entelodonts were also proportionally large, accounting for about 35 to 45 percent of the animal’s total length in Dinohyus. Entelodonts had distinctive tusklike projections of bone that grew out from the skull. These structures were related to the musculature and movements of the jaw during feeding, and they also might have  protected sensitive areas of the head.
Compared with other ungulates, the structure of the jaw and musculature was remarkably like that of carnivores; the joint connecting the lower and upper parts of the jaw was in line with the dentition rather than raised above it. Some researchers interpreted the jaw structure as indicative of a carnivorous diet, but the overall structure of jaw musculature, the teeth, and the wear patterns on the teeth suggest a quite omnivorous diet. Entelodonts had specializations for eating tough or hard foods and were perhaps even capable of crushing bone. (For example, entelodonts possessed proportionally massive jaw muscles connected to large bony attachments on the skull and mandible.) Thus, like living pigs, entelodonts were probably mixed feeders, subsisting on a variety of plant and animal foodstuffs. Even though some entelodont species were extraordinarily large, their limb skeletons indicate that they were fully terrestrial and specialized for running.
