Gayal,  (Bos gaurus frontalis), also called mithan,  a subspecies of the gaur and the largest of the wild oxen, subfamily Bovinae (family Bovidae), which is kept and utilized by the hill tribes of Assam and Myanmar (Burma).
Smaller than the gaur and with shorter legs, the gayal stands 140–160 cm (55–63 inches) at the shoulder. Bulls weigh up to a ton, 20–25 percent more than cows. The gayal lacks the gaur’s massive shoulder hump, and its skull is shorter, wider, and flatter; the horns of both sexes protrude from the sides of the head and are thicker, but shorter, than those of the gaur. A double dewlap at the chin and throat is well developed. Bulls are black and females brown-black; both have white stockings. Some gayals are piebald, and even white, as the result of hybridizing with cattle.
Gayals are not tame enough to be herded like cattle. However, they live and forage in the vicinity of settlements, to which they come close to spend the night. They can be lured right up to a village with salt, an important element in the diet of all cattle. Gaurs are water-dependent grazers and browsers with a preference for green grass and other monocots that grow in forest clearings, which may explain the origins of the gayal. The clearings created by the hill tribes for growing crops provide food for gaurs also; not only the crops but also the grass and forbs that colonize abandoned fields are undefended. When these factors are combined with the proximity of settlements to water and the protection from predators (primarily tigers) gained by sleeping close to people who tolerate, and even promote, the arrangement, all the conditions for self-domestication are met. The final stage of self-domestication is reached when animals have so lost their fear of humans that they can be used for food and trade. Such is the fate of the gayal.
The social organization and mating system of the gayal remains unchanged from its wild progenitors. The mating call of the bull gayal sounds like a gaur and unlike any other bovine; it is loud and as resonant as the base notes of an organ. Further proof of the relationship of the two animals is the mating of gayal cows with gaur bulls, which is promoted by gayal keepers to improve the breed.
