Grizzly bear,  traditional name given to brown bears (Ursus arctos) of North America. Grizzly bears of the northern Rocky Mountains (U. arctos horribilis) are classified as a subspecies, as are the huge Kodiak bears of Alaska (U. arctos middendorffi).
Grizzlies are massive animals with humped shoulders and an elevated forehead that contributes to a somewhat concave profile. The fur is brownish to buff, and the hairs are usually silver- or pale-tipped to give the grizzled effect for which they are named. Large adult grizzlies may be about 2.5 metres (8 feet) long and weigh about 410 kg (900 pounds). The Kodiak bear is the largest living land carnivore and may attain a length of more than 3 metres and a weight of 780 kg. It lives only on Kodiak Island and neighbouring islands. Because of their bulk and long straight claws, these bears rarely climb, even as cubs. Other grizzlies, however, are surprisingly agile and can run as fast as 48 km per hour (30 mph). Their eyesight is poor, and they have been known to attack humans without evident provocation. Females with cubs are the most aggressive.
Omnivorous animals, grizzlies feed on berries, plant roots and shoots, small mammals, fish, calves of many hoofed animals, and carrion. Food is often cached in shallow holes, and grizzlies dig readily and vigorously in search of rodents. Each spring the bear marks the boundary of its territory by rubbing trees, scratching bark, or even biting large pieces from the trunks of trees. During late summer and autumn, grizzlies accumulate large amounts of fat and then retire to dens in winter. Cubs, most often twins, are usually born in January or February after about 6–8 months of gestation.
Grizzlies once ranged through forested and open regions of western North America from Alaska to Mexico. Formerly living across the Great Plains, the grizzly bear has been the subject of many Native American legends and was one of the mammals reported by Lewis and Clark in their journey through eastern Montana in 1804. Grizzlies remain numerous in Alaska and Canada, where they continue to be highly prized as big game. In the continental United States, however, fewer than 1,000 remain, and they are protected by law.
The American black bear (Ursus americanus) is sometimes mistaken for the grizzly because it is sometimes brown in western parts of its range. Bears (family Ursidae) are members of the mammalian order Carnivora.
