Guenon,  (genus Cercopithecus),  any of 26 species of widely distributed African monkeys characterized by bold markings of white or bright colours. Guenons are slim, graceful quadrupedal monkeys with long arms and legs, short faces, and nonprehensile tails that are longer than the combined head and body length of about 42–56 cm (16–22 inches). Males of the large species weigh over 7 kg (about 15 pounds) and females as much as 5 kg (11.7 pounds); individuals of the smaller species may be as light as 2.3 kg (5.1 pounds). Guenons are known for the beauty of their soft, dense fur, which in many species has a speckled appearance produced by the alternation of two colours along each hair shaft. The bodies of guenons are commonly grayish, reddish, brown, green, or yellow.
In general, these monkeys are arboreal forest dwellers; however, some species also inhabit wetlands. Most guenons live in sizable groups of females and young with a single adult male. The groups are territorial, and the males utter loud barks or chirps as spacing calls. Groups from different species will often combine for foraging, at times associating for long periods. Guenons forage for leaves, fruit, and other vegetation and possibly for insects and other small animals; several species raid crops. In some species breeding seems to occur at any time of year. Single young are born after a gestation period of approximately five to seven months, depending on the species. Numerous species can be tamed, and they are commonly seen in zoos, owing to their hardiness, activity, good nature, and habit of grimacing at observers. With good care, their life span may exceed 20–30 years.
Guenons have patches of short contrasting fur on the nose. For example, the large spot-nosed guenon, or putty-nosed monkey (Cercopithecus nictitans), is a common West African form with gray-flecked black fur and an oval yellowish or white nose spot. Among other species with nose patches are the lesser spot-nosed guenon (C. petaurista) and the redtail (C. ascanius), both with heart-shaped white nose spots.
The lesula (C. lomamiensis), which inhabits pockets of habitat in Rwanda’s Nyungwe Forest National Park, possesses a spot of yellowish brown fur on the tip of its nose. The lesula was first described in 2007 and determined to be a new species in 2012. It has buff-coloured fur on its back and jet black fur on its underside. Scientists note that the lesula’s large eye orbits make the animal distinct from other members of Cercopithecus.
Some guenons are generally known by other names, among them the diana monkey (including the roloway), the owl-faced monkey (also called Hamlyn’s monkey), the mona monkey, and DeBrazza’s monkey. Guenons, as a group, formerly included other closely related types, such as the vervets (genus Chlorocebus), the patas monkey (genus Erythrocebus), the talapoin, or mangrove monkey (genus Miopithecus), and the robust Allen’s swamp monkey (genus Allenopithecus).
