Harvest mouse,  either of two genera of small mice: the American harvest mouse (Reithrodontomys) or the Old World harvest mouse (Micromys).
The 20 species of American harvest mice are widespread, being found from southern Canada to northern South America at elevations ranging from below sea level to above the timberline in the northern Andes Mountains. They live in prairies, grassy fields with shrubs or trees, meadows, temperate and tropical forests, and cultivated fields. One, the salt-marsh harvest mouse (R. raviventris), lives only in the tidal salt marshes surrounding San Francisco Bay in California and is listed as an endangered species under federal and state laws. American harvest mice are nocturnal and are active all year. Although terrestrial, they are excellent climbers and build globular nests of vegetation either on the ground or above it in grass, sedge, shrubs, or trees. Their diet includes seeds, flowers, cactus fruit, succulent green sprouts, and invertebrates. Weight varies among species from 6 to 20 grams (0.2 to 0.7 ounce) and body length from 5 to 15 cm (1.9 to 5.9 inches); the slender, scantily haired tail may be either shorter or longer than the body. Fur is soft and ranges in colour from pale buff gray to shades of brown or blackish, with underparts of white or gray, sometimes tinted with buff.
New World harvest mice belong to the subfamily Sigmodontinae of the mouse family Muridae within the order Rodentia. Their ancestry is seen in the North American geologic record back to the early Pliocene Epoch (5.3 million to 3.6 million years ago). Their closest living relatives are deer mice.
The single species of Old World harvest mouse (Micromys minutus) lives from Great Britain and Europe westward to Siberia and Korea, southern China, Assam, and Japan. As suggested by its scientific name, it is among the smallest of rodents, weighing less than 7 grams and having a body length of less than 8 cm. The semiprehensile tail is about the same length as the body and is scantily haired. The soft fur is brownish yellow to reddish brown above, white to buff on the underparts.
The Old World harvest mouse is an agile climber that prefers tall vegetation such as hedgerows, grasses, reeds, bamboo, and cultivated grain or rice fields. It is active all year and is primarily but not entirely nocturnal. During breeding season this mouse constructs globular nests of grass suspended between vertical stems up to 13 cm above ground; during the rest of the year, nests are located in holes in the ground, beneath haystacks, or in buildings. The Old World harvest mouse eats seeds and other vegetation in addition to insects and the eggs of small birds. Modern farm machinery may be destroying the animal’s food and nesting resources in Great Britain and Europe, where populations are apparently declining.
The Old World harvest mouse belongs to the subfamily Murinae of the mouse family Muridae. While some investigators recognize only one species of Micromys, others speculate that additional species exist. Fossils of six extinct Eurasian species date back as far as the late Pliocene Epoch (3.6 to 2.6 million years ago). Wood mice are the closest living relatives of the Old World harvest mouse.
