Hooded seal,  (Cystophora cristata), also called bladdernose seal,  large grayish seal with dark spots that is found in open waters of the North Atlantic and Arctic oceans. Hooded seals range from the Svalbard archipelago and the Barents Sea to the Gulf of St. Lawrence. Average-sized adult males measure about 2.6 metres (8.5 feet) long and typically weigh between 300 and 400 kg (660 and 880 pounds), whereas average-sized females measure 2.2 metres (7 feet) and weigh between 160 and 230 kg (350 and 500 pounds). Hooded seals are named for the nasal ornamentation occurring in sexually mature males. Hanging like a wrinkled sac when relaxed, the appendage can be inflated to become a hood that covers the front of the face and the top of the head. Adult males also have an elastic nasal septum that can be inflated to become a reddish balloon in front of their face. These two unusual features have a role in attracting females and, when competing for females, advertising strength to other males.
Hooded seals are gregarious only during molting and breeding season. Breeding typically occurs between April and June, and pups are born on the pack ice during the following March and April. Pups weigh roughly 25 kg (55 pounds) at birth and already possess a thin layer of blubber. Their coloration is gray on the belly, with darker, almost bluish fur on their back. For this reason they are often referred to as “bluebacks.” Lactation lasts only four days, and pups drink 10 litres (2.6 gallons) of milk daily to gain 7 kg (15 pounds) per day during that period. Weaned pups weigh up to 60 kg (130 pounds). After weaning, pups fast for several weeks until hunger drives them to enter the water and start feeding on their own. Females reach sexual maturity between three and six years of age, whereas males become sexually mature between five and seven years of age. Hooded seals may live for 25–30 years.
Hooded seals are strong swimmers that can dive to depths of over 1,000 metres (3,000 feet) and remain underwater for almost one hour. They feed on deepwater fishes—such as the Atlantic halibut (Hippoglossus hippoglossus), the Greenland halibut (Reinhardtius hippoglossoides), and redfish (Sebastes marinus)—and squid. Polar bears (Ursus maritimus), Greenland sharks (Somniosus microcephalus), and killer whales (Orcinus orca) are the natural predators of the hooded seal.
Valued for their pelts, meat, and oils, hooded seals are also hunted by humans. Hunting occurs most often in conjunction with efforts to harvest the more abundant harp seal. Trade in products made from hooded seals has been outlawed by the European Union since 1983; however, other countries (such as Canada) sanction limited harvesting by indigenous peoples and commercial interests. Worldwide, the population of hooded seals is estimated at 650,000 animals; however, there are concerns that forecasted decreases in Arctic ice extent due to global warming may substantially reduce their habitat and thus contribute to a population decline.
