Howler monkey,  (genus Alouatta),  any of several tropical American monkeys noted for their roaring cries. Several species of howlers are widely distributed through Central and South America. These are the largest New World monkeys and generally attain lengths of about 40–70 cm (16–28 inches), excluding the 50–75-cm (20–30-inch) tail. Howlers are stoutly built bearded monkeys with a hunched appearance and thickly furred prehensile tails that are naked on the underside of the tip to afford a better grip. The hair is long and thick and, depending on species, is typically black, brown, or red. Howlers are characterized by expansion of the hyoid bone into a large shell-like organ in the throat that gives resonance to the voice. In connection with the enlarged hyoid, howlers have a large throat, protruding jaws, and high sloping faces.
Howlers live in groups within territories whose boundaries are mapped out by howling matches with neighbouring clans. Their voices carry for 3 to 5 km (2 to 3 miles) and can be heard at dusk, at dawn, and during rainstorms. Howlers are slow-moving monkeys that commonly sit on the topmost branches and rarely descend to the ground. They feed primarily on leaves. When on the move, howlers progress in orderly groups usually led by an old male. Births are usually single and occur at any time of year.
The Colombian red howler (A. seniculus) has the largest distribution, and it has been listed as a species of least concern on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, but it is heavily hunted in some areas for its meat. Many other howler monkey species are also listed as species of least concern, but the decline of two species in particular has worried ecologists. The Maranhão red-handed howler monkey (A. ululata)—whose range is limited to the Atlantic coastal forests in the states of Maranhão, Piauí, and Ceará in Brazil—has been considered critically endangered since 1996. Hunting and habitat loss have taken a substantial toll on the species, and in 2008 ecologists estimated that the population was made up of fewer than 2,500 adults. The Yucatán black howler monkey (A. pigra), which is native to Guatemala, Belize, and southern Mexico, has been listed as an endangered species since 2003. Since 1978 it has declined by more than 60 percent because of hunting, habitat loss, and disease. Diet, temperament, and other factors make howler monkeys difficult to maintain in captivity, so ecologists often emphasize conservation measures that include habitat protection over captive breeding programs for these animals.
The Alouatta genus is one of several within the family Atelidae, which also includes woolly monkeys, spider monkeys, and woolly spider monkeys. All are found only in the Western Hemisphere.
