jaguar,  (Panthera onca), also called el tigre or tigre americano,  largest New World member of the cat family (Felidae), found from northern Mexico southward to northern Argentina. Its preferred habitats are usually swamps and wooded regions, but jaguars also live in scrublands and deserts. The jaguar is virtually extinct in the northern part of its original range and survives in reduced numbers only in remote areas of Central and South America; the largest known population exists in the Amazon rainforest.
Typical coloration is orange to tan, with black spots arranged in rosettes with a black spot in the centre. The jaguar resembles the leopard of Africa and Asia, but the leopard lacks the black centre spot. Along the midline of the jaguar’s back is a row of long black spots that may merge into a stripe. The base colour of the jaguar varies greatly from white to black. Although brown and black jaguars appear to be solid-coloured, spots are always faintly visible.
Jaguars are also larger and more heavily built than leopards. The male jaguar, which is generally larger than the female, attains a length of 1.7–2.7 metres (5.6–9 feet), including the 0.6–0.9-metre (2–3-foot) tail, with a shoulder height of 0.7–0.8 metre (2.3–2.6 feet); it weighs from 100 to 160 kg (220 to 350 pounds). South American jaguars are larger than those of Central America. The jaguar is grouped along with lions and tigers with the big, or roaring, cats and is the only such cat in the Western Hemisphere. Its sound repertoire includes snarls, growls, and deep hoarse grunts.
A solitary predator, the jaguar is a stalk-and-ambush hunter; its name comes from yaguar, the Tupí-Guaraní word meaning “he who kills with one leap.” Jaguars are swift and agile and are very good climbers. They enter water freely and appear to enjoy bathing. Although active during the day, jaguars hunt mainly at night and on the ground. Capybara and peccary are their preferred prey, but they will also take deer, birds, crocodilians, and fish. Livestock are occasionally attacked in areas where ranches have replaced natural habitat. The cat is a savage fighter when cornered but does not normally attack humans.
Jaguars adhere to a land tenure system much like cougars and tigers. Females establish overlapping home ranges, and female offspring may inherit land from their mothers. Males establish territories twice as large as females and overlap the ranges of several females. Both sexes mark their ranges with urine. Northern populations mate toward the end of the year, but in the tropics mating activity seems not to be restricted to a particular breeding season. After a gestation period of about 100 days, the female bears one to four tiny spotted cubs weighing 100–900 grams (less than 2 pounds) that do not open their eyes for 13 days. The mother raises the young for approximately two years. Full size and sexual maturity are reached at three to four years.
The geographic range of the jaguar once extended from the U.S.-Mexico border as far north as the Grand Canyon southward to Patagonia, Argentina. Habitat loss and fragmentation, trophy hunting, the illegal trade in body parts, and retaliatory killings stemming from the loss of livestock have reduced the jaguar’s geographic range and its population. Wildlife officials estimate that 64,000 jaguars remain, with some 89 percent of the global population living in the Amazon River basin. The International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources has classified the jaguar as a near threatened species since 2002.
