Jumping mouse,  (subfamily Zapodinae),  any of five species of small leaping rodents found in North America and China. Jumping mice weigh from 13 to 26 grams (0.5 to 0.9 ounce) and are 8 to 11 cm (3.1 to 4.3 inches) long, not including the scantily haired tail, which is longer than the body. Their glossy fur is soft or slightly coarse; coloration is tripartite: brown on top from nose to rump, grayish to rust-coloured on the sides, and white on the underparts. The tail is brown above and white below.
Jumping mice normally run on all four legs or bounce along in a series of short hops, but when alarmed they leap powerfully yet erratically up to 4 metres (13 feet), using their disproportionately long hind legs. They are balanced by the slender tail.
Generally terrestrial, these rodents are also agile shrub climbers and excellent swimmers. Their spherical nests are constructed of vegetation and are found in abandoned burrows of other animals, on the ground beneath logs or heavy brush, and sometimes in low shrubs and trees. Jumping mice eat a varied diet of fungi, fruit, seeds, invertebrates, and occasionally mollusks and small fish. During the winter they retreat underground to hibernate.
North American jumping mice, though common in some areas, are rarely seen because they are completely nocturnal. The woodland jumping mouse (Napaeozapus insignis) lives in moist forests of eastern North America. The meadow, Pacific, and western jumping mice (Zapus hudsonius, Z. trinotatus, and Z. princeps, respectively) range over much of North America, in grasslands as well as riverine and wet meadow habitats of cool and moist forests. The only species found outside North America is the Sichuan jumping mouse (Eozapus setchuanus), which inhabits cool and wet mountain forests of southern China. It is sometimes incorrectly included in the genus Zapus. Very little is known about its natural history.
Jumping mice constitute the subfamily Zapodinae. Along with birch mice and the more distantly related jerboas, jumping mice are classified in the family Dipodidae rather than with the “true” mice (family Muridae). Fossils of four extinct genera provide evolutionary history of jumping mice from the Middle Miocene Epoch (16.4 million to 11.2 million years ago) in North America and the Late Miocene Epoch (11.2 million to 5.3 million years ago) in Eurasia.
