Kinkajou,  (Potos flavus), also called honey bear,  an unusual member of the raccoon family (see procyonid) distinguished by its long, prehensile tail, short muzzle, and low-set, rounded ears. Native to Central America and parts of South America, the kinkajou is an agile denizen of the upper canopy of tropical forests.
The kinkajou is the only species of the genus Potos. Though related to the raccoon and coati, its appearance, behaviour, and ecology more closely resemble those of a primate. Indeed, the kinkajou was originally described to the scientific community as a lemur. It has soft, gray or brownish fur and large eyes set in a small, round face. The eyes are highly reflective of light, giving them a bright orange eyeshine. The kinkajou’s feet can be rotated 180° and have a thick covering of short hair on the soles. Its body length is less than 61 cm (24 inches), excluding its 40–57-cm (16–22-inch) tail. Adult weight ranges from 2 to 3.2 kg (4.4 to 7 pounds).
Nocturnal and arboreal, kinkajous generally feed alone or in pairs but will form stable groups in which members, particularly the males, groom each other and return each morning to established tree holes to sleep together. Kinkajous are highly vocal, emitting screams, barks, and a variety of softer sounds, including some described as “sneezes.” It rarely leaves the trees, feeding mostly on fruit and insects;  it also drinks nectar from flowers during dry periods. A litter consists of one or two young, born in spring or summer.
The kinkajou often shows little fear of humans. It is sometimes kept as a pet known as a “honey bear,” although the animal cannot be litter-trained.  Considered gentle if they are obtained when young, kinkajous do possess anal glands that produce a musky odour when the animal is angered or frightened; kinkajous can also deliver a sharp bite. In captivity, they can live 20 years or more.
The cacomistle and especially the olingo are similar members of the family Procyonidae. These animals, however, do not have prehensile tails.
