marsupial,  any of more than 250 species belonging to the infraclass Metatheria (sometimes called Marsupialia), a mammalian group characterized by premature birth and continued development of the newborn while attached to the nipples on the mother’s lower belly. The pouch—or marsupium, from which the group takes its name—is a flap of skin covering the nipples. Although prominent in many species, it is not a universal feature. In some species the nipples are fully exposed or are bounded by mere remnants of a pouch. The young remain firmly attached to the milk-giving teats for a period corresponding roughly to the latter part of development of the fetus in the womb of a placental mammal (eutherian).
The largest and most-varied assortment of marsupials—some 200 species—is found in Australia, New Guinea, and neighbouring islands, where they make up most of the native mammals found there. In addition to larger species such as kangaroos, wallabies, wombats, and the koala (Phascolarctos cinereus), there are numerous smaller forms, many of which are carnivorous, with the Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus harrisii) being the largest of this group (family Dasyuridae). About 70 species live in the Americas, mainly in South and Central America, but one, the Virginia opossum (Didelphis virginiana), ranges through the United States into Canada. The largest living marsupial is the red kangaroo (Macropus rufus), males of which can grow to about 2 metres (6.6 feet) in height, 3 metres (10 feet) from muzzle to tail tip, and a weight of up to 90 kg (about 200 pounds). The smallest are the planigales (see marsupial mouse), especially the long-tailed planigale (Planigale ingrami), measuring barely 12 cm (4.7 inches) in total length. Most marsupials range from the size of a squirrel to that of a medium-size dog.
The structural and behavioral parallels with placental mammals are sometimes quite striking. Such resemblances are examples of convergent evolution—a tendency for organisms to adapt in similar ways to similar habitats. Thus, there are marsupials that look remarkably like moles, shrews, squirrels, mice, dogs, and hyenas. Others are the ecological counterparts, less in structure than in habits, of cats, small bears, and rabbits. Even the larger grazing marsupials (such as kangaroos), which resemble no placental mammals, can be thought of as filling the same ecological role (niche) as the deer and antelope found elsewhere.
The niches that marsupials fill are closely associated with structure. The burrowing species, such as the marsupial moles (Notoryctes typhlops and N. caurinus) and the wombats, have powerful foreclaws with which they can tunnel into the ground for food and shelter. Terrestrial forms, such as kangaroos and wallabies, possess well-developed hind limbs that serve both as formidable weapons and as catapults by which they can bound over the plains. The gliders have a membrane along either flank, attached to the forelegs and hind legs, that enables these arboreal animals to glide down from a high perch. A few marsupials—such as tree kangaroos, koalas, and some cuscuses—spend most of their lives in trees. The water opossum, or yapok (Chironectes minimus), of Central and South America is semiaquatic.
The diets of marsupials are as varied as the niches they occupy. Many dasyurids live chiefly on insects and other small animals. Dunnarts (Sminthopsis) are so hyperactive—like shrews—that, in order to supply their high energy needs, they must devour their own weight in food (chiefly insects) each day. The numbat uses its remarkable wormlike tongue to lap up termites and ants. Many Australian possums, bandicoots, and American opossums have a mixed diet of plants and insects. Wombats and many other marsupials are strictly vegetarian. The small honey possum (Tarsipes rostratus) is specialized to feed on the nectar of flowers, and other marsupials also may serve as important pollinators in that way. Few large carnivores have ever evolved in Australia, because of the low productivity of its environment. The most-recent large carnivorous marsupials to evolve—the Tasmanian devil and the now-extinct thylacine, or Tasmanian wolf (Thylacinus cynocephalus)—were both displaced on the mainland by the dingo.
Marsupials are notably less intelligent than placental mammals, partly because of their simpler brains. Compared with that of placentals, the brain of marsupials differs markedly in both structure and bulk. Most notably, it lacks a corpus callosum, the part of the placental brain that connects the two cerebral halves. The marsupial brain is also smaller relative to overall body size; for example, a quoll has about half as much brain tissue as a placental cat of similar skull size. It is not surprising, therefore, to find that marsupial behaviour differs somewhat from that of placentals. One peculiarity that may stem from that underdevelopment is restricted vocal ability. Although marsupials are not entirely silent, few emit loud sounds of excitement or distress; apparently, none utters grunts of contentment or even cries of hunger when young. Their vocalizing is more limited and less variable than that of placentals. The ferocious-sounding rutting roars of male koalas are a dramatic and unexpected exception.
There seems to be little permanent social organization among most marsupials beyond short-lived pair bonds during mating. Many of the grazing marsupials, such as kangaroos and wallabies, move in feeding groups called mobs, but those associations are not true social groups, as there is no attention paid to any leaders or elders. Only the lesser gliders (Petaurus) have permanent cohesive social groupings.
The life cycle of marsupials exhibits peculiarities that have long been considered primitive compared with those of placental mammals but are more likely adaptations to low-productivity environments. The uterine cycle of the female marsupial has no secretory phase, and the uterine wall is not specialized for embryo implantation, although a transitory placenta does exist in the bandicoots. The period of intrauterine development in marsupials ranges from about 12 days in the bilby (Macrotis lagotis) to 38 days in the swamp wallaby (Wallabia bicolor).
The young, born in a vulnerable embryonic condition, make their own way to the shelter, warmth, and nourishment of the pouch; in pouchless marsupials the young simply cling to the teats. Those fortunate enough to survive that arduous journey may succeed in attaching themselves to the mother’s nipples, which then swell and become firmly fastened—almost physically fused—to the mouth tissues of the young. In that condition the young continue their development for weeks or months, after which they are weaned and begin to look after themselves. Frequently, the partially developed young outnumber the available teats, and the excess individuals perish.
