Mouse opossum, also called murine opossum,  any of a group of more than 55 species of Central and South American marsupials that are the most abundant members of the opossum family (Didelphidae, subfamily Didelphinae). Previously included in the genus Marmosa, mouse opossums are divided today among eight genera: gracile mouse opossums (genus Gracilinanus) with six species; true mouse opossums (genus Marmosa), 10 species; slender mouse opossums (Marmosops), 15 species; woolly mouse opossums (genus Micoureus), six species; southern, or fat-tailed, mouse opossums (genus Thylamys), 10 species; and the pygmy (genus Chacodelphys), gray (genus Tlacuatzin), and Kalinowski’s (genus Hyladelphys) mouse opossums are known from one species each. Gray mouse opossums are found only in Mexico. True mouse opossums occur from southern Mexico through Central and South America to southern Brazil. Woolly mouse opossums are found in Central and South America from Belize to Brazil. The other mouse opossums are found only in South America, where several species are known from only one or a few localities and individuals.
Adults vary in total length from a little over 10 cm (4 inches) for the pygmy mouse opossum to 49 cm (19 inches) for the larger woolly mouse opossums. Fat-tailed mouse opossums have the ability to store fat in their tail, which is usually about the same length as the head and body combined. Tails in the other species are prehensile, slender, and longer than the head and body. The mouse opossum’s colour varies from pale gray to brown above and white to pale gray below; the darker-coloured species live in mountain forest habitats. Mouse opossums have large naked ears, nearly naked tails, and a dark ring around each eye. Females lack a pouch. All species have abdominal mammary glands, and a few also have pectoral mammary glands.
All mouse opossums are agile climbers, and many build nests in palms and in holes in trees and large cacti, as well as in hollow logs and holes in the ground. They eat a variety of fruits, insects, and small animals. For some mouse opossums, the litter size may be as high as 15, but for most species it is half that number or less.
