muskrat,  (Ondatra zibethicus),  a large amphibious rodent indigenous to North America but found also in Europe, Ukraine, Russia, Siberia, adjacent areas of China and Mongolia, and Honshu Island in Japan. The muskrat is a robust vole weighing up to 1.8 kg (4 pounds). It has short legs and a compact body up to 33 cm (13 inches) long. The sparsely haired scaly tail is flattened vertically and can be as long as the body. The eyes are small, and the ears are nearly concealed by fur, which ranges in colour from reddish to blackish brown and consists of a short, soft underfur heavily overlaid with long, stiff, glossy guard hairs. The dense underfur traps air, providing both insulation and buoyancy. Muskrats’ large hind feet, fringed with stiff bristles and partially webbed, are used as oars when swimming, with the tail serving as a rudder. They can stay submerged for up to 20 minutes and swim as fast as 5 km (3.1 miles) per hour. The animal is named for the musky odour of a yellowish substance produced by its perineal glands. Secreted into the urine, the substance is used to mark lodges, pathways, and other landmarks throughout an individual’s home range.
Marshes are the usual habitat of muskrats, but they also live in wooded swamps, lakes, and streams, where they build sizable lodges of cattails, sedges, and other vegetation. They also dig burrows near the water’s edge for shelter, and their burrowing sometimes weakens earthen dams and dikes. Eating mostly grasses and cattails, muskrats consume the roots and stalks of a wide variety of other aquatic plants; they are, however, occasionally predatory, taking freshwater mussels, snails, crustaceans, salamanders, fish, and young birds for food. Females produce one or more litters of three to eight young each year after a gestation period of three to four weeks.
The muskrat’s indigenous geographic range covers most of North America south of the tundra from Alaska to Newfoundland into the southern United States. It does not occur in Florida or coastal parts of Georgia and South Carolina; British Columbia and California have nonnative populations, although Baja California has an indigenous population. In South America the muskrat was introduced into southern Argentina. It is widespread in Eurasia owing to the introduction of several populations during the early 1900s. Historically, the muskrat was trapped for its thick and durable coat, and it is still sought by the fur trade. Muskrat flesh has been sold as “marsh rabbit.”
The Florida water rat (Neofiber alleni) is sometimes called the round-tailed muskrat. It resembles a small muskrat (up to 38 cm in total length), but its tail is round rather than flat. This animal is less aquatic than Ondatra and lives in the grassy marshes and prairies of Florida and southeastern Georgia. Both belong to the subfamily Arvicolinae of the mouse family (Muridae) within the order Rodentia.
