Perissodactyl,  any member of the order Perissodactyla, a group of herbivorous mammals characterized by the possession of either one or three hoofed toes on each hindfoot. They include the horses, asses, and zebras, the tapirs, and the rhinoceroses. The name—from Greek perissos, “odd,” and daktylos, “finger”—was introduced to separate the odd-toed ungulates from the even-toed ones (Artiodactyla), all of which had previously been classified as members of a single group.
The Perissodactyla comprise three families of living mammals: six species of horses (Equidae), four species of tapirs (Tapiridae), and five species of rhinoceroses (Rhinocerotidae). These families are remnants of a group that flourished during the Paleogene and Neogene periods (from 65.5 million to 2.6 million years ago), a time when it was much richer in species and in variety of form than at present and played a dominant role in the fauna of the world. Today there are far fewer species of perissodactyls than artiodactyls, and most of the species still living are endangered, especially the rhinoceroses, the tapirs, and two of the three species of zebras.
The horses, asses, and zebras are long-legged, running forms with one functional digit in each foot and with high-crowned, molariform (i.e., modified for grinding) cheek teeth. The tapir is a rather rounded, piglike, semiamphibious forest and woodland animal with a small proboscis (trunklike snout) and a coat of short, bristly hairs. Tapirs have primitive features, such as four hoofed toes in the forefoot and three in the hind, and they have rather simple molar teeth. Rhinoceroses are massive creatures with a thick and nearly hairless hide, excepting the hairy Sumatran rhinoceros, and three digits on each foot. They bear hornlike structures on the head.
The Perissodactyla are of particular scientific interest because their fossil history is so well known. The evolution of horses from the tiny “dawn horse” (Hyracotherium, formerly Eohippus) to the present form is a classic sequence, knowledge of which has played an important role in evolutionary thought. The order also provides a notable example of parallel evolution. Following completely different evolutionary paths, both perissodactyls and artiodactyls (e.g., cattle, antelope, swine) independently evolved features such as high-crowned grinding teeth and elongated limbs with a reduced number of digits, in adaptation to a similar running (cursorial), herbivorous mode of life.
Living perissodactyls are of medium or large size. Asses and tapirs, the smallest representatives of the order, attain a length of approximately 2 to 2.5 metres (6.6 to 8.2 feet), stand 1 metre or more at the shoulder, and weigh up to 250 or 300 kg (550 to 660 pounds). The largest forms are the Indian and square-lipped rhinoceroses (Rhinoceros unicornis and Ceratotherium simum, respectively), which are 4 to 5 metres (13 to 16.4 feet) long, measure up to 2 metres at the shoulder, and often weigh more than 1,600 kg (3,500 pounds). Indricotherium (or Paraceratherium, formerly Baluchitherium), known as the giraffe rhinoceros from the Oligocene (about 30 million years ago), was the largest known land mammal, standing about 5.5 metres (18 feet) at the shoulder.
All feed either by grazing (i.e., cropping grasses) or by browsing (taking shoots and leaves from trees and bushes). The Equidae in particular were abundant and important members of the Old World fauna until their numbers were reduced by modern man. Zebras are still numerous and ecologically important in a few parts of Africa. The importance of the domestic horse and the ass in the history of humankind is very great indeed. Both have served extensively as pack, draft, and riding animals. The horse is sometimes eaten by humans, and its flesh is widely used as pet food. Through centuries of domestication, it has been developed into a number of different breeds (for more information on domesticated horses, see horse).
The living wild Equidae are confined to the Old World. Zebras and the true wild ass (Equus asinus) are African, with the zebras confined to the southern and eastern parts, while the ass originally ranged over northern and northeastern Africa.
The wild horse (Equus caballus), ancestor of the domestic horse, occupied the low country north of the great mountain ranges from Europe across central Asia; it may now be extinct as a wild animal. The half-asses, races of E. hemionus, were found in the arid zone of Asia from Persia to the Gobi Desert, as well as in Arabia, Syria, and northwestern India.
The living rhinoceroses are also Old World forms, with two species in Africa and three in Asia. There are three species of tapirs in the New World tropics, one in Middle America and two in South America. The fourth species of tapir is Asiatic.
The Equidae are highly specialized for a cursorial, herbivorous mode of life. They are absent from forests and other densely vegetated regions, but, apart from this limitation, the range of the group is relatively unrestricted by the type of vegetation, climate, and topography. The species replace one another geographically for the most part, and each occupies a somewhat different habitat.
Grass plays a major role in the diet; the zebras, for example, are known to feed on tall, coarse grasses avoided by most antelopes. Some species also take shrubs, herbs, and even bulbs. Water requirements vary in different species. In South Africa the plains zebra has been found to drink about once every 36 hours. By contrast, the mountain zebra (Equus zebra), Przewalski’s horse (Equus caballus przewalskii) and the half-ass, all living in semidesert areas, are reported to survive if they can drink once in three or four days. The ass too can manage with less water than the horse. The mountain zebra and Przewalski’s horse dig for water in dry riverbeds and depressions.
The mountain zebra occupies parts of the arid rocky escarpment separating the interior plateau of the southern African subcontinent from the coast lowlands. The race E. zebra hartmannae, still relatively numerous over much of its original range in Namibia and southern Angola, enjoys legal protection and is represented in game reserves. Conflict between these zebras and farm livestock for the meagre pasture of the semidesert regions, however, has led to a reduction in zebra numbers. The race E. zebra zebra was originally common in the mountain ranges of the Cape region but now survives only as a remnant of perhaps 100 animals. About one-half of these have sanctuary in a national park.
The plains zebra (E. quagga) formerly inhabited a great area of grassland and savanna from the Cape to South Sudan. The southernmost race (E. quagga quagga), which was only partly striped, became extinct in the 19th century. The populations of the other races have been much reduced in many places, and the range of the species has shrunk considerably. There are large populations in reserves, however, and the species is not in any immediate danger of extermination.
Grevy’s zebra (E. grevyi), which shares a narrow zone in northern Kenya with the plains zebra, is confined to sparsely wooded, semidesert plains and low hills in northern Kenya, southern and eastern Ethiopia, and western Somaliland. Its status appears to be generally satisfactory.
The true ass (Equus asinus), ancestor of the domestic donkey, is the equid of arid North Africa whose range extends south to approximately 6° N latitude. Its natural distribution probably included all habitable parts of North Africa. At present, asses are known from semidesert country extending from the east bank of the Nile (in Sudan) to the Red Sea and in parts of Eritrea, Ethiopia, and Somalia. There are also isolated pockets in the Tibesti Mountains in the Sahara and in the countries of central and western Africa. There is a great deal of uncertainty about the identity of all asses now described as “wild.” Some may be merely feral (escaped or released) donkeys, and interbreeding with feral donkeys is likely to have occurred in many, if not all, existing populations.
The wild horse was widely distributed in Eurasia north of the mountain chains. The Romans encountered it in Spain. Two races have survived to modern times. A gray race, known as the tarpan, was the horse of southern Russia. It became extinct in Ukraine during the mid-19th century. The endangered Przewalski’s horse (E. caballus przewalskii), a small reddish brown race (considered a species by some authors), was last seen in the wild in 1968 in the remote semidesert steppe country on the boundary between Mongolia and China. Wild horses enjoy legal protection in Mongolia and China, but nomadic pastoralists have been encroaching on previously uninhabited country and competing with the horses for pasture and the scarce water supplies.
The half-asses, races of Equus hemionus, occupied the dry belt from Mongolia through central Asia to Syria, with a northern limit at about 50° N latitude. The chigetia or kulan (E. hemionus hemionus), which was formerly widespread over an immense region of the Gobi, now occurs only in semidesert steppe country in central Mongolia. Hunting and competition for water by pastoral tribesmen are responsible for its decline. The kulan is slightly smaller than the kiang (E. hemionus kiang), which is found on the cold arid steppes of Nepal, Sikkim, and western Tibet at altitudes of 4,270 metres (14,000 feet) and more. The kiang is now said to be rare but not endangered. The Persian onager (E. hemionus onager) lives in a lower semidesert or desert environment, with a range that formerly included northeastern Iran, northwestern Afghanistan, and Russian Turkestan. It is now extremely rare and unlikely to survive outside northeastern Iran and the Badkhyz Reserve in Turkmeniya. A small nucleus has sanctuary in the semidesert salt plains of the Kavir Protected Region in Iran. The Indian wild ass is a closely related, probably identical, form sometimes distinguished as the race E. hemionus khur. A fairly small population occupies salt flats in the Rann of Kutch, a remnant of the thousands found there at the end of World War II. The Syrian onager (E. hemionus hemippus) is the smallest member of the group and stands about one metre (three feet) at the shoulder. It was once found in the desert region of Palestine, Syria, and Iraq, and was domesticated by the ancient Sumerians before the introduction of the domestic horse into Mesopotamia. This race may survive in the Djezireh Desert, Syria, or north of the Syrian-Turkish border; if so, the number must be extremely small.
