pronghorn,  (Antilocapra americana), also called American antelope,  North American hoofed mammal, the sole living member of the old ruminant family Antilocapridae (order Artiodactyla). It is the only animal that has branching horns and sheds them annually. This graceful denizen of open plains and semideserts is reddish brown and white in colour, with a short, dark brown mane, white underparts, two white bands on the throat, and a large circular white patch of long hair on the rump. The rump patch can be suddenly erected to warn other pronghorns of danger; the flash of white from the rump patch can be seen by a human for 3–4 km (2–2.5 miles). Its common name to the contrary, it is not closely related to the antelopes.
Pronghorns stand about 80–100 cm (2.5–3.25 feet) at the shoulder; large northern males weigh about 40 kg (90 pounds) and the females slightly less. They are highly evolved runners. Faster than any Old World antelope, they can attain a speed of 70 km (40 miles) per hour and leap 6 metres (20 feet) at a bound. With eyes as large as those of elephants, pronghorns have astonishingly acute vision and can readily identify predators at distances of up to 1 km (0.6 mile). Their extreme adaptations reflect the severe predation on pronghorns during the Ice Age.
Both sexes bear horns. Those of the male are longer and branch into two prongs; the longer curves backward and the shorter projects forward. Pronghorn bucks shed their horns in October after the mating season. The horns grow during winter and are fully grown just before the territorial contests of the bucks in spring.
The short mating season is in late summer and early fall. Bucks on fertile pastures become territorial and mate in seclusion with females that have entered estrus. In dry areas bucks may form harems. Pronghorns use the summer’s vegetation to replenish the energy lost by their mating activities, and consequently they have a very long gestation period (250 days) for their small body size. Females implant half a dozen or more embryos, but only two survive, one in each of the two uterine horns. Thus, twin births are normal. The extra embryos succumb to intrauterine competition, in which embryos kill off their neighbours using outgrowth from their fetal membranes that penetrates and dispatches the losers.
Pronghorns normally live in small bands in summer, but they may form large herds in winter. They are found from Alberta to northern Mexico. Nearly exterminated in the late 19th century, pronghorns have returned to great abundance with the help of dedicated conservation efforts. Today they are common game animals. Only the small desert-adapted Sonoran pronghorn of southern Arizona and northern Mexico and the peninsular pronghorn of Baja California remain endangered.
