Rat opossum,  (family Caenolestidae), also called selva or shrew opossum,  any of six species of South American marsupials in the order Paucituberculata. Rat opossums include the common shrew opossums (genus Caenolestes) with four species, the Incan caenolestid (Lestoros inca), and the Chilean shrew opossum (Rhyncholestes raphanurus). These six species, together with opossums (family Didelphidae), form the New World section (Ameridelphia) of the cohort Marsupialia. Rat opossums, named for their general appearance and size, have 46–48 teeth and long epipubic bones associated with the pelvis. Rat opossums are pouchless.
Adults vary in total length from about 15 to 27 cm (6 to 11 inches), with the tail length about equal to that of the head and body; weight varies from about 21 grams (0.75 ounce) in the Chilean shrew opossum to as high as 41 grams (1.4 ounces) in the common gray shrew opossum (Caenolestes fuliginosus). The muzzle is long and narrow. The fur of the head and body is dark slate gray, with the underparts of the body being slightly paler in most species. The ears and tail are covered with short fine hair. The front feet have five toes each; the inner three toes have well-developed claws, and the outer and inner toes each have a short nail. On the hind feet, all but the inner toe have claws. The inner (big) toe has neither claw nor nail and, unlike the big toe in other American opossums, it cannot be used like an opposable thumb to grasp objects. Common shrew opossums and Incan caenolestids have four mammary glands, and Chilean shrew opossums have five. Shrew opossums have three or four incisors on each side of the lower jaw and long, greatly enlarged lower anterior incisors that project forward.
Common shrew opossums are found from Venezuela to Peru. Incan caenolestids occur in southern Peru and adjacent Bolivia. Both common shrew opossums and Incan caenolestids live in moist subtropical  and cloud forests of the Andes Mountains. Chilean shrew opossums live in the temperate rainforests of south-central Chile.
Shrew opossums are nocturnal and mainly terrestrial (although they climb well), and they feed on insects, small vertebrates, fruit, and other vegetation. In the moist forests they inhabit, their runways can be found on the ground, along fallen logs, and under and around tree roots and moss-covered rocks. Pregnant or lactating common shrew opossums have been found in September and October. Lactating Chilean shrew opossums have been found in most months of the year except during the South American winter (June to September).
