Sitatunga,  (Tragelaphus spekei),  the most aquatic antelope, with elongated, splayed hooves and flexible foot joints that enable it to traverse boggy ground. Though common, even abundant, in African swamps and permanent marshes, the sitatunga is also one of the most secretive and least known of Africa’s large fauna. It is a member of the spiral-horned antelope tribe, Tragelaphini (family Bovidae), which also includes the nyala and kudu.
Female sitatungas stand 75–90 cm (30–35 inches) tall and weigh 40–85 kg (90–185 pounds); males stand 88–125 cm (35–49 inches) tall and weigh 70–125 kg (150–275 pounds). Both sexes have a woolly, bright rufous coat that is marked with 8–10 white stripes, spots on flanks and cheeks, and patches on neck and legs; they also have a white-to-brown spinal crest. Sitatungas develop shaggy, water-repellent pelage, which is brown to chestnut in females and gray-brown to chocolate-brown in males, that partially obscures the markings; coloration varies individually and regionally, with southern populations being the least colourful. Only males have horns, which are 45–90 cm (18–35 inches) long with one to one and a half turns. The sitatunga’s range is centred on rivers and swamps in the rainforest of the Congo basin. Isolated populations occur in wetlands that afford cover in the form of papyrus, reeds, bulrushes, or sedges on the borders of major rivers and lakes in sub-Saharan Africa.
Sitatungas frequent the deepest, densest parts of the swamp, where they make themselves even more inconspicuous by moving very slowly and deliberately, standing and often ruminating in water up to their shoulders and even submerging with only the nose above water in order to avoid detection. Platforms of trampled vegetation serve as individual resting places where sitatungas can lie out of water in daytime. As wetlands are among the most productive habitats, they can support as many as 55 sitatungas per square km (142 sitatungas per square mile). Sitatungas are nonterritorial with overlapping home ranges, yet they are largely solitary, particularly males; two or three females with calves, often accompanied by a male, are the largest herds likely to be seen.
Sitatungas not only feed on swamp vegetation but also often come ashore at night to graze on green pasture and enter nearby woodlands to browse foliage and herbage. Regularly used passageways between feeding and resting areas make sitagungas unusually vulnerable to poachers’ snares and nets. Their specialized feet and a powerful bounding gait enable them to outrun mammalian predators (wild dogs, lions, and spotted hyenas) on soft ground and in the water, but they are clumsy runners on dry land.
Sitatungas have no fixed breeding season, but most calves are born in the dry season, after a seven-and-a-half month gestation. Calves remain hidden on platforms in the swamp for a month and even afterward are only seen in company with other sitatungas.
