Spring hare,  (Pedetes capensis), also spelled springhare,  a bipedal grazing rodent indigenous to Africa. About the size of a rabbit, the spring hare more closely resembles a giant jerboa in having a short round head, a thick muscular neck, very large eyes, and long, narrow upright ears. Like jerboas, it has short forelegs but long, powerful hind legs and feet used for jumping. Standing on its hind feet and using its tail as a brace, the spring hare moves in a series of short hops with its forefeet held close to the body. When alarmed, it travels quickly in erratic leaps of 2 to 3 metres (6.6 to 9.8 feet) until it reaches a burrow.
Found throughout southern and eastern Africa northward into Kenya, spring hares live in open arid habitats of sandy ground, overgrazed or floodplain grasslands, dry riverbeds, sparse scrub, and cultivated areas. During the day they den in burrows, usually in well-drained, hard-packed sandy soils on flat open land near an abundant source of grass. They dig by using sharp curved claws on the five digits of their forefeet. Large flattened claws on the four digits of the hind feet allow them to throw loosened soil clear of the excavation. Grass is their primary food; they consume all parts of the plant, including roots, but different parts are preferred in different seasons. They sometimes eat locusts as well as cultivated crops. Litters of one (rarely two) young may be born at any time during the year or, depending on geography, only during the wet season.
Weight generally ranges from 3 to 4 kg (6.6 to 8.8 pounds), and body length is about 35 to 43 cm (14 to 17 inches). The tail is approximately equal in length to the body and is covered with thick hairs that form a dark brown or black brush at the tip. The fur is straight, long, soft, and thin, ranging in colour from sandy to reddish brown. The pale fur of the underparts extends to the front of the thighs and inner sides of the legs. A small flap of skin (the tragus) at the base of each ear can be folded back over the ear opening to keep out sand and dust; the nostrils can be closed for the same purpose.
Spring hares are not related to hares and rabbits, which belong to a separate order of mammals (Lagomorpha). Within the order Rodentia, spring hares have been speculatively allied with jerboas (family Dipodidae), gundis (family Ctenodactylidae), African and Asian porcupines (family Hystricidae), or rats and mice (family Muridae). However, most specialists now agree that the spring hare is not closely related to any group of living rodents. The spring hare is the only member of the family Pedetidae, which was recently placed, along with anomalures, in a separate suborder of rodents, Anomaluromorpha. The spring hare’s closest relatives are represented only by fossils. The extinct genus Pedetes lived in Africa during the Early Pliocene Epoch, probably in habitats similar to those occupied by the living species. A much larger version of the spring hare (genus Megapedetes) lived during Miocene times in Asia.
