Tuco-tuco,  (genus Ctenomys),  South American burrowing rodents similar to the North American pocket gopher in both appearance and ecology. There are 48 species, although different authorities recognize from 39 to 56. More continue to be found, reflecting the variability in size, colour, and number of chromosomes among different populations. Their name is derived from the sound they make.
Tuco-tucos have small eyes, tiny ears, and short muscular legs with strong claws on the digits. Their stout, cylindrical bodies measure up to 25 cm (10 inches) long, with a tail of up to 11 cm. The dense fur is short in some species and long in others, and it ranges in colour from solid gray through various shades of brown to almost black; underparts are lighter.
Some species are solitary and others colonial, but all tuco-tucos construct extensive burrows that include chambers for nesting and for storage of roots, stems, and grasses. Usually active in early morning and late afternoon, these sedentary rodents remain close to their burrows but will occasionally leave at night to forage. Tuco-tucos breed annually and, depending upon the species, give birth to litters of one to seven well-developed young. Gestation lasts from 102 to 120 days.
Found primarily in the southern half of South America, tuco-tucos have a geographic range that extends from southern Peru and eastern Brazil southward to Tierra del Fuego. They live at elevations ranging from sea level to about 4,000 metres (13,000 feet) in a variety of natural habitats, including Altiplano, tropical forest, and grasslands. Tuco-tucos also live in man-made habitats such as pastures, agricultural fields, and vacant city lots.
Tuco-tucos are members of the degu family (Octodontidae), although they are sometimes classified in their own family (Ctenomyidae). The remarkable array of species is likely due to the sedentary nature of tuco-tucos, which, combined with their burrowing behaviour, results in isolated populations—a condition associated with rapid speciation. All living species appear to have evolved very quickly and recently during the Pleistocene Epoch (2,600,000 to 11,700 years ago).
