Uakari,  (genus Cacajao),  any of several types of short-tailed South American monkeys with shaggy fur, humanlike ears, and distinctive bald faces that become flushed when the animal is excited. In two of the three colour forms, the face is bright red. Uakaris are about 35–50 cm (14–20 inches) long, excluding their strangely short 15–20-cm nonprehensile, or nongrasping, tails.
The monkeys live in troupes of about 15 individuals and are diurnal (active during the day), feeding mainly on fruit. Acrobatic and athletic, they launch themselves from high branches, bouncing on small tree limbs to leap from one tree to another with arms outstretched.
There are two species and three main colour forms of this primate, and all are either endangered or vulnerable. The faces of red uakaris (subspecies Cacajao calvus rubicundus, C. calvus novaesi, and C. calvus ucayalii) are bright red, and the coats range from reddish brown to red-orange. They live in flooded forests along the upper Amazon River and its tributaries in eastern Peru and western Brazil. The white, or bald, uakari (C. calvus calvus) is a different colour form of the same species. It has whitish fur and lives only in the Mamirauá Sustainable Development Reserve along the upper Amazon in Brazil. Because of its vermilion face, local people call it the “English monkey.” The face, shoulders, arms, hands, and feet of the black-headed uakari (C. melanocephalus) are black, and the coat is chestnut-coloured with a saddle of reddish or yellowish hair. It lives in southern Venezuela, southeastern Colombia, and northwestern Brazil. Males are particularly red, which leads some scientists to speculate that the colour attracts females; in fact, since male uakaris pale with malaria, the bright colour may help females to select healthy mates.
Uakaris are captured by Amazonian Indians; the young are kept as pets, the adults eaten. In general, uakaris do not do well in captivity. They belong to the family Cebidae and are one of the few New World monkeys without a prehensile tail.
