Urial,  (Ovis orientalis),  medium-size, rather stout-bodied wild sheep, distributed from northwest India and Ladakh to southwest Russia, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iran. Six to nine subspecies are usually recognized; they differ in the colour and size of the winter neck-ruff of males, as well as in the colour of their saddle patches and in their horn shape. (Horn tips can converge to the back of the neck, point forward, or sometimes diverge.) Urials show such genetic variation, both within and between populations, that it is hard for taxonomists to agree upon their classification. Some zoologists give these sheep the taxonomic name of O. vignei; others suggest O. gmelini. Mouflons have also been classified as urials by some zoologists, but others have recently split them into separate species. Western urials (mouflons) have 54 diploid chromosomes, while eastern ones have 56. Urials weigh about 50 kg (110 pounds).
Urials are generally found in arid country at relatively low altitudes, although they live more than 4,000 metres (13,000 feet) above sea level in Ladakh. Most urials live in open habitats, with few or no trees, but there are indications that this may be a recent adaptation to changing environmental conditions and that the urial was originally more of a woodland animal than at present. The mating season typically falls in the autumn, and one or, on rare occasions, two young are delivered about five months later. Urial ewes withdraw into the upper reaches of ravines and eroded gullies and give birth in these shady retreats. Urials graze mainly on grass, but they may also feed upon a variety of forbs and leaves from shrubs and trees.
The urial, as a species, is considered vulnerable to extinction, but most subspecies are actually endangered (O. o. bocharensis, O. o. punjabiensis, O. o. severtzovi, and O. o. vignei). These wild sheep are especially threatened for several reasons. They live at low altitudes in open terrain that is usually near inhabited areas heavily used by cattle, sheep, and goats, all of which are ecological competitors and may infect them with disease. The close presence of man also brings excessive hunting or poaching. By inhabiting arid and low-productivity habitats, urials occur naturally at low densities, often at less than one individual per 100 hectares (250 acres). Male urials are highly prized by trophy hunters; therefore, mature rams are usually overhunted, and local populations are gravely damaged. As with argalis and several other Caprinae species, urgent conservation measures and sustainable management are necessary for the urial’s preservation.
