Vampire bat,  (family Desmodontidae),  any of three species of blood-eating bats, native to the New World tropics and subtropics. The common vampire bat (Desmodus rotundus), together with the white-winged vampire bat (Diaemus, or Desmodus, youngi) and the hairy-legged vampire bat (Diphylla ecaudata) are the only sanguivorous (blood-eating) bats. The common vampire bat thrives in agricultural areas and feeds on livestock such as cattle, pigs, and chickens. The other two vampires are primarily restricted to intact forests, where they feed on birds, reptiles, and other forest animals.
Common vampire bats are tailless and are considered medium-sized, with a length of 7–9 cm (2.8–3.5 inches). Weight is variable owing to the large volume of blood that the bat ingests. A 57-gram (2-ounce) specimen, for example, can double its weight in one feeding. Its fur is short, ranging in colour from brown to reddish orange; its wings are long and pointed; and the first segments of the thumb are exceptionally long, enabling it to hop and creep in a strangely agile, yet froglike manner along the ground. The common vampire bat is the only bat capable of taking off from the ground, using its long thumbs to leap a metre (three feet) or more into the air before flying off.
At night, the bats emerge from their roosts in hollow trees or caves. Using sonar (see echolocation) for orientation, they detect the presence of prey with heat sensors located in the face. The bats will usually land near their resting prey and then hop or crawl toward it. Once they have reached their prey (which can include sleeping humans), they make a tiny incision in the skin with their razor-sharp incisor teeth. The incision usually goes unnoticed by the resting animals, and the bats subsequently lick the blood flowing from the tiny wound. A very strong anticoagulant in the saliva of vampire bats keeps the blood from clotting. Although the wounds themselves are usually not serious, infection may result. Vampire bats are considered pests in much of their range, as they frequently transmit rabies to livestock. Humans can also be infected.
The common vampire bat is noted for its unusual and highly evolved social structure. When an individual bat in a group does not get enough food at night, members of its group share their blood meals. Births are single but, unlike other bats that are usually weaned after four to six weeks, young vampires stay with their mothers for several months until they have learned to feed on their own. Females and their young form stable groups that roost together. Males roost separately, except for dominant males who roost with the females.
Vampire bats are related to the New World leaf-nosed bats (see family Phyllostomatidae) and are sometimes classified with them as a subfamily (Desmodontinae). The New World false vampire bats (genera Vampyrum and Chrotopterus) are phyllostomatids that are much larger than the sanguivorous bats. Although Vampyrum species are fierce in appearance, their snouts and long canine teeth are used to capture and eat small prey. Various Old World false vampire bats are found in Africa, Asia, and Australia.
