vervet,  (genus Chlorocebus), also called vervet monkey or savanna monkey,  any of six known species of widely distributed semiarboreal African monkeys. Vervet monkeys are quadrupedal and occur throughout sub-Saharan Africa in savannas and dry deciduous forests. They may be found as far north as Egypt or as far south as South Africa. The six Chlorocebus species are: the grivet (C. aethiops) of Ethiopia and northeastern Africa, the Malbrouck monkey (C. cynosuros) of Angola and the southern Congo, the bale monkey (C. djamdjamensis) of the Bale Mountains of Ethiopia, the vervet (C. pygerythrus) of eastern and southern Africa, the green monkey (C. sabaeus) of West Africa, and the tantalus monkey (C. tantalus) of central Africa. Vervet monkeys are closely related to guenons and were formerly classified with them in genus Cercopithecus. The green monkey has been established on several islands in the Caribbean Sea, having been introduced there in the late 17th century. Although the term vervet is often applied to all members of the genus, it is also used to refer to C. pygerythrus specifically.
These largely ground-dwelling monkeys are sometimes known collectively as savanna monkeys because they are found in open country or in woodland, as opposed to rainforest. Some vervet monkeys have also adapted to urban environments.
Slight variations in appearance occur between species, and there is pronounced variation on coat coloration, from golden-green in green monkeys to darker brown in bale monkeys. Vervet monkeys have pale yellow or white underparts and black faces. The grivet has a white tuft on the tip of the tail and a thin white browband that continues into backswept white whiskers. The vervet has shorter whiskers and black hands, feet, and tail tip. The green monkey has yellow whiskers, grayish hands and feet, and a yellow and black tail. Males of all species possess bluish skin on the abdomen, bright light blue skin on the scrotum, and a red penis.
The average male weighs 5.5 kg (12.1 pounds) and grows to 49 cm (about 19 inches) in length, from the top of the head to the base of the tail. Females are somewhat smaller, with an average weight of 4.1 kg (about 9 pounds) and an average length of 42.6 cm (about 17 inches).
All species have cheek pouches that may be stuffed with food for ingestion at a later time.
Vervet monkeys are omnivorous, consuming plants, insects and other invertebrates, small vertebrates, and fungi. Cooperative foraging is common. Vervet monkeys are prey for several large predators, including leopards (Panthera pardus), pythons, birds of prey, and humans.
These monkeys employ a sophisticated system of vocalizations to alert others in the group to potential attacks. Different calls identify the type of predator threatening the group. Calls produce a collective response to either seek shelter or confront the threat en masse. For example, one call signals a threat from a large feline (such as a leopard) that directs the group to take to the trees, whereas another warns of birds of prey, signaling the group to hide in dense vegetation. Scientists have identified another call that is used to spot a lurking snake in tall grass and that directs the troop to swarm and kill it.
Breeding occurs from April to June in Africa and year-round in the Caribbean. A single offspring is born after a gestation period of five and a half months. In the wild, females become sexually mature at four years of age, but in captivity they can produce young as early as age two. Males, in contrast, become sexually mature at age five. Members of both sexes rarely live past 10–11 years. The oldest recorded captive individuals lived to 31 years.
Vervet monkeys live in larger social groups consisting of several males and 10 or more females and their young. Each troop is led by a dominant male that restricts breeding and other social interactions of subordinate males. The female members of the troop are often related to one another; through their collective support of one male over another, the troop’s females may influence the outcome of a play for dominance. Offspring of different generations remain with one another for years, with elder females assisting their mother in the care of younger siblings of both sexes. Vervet societies are male-dominated, but an age-related dominance hierarchy exists among and between members of both sexes.
The International Union for Conservation of Nature’s (IUCN’s) Red List of Threatened Species classifies the bale monkey as vulnerable to extinction but lists all other vervet monkeys as species of least concern (i.e., they are at low risk of extinction). Nevertheless, some vervet monkey populations are subject to intense hunting pressure in areas where people depend on bushmeat. In addition, farmers often regard these monkeys as nuisance animals, because they easily adapt to agricultural environments and raid crops.
With the exception of the bale monkey—a species whose habitat is restricted to bamboo forests—vervet monkeys themselves appear to be resilient to habitat loss and human encroachment. However, other animals that share their habitat, such as elephants, are less resilient, and vervet monkeys may suffer from the attempts of these animals to cope with habitat reduction. For example, elephants fenced in within the boundaries of Kenya’s Amboseli National Park have destroyed many of the resources needed by the vervet (C. pygerythrus), such as watering holes and foraging trees; as a result, the monkey’s populations in the park have declined by more than 50 percent.
