Water shrew,  any of 12 species of amphibious shrews that have a broad, fleshy muzzle, large chest, and long hind legs and digits. Most water shrews live in montane habitats and forage in clear, cold streams and small rivers. They use all four feet to swim, but most of the propulsive force comes from the hind feet. Their relatively large brain is associated with enlarged nerves leading to the shrews’ abundant and sensitive whiskers, which are used to locate prey underwater by touch. Water shrews do not hunt by using smell, sight, or hearing, as their olfactory regions of the brain are reduced, their eyes small, and their ears hidden in fur.
Their soft, very dense fur is blackish but slightly paler or white on the underparts. The longer hairs in its coat, instead of being rounded, as in terrestrial shrews, are grooved on each side (H-shaped in cross section), and the grooves contain numerous ridges. This configuration helps trap air, providing the coat with water-repellent properties and increased insulation to counter heat loss while submerged. The long tail is finely furred.
The elegant water shrew (Nectogale elegans) of continental Southeast Asia is the most specialized for aquatic life. Only occasionally emerging from the water, it eats only aquatic insect larvae and nymphs. This species lacks external ears entirely and is blind, its eyes covered by skin. Its nostrils are located behind a nosepad that is closed by flaps to keep out water. The sides of the feet have small scales, and the digits are fringed with stiff hairs; all four feet are webbed. Fringes and webbing expand the surface area of the feet for pushing through the water. The palms have large disklike pads that enhance agility on wet, slippery surfaces. Along the tail are four rows of fringes that coalesce toward the tip into a rudderlike shape. The elegant water shrew weighs up to 45 grams (1.6 ounces), with a body 10 to 14 cm (4 to 5.5 inches) long and a tail nearly as long as the body.
Two of the 72 species in the genus Sorex are water shrews. The North American water shrew (S. palustris) is found throughout much of the western United States and Canada, from the plains to the mountains. It is the smallest and least specialized species of water shrew, weighing up to 18 grams, with a body 6 to 9 cm long and a slightly shorter tail. It forages on land and enters water to seek food and escape predators. It can remain underwater for 45 seconds or more at a time and is able to skitter across the surface supported by air bubbles trapped in the feet and toe fringes. Half of its diet consists of aquatic insects, the other half of terrestrial insects, earthworms, snails, and slugs as well as vegetation, mice, fish, and salamanders.
In addition to the North American and elegant water shrews, there are several species of Oriental water shrews (genus Chimarrogale) and three species of Old World water shrews (genus Neomys). All are classified in the family Soricidae of the order Soricimorpha, which belongs to a larger group of mammals referred to as insectivores.
