white rhinoceros,  (Ceratotherium simum), also called square-lipped rhinoceros,  the largest rhinoceros species and one of two African species of rhinoceroses. Historically, the species has been divided into two subspecies—the northern white rhinoceros (Ceratotherium simum cottoni) and the southern white rhinoceros (C. simum simum)—but comparative anatomy and DNA analysis suggest that the two groups are in fact different species.
The white rhinoceros, 4 metres (13 feet) long and nearly 2 metres (7 feet) high, can weigh up to 1,600 kg (3,500 pounds); it is the only rhinoceros in which males are noticeably larger than females. The white rhinoceros is a grazing species and has a broad square muzzle. It prefers short grasses 7–10 cm (3–4 inches) high. The animal makes much use of shade trees for resting. The white rhinoceros tends to be paler than the other rhinoceroses. It lives in groups of up to 10 individuals and fights with its horns.
The range of the white rhinoceros is not contiguous. South of the Zambezi River it was once extremely common over a fairly large area of bushveld. The southern white rhinoceros population in Southern Africa was reduced to fewer than 100 individuals about 1900 but today numbers well over 19,000, one of the most-remarkable success stories in African conservation. Some of these animals have been redistributed to several other parks and reserves in Southern Africa.
The northern white rhinoceros formerly inhabited South Sudan and adjacent areas of Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, extending westward into the Central African Republic. However, wild populations are thought to have gone extinct, and only two females, a mother and daughter named Najin and Fatu, residing in the Ol Pejeta Conservancy in Kenya, have been confirmed as still alive. (The last known remaining male northern white rhinoceros died in 2018.) To save the subspecies, conservationists are developing techniques to create embryos that could be carried to term by southern white rhinoceroses. One technique involves harvesting of some of the remaining viable eggs from the remaining northern white rhinoceros females and fertilizing them with sperm from male northern white rhinos that had been collected previously. Several viable embryos, created using in vitro fertilization, have been frozen to allow advancements in rhino embryo transfer to catch up. Another technique involves changing northern white rhino skin cells back into stem cells, which could be used to produce sperm cells and egg cells.
