Woolly monkey,  any of five species of densely furred South American primates found in rainforests of the western Amazon River basin. Woolly monkeys average 40–60 cm (16–24 inches) in length, excluding the thick and somewhat longer prehensile tail. Females weigh 7 kg (15.5 pounds) on average, males a little more. The common, or Humboldt’s, woolly monkeys (Lagothrix lagotricha and related species) have short fur that, depending on the species, is tan, gray, reddish, or black; some have darker heads. The head itself is large and round, with a bare black or brown face. Their bodies are thick with sturdy limbs, and their protruding bellies have given them the Portuguese name barrigudo, or “big belly.”
Woolly monkeys are active during the day. Gregarious, they live in small groups and are often found in the company of capuchins, howlers, and other monkeys. They are rather slow-moving and generally travel on all fours, although they often swing by their hands, feet, and tail or by their tail alone. On the ground they are able to stand erect, using the tail for support.
Woolly monkeys mature at about four years and bear single young after seven to eight months’ gestation. Diet in the wild consists primarily of fruit and leaves, but in captivity they accept almost any food, which can result in nutritional problems. Although placid and gentle, they need attention and must be coddled to some extent. They appear to weep when upset, and those kept as pets enjoy playing hide-and-seek.
The yellow-tailed, or Hendee’s, woolly monkey (Oreonax flavicauda) is very different from Lagothrix and is not closely related, hence its classification as a separate genus. This species has silky mahogany-coloured fur, a whitish nose, and a yellow stripe on the underside of the tail. It is restricted to the cloud forests of northern Peru and is critically endangered; little is known of its behaviour, its ecology, or even its range. The other woolly monkeys are becoming rarer as their habitat is destroyed. Both genera belong to the family Atelidae of the New World monkeys.
