Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, née Ellen Johnson,  (born October 29, 1938, Monrovia, Liberia), Liberian politician and economist who was president of Liberia (2006–18). She was the first woman to be elected head of state of an African country. Johnson Sirleaf was one of three recipients, along with Leymah Gbowee and Tawakkul Karmān, of the 2011 Nobel Prize for Peace for their efforts to further women’s rights.
Johnson Sirleaf is of mixed Gola and German heritage. Her father was the first indigenous Liberian to sit in the national legislature. She was educated at the College of West Africa in Monrovia and at age 17 married James Sirleaf (they were later divorced). In 1961 Johnson Sirleaf went to the United States to study economics and business administration. After obtaining a master’s degree (1971) in public administration from Harvard University, she entered government service in Liberia.
Johnson Sirleaf served as assistant minister of finance (1972–73) under Pres. William Tolbert and as finance minister (1980–85) in Samuel K. Doe’s military dictatorship. She became known for her personal financial integrity and clashed with both heads of state. During Doe’s regime she was imprisoned twice and narrowly avoided execution. In the 1985 national election she campaigned for a seat in the Senate and openly criticized the military government, which led to her arrest and a 10-year prison sentence. She was released after a short time and allowed to leave the country.
During 12 years of exile in Kenya and the United States, during which time Liberia collapsed into civil war, Johnson Sirleaf became an influential economist for the World Bank, Citibank, and other international financial institutions. From 1992 to 1997 she was the director of the Regional Bureau for Africa of the United Nations Development Programme.
After a tentative truce had been reached in Liberia’s conflict, Johnson Sirleaf ran for president in the 1997 election, representing the Unity Party (UP). She finished second to Charles Taylor and was forced back into exile when his government charged her with treason. By 1999 Liberia’s civil war had resumed. After Taylor went into exile in 2003, Johnson Sirleaf returned to Liberia to chair the Commission on Good Governance, which oversaw preparations for democratic elections. In 2005 she again ran for president, vowing to end civil strife and corruption, establish unity, and rebuild the country’s devastated infrastructure. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she placed second in the first round of voting, and on November 8, 2005, she won the runoff election, defeating football (soccer) legend George Weah. Johnson Sirleaf was sworn in as president of Liberia on January 16, 2006.
With more than 15,000 United Nations peacekeepers in the country and unemployment running at 80 percent, Johnson Sirleaf faced serious challenges. She immediately sought debt amelioration and aid from the international community. By late 2010 Liberia’s entire debt had been erased, and Johnson Sirleaf had secured millions of dollars of foreign investment in the country. In addition, she established a Truth and Reconciliation Committee (TRC) in 2006 to probe corruption and heal ethnic tensions. Ironically, in 2009 Johnson Sirleaf was mentioned in one of the TRC’s reports, which recommended that she, along with a number of others, be banned from holding elective office for 30 years for having supported warring factions in the civil war. In Johnson Sirleaf’s case, she had supported Taylor for a time very early in the war. The report’s recommendations were not binding, though, and she was buoyed by a widespread demonstration of both domestic and international support. Efforts toward eradicating corruption—a significant problem that Johnson Sirleaf had pledged to end—included the creation of the Anti-Corruption Commission in 2008.
Despite having previously pledged to serve only one term as president, in 2010 Johnson Sirleaf announced her intent to stand in the October 2011 presidential election, stating that she still had work to do. A month before the election, however, Johnson Sirleaf’s eligibility was challenged in court by a small opposition group that pointed to a provision of the constitution that stated that all presidential candidates were to have resided in Liberia for 10 years prior to an election, a requirement that Johnson Sirleaf and several other candidates did not meet and one that the government had tried—but failed—to have changed via referendum in August 2011. Six days before the election the Supreme Court dismissed the challenge, noting that the writers of the 1986 constitution could not have foreseen the years of conflict that forced many Liberians to live outside the country. Additional preelection controversy was generated when Johnson Sirleaf won the Nobel Peace Prize mere days before the poll. Other candidates complained that the Nobel Committee was interfering with Liberian politics by awarding the prize so close to the election.
More than a dozen candidates stood in the October 11, 2011, election. Johnson Sirleaf was the top vote getter, with more than 43 percent of the vote, followed by Winston Tubman—running with Weah as his vice presidential candidate—who garnered about 32 percent. As Johnson Sirleaf did not win more than 50 percent, a runoff election was held on November 8. It did not go as smoothly as the first round of voting, however. Tubman and the Congress for Democratic Change party had raised allegations of voting irregularities in the first round. Although these allegations were widely dismissed as being unsubstantiated, they still cast a pall on the second round of voting, as Tubman announced that he was dropping out of the race and called for voters to boycott the election. Though Johnson Sirleaf was reelected with slightly more than 90 percent of the vote, her victory was clouded by Tubman’s withdrawal and low voter turnout, which was less than half that of the first round.
Although Johnson Sirleaf’s administration had made efforts to curb corruption, it continued to be a problem during her second term. Complaints of nepotism also hit the administration, with Johnson Sirleaf herself coming under fire in 2012 because some of her children had high-level jobs in government or state-owned enterprises. Economic progress continued during Johnson Sirleaf’s second term until the country was hit with the devastating Ebola virus disease in 2014. Over the course of the next two years, the disease killed more than 4,800 Liberians, crippled the country’s economy, and erased many of the country’s hard-fought gains of the previous postwar decade.
As the country attempted to recover from Ebola, Johnson Sirleaf, constitutionally limited to two terms as president, prepared to step down after the 2017 presidential election. Her running mate of the previous two elections and current vice president of Liberia, Joseph Boakai, became the presidential candidate of her political party, the Unity Party (UP). After the first round of voting, however, she was accused by the UP of having supported another presidential candidate: her previous opponent, George Weah. Although she vigorously denied the accusations, the charges persisted, and in January 2018 the UP expelled her from the party. Later that month, on January 22, she stepped down as president of Liberia, handing power to Weah, who had emerged as the winner of the second round of voting. It was the first transfer of power between democratically elected leaders in Liberia since 1944.
In recognition of Johnson Sirleaf’s leadership of Liberia during the challenging period of transition after the country’s devastating years of conflict and for the positive changes that took place in Liberia under her administration, in February 2018 she was awarded the 2017 Ibrahim Prize for Achievement in African Leadership. The award provided $5 million, disbursed over 10 years, followed by an annual $200,000 stipend for the rest of Johnson Sirleaf’s life. It also brought the possibility of the foundation awarding $200,000 annually over the course of 10 years to charitable causes supported by Johnson Sirleaf.
