Fidel Ramos, in full Fidel Valdez Ramos, byname Eddie Ramos,  (born March 18, 1928, Lingayen, Phil.), military leader and politician who was president of the Philippines from 1992 to 1998. He was generally regarded as one of the most effective presidents in that nation’s history.
Ramos was educated at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, N.Y., and at the University of Illinois, U.S. He then entered the Philippine army, serving in Korea and Vietnam. In 1972 President Ferdinand Marcos (who was Ramos’ second cousin) appointed him chief of the Philippine Constabulary, and when Marcos imposed martial law later that year Ramos was responsible for enforcing it; the Constabulary arrested thousands of political dissidents. In 1981 Ramos became deputy chief of staff of the armed forces.
After the presidential elections of 1986, in which Marcos claimed victory despite allegations of large-scale electoral fraud, Ramos and defense minister Juan Ponce Enrile supported Marcos’ opponent, Corazon Aquino. Their defection sparked the civilian “People Power” movement that forced Marcos into exile. During Aquino’s presidency Ramos served as military chief of staff (1986–88) and secretary of national defense (1988–91), and he suppressed several military coup attempts against her government.
Ramos was elected to succeed Aquino in May 1992. As president he purged the national police force of corrupt officers; encouraged family-planning practices to curb the growth of the country’s population; and liberalized the Philippines’ heavily protected economy in order to spur economic growth. Ramos’ governing coalition won a decisive victory in congressional elections held in 1995, midway through his six-year term as president. His administration reached peace agreements with two long-active guerrilla insurgencies, the communist New People’s Army and the Muslim separatists of the Moro National Liberation Front. He meanwhile continued his efforts to deregulate major industries that were dominated by a handful of large companies and to improve the government’s inefficient tax-collection system. These reforms helped revitalize the Philippines’ economy, which emerged from years of stagnation to grow at a rapid rate in 1994–97. The country was thus able to weather a severe business downturn that crippled national economies across Southeast Asia in 1998. Ramos was constitutionally restricted to one term as president, which ended in June 1998.
