Nicolás Maduro , in full Nicolás Maduro Moros,  (born November 23, 1962, Caracas, Venezuela), Venezuelan politician and labour leader who won the special election held in April 2013 to choose a president to serve out the remainder of the term of Pres. Hugo Chávez, who had died in March. After serving as vice president (October 2012–March 2013), Maduro became the interim president following Chávez’s death. A zealous proponent of chavismo (the political system and ideology established by Chávez), Maduro was the successful candidate of the United Socialist Party of Venezuela (Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela; PSUV) in the special election to replace Chávez, and he was reelected in 2018. Maduro’s increasingly authoritarian rule led to repeated attempts by the opposition to remove him from office.
Maduro grew up in a family of moderate means in Caracas, where his father was engaged in leftist politics and the labour movement. His own early interest in left-wing politics led Maduro to pursue training as an organizer in Cuba rather than a university education. While working as a bus driver in Caracas, he became a representative in the transit workers union and rose through its ranks. When Chávez, then an army officer, was imprisoned in 1992 after leading an unsuccessful coup attempt, Maduro and his future wife, Cilia Flores, then a young lawyer, campaigned for Chávez’s release, which came in 1994.
In 1999 Maduro was a member of the National Constituent Assembly that rewrote the constitution that was part of Chávez’s ascent to the presidency. That year Maduro also served in the Chamber of Deputies (the lower house of the Venezuelan legislature), which was eliminated when the legislature became the unicameral National Assembly, in which Maduro began serving in 2000. He was reelected in 2005 and served as the body’s president until 2006, when he became foreign minister. In that capacity he worked to advance the goals of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America (ALBA), which sought to increase social, political, and economic integration in Latin America and to blunt U.S. influence in the region. He also helped cultivate friendly relations for Venezuela with such controversial world leaders as Libya’s Muammar al-Qaddafi, Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe, and Iran’s Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
Maduro’s profile in the administration began to grow, especially as Chávez’s health began to deteriorate, beginning with Chávez’s initial announcement in 2011 that he had cancer. In October 2012, following Chávez’s triumph in the presidential election over Henrique Capriles Radonski, Maduro became vice president. At the same time, Maduro’s wife (herself a former president of the National Assembly) was serving as Venezuela’s attorney general, which led to the perception of the two as the country’s ultimate political power couple. Before leaving for another round of surgery in Cuba in December 2012, Chávez named Maduro as his preferred successor should he not survive. Indeed, while most of the world was kept in the dark regarding Chávez’s status during a postsurgery recovery in Cuba that forced the postponement of his inauguration in January 2013, Maduro, ever the loyal chavista, acted as the country’s de facto leader. His principal rival for power within the chavismo movement was the president of the National Assembly at that time, Diosdado Cabello, who was widely perceived as the favourite of the military, whereas Maduro was seen as having the support of Chávez’s pivotal ally the Castro regime in Cuba.
When Chávez died on March 5, it was the husky, mustachioed Maduro who made the announcement to the country. Earlier he had accused Venezuela’s “imperialist” enemies of having poisoned Chávez. While interim president, Maduro ran against Capriles in the special election on April 14 to choose a president to serve out the remainder of Chávez’s term. Maduro won the razor-close contest, capturing nearly 51 percent of the vote over just more than 49 percent for Capriles, who was quick to make allegations of voting irregularities and to demand a full recount. Instead, the National Election Council chose to conduct an audit of the ballots in the 46 percent of precincts that had not already been automatically audited under Venezuelan election law, though Capriles refused to participate in the audit and announced that he would undertake a legal challenge to the election results. Nevertheless, Maduro was sworn in as president on April 19.
Maduro sought to bring his deeply divided country together, but during the first part of 2014 middle-class citizens in many Venezuelan cities took to the streets to protest his government. The country’s shantytown residents, however, stood with Maduro, and the military and police mobilized in support of him. By May the demonstrations had waned. Even the imprisonment of Leopoldo López, the leader of the hard-line faction of the opposition, brought only limited protest. Emboldened, in July Maduro’s government incarcerated several high-profile critics.
Three groups within the chavismo movement competed for influence: (1) leftist civilians with strong ties to Cuba, (2) military officers who had taken part in the failed coup of February 1992, and (3) regional leaders with strong local support. Maduro landed on the side of the leftist civilians, as evidenced by some of his prominent dismissals and appointments.
Meanwhile, the Venezuelan economy struggled mightily, largely as a result of depressed world oil prices. Moreover, the output of Venezuelan crude oil consisted of an increasingly high proportion of viscous petroleum, which was more costly to refine than the highly coveted sweet light crude. The economy was also burdened with declining industrial production and falling non-oil exports—the result, according to some observers, of the government’s failure to adequately invest in the industrial sector and its ideologically driven nationalization of industries such as electricity and steel. Inflation ballooned, registering among the highest levels in the world. As import capabilities shrank, shortages of staples such as toilet paper, milk, and flour, as well as certain medicines, became more and more widespread. 
Against that backdrop Maduro was quick to focus on a long-standing dispute with Guyana over a portion of that country claimed by Venezuela since the 19th century, which intensified in May 2015 with the discovery of oil offshore of the contested region. A shooting incident near the Colombian border in August 2015 and accusations of smuggling led Venezuela to close the border and deport some 1,400–1,500 Colombians living in Venezuela. In September tensions eased, and the expelled ambassadors of the two countries returned to their posts, after Maduro and Colombian Pres. Juan Manuel Santos, meeting in Quito, Ecuador, agreed to progressively normalize relations between their countries.
