Adelaide Festival of Arts,  late-summer international festival showcasing visual, performing, literary, and media arts, held every two years in Adelaide, S.Aus., Austl.
The first Adelaide Festival of Arts was held in 1960 as a result of the passionate and pioneering efforts of newspaper executive Sir Lloyd Dumas and University of Adelaide music professor John Bishop. Inspired by Scotland’s Edinburgh Festival, the two men formulated a plan and a budget to stage a similar event in Adelaide. Their idea won the support of the city’s mayor, who subsequently helped to generate funding for the festival. With the patronage of Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, and guidance from the Edinburgh Festival artistic director, Ian Hunter, who was recruited to help organize the production, the festival was launched in March. Highlights of the two-week event included performances by the Sydney Symphony, American pianist Dave Brubeck and his jazz ensemble, and the popular Hogarth Puppets from London, as well as an exhibition of the works of English landscape painter J.M.W. Turner.
Owing to the resounding success of the inaugural event, the Adelaide Festival of Arts was staged again in 1962, after which it became a regular biennial affair, with each festival offering a fresh array of traditional, contemporary, Western, and the non-Western arts. Actress Marlene Dietrich, Irish comedian Spike Milligan, the Royal Shakespeare Company, the Frankfurt Ballet, the Bayanihan dance company from the Philippines, and American salsa musician Tito Puente were among the festival’s many notable artists over the years. The festival also became host to Adelaide Writers’ Week—a major literary event featuring author talks, workshops, and panel discussions. In 1992 the first WOMAD (World of Music, Arts, and Dance) festival in Australia was held in conjunction with the Adelaide Festival of Arts, and it later became an independent event. A popular addition in 2008 was Northern Lights, a spectacular display of coloured-light artwork projected onto Adelaide’s distinctive architecture. In the 21st century the festival typically drew several hundred thousand visitors.
