Burning Man,  late-summer arts festival and adventure in the establishment of expressive communities, held annually in the Black Rock Desert, northwestern Nevada, U.S.
Burning Man was inaugurated in 1986, when Larry Harvey and Jerry James—two members of the San Francisco arts community—burned an eight-foot- (two-metre-) tall wooden effigy of a man on San Francisco’s Baker Beach in celebration of the summer solstice. Twenty people witnessed the event. Over the next four years Harvey and James (and ever expanding crowds) returned to the site with increasingly taller effigies. In 1990, however, when a 40-foot- (12-metre-) tall effigy was prepared for immolation at the beach location, the police intervened at the last minute and forbade the structure from being set ablaze. Consequently, the event was moved that year to the Black Rock Desert, where the effigy was burned on the Labor Day weekend, in early September. Once it had relocated, the festival never returned to San Francisco or to the solstice; rather, it made the desert its long-term home and Labor Day its calendrical landmark.
The Burning Man festival expanded dramatically over the next two decades. Its duration was extended to span the entire week preceding Labor Day, with ignition of the effigy regularly scheduled for the Saturday before the holiday. Meanwhile, attendance rose exponentially, exceeding 50,000 by 2010. Each year a temporary city—with named streets, villages, and camps—was erected in the desert to accommodate all of the attendees. After the festival was over, however, the city was completely obliterated, in keeping with the “leave no trace” policy of the festival organizers.
Every Burning Man festival has a unique theme, announced well in advance of the event, and virtually all aspects of the festival reflect that theme. For example, in 2000 the theme was “The Body,” 
and the streets of the city were given names such as “Head Way” and “Feet Street.” The many camps and villages within the city are founded on relevant subthemes and may be organized further around particular foods, sports, learning disciplines, or arts.
Anyone attending Burning Man is expected to be an active participant, particularly through the installation of art projects or by involvement in one of the camps or villages. Unlike most other festivals, Burning Man is virtually vendor-free. With minimal goods for sale, people are expected to bring with them whatever they need for a week’s subsistence in the desert and to trade for any items they might lack. Ultimately, Burning Man is an exercise—indeed, a challenge—in balancing cooperation, self-reliance, individual expression, and creative collaboration in the formation of an artistic community.
