Film festival,  gathering, usually annual, for the purpose of evaluating new or outstanding motion pictures. Sponsored by national or local governments, industry, service organizations, experimental film groups, or individual promoters, the festivals provide an opportunity for filmmakers, distributors, critics, and other interested persons to attend film showings and meet to discuss current artistic developments in film. At the festivals distributors can purchase films that they think can be marketed successfully in their own countries.
The first festival was held in Venice in 1932. Since World War II, film festivals have contributed significantly to the development of the motion-picture industry in many countries. The popularity of Italian films at the Cannes and Venice film festivals played an important part in the rebirth of the Italian industry and the spread of the postwar Neorealist movement. In 1951 Kurosawa Akira’s Rashomon won the Golden Lion at Venice, focusing attention on Japanese films. That same year the first American Art Film Festival at Woodstock, New York, stimulated the art-film movement in the United States.
Probably the best-known and most noteworthy of the hundreds of film festivals is held each spring in Cannes, France. Since 1947, people interested in films have gathered in that small resort town to attend official and unofficial showings of films. Other important festivals are held in Berlin, Karlovy Vary (Czech Republic), Toronto, Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso), Park City (Utah, U.S.), Hong Kong, Belo Horizonte (Brazil) and Venice. Short subjects and documentaries receive special attention at gatherings in Edinburgh, Mannheim and Oberhausen (both in Germany), and Tours (France). Some festivals feature films of one country, and since the late 1960s there have been special festivals for student filmmakers. Others are highly specialized, such as those that feature only underwater photography or those that deal with specific subjects, such as mountain climbing.
