Golden Globe Award,  any of the awards presented annually by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association (HFPA) in recognition of outstanding achievement in motion pictures and television during the previous year. Within the entertainment industry, the Golden Globes are considered second in importance both to the Academy Awards (for film) and to the Emmy Awards (for television), and the televised awards ceremony is a comparably lavish affair.
For each medium, Golden Globes are given in several categories. The film awards include those for best motion picture, best actor, and best actress, each separated into “drama” and “comedy or musical” divisions. Supporting acting performances, direction, screenwriting, music, animated films, and foreign-language films are also honoured. The television awards include those for drama series, comedy or musical series, miniseries or movies, as well as for acting performances in each genre or format. For all competitive awards, members of the HFPA cast ballots to determine a slate of nominees and then usually a single winner in each category. In most years, the Cecil B. DeMille Award, a prize for lifetime achievement, is also bestowed. Golden Globe winners receive a statuette consisting of a globe encircled by a strip of film.
The presentation of the awards originated in 1944 as an endeavour of the newly formed Hollywood Foreign Correspondents Association, a consortium of entertainment journalists based in Los Angeles but working for publications outside the United States. In 1955, upon the reincorporation of a short-lived splinter group, it was renamed the HFPA. The following year the Golden Globe Awards, which initially honoured only motion pictures, featured its first prizes for television. The awards gala began to be televised nationally in the mid-1960s.
Questions of credibility have dogged the Golden Globe Awards for much of their history, in part because of accusations of impropriety that the HFPA has occasionally suffered. In 1968, for instance, the Federal Communications Commission, investigating NBC’s broadcast of the Golden Globes, contended that the HFPA had “substantially misled the public” regarding its procedures for selecting winners; one particular allegation was that the organization had negotiated to extend awards to some performers in exchange for their attendance at the ceremony. In 1982 it was revealed that the husband of actress Pia Zadora, the winner of an award that was widely considered to be undeserved, had furnished voters with various favours. Both incidents resulted in the disappearance of the ceremony from network television for several years.
By the 21st century, however, the increasing importance placed by the entertainment industry on awards of all kinds had conferred an air of prestige on the long-running Golden Globes. The Golden Globes for film are observed closely as precursors to the Oscars, and the ceremony is frequently among television’s most-watched events.
