Lollapalooza,  annual Chicago rock festival that features dozens of hip-hop, techno, and alternative rock performers over a four-day period.
Lollapalooza was begun in 1991 by Jane’s Addiction leader Perry Farrell as a multicity venue for his band’s farewell tour. Farrell claimed that he chose the festival’s name—an archaic word meaning “extraordinarily impressive”—after he heard the word used in a Three Stooges film. Acts that played in that tour, which reached 20 cities across the United States and Canada, included the Rollins Band, Nine Inch Nails, and Ice-T. The events were profitable, so a similar tour was planned for 1992 with a second stage added. The festival again visited many cities across North America, establishing the format of Lollapalooza through 1997. The tour began losing money, however, and it was canceled in 1998. Lollapalooza was revived in 2003, but it continued to struggle financially, and the 2004 tour was also canceled.
Abandoning the show’s previous touring model, Farrell found new backers, and Lollapalooza was given a third chance in 2005—this time as a destination festival in Chicago. The two-day format was such a success that a third day was added for 2006, and Lollapalooza became an annual event. In 2016 a fourth day was added to the festival.
Held each August in Grant Park, Lollapalooza attracts some 200,000 attendees, including many families. The Kidzapalooza area caters to the youngest fans, with concerts, music workshops, and interactive art exhibits. For adults, side stages offer up-and-coming artists an opportunity to perform for a wider audience, and DJs play a varied selection of electronic music in the festival’s dance tent. Headlining acts appear on a staggered schedule, allowing attendees time to travel between stages, as well as minimizing the amount of excess noise, or “sound bleed,” that could intrude on a given performance.
In 2011 the Lollapalooza brand expanded to South America, with a two-day festival held in April in Santiago, Chile. Lollapalooza subsequently expanded to produce festivals in five additional countries.
