Arches National Park,  desert area of sandstone formations in eastern Utah, U.S., on the Colorado River just north of Moab and northeast of Canyonlands National Park. It was established as a national monument in 1929 and as a national park in 1971, and it has an area of 120 square miles (310 square km).
The park lies on the northern edge of the Colorado Plateau at elevations roughly between 4,000 and 5,600 feet (1,200 and 1,700 metres). The area’s red sandstone has eroded into a variety of unusual shapes, including pinnacles, windows, and arches. Notable features are Balanced Rock, Courthouse Towers (with spires that resemble skyscrapers), The Windows Section, Delicate Arch, Fiery Furnace (so named because it glows in the setting sun), and Devils Garden. Landscape Arch, measuring about 290 feet (88 metres) long from base to base, is one of the longest natural freestanding spans of rock in the world; since 1991 large pieces of the formation have fallen, though the arch remains intact. In 2008 Wall Arch, one of the park’s most-photographed arches, collapsed.
Underlying the present landscape of the park is a salt bed that was deposited some 300 million years ago. Sand and other sediments covered the salt bed and eventually were compressed into rock. The weight of this overlying rock caused the unstable salt bed to shift and buckle; layers of rock were moved upward to form domes, while elsewhere in the region cavities developed. When a salt dome collapsed, the rocks on its flanks cracked. Wind and water erosion formed fins of sandstone out of the cracked rock, and further weathering (particularly of the sides of the fins) created rock arches. More than 2,000 arches have been cataloged in the park.
The park has an arid climate marked by often considerable diurnal temperature fluctuations. Summers are hot, with daytime highs frequently exceeding 100 °F (38 °C), and winters are cold, as nighttime lows generally are well below freezing. Precipitation is scanty and often comes as brief and heavy downpours that can trigger flash flooding in arroyos and canyons. The rocky soils support mainly scrub, grasses, several species of cactus (notably prickly pear), and a wide variety of wildflowers, particularly in spring. In addition, forests of scattered juniper and piñon pine trees cover about half the area, and cottonwoods, box elders, Russian olives, and tamarisks—the latter two nonnative and considered invasive—grow along streambeds. Wildlife includes jackrabbits, mule deer, foxes, a variety of reptiles and amphibians, and dozens of species of birds, including golden eagles and piñon jays.
The central portions of Arches National Park are accessible by paved road from the south, and dirt roads lead to remoter areas of the park, notably Klondike Bluffs in the northwest. Park headquarters and a visitor’s centre are located near the park entrance. Arches National Park is a popular tourist destination; many of the visitors drive to the several overlook vistas along the main road or take short day hikes to the various rock formations.
