Assateague Island National Seashore,  natural area including Assateague Island (a barrier island) and several nearby islets off the Atlantic Ocean coast of southeastern Maryland and eastern Virginia, U.S. The island is 37 miles (60 km) long, and the park, established as a national seashore in 1965, occupies some 75 square miles (195 square km) of land and water. Within the national seashore boundaries are Chincoteague National Wildlife Refuge (established 1943) at the southern (Virginia) end and Assateague State Park (1956) near the northern (Maryland) end. The island lies immediately south of Ocean City, Md., and is separated from the mainland by Sinepuxent (north) and Chincoteague (south) bays, which are spanned by two bridges—one from Barrier Island Visitor Center in Maryland, near the northern end, and the other from Chincoteague, Va., near the southern tip.
Assateague Island is renowned for its wild horses, which actually are feral, formerly domesticated animals. They are the size of ponies; their diminutive size is mainly attributed to a relatively poor diet of mostly beach grass and cordgrass and exposure to often harsh environmental conditions. They live in two herds, one at each end of the island and each totaling up to 150 animals. During the annual Pony Swim—a roundup held each July—the Virginia herd, known as the Chincoteague ponies, swims across a narrow channel to Chincoteague Island, where foals are auctioned off to keep the wild population sustainable.
Assateague Island is also a bird sanctuary on the Atlantic flyway migration route. The beaches, sand dunes, salt marshes, bays, and forests provide habitat for some 300 species of birds such as snow geese, herons, egrets, sandpipers, and osprey. Other wildlife includes deer, red foxes, and horseshoe crabs.
The island’s white-sand beaches are a popular tourist destination for swimming, canoeing, fishing, and off-road vehicle driving. In sheltered bays and inlets, crabs and clams are harvested. Of the island’s three visitors’ centres, the two operated by the U.S. National Park Service feature aquariums and beachcombing exhibits.
