Bering Land Bridge National Preserve, formerly Bering Land Bridge National Monument,  large natural area in northwestern Alaska, U.S. The national preserve occupies most of the northwestern and northern shore area of the Seward Peninsula, adjacent to the Bering Strait, the Chukchi Sea, and Kotzebue Sound. Its lands also extend southward into the east-central interior of the peninsula. It was proclaimed a national monument in 1978, and, in 1980, after undergoing boundary changes, it was redesignated a national preserve. It covers some 4,200 square miles (about 10,900 square km). At its westernmost point, the preserve is approximately 70 miles (110 km) from the Chukchi Peninsula, the northeasternmost part of Siberia (Russia). Headquarters and the visitors centre are in Nome, on the southern coast of the Seward Peninsula.
The preserve occupies a tiny portion of what was once called Beringia, a vast ancient land region (often referred to as a “land bridge”) that existed periodically and in various configurations for hundreds of thousands of years during the Pleistocene Epoch (about 2,600,000 to about 11,700 years ago) and connected North America and Asia. Beringia was formed during periods of worldwide glaciation, when global sea levels dropped significantly and exposed large tracts of dry land. The last of these Beringia formations began to appear about 38,000 years ago and reached its maximum extent some 20,000 years ago. Subsequently, as the glaciers melted, sea levels rose again, and the land bridge was reduced until, sometime at the end of the Pleistocene, the connection was lost. Much of that former land area is now submerged beneath the Beaufort, Bering, and Chukchi seas. The most recent Beringia is thought to have been unglaciated, allowing plants and animals to move between the two continents, and it is widely believed to be at least one of the ways (if not the principal route) by which humans first reached the Americas from Asia.
Bering Land Bridge National Preserve abounds with paleontological and archaeological material that provides a record of thousands of years of human habitation. The present-day environment consists largely of low coastal plains that are barren or covered in tundra vegetation. The land rises to mountains in the south, toward the interior of the peninsula. Ash explosion craters and lava fields are found in the preserve, as are several maar lakes (lakes formed in volcanic craters created by the meeting of magma with surface water or permafrost). The Devil Mountain Lakes maar is the largest such feature in the world. The Serpentine Hot Springs area, in the south-central part of the preserve, features thermal pools and formations called tors (exposed masses of jointed and broken granite) that also are remnants of past volcanic activity.
Some 170 species of migrating birds nest in the preserve, including several rare types from northeastern Asia. Among the marine mammals found in coastal areas are seals, walruses, and beluga and bowhead whales. Land mammals include moose, musk oxen, reindeer, wolves, and polar and brown (grizzly) bears. The preserve also features some 400 different species of plants.
There are no roads directly to or within the national preserve. Access to it in summer is by seaplane or small boat and in winter by airplanes with ski runners or snowmobiles and other tracked vehicles. The limited facilities within the preserve include a bunkhouse shelter at Serpentine Hot Springs.
