Grand Teton National Park,  spectacular glaciated mountain region in northwestern Wyoming, U.S. It lies just south of Yellowstone National Park (to which it is connected by the John D. Rockefeller, Jr., Memorial Parkway) and north of the city of Jackson; the National Elk Refuge adjoins the park’s far southeastern boundary. In 1950 most of Jackson Hole National Monument (established 1943) was incorporated into the park, which itself had been established in 1929; the park now covers 484 square miles (1,254 square km).
The park encompasses much of the Teton Range and most of Jackson Hole, a fertile valley just to the east of the Tetons, through which runs the Snake River. The snow-covered and glacially scoured peaks of the range—whose highest point is Grand Teton, 13,770 feet (4,198 metres) above sea level—tower some 7,000 feet (2,130 metres) above Jackson Hole. The steep, rugged mountains give way to the morainic landscape of the valley, which is dotted with glacial lakes of varying sizes. The best-known of these is Jenny Lake, which lies at the base of the tallest peaks, and the largest is Jackson Lake, formed by a dam across the Snake River.
The national park has a generally cool montane climate, with warm summers and severe winters. High temperatures in July average about 80 °F (27 °C), and average lows in January are about 1 °F (−17 °C). Precipitation is moderate, about 22 inches (560 mm) annually, much of it falling as snow in the colder months. The heavy amount of snow—averaging some 15 feet (4.5 metres) per year—helps sustain small residual glaciers in the high mountains.
The lower elevations are forested with straight, tall lodgepole pines, which benefit from periodic wildfires (the heat releases seeds from the cones), while fir and sharp-pointed Engelmann spruce grow higher up. Deciduous trees, such as cottonwood, poplar, and aspen, grow in well-watered places. Throughout the warmer months a succession of different varieties of wildflowers appear, the earliest of which begin to bloom while still underneath the snow. The streams abound in fish. Herds of bison, elk, and antelope roam at will, moose graze in wetter areas, and black and brown (grizzly) bears are found in remote areas. Notable among the many species of birds are bald eagles and brilliantly coloured western bluebirds.
Grand Teton is one of the most heavily visited of the U.S. national parks, with the great bulk of people coming during the warmer months (May–October). The park is accessible by road from the north (Granite Canyon), east (Moran), and south (Moose). Park headquarters and a visitor’s centre are at Moose, and during the warmer months another visitor’s centre is open at Colter Bay on Jackson Lake. In addition to extensive camping facilities, the park has several seasonal lodging concessions, notably Jackson Lake Lodge a short distance south of Colter Bay. Grand Teton is renowned for its spectacular hiking trails, totaling more than 235 miles (380 km) throughout the park, and for climbing routes of varying skill levels up the high peaks.
