Great Smoky Mountains National Park,  scenic wilderness area in eastern Tennessee and western North Carolina, U.S., encompassing the core of the Great Smoky Mountains. Covering 816 square miles (2,113 square km), the park is some 15 to 20 miles (24 to 32 km) wide and extends southwestward for 54 miles (87 km) from the Pigeon River to the Little Tennessee River. It was established in 1934 to preserve the last remaining sizable area of southern primeval hardwood forest in the United States, and it contains some of the highest peaks in the Appalachian Mountains—including Clingmans Dome, the park’s highest point at 6,643 feet (2,025 metres). The park was designated a UNESCO International Biosphere Reserve in 1976 and a World Heritage site in 1983.
Nearly all of the park is forested. Summits and ridges are crowned with relict ice-age forests of red spruce and Fraser fir; both species are threatened—the firs by a nonnative insect and the spruce by acid rain and air pollution. In open areas (balds), purple and pink rhododendron blossoms often appear in the early summer. Among the rushing streams on the lower slopes are found such trees as hemlock, silverbell, black cherry, black walnut, buckeye, yellow birch, and tulip tree; the latter tree sometimes attains a trunk diameter of more than 7 feet (2.1 metres). Other vegetation at lower elevations includes flowering dogwood, redbud, and serviceberry; dense stands of mountain laurel, white-blossomed rhododendron, and azaleas form almost impenetrable thickets. Important species of wildlife in the park include black bears, white-tailed deer, wild boars, foxes, raccoons, red wolves, ruffed grouse, wild turkeys, at least 25 species of salamanders, and numerous colourful songbirds.
Until the 1800s the area formed part of the Cherokee Nation; its people named the land “Place of Blue Smoke” for the bluish haze characteristic of the region. The first white settlers established themselves in the sheltered coves and valleys of the area, and a number of their picturesque primitive buildings have been preserved. The area was heavily logged during the first quarter of the 20th century.
The park, easily accessible via a road bisecting its centre, is one of the most heavily visited in the country. Its three visitor centres contain exhibits on natural history and culture, such as the Mountain Farm Museum’s collection of historic log buildings. Popular activities include hiking some of the 800 miles (1,300 km) of trails, fishing, horseback riding, cross-country skiing, and going on driving tours; autumn draws many visitors to view the changing colours of the leaves. The Appalachian National Scenic Trail follows the crestline between North Carolina and Tennessee, and the southern terminus of the Blue Ridge Parkway is at the park’s southern border, where it meets the Cherokee Indian Reservation. Gatlinburg, Tenn., just north of the park, is a popular tourist spot.
