Ituri Forest, French Forêt de L’Ituri,  dense tropical rainforest lying on the northeastern lip of the Congo River basin in the Central African nation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Situated between 0° and 3° N latitude and 27° and 30° E longitude, the precise geographic limits of the Ituri are poorly defined, especially along its southern and western extensions. The Ituri is bounded to the north and northeast by savanna and in the east by the fertile highlands of the Western Rift Valley, while to the south and west it is contiguous with the lowland rainforest, where its rivers drain into the Congo River. The total area of the Ituri Forest is approximately 24,300 square miles (62,900 square km). The forest, which is inhabited by both Bantu-speaking and Pygmy peoples, owes its name to the Ituri River, which flows east-west across the forest into the Aruwimi River and thence to the Congo.
The magnificence of the tropical rainforest of the Ituri cannot help but inspire the modern-day observer with the same poetic enthusiasm displayed by the famous Welsh explorer Henry Morton Stanley when he described his crossing of the area in 1887–88. The trees of the forest range in size from small saplings just inches in diameter to gigantic hardwoods reaching to heights of 170 feet (52 metres). Like the pillars of a Gothic cathedral, these giant trees are buttressed; roots run down their sides and extend great distances across the forest floor, making the ground a labyrinth of roots that anchor the trees and grab scarce nutrients from the shallow forest soil. In places where the high canopy is nearly continuous, only small, elusive patches of sunlight reach the forest floor. The lack of light at lower levels is accentuated by the darkness of the foliage of the few shrubs and small trees that can grow under such shaded conditions. Where gaps occur in the upper canopy, herbaceous plants with long leaves resembling those of the banana plant take advantage of the available light and grow in dense stands. In many places the forest has been disturbed, either by human activity or by natural treefalls that cut large swathes through the canopy and open up the forest to the strong equatorial sun. There, the vegetation near the ground is a dense tangle of nettles, creepers, and competing species of fast-growing, short-lived trees, which make walking difficult if not impossible. Everywhere on the ground there is a profusion of fallen nuts and fruits, some as large as basketballs and many partially eaten by monkeys, antelope (duikers), and rodents. During some seasons the air is filled with the nectar of numerous species of flower, including many epiphytes, which cling to the surface of other plants and draw their sustenance from the air. Always there is the sound of myriad insects. Cicadas perch on tree trunks and emit an irritating buzz that seems designed to drive any intruder to madness. Army ants advance in columns, audibly cracking the bodies of their insect prey. Seemingly endless lines of migrating butterflies flutter through the understory and sometimes congregate in colourful displays along streambeds. The buzzing of bees, busily plying the treetops in search of sweet nourishing nectar, is ever present. While magnificent, the forest with its constant high humidity and dark interior may seem oppressive to some. Certainly Joseph Conrad thought so when he referred to the forest as the “heart of darkness.” But the overwhelming impression for even the most squeamish visitor is not of darkness, not of oppressive gloom, but of life in its most vibrant and exciting form.
The Ituri Forest varies in altitude between 2,300 feet (700 metres) in its southern portions to 3,300 feet in the north. The topography is gently undulating in the south, but in the north there are frequent outcroppings of smooth granite that rise several hundred feet above the forest.
Steeped in the tannin-rich leaves covering the forest topsoil, the water flowing in the numerous streams that drain the Ituri is the colour of strong tea. Besides the Ituri River itself, there are many broad streams that flow generally from east to west. The most notable are the Nepoko in the north, the Epulu and Nduye in the centre, and the Ibina in the south. None of these rivers is navigable, even by pirogue, for more than a few miles. The streams are fed by rains that are highly variable from month to month and from year to year. Average annual rainfall is 75 inches (1,900 mm), and there are approximately 2,000 hours of sunshine per year. Average temperature at lower elevations is 88 °F (31 °C). There is a dry season that lasts roughly from December through February, when less than 7 inches of rain normally falls. By the end of the dry season humidity within the forest is reduced, and the smaller forest streams dry up. The heaviest rains fall in October and early November; rivers overflow their banks, and large areas of the forest become flooded, making walking through the forest or driving on the few available roads extremely difficult.
