Kobuk Valley National Park,  large wilderness area in northwestern Alaska, U.S. It is part of a vast region of national parks, monuments, and preserves located north of the Arctic Circle that stretches for hundreds of miles from west to east. It is bordered to the north by Noatak National Preserve and to the south by Selawik National Wildlife Refuge. Proclaimed a national monument in 1978, it underwent boundary changes in 1980 when it became a national park. Its total area is 2,736 square miles (7,086 square km).
The park preserves the natural features of the Kobuk River valley, including the Kobuk, Salmon, and other rivers, a region of boreal forest (taiga), and the Great Kobuk Sand Dunes. The slow-moving westward-flowing Kobuk River, 1,500 feet (450 metres) at its widest point, lies in a shallow valley separating the Baird Mountains in the northern half of the park from the Waring Mountains on the park’s southern boundary. The Great Kobuk Sand Dunes, with crests rising to heights of 100 feet (30 metres) above the surrounding area, cover about 25 square miles (65 square km) southeast of the Kobuk River; nearby are the Little Kobuk Sand Dunes. Glacial-outwash streams emptying into what was once a large lake in the Kobuk valley are thought to have formed the dunes some 150,000 years ago.
Boreal forests of spruce, alder, and birch give way to Arctic tundra northward across the Kobuk valley. A great variety of wildlife is found there, including grizzly (Alaskan brown) and black bears, moose, foxes and other small fur-bearing mammals, wolves, and numerous waterfowl; the waterways abound in fish, including the sheefish (a type of whitefish). The park lies astride the major migration route of the western herd of northern caribou (reindeer). The herd crosses the park in the spring from its winter area south of the park to reach its calving ground to the north along the Arctic coastal plain. In the fall the herd returns southward through the park, which is part of its rutting area, to reach its winter area. Archaeological sites, including the Orange Portage site in the southeast, reveal at least 12,000 years of human occupation. Access to the park is largely by small airplane from Kotzebue (location of the park’s headquarters), some 100 miles (160 km) to the west.
