National Park of American Samoa,  tropical preserve of rainforest and coral reef in the south-central Pacific Ocean islands of the U.S. territory of American Samoa. The park was established in 1988 and covers 14 square miles (36 square km) in three separate sections: the north-central part of the main island of Tutuila, a large section of the island of Tau, and a small portion of shoreline and offshore reef on the island of Ofu. Tau and Ofu are located some 60 miles (95 km) east of Tutuila and can be reached only by airplane from the capital city of Pago Pago, where the visitors’ centre is located.
Located on the southern shore of Tau are the world’s tallest sea cliffs, which soar as much as 3,000 feet (915 metres) above the ocean; visitors can walk along the coast at the base of the cliffs. Saua, a village site on the east coast of Tau, is thought by some to be the birthplace of the Polynesian people. Inaccessible tracts of untouched native rainforest are found on both Tutuila and Tau. Snorkeling among the pristine coral reefs off Ofu’s white-sand beaches is a favourite visitor activity.
The park is home to American Samoa’s only native land mammal, the flying fox, and its sole snake species, the Pacific boa. Birds and marine life are plentiful; the reef supports nearly 900 species of fish, and a variety of seabirds and shorebirds such as noddies, terns, frigate birds, rails, and plovers are found there. Among the park’s rainforest birds are the honeyeater, the fuia (an endemic starling), and the lupe, or Pacific pigeon, whose importance to ancient Samoans is indicated by the dozens of star-shaped mounds once used to trap them. Some 450 species of plants grow in the rainforest. In addition to its natural resources, the park preserves Samoan cultural sites and artifacts.
An unusual feature of the park is the ownership of the land. Although the park land is managed as a unit of the U.S. National Park Service, the land is actually owned by the Samoan people, who lease it to the park service. The people are thus allowed to continue using the land in their traditional fashion.
