Sequoia National Forest and Giant Sequoia National Monument,  large natural region of mountains and forestland in east-central California, U.S. The area is noted for its more than three dozen groves of big trees, or giant sequoias (Sequoiadendron giganteum), for which the national forest and the national monument are named.
The region lies at the southern end of the Sierra Nevada and is divided into two main sections of unequal size. The smaller, northern portion is separated from Sierra National Forest (north) by the Kings River and adjoins Kings Canyon (east) and Sequoia (south) national parks. The larger, southern section borders Sequoia National Park (north) and Inyo National Forest (northeast and east) and stretches south nearly to Bakersfield and the Mojave Desert (south). Two small, separate units of Sequoia National Forest lie immediately south and southeast of this section, and the Tule Indian Reservation adjoins its western border. The national forest, which was established in 1908, has a total area of 1,780 square miles (4,610 square km), with elevations ranging from 1,000 to above 12,000 feet (300 to above 3,700 metres). Giant Sequoia National Monument was established within Sequoia National Forest in 2000 to protect the groves of giant sequoias dotted throughout both sections of the forest. The national monument occupies a total of some 513 square miles (1,329 square km) of land and includes campgrounds and an interpretive trail.
The forest, which includes conifers, hardwoods, and chaparral as well as big trees, provides timber, water, forage, wildlife habitat, and recreation. In addition to the groves of giant sequoias, notable features include Kern River and Kings River canyons, Boyden Cavern, Balch Park (which has a notable grove of redwoods), many mountain lakes and well-stocked trout streams, and the Boole Tree, with a height of 269 feet (82 metres) and a circumference of 35 feet (11 metres), the largest known tree in any U.S. national forest. Dome Land Wilderness, one of five wilderness areas within the national forest, is a lofty region northeast of Bakersfield containing numerous rock outcroppings.
Sequoia National Forest is a popular hunting area, particularly for such large game as bears and mule deer. Trout fishing, camping, skiing, snowmobiling, and kayaking are also widely enjoyed, and the Kings and North Fork Kern rivers are major destinations for white-water rafting trips. The 900 miles (1,450 km) of trails are used by hikers, horseback riders, and off-road vehicle operators. The Pacific Crest National Scenic Trail runs through parts of the forest. Headquarters are at Porterville.
