Zion National Park,  dramatic landscape of colourful deep canyons, high cliffs, mesas, and forested plateaus in southwestern Utah, U.S. The park lies on the northwestern edge of the Colorado Plateau about 30 miles (50 km) northeast of the city of St. George. Cedar Breaks National Monument is nearby to the northeast, Bryce Canyon National Park and Grand Staircase–Escalante National Monument are nearby to the east, Pipe Spring National Monument and the north rim of Grand Canyon National Park are to the south, and Parashant National Monument is to the southwest.
The park’s principal feature is Zion Canyon, which received its name from the Mormons who discovered it (1858) and settled there in the early 1860s. A portion of the area was first set aside as Mukuntuweap National Monument in 1909. The monument was enlarged and renamed Zion National Monument in 1918 and was established as a national park in 1919. The park was enlarged in 1956, by the addition of adjacent land that had also been named Zion National Monument but is now called Kolob Canyons; the entire park now occupies 229 square miles (593 square km).
The park’s layers of sedimentary rock give evidence of its geologic origins; the area has, in the past 230 million years, been underwater, uplifted, covered with volcanic ash, dried into a windswept desert, flooded again, and, 13 million years ago, thrust upward once more. Rivers heavy with sediment began the erosion process responsible for Zion’s dramatic canyon and valley formations. Zion Canyon, for example, carved by the Virgin River, is about 15 miles (25 km) long and some 2,000 to 3,000 feet (600 to 900 metres) deep. The rocky domes and pinnacles that dot the canyon walls range in colour from rust-red at lower elevations to nearly white at the summits. The abundant fossil record of the walls has yielded evidence that prehistoric peoples (Basket Makers [see Ancestral Pueblo culture] and Pueblo Indians) once inhabited the area. The Great White Throne, a giant monolith on one canyon wall, rises 2,394 feet (730 metres) above the canyon floor. Among the park’s other sites are Emerald Pools, Weeping Rock, and the Temple of Sinawava, all in Zion Canyon, and Kolob Arch, in the Kolob Canyons area.
Zion’s wildlife includes mule deer, golden eagles, mountain lions, peregrine falcons, and the Zion snail, which is endemic to the park. Bighorn were reintroduced to the park in 1973 after having died out two decades earlier. The nearly 800 native species of plants include mainly semiarid types such as cactus, but cottonwood, willow, and box elder grow along the canyon floor, and juniper and pines are found at higher elevations.
Hiking and horseback riding are popular activities. The park has several scenic drives; however, excessive traffic congestion and parking problems led to the creation of a shuttle bus system in 2000, and from April through October the main route through Zion Canyon is accessible only by this bus.
