Benedetto Croce,  (born February 25, 1866, Pescasseroli, Italy—died November 20, 1952, Naples), historian, humanist, and foremost Italian philosopher of the first half of the 20th century.
Croce belonged to a family of landed proprietors with estates in the Abruzzi region of central Italy but chiefly resident in Naples. His background was religious, monarchical, and conservative. Croce spent almost his whole life in Naples, becoming intimately identified with, and a keen observer of, its life, as well as a biographer of its heroes. His life, of which he left a too-modest record in his autobiography, falls roughly into four phases; each develops the dual theme of his intellectual and moral growth and his gradual, ever-deepening identification with the moral character and destiny of the Italian nation.
The first period of Croce’s life (until about 1900) was the period of his agony. Orphaned (with his brother, Alfonso) by the earthquake of Casamicciola in 1883, his life became, in his words, a “bad dream.” The stable world of childhood and youth was shattered, leaving him forever marked. Henceforth, he was a solitary figure, despite his considerable activity in the world.
His salvation lay in work. Disillusioned with the university, he set out upon an austere course of study, to become one of the great self-taught students of history. His writings of this period are universally alert, intelligent, and engaging. Although limited in scope, they show a fine sobriety of style, as well as wit, irony, and a fiery polemical spirit—although lyricism, which he eulogized, eluded him. Ostensibly he had little taste for politics, but actually several basic attitudes were forming. Disillusioned with the nationalistic liberal leaders of the period following the Risorgimento (the 19th-century movement for Italian unity), he began to develop his own convictions on how an ethical, democratic, liberal government should be structured. He “coquetted”—according to his autobiography—with socialism and Marxism, eventually discarding those views after thorough examination and severe criticism of both positions. Nevertheless, he was subject to a constant and profound malaise. Subliminally he desired public relevance for his activity but saw none; the limited world of erudition palled on him.
He was delivered from his malaise, and the second period of his life was opened in 1903 with his founding of La Critica, a journal of cultural criticism in which, during the course of the next 41 years, he published nearly all of his writings and reviewed all of the most important historical, philosophical, and literary work that was being produced in Europe at the time.
According to Croce, “The foundation of La Critica marked the beginning of a new period in my life, the period of maturity or harmony between myself and reality.” Through the journal, he found the larger public theatre he had been seeking. “La Critica was the most direct service I could render to Italian culture.…I was engaged in politics in the broad sense…uniting the role of a student and of a citizen.” Through La Critica, Croce’s public role as teacher of modern Italy emerged. Count Camillo Benso di Cavour, the prime minister who presided over the formation of a unified Italy, had said, “Having made Italy, we must make Italians.” La Critica took up that task.
The image of the Italian which animated that work was severe and beautiful. Creative effort, a passion for freedom united with a profound sense of civic duty, a lifestyle purged of all rhetoric and sentimental romanticism, unambiguous norms of public and private truth, a sense of history united with an obligation to the future, unceasing but constructive self-criticism—those were its elements. That image strongly reflected the personal ideal Croce had gradually formed for himself. But history was preparing to put that ideal to the test.
