Confession, also called reconciliation or penance,  in the Judeo-Christian tradition, the acknowledgment of sinfulness in public or private, regarded as necessary to obtain divine forgiveness.
The need for confession is frequently stressed in the Hebrew Bible. The mission of the Jewish prophets was to awaken in the people a sense of sinfulness and an acknowledgment of their guilt, both personal and collective. Before the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem (70 ce), the sin offerings on the Day of Atonement (Yom Kippur) were prefaced by a collective expression of sinfulness (Leviticus 16:21), and, since the destruction of the Temple, the Day of Atonement has continued in Judaism as a day of prayer, fasting, and confession.
In the New Testament the public ministry of Jesus was prepared for by John the Baptist, who baptized the people; the baptism was accompanied by a public confession of sins (Matthew 3:6). The necessity of confession is discussed in many places in the New Testament (James 5:16; 1 John 1:9), although there is no direct evidence that confession had to be specific or detailed or that it had to be made to a priest.
A detailed confession to a bishop or priest, however, appeared early in the church’s history. In the 5th-century discipline of the Roman church, the practice was to hear confessions at the beginning of Lent and to reconcile the penitents on Holy Thursday in preparation for Easter. Gradually, however, the practice of reconciling, or absolving, sinners immediately after confession and before fulfillment of penance was introduced. By the end of the 11th century, only notorious sinners were reconciled on Holy Thursday. Often, those guilty of serious, mortal sins put off penance until death approached. To correct this abuse, the Fourth Lateran Council (1215) established the rule that every Christian should confess to a priest at least once a year.
In modern times the Roman Catholic Church teaches that confession, or reconciliation, is a sacrament, instituted by Christ, in which a confession of all serious sins committed after baptism is necessary. The Roman Catholic Church claims that the absolution of the priest is an act of forgiveness; to receive it, the penitent must confess all serious sins and manifest genuine “contrition,” or sorrow for sins, and a reasonably firm purpose to make amends. Following Vatican II, the church began to emphasize penance as a process of reconciliation and as a means of obtaining pardon from God. The priest is seen as a healer aiding in the process, and penitent sinners are called to conversion and correction of their lives.
The doctrine of the Eastern Orthodox churches concerning confession agrees with that of the Roman Catholic Church. In Orthodox practice, confession is generally viewed as a form of spiritual healing, and the relative lack of legalism reflects the Eastern patristic understanding of sin as an internal passion and as an enslavement.
During the Reformation the Church of England resisted attempts to have all references to private confession (e.g., with a priest or confessor) and absolution removed from the prayer book. In the 19th century the Oxford Movement encouraged a revival of private confession, and it was accepted by some Anglo-Catholics. Many Anglicans, however, favour the general confession and absolution of the Communion service.
Most Protestants regard the general confession and absolution of the Communion service as sufficient preparation for the Lord’s Supper. Among Lutherans, private confession and absolution survived the Reformation for a time but were eventually given up by most members. John Calvin also recognized the value of private confession and absolution for those troubled in conscience, but he denied that such confession was a sacrament or that it was necessary for the forgiveness of sins. In some Pentecostal and Fundamentalist churches, confession of sins is an important part of the worship service.
Most Protestants consider auricular or private confession to be unbiblical and consider confession viewed as a sacrament to be equally unbiblical. These Protestants stress that God alone can forgive sins, and they believe that regular introspection and direct contrite confession of one’s sins to God through prayer is a vital part of the Christian life.
