Faith,  inner attitude, conviction, or trust relating human beings to a supreme God or ultimate salvation. In religious traditions stressing divine grace, it is the inner certainty or attitude of love granted by God himself. In Christian theology, faith is the divinely inspired human response to God’s historical revelation through Jesus Christ and, consequently, is of crucial significance.
No definition allows for identification of “faith” with “religion.” Some inner attitude has its part in all religious traditions, but it is not always of central significance. For example, words in ancient Egypt or Vedic India that can be roughly rendered by the general term “religion” do not allow for “faith” as a translation but rather connote cultic duties and acts. In Hindu and Buddhist Yoga traditions, inner attitudes recommended are primarily attitudes of trust in the guru, or spiritual preceptor, and not, or not primarily, in God. Hindu and Buddhist concepts of devotion (Sanskrit bhakti) and love or compassion (Sanskrit karuna) are more comparable to the Christian notions of love (Greek agapē, Latin caritas) than to faith. Devotional forms of Mahayana Buddhism and Vaishnavism show religious expressions not wholly dissimilar to faith in Christian and Jewish traditions.
In biblical Hebrew, “faith” is principally juridical: it is the faithfulness or truthfulness with which persons adhere to a treaty or promise and with which God and Israel adhere to the Covenant between them. In Islam and Christianity, both rooted in this tradition, the notion of faith reflects that view. In Islam, faith (Arabic īmān) is what sets the believer apart from others; at the same time, it is ascertained that “None can have faith except by the will of Allah” (Qurʾān sura 10, verse 100). The First Letter to the Corinthians in the Christian New Testament similarly asserts that faith is a gift of God (12:8–9), while the Letter to the Hebrews (11:1) defines faith (pistis) as “the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen.” Some scholars think that Zoroastrianism, as well as Judaism, may have had some importance in the development of the notion of faith in Western religion; the prophet Zoroaster (before the 7th century bce) may have been the first founder of a religion to speak of a new, conscious religious choice on the part of man for truth (asha).
In Christianity the intellectual component of faith is stressed by St. Thomas Aquinas. One of the major issues of the Protestant movement was the theological problem of justification by faith alone. Martin Luther stressed the element of trust, while John Calvin emphasized faith as a gift freely bestowed by God. A 19th-century German theologian, Friedrich Schleiermacher, wrote of the subjective nature of faith. In the 20th century, theologians, led by Karl Barth, made conscious efforts to turn away from Schleiermacher’s subjective interpretation.
Notions of religious trust in India, China, and Japan are as a rule different from the notion of faith in Christianity. The “trust” (Pali saddha, Sanskrit shraddha) described in the Buddhist Eightfold Path is comparable to the confidence with which a sick person entrusts himself to a physician. In Chinese traditions xin (“fidelity” or “trustfulness”; the character depicts a person standing by his spoken word) is considered to be an important virtue.
