Jesuit,  member of the Society of Jesus (S.J.), a Roman Catholic order of religious men founded by St. Ignatius of Loyola, noted for its educational, missionary, and charitable works. The order has been regarded by many as the principal agent of the Counter-Reformation and was later a leading force in modernizing the church.
The order grew out of the activity of Ignatius, a Spanish soldier who experienced a religious conversion during a period of convalescence from a wound received in battle. After a period of intense prayer, he composed the Spiritual Exercises, a guidebook to convert the heart and mind to a closer following of Jesus Christ. On August 15, 1534, at Paris, six young men who had met him at the University of Paris and made a retreat according to the Spiritual Exercises joined him in vows of poverty, chastity, and a pilgrimage to Jerusalem. If this last promise did not prove possible, as it did not, they vowed to accept any apostolic work requested by the pope. In 1539 Ignatius drafted the first outline of the order’s organization, which Pope Paul III approved on September 27, 1540.
The society introduced several innovations in the form of the religious life. Among these were the discontinuance of many medieval practices—such as regular penances or fasts obligatory on all, a common uniform, and the choral recitation of the liturgical office—in the interest of greater mobility and adaptability. Other innovations included a highly centralized form of authority with life tenure for the head of the order, probation lasting many years before final vows, gradation of members, and lack of a female branch. Particular emphasis was laid upon the virtue of obedience, including special obedience to the pope. Emphasis was also placed upon flexibility, a condition that allowed Jesuits to become involved in a great variety of ministries and missionary endeavours in all parts of the world.
The society grew rapidly, and it quickly assumed a prominent role in the Counter-Reformation defense and revival of Catholicism. Almost from the beginning, education and scholarship became the society’s principal work. The early Jesuits, however, also produced preachers and catechists who devoted themselves to the care of the young, the sick, prisoners, prostitutes, and soldiers; they also were often called upon to undertake the controversial task of confessor to many of the royal and ruling families of Europe. The society entered the foreign mission field within months of its founding as Ignatius sent St. Francis Xavier, his most gifted companion, and three others to the East. More Jesuits were to be involved in missionary work than in any other activity, save education. By the time of Ignatius’s death in 1556, about 1,000 Jesuits were already working throughout Europe and in Asia, Africa, and the New World. By 1626 the number of Jesuits was 15,544, and in 1749 the total was 22,589.
The society encountered an important controversy centred on the Italian Jesuit Matteo Ricci, who worked as a missionary in China in the late 16th and the early 17th century. Decades of scholarly research into Buddhist and Confucian thought had prepared Ricci to attach the Roman Catholic understanding of the Christian faith to the deepest spiritual apprehensions of the Chinese religious tradition. The veneration of Confucius, the great Chinese religious and philosophical leader, and the religious honours paid to ancestors were to be seen not as elements of paganism to be rejected out of hand but as rituals of Chinese society that could be adapted to Christian purposes. Although Ricci’s apostolic labours won him many converts in China, they also aroused the suspicion of many in the West that the distinctiveness of Christianity was being compromised. The suspicion did not assert itself officially until long after Ricci’s death, but, when it did, the outcome was a condemnation of the so-called Chinese rites by Pope Clement XI in 1704 and 1715 and by Pope Benedict XIV in 1742. Ancestor veneration and Confucian devotion were said to be an inseparable element of traditional Chinese religion and hence incompatible with Christian worship and doctrine.
Among the repercussions of the controversy over Chinese rites was an intensification of the resentment directed against the Jesuits. Their preeminent position among the religious orders and their championship of the pope exposed them to hostility, and by the middle of the 18th century a variety of adversaries, both lay and clerical, were seeking to destroy the order. The opposition can be traced to several reasons, primarily perhaps to the anticlerical and antipapal spirit of the times. Hostility to the Jesuits was further inspired by their defense of the indigenous populations of the Americas against abuses committed by Spanish and Portuguese colonizers and by the strength of the order, which was regarded as an impediment to the establishment of absolute monarchist rule.
The Portuguese crown expelled the Jesuits in 1759, France made them illegal in 1764, and Spain and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies took other repressive action in 1767. Opponents of the Society of Jesus achieved their greatest success when they took their case to Rome. Although Pope Clement XIII refused to act against the Jesuits, his successor, Pope Clement XIV, issued a brief abolishing the order in 1773. The society’s corporate existence was maintained in Russia, where political circumstances—notably the opposition of Catherine II the Great—prevented the canonical execution of the suppression. The demand that the Jesuits take up their former work became so insistent that in 1814 Pope Pius VII reestablished the society. Meanwhile, however, the suppression of the Jesuits had done serious damage to the missions and the educational program of the church at a time when both enterprises were under great pressure.
After the society was restored, the Jesuits grew to be the largest order of male religious. Work in education on all levels continued to involve more Jesuits than any other activity, while the number of Jesuits working in the mission fields, especially in Asia and Africa, exceeded that of any other religious order. They were involved in a broad and complex list of activities, including the field of communications, social work, ecumenism, human rights, and even politics. In 1968 the Jesuit superior general, Father Pedro Arrupe, refocused the order with “a preferential option for the poor,” and the Jesuit ranks experienced a rise in the popularity of liberation theology, which holds that ministry should include involvement in the political struggle of the poor. This ideology influenced a number of Jesuit leaders in Latin America in the late 20th century, some of whom were met with violence and death because of their activism, and brought the order into conflict with Pope John Paul II, who sought to curb the movement with the appointment of conservative prelates in Latin America. In 2013 Jorge Mario Bergoglio of Argentina became Pope Francis, the first Jesuit to be elected pope.
