Katherine Augusta Westcott Tingley, née Katherine Augusta Westcott,  (born July 6, 1847, Newbury, Mass., U.S.—died July 11, 1929, Visingsö, Swed.), American theosophist, a woman of forceful personality, who introduced charitable works and educational endeavours into the mission of the Theosophical Society in America during her leadership of that group.
Katherine Westcott was educated in public schools and briefly in a convent school in Montreal. In 1888 in New York City she married her third husband, Philo B. Tingley. She was interested in various charitable activities as well as in spiritualism, and in her mission work on the Lower East Side she often attempted to combine the two. In the winter of 1892–93 she met William Quan Judge, who in 1875 had helped Helena Blavatsky form the Theosophical Society.
In 1895 Judge led the American branch of the society out of the international movement based in Adyar, India, and reorganized it as the Theosophical Society in America. On his death in 1896 a secret diary, supposed to be Judge’s, was found, and in it he indicated that Tingley was to be his successor. She quickly began to reshape the organization according to her own notions. She raised funds to establish the School for the Revival of the Lost Mysteries of Antiquity. In 1897 she founded the International Brotherhood League to work for the benefit of convicts, “fallen women,” and ordinary workingmen and to promote racial harmony. In 1898 she promulgated a new constitution under which the league and the Theosophical Society were merged into the Universal Brotherhood and Theosophical Society, of which she had absolute control as “Leader and Official Head.”
New headquarters were dedicated at Point Loma, a picturesque promontory north of San Diego, California, and in 1900 she established herself there. A remarkable “white city” of eclectic Asian architecture grew up at Point Loma and became a centre for artists, poets, and sightseers. The School for the Revival of the Lost Mysteries of Antiquity was transferred there and evolved into the Theosophical University. It was chartered by the state of California in 1919. The Raja Yoga school and college educated about 300 children, some as a charity, with a program combining shared labour, calisthenics, music and drama, and live-in teachers. Tingley edited the weekly Century Path from 1907 to 1911 and its successor, the Theosophical Path, from 1911 to 1929.
She established theosophical schools abroad, in Cuba, Sweden, Germany, and England, as well as in Massachusetts and Minnesota, but nearly all were short-lived. Her single-minded devotion to Point Loma left the society at large open to schism; some local lodges split from Tingley’s group. After 1925 Tingley lived mainly in Europe. She was severely injured in an automobile accident in Germany in 1929, and she died two months later.
