Lucia dos Santos, in full Lucia de Jesus dos Santos, original name Lucia Abobora, also called Sister Lucia,  (born March 22, 1907, Aljustrel, Portugal—died February 13, 2005, Coimbra), Portuguese shepherd girl, later a Carmelite nun, who claimed she saw visions of the Virgin Mary in 1917 at Fátima, Portugal, which subsequently became one of the most famous Marian shrines in the world.
The first of six visions came to Lucia on May 13, 1917, while she was tending sheep with her two cousins, Francisco and Jacinta Marto. In accordance with the Virgin’s promise, another vision came on the 13th of each month until October, except for August, when the children were at Valinhos pasture, near Aljustrel, where they saw the Lady on August 19. At that time, the children had been abducted by incredulous civil authorities, who interrogated and threatened them. In the August vision the Lady promised a great miracle for October.
Reports of the visions excited interest, and by October 13 the observers at Fátima reached an estimated 70,000. The Virgin Mary reportedly revealed herself to the children as the Lady of the Rosary and asked for a chapel to be built there for her. Immediately afterward there occurred a “solar phenomenon” that was reported by many who saw it; the Sun reputedly fell toward the Earth. Lucia then announced the identity of the Lady and her wish.
Lucia and her cousins, both of whom died soon after the visions, were interviewed frequently by officials of the Roman Catholic Church, and a formal inquiry commenced in 1922. After years of investigation, the veneration of Our Lady of Fátima was authorized by the bishop of Leiria, Portugal, on October 13, 1930. In the 1930s and ’40s Lucia prepared documents giving additional details of the experience. In 1948 she entered the Carmelite order at Coimbra, Portugal, and, on the 50th anniversary (May 13, 1967) of the first vision, she accompanied Pope Paul VI to the shrine with about one million pilgrims.
The “secret of Fátima,” said to have been revealed in three messages from the Virgin Mary to Lucia and her cousins, remained private until the 1940s, when church officials disclosed two of the messages. The first was a vision of hell, and the second was commonly interpreted as prophesying the end of World War I and the start of World War II and the rise and fall of communism. The third remained secret until the day of the beatification ceremonies for Francisco and Jacinta in 2000, when the Vatican interpreted the message as a prediction of the assassination attempt on Pope John Paul II in 1981.
