Shaykh Aḥmad Sirhindī,  (born 1564?, Sirhind, Patiāla, India—died 1624, Sirhind), Indian mystic and theologian who was largely responsible for the reassertion and revival in India of orthodox Sunnite Islam as a reaction against the syncretistic religious tendencies prevalent during the reign of the Mughal emperor Akbar.
Shaykh Aḥmad, who through his paternal line traced his descent from the caliph ʿUmar I (the second caliph of Islam), received a traditional Islamic education at home and later at Siālkot (now in Pakistan). He reached maturity when Akbar, the renowned Mughal emperor, attempted to unify his empire by forming a new syncretistic faith (Dīn-e-Ilāhī), which sought to combine the various mystical forms of belief and religious practices of the many communities making up his empire.
Shaykh Aḥmad joined the mystical order Naqshbandīyah, the most important of the Indian Sufi orders, in 1593–94. He spent his life preaching against the inclination of Akbar and his successor, Jahāngīr (ruled 1605–27), toward pantheism and Shīʿite Islam (one of that religion’s two major branches). Of his several written works, the most famous is Maktūbāt (“Letters”), a compilation of his letters written in Persian to his friends in India and the region north of the Amu Darya (river). Through these letters Shaykh Aḥmad’s major contribution to Islamic thought can be traced. In refuting the Naqshbandīyah order’s extreme monistic position of waḥdat al-wujūd (the concept of divine existential unity of God and the world, and hence man), he instead advanced the notion of waḥdat ash-shuhūd (the concept of unity of vision). According to this doctrine, any experience of unity between God and the world he has created is purely subjective and occurs only in the mind of the believer; it has no objective counterpart in the real world. The former position, Shaykh Aḥmad felt, led to pantheism, which was contrary to the tenets of Sunnite Islam.
Shaykh Aḥmad’s concept of waḥdat ash-shuhūd helped revitalize the Naqshbandīyah order, which retained its influence among Muslims in India and Central Asia for several centuries thereafter. A measure of his importance in the development of Islamic orthodoxy in India is the title that was bestowed posthumously on him, Mujaddid-i Alf-i Thānī (“Renovator of the Second Millennium”), a reference to the fact that he lived at the beginning of the second millennium of the Muslim calendar. His teachings were not always popular in official circles. In 1619, by the orders of the Mughal emperor Jahāngīr, who was offended by his aggressive opposition to Shīʿite views, Shaykh Aḥmad was temporarily imprisoned in the fortress at Gwalior. His burial place at Sirhind is still a site of pilgrimage.
