Amygdala,  region of the brain primarily associated with emotional processes. The name amygdala is derived from the Greek word amygdale, meaning “almond,” owing to the structure’s almondlike shape. The amygdala is located in the medial temporal lobe, just anterior to (in front of) the hippocampus. Similar to the hippocampus, the amygdala is a paired structure, with one located in each hemisphere of the brain. The amygdala is part of the limbic system, a neural network that mediates many aspects of emotion and memory. Although historically the amygdala was considered to be involved primarily in fear and other emotions related to aversive (unpleasant) stimuli, it is now known to be involved in positive emotions elicited by appetitive (rewarding) stimuli.
The amygdala comprises a group of nuclei, or clusters of neurons. The basolateral complex, the largest of the clusters and located roughly in the lateral and middle parts of the amygdala, includes the lateral, basal, and accessory-basal nuclei. The lateral nucleus is the major recipient of input from sensory cortices (cortical brain regions that represent information about sensory stimuli) of all modalities (e.g., vision, hearing). In addition, it has been established that in rodents information about auditory stimuli arrives in the amygdala directly from a subcortical (beneath the cortex) area of the brain known as the medial geniculate nucleus, which is located in the thalamus.
The cortical and medial nuclei of the amygdala form the so-called cortico-medial group. Olfactory (smell) information flows directly into the cortico-medial amygdala from the olfactory bulb and pyriform cortex, both of which function in the sense of smell. The intercalated masses are a ribbon of inhibitory neurons that gate information flow from the basolateral complex to the central nucleus of the amygdala.
In addition to sensory input, the amygdala receives input from a number of cortical and subcortical brain systems. Most prominently, the amygdala receives dense input from the prefrontal cortex, especially from the anterior cingulate and orbitofrontal cortices. The amygdala also receives prominent input from the insula and from the hippocampus and rhinal (olfactory) cortices. Subcortical information flows to the amygdala from numerous nuclei, including every neuromodulatory system.
Output from the amygdala can be directed to both subcortical and cortical brain structures. The central nucleus is directed to numerous subcortical structures known to mediate different autonomic, physiologic, and behavioral expressions of emotional state. The basal and accessory-basal nuclei are the major outputs of the amygdala directed to the cerebral cortex. Those anatomical projections may underlie the role of the amygdala in modulating cognitive processes such as decision making, attention, and memory.
The amygdala plays a prominent role in mediating many aspects of emotional learning and behaviour. There exist a vast array of human emotions, ranging from joy to sadness, disgust to excitement, and regret to satisfaction. Most emotions possess a valence (positive or negative) and an intensity (low to high) that reflects emotional arousal. Studies of the neural basis of emotion in animal models, including those focusing on the amygdala, typically have utilized physiological (e.g., autonomic) or behavioral (e.g., approach or defense) measures that likely reflect the valence and intensity of an emotional experience.
In the early part of the 20th century, psychologist Heinrich Klüver and neurosurgeon Paul C. Bucy studied monkeys with lesions of the temporal lobe that included the amygdala and observed changes in emotional, feeding, and sexual behaviour. Subsequent studies established that the amygdala was a critical structure mediating those effects.
Pheromones and innately appetitive and aversive stimuli, including certain odours, tastes, or sexual imagery, can produce physiological and behavioral expressions of emotional state. For olfactory stimuli, the cortico-medial amygdala is known to mediate innate emotional behaviour. For other innately reinforcing stimuli, including some drugs of abuse, circuitry within the basolateral complex likely also contributes to emotional responses.
Emotional learning most commonly has been studied in both animal models and humans, using Pavlovian conditioning, in which an otherwise neutrally conditioned stimulus is paired with an innately aversive unconditioned stimulus. This type of paradigm, often referred to as fear conditioning, can result in robust learning, owing to the convergence of sensory information about the conditioned stimulus and the unconditioned stimulus. Neuromodulatory input may also contribute to this learning. As an animal learns, the responses of amygdala neurons to conditioned stimuli change, reflecting the learning process. Furthermore, the activation of neurons in the basolateral amygdala can induce learning, suggesting that those neurons play a causal role in emotional learning. After learning, input from the basolateral complex to the central nucleus of the amygdala leads to the orchestration of a range of physiological and behavioral responses that are correlated with emotional states. Measures of fear conditioning include the cessation of movement (“freezing”), a defensive behaviour, and increased skin conductance responses or increased blood pressure (autonomic measures that reflect arousal level). Lesions of the amygdala impair the acquisition and expression of this learning.
Although the study of the amygdala has been most extensively pursued by means of aversive stimuli, there is substantial evidence that the amygdala is also involved in the processing of rewarding stimuli and in appetitive learning. Within the amygdala neural responses to conditioned stimuli change during appetitive learning, and many amygdala neurons respond to different rewarding stimuli. The activation of amygdala neurons that respond to a rewarding stimulus can induce both Pavlovian and instrumental learning (learning in which behaviour is influenced by consequences). A pathway from the amygdala to the ventral striatum, which has been implicated in reward processing in addiction, mediates learned approach behaviours (movements toward objects or other individuals). However, amygdalar lesions often do not impair appetitive learning, indicating that such learning is likely also supported by parallel neural pathways that do not involve the amygdala.
Emotional responses to sensory stimuli not only arise through innate mechanisms and through learning but also can be altered by extinction and cognitive control mechanisms. Both extinction and cognitive control involve interactions between the prefrontal cortex and the amygdala. Extinction, which itself is a learning process, is induced by the repeated presentation of a conditioned stimulus in the absence of a previously associated unconditioned stimulus, resulting in the elimination of a previously elicited response. Projections from the prefrontal cortex to the amygdala mediate extinction, with complex circuitry involving the central nucleus, the basolateral complex, and the intercalated masses playing a role in the modification of responses to previously conditioned stimuli.
The cognitive control of emotion is an important process to understand, given its critical role in normal adaptive emotional behaviour. Human studies using functional magnetic resonance imaging have implicated prefrontal-amygdala interactions in these processes, though the precise mechanisms remain poorly understood, in part owing to the difficulty in studying those processes in animal models.
Emotions influence cognitive processes such as attention, memory formation, and decision making, and they play a prominent role in social behaviour. A large body of literature supports a role for the amygdala in those functions, presumably by virtue of amygdalar projections to the prefrontal and sensory cortices, to the hippocampus and rhinal cortices, and to subcortical neuromodulatory systems. For example, patients with isolated lesions of the amygdala resulting from Urbach-Wiethe disease (a rare genetic disorder) can exhibit a deficit in identifying fearful facial expressions. That deficit appears to be due to difficulties in directing attention to the eyes of others, which is important for discerning fear. Consistent with that observation, amygdala neural activity can reflect the emotional significance and location of visual stimuli. Substantial work also implicates a role for the basolateral amygdala in modulating the formation of memories in relation to emotional events. In addition, human neuroimaging studies suggest a role for the amygdala in mediating the so-called framing effect during economic choices, which is thought to reflect the effect of positive or negative emotion on decision making.
Dysfunction within the amygdala and the neural circuits connecting the amygdala with a variety of cortical and subcortical structures likely contributes to the pathophysiology (disease-associated physiological processes) of a number of neuropsychiatric disorders. However, the precise mechanisms responsible for those disorders remain poorly understood. The anatomical interconnections between the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex, which likely are critical for normal adaptive emotional behaviour, do not fully develop until early adulthood. Many neuropsychiatric disorders emerge during or before that time.
Work in animals and studies of clinical populations suggest a role for amygdalar dysfunction in anxiety disorders, addiction, and complex neuropsychiatric disorders such as autism, where clinical features include social, cognitive, and affective components. As research on the amygdala and related structures advances, the precise disturbances in circuit mechanisms that underlie those and other psychiatric disorders are likely to be elucidated, opening the way to the development of new therapeutic interventions that transform the treatment of psychiatric disorders.
