Bone mineral density,  estimate of bone mass. Bone is a rich mineral reservoir, composed mainly of calcium and phosphorous, which together impart hardness, rigidity, and compressive strength to bone. Bone is also dynamic in that it is constantly being broken down and rebuilt. A normal individual has a healthy equilibrium between these two opposing processes. However, when the mineral content of bone is taken away faster than it is added, the bone becomes thin, weak, and prone to fracture.
Bone mineral density tests specifically measure the mineral content in one square centimetre of bone and estimate the risk for fracture. An example of a bone mineral density test is the dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scan, which employs minimal amounts of radiation and is commonly used for osteoporosis (bone-thinning) screening. Other types of clinical tests that are used to determine bone mineral density include those based on the use of single-photon absorptiometry, dual-photon absorptiometry, ultrasound, and quantitative computed tomography.
In order to determine whether a person is affected by a reduction in bone density, bone mineral density testing typically is performed on the individual’s wrists, spine, and hips. In the case of a DXA scan, the results are expressed in two numbers, the Z-score and the T-score. The Z-score is derived by comparing a person’s DXA scan result to a healthy person of similar age and represents the number of standard deviations that the patient may diverge from the normal bone mineral density score for his or her age. The Z-score can sometimes shed light on the underlying cause of bone loss. The T-score is derived by comparing a person’s DXA scan result to that of a healthy young adult of the same sex and race or to that of a healthy young adult woman. A T-score between −1.0 and −2.5 indicates osteopenia (a reduced amount of bone tissue), while a T-score of −2.5 indicates osteoporosis.
An integral part of preventing bone fractures associated with osteoporosis is early patient screening and intervention. General guidelines recommend obtaining a bone mineral density test in all women aged 65 and older, regardless of the presence of any other risk factors for osteoporosis. Younger postmenopausal women who have one or more risk factors for osteoporosis (e.g., family history, early estrogen deficiency, endocrine abnormalities) and postmenopausal women who experience fractures may also undergo DXA scan screening.
Bone mineral density testing has been shown to significantly reduce fracture risk. For example, by identifying individuals at greatest risk for osteoporosis and employing early intervention, such as lifestyle modification and medications, the risk of hip and vertebral fractures can be reduced by as much as 50 percent.
