Dizygotic twin, also called fraternal twin or nonidentical twin,  two siblings who come from separate ova, or eggs, that are released at the same time from an ovary and are fertilized by separate sperm. The term originates from di, meaning “two,” and zygote, “egg.” The rate of dizygotic twinning varies considerably worldwide. For example, parts of central and western Africa have very high twinning rates; studies in Nigeria have reported rates of more than 45 sets of twins per 1,000 births. By comparison, the rate in South and Southeast Asia appears to be as low as 6 to 9 per 1,000 births. While these figures concern all twin births (monozygotic and dizygotic), dizygotic twinning accounts for the majority—at least two-thirds—of them.
Dizygotic twins develop in the uterus separately. Each zygote develops with its own chorion (or outer sac). The chorion is connected to the placenta, which is the protective membrane that surrounds the developing fetus. The placenta lines the uterine wall, partially envelops the fetus, and is attached to the umbilical cord. The placenta exchanges nutrients, wastes, and gases between maternal and fetal blood. Each zygote also has its own inner sac that contains amniotic fluid, and each develops its own placenta. However, if the two zygotes implant in the uterus close together, the two placentas may appear as one on an ultrasound.
Because of their being two separate zygotes, the genetic makeup of dyzygotic twins is different, and thus they are not identical. On average, these twins will share half of their genes, just like any other pair of siblings. Furthermore, they may be the same sex or be a male and female pair. Dizygotic twins may have different fathers, meaning that one egg is fertilized by a sperm from one father and the other egg is fertilized by a different sperm from a different father. These cases are rare and few have been documented.
Dizygotic twins are most common for older mothers, with the highest rates found among mothers over age 35. With the advent of technologies and techniques to assist women in becoming pregnant, the rate of dizygotic twins has increased markedly. In some cases, family history of dizygotic twinning is an important factor. Other possible predispositions to dizygotic twins include mothers who are taller and heavier, the recent discontinuation of oral birth control, emotional stress, and diet. There has been speculation that diet may play a pronounced role in African mothers, particularly among the Yoruba in Nigeria, where a high frequency of dizygotic twinning is coincident with the consumption of large quantities of phytoestrogen-rich yams. Environmental stress from chemical agents in highly polluted areas may have negative impacts on the frequency of dizygotic twinning. Thus, while certain background factors likely are important, the occurrence of dizygotic twins may also be influenced by a complex mix of events, many of which are yet to be fully understood.
