Laterality,  in biological psychology, the development of specialized functioning in each hemisphere of the brain or in the side of the body which each controls.
The most obvious example of laterality is handedness, which is the tendency to use one hand or the other to perform activities. It is the usual practice to classify persons as right-handed, left-handed, or ambidextrous (two-handed). People differ considerably in the range of activities for which they prefer a given hand as well as in the degree of disparity in skill between their two hands. Probably no one favours either the right or left hand exclusively.
There is no extensive agreement on the origin of manual preferences. Some believe such laterality is inherited; others, that the child is trained to it; and still others, that biases are initiated in an infant during pregnancy by some organization of intrauterine forces, such as those producing twinning, or some extrauterine environmental influences. It is possible all three hypotheses are, in some measure, correct. It does seem clear that left-handed parents more frequently have left-handed offspring than do right-handed parents; that even at birth most babies tend to move one arm—usually the right—more than the other; and that, if a systematic effort is made to keep infants from developing a preference, they still come to favour one hand. It is equally apparent that most babies shift their preference once or twice during their first year. The consistency with which children use one hand in preference to the other increases with age, at least through the preschool years and probably longer. By far, most children are right-handed.
There is some data suggesting that humans are genetically biased toward right-handedness. During the third and fourth months of gestation, for example, a fetus’ fingerprints are larger on the right hand than the left. Recent research, however, suggests that right-handedness and left-handedness are not genetically encoded within the body’s genes but rather are coded in the spatial structure of ovarian cells. Other scientists believe handedness is not biologically determined at all, but is a factor of the environment. Most children can be trained to use and to prefer the right hand for any activity, and many have been so trained without obvious harmful effects. The wisdom of interfering with a child’s spontaneous preference, however, has been questioned.
One of the first to suggest the relationship between the brain’s hemispheres and specialized functions was the French pathologist and anthropologist Paul Broca (1824–80). He localized the brain centre for articulate speech in the third convolution of the left frontal lobe. He referred to this area as the “convolution of Broca” (mainly known as Broca’s area). Broca also realized that damage to the brain’s left hemisphere could lead to the loss of certain abilities such as the comprehension of spoken language and such functions as speech, reading, and writing. Loss of these functions is referred to as aphasia, alexia, and agraphia, respectively. Broca’s work seems supported by evidence that the brain speech centre tends to be located in the hemisphere (usually left) opposite to the side of the dominant hand (usually right) and that brain waves from corresponding parts of the two cerebral hemispheres are more conspicuous on the nondominant side. This evidence, however, fails to prove that the cortical organization a person inherits is responsible for his hand preference. There is little support for the view, as the theory of a dominant cerebral hemisphere might lead one to expect, that the body structures under the control of one hemisphere are uniformly more efficient than those under control of the other. Indeed, the dominant hand is not always on the side of the dominant foot, and about three-fourths of right-handed and one-third of left-handed persons are right-eyed in sighting.
