Melanocyte,  specialized skin cell that produces the protective skin-darkening pigment melanin. Birds and mammals possess these pigment cells, which are found mainly in the epidermis, though they occur elsewhere—e.g., in the matrix of the hair. Melanocytes are branched, or dendritic, and their dendrites are used to transfer pigment granules to adjacent epidermal cells.
All melanocytes, whether resident in the basal epidermis or in the matrix of the hair, have migrated there during embryonic life from a region known as the neural crest. Each epidermal melanocyte is associated with a group of neighbouring keratinocytes (keratin-synthesizing epidermal cells) into which its dendrites transfer pigment. This structure is known as an epidermal melanocyte unit. The melanin produced by melanocytes is of two kinds: dark brown eumelanin and pale red or yellowish phaeomelanin. Both are formed within the melanocytes by the initial oxidation of the amino acid tyrosine with the aid of the enzyme tyrosinase; subsequently their synthetic pathways diverge.
An increase in melanin pigmentation may be caused by an increased density of melanocytes, by abnormal packaging of melanin, or by increased melanin production. Pigmented birthmarks usually reflect local increases in melanocyte numbers, but in certain rare congenital pigmentary disorders, such as von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis, there is abnormal packaging of melanin within the melanocytes. Pigment production in the skin is regulated by a pituitary gland peptide hormone called melanocyte-stimulating hormone, and the increase in melanin pigmentation seen with pituitary tumours may reflect overproduction of this hormone by the pituitary. Both suntans and postinflammatory pigmentation result from the overproduction of melanin.
The absence of melanocytes, which occurs in vitiligo, results in a loss of melanin pigmentation. Conditions such as albinism and phenylketonuria are caused by reduced or absent synthesis of melanin by melanocytes.
