Menopause,  permanent cessation of menstruation that results from the loss of ovarian function and therefore represents the end of a woman’s reproductive life. At the time of menopause the ovaries contain very few follicles; they have decreased in size, and they consist mostly of atretic (shrunken) follicles, some interstitial cells, and fibrous tissue. Estrogen production decreases by 80 percent or more, and this along with the loss of follicles results in marked increases in the secretion of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). Menstrual periods may cease abruptly or may be irregular for a year or so before ceasing. In a similar fashion, menopausal symptoms may occur abruptly or gradually. While menopausal symptoms may begin when the woman is still menstruating, they are more likely to begin after menstruation ceases.
The term male menopause is sometimes used to describe an equivalent aging-related decline in testicular function that results in testosterone deficiency in men. This process is alternatively referred to as late-onset hypogonadism or andropause. It affects about 2 percent of men and may begin at age 40. Unlike menopause in women, late-onset hypogonadism in men occurs gradually, with testosterone levels decreasing over the course of many years. Symptoms include decreased libido, fatigue, depression, and erectile dysfunction. Symptoms may be subtle initially, and hence the condition may go unnoticed for years.
Menopause occurs in most women between ages 45 and 55, although it may begin as early as age 40 or be delayed to the late 50s. The age of onset appears to be determined in large part by the hereditary background of the individual. In fact, genes associated with age variations in normal menopause have been identified on multiple chromosomes. However, nutrition and health habits can also influence the age of onset. Premature menopause, which takes place spontaneously before age 40, occurs in about 8 percent of women. The spontaneous onset of menopause before age 45 is sometimes referred to as early menopause. Early or premature menopause may be induced if the ovaries are surgically removed (for example, in a hysterectomy or in treatment of ovarian cancer) or incidentally damaged or destroyed (as a side effect of radiation therapy or chemotherapy).
The natural life of the ovaries is about 35 years, and thus the decline of ovarian function is a normal result of aging, though it is accelerated as menopause approaches. During the reproductive years, follicles in the ovaries mature and release their ova (mature eggs) periodically under hypothalamic-pituitary stimulation. However, in the years immediately preceding menopause, a transitional phase known as perimenopause which can begin as early as 10 years before menopause, first some follicles and later all follicles fail to rupture and release their ova. In the last one or two years of perimenopause, estrogen levels decline quickly.
The failure to ovulate in late perimenopause results in a disturbed menstrual pattern. A woman may miss a period or two and suspect pregnancy. However, a medical examination will establish the proper diagnosis. The continued decline in ovarian activity may provoke prolonged intervals between periods or irregular bleeding episodes. The length of the periods may vary, and the flow may become either more scant or more profuse. In a small minority the periods cease abruptly.
As the ovaries decline in function, they produce smaller and smaller amounts of the hormone estrogen, thereby initiating subtle rearrangements in the hormonal activity of the glands that control reproductive function. Estrogen deficiency, during menopause and in general, causes the uterus and breasts to decrease in size and the vaginal mucosa to become atrophic and dry. In addition, sexual intercourse often becomes painful (dyspareunia).
A common symptom of declining estrogen production during menopause is “hot flashes,” which are characterized by a sensation of warmth of the face and upper body, flushing of the skin, sweating, tachycardia (accelerated heart rate), irritability, and headache. A hot flash typically lasts a few minutes and may be followed by a sensation of cold and even shivering. About 75 percent of women have hot flashes at the time of menopause, and about 30 percent may still have hot flashes five years later. The frequency of hot flashes varies from one or two per day to one per hour. Hot flashes may be a source of embarrassment and may interfere with sleep. They seem to be caused by sudden autonomic nerve activation that stimulates the dilation of blood vessels that supply the skin, leading to an increase in skin temperature.
Other physiological symptoms associated with menopause include decreased libido and dryness and atrophy of the skin. Some of these symptoms may be due in part to rearrangements in the hormonal activity of the adrenal and thyroid glands, since the metabolic activities of these glands are interrelated and are associated with some actions of estrogen. Many women complain of weight gain during menopause, and occasionally this is related to decreased thyroid function. However, menopause is not necessarily associated with unusual changes in physical appearance and fitness. Many menopausal women experience psychological symptoms, such as changes in mood, depression, and feeling as though they lack well-being; nervousness, headaches, and dizziness are common complaints. A fear of aging or an altered pattern of life may precipitate psychological symptoms.
