Pulmonary alveolus, plural pulmonary alveoli,  any of the small air spaces in the lungs where carbon dioxide leaves the blood and oxygen enters it. Air, entering the lungs during inhalation, travels through numerous passageways called bronchi and then flows into approximately 300,000,000 alveoli at the ends of the bronchioles, or lesser air passages. During exhalation, the carbon-dioxide-laden air is forced out of the alveoli through the same passageways.
The alveoli form clusters, called alveolar sacs, that resemble bunches of grapes. By the same analogy, the alveolar ducts leading to the sacs are like the stems of individual grapes, but, unlike grapes, the alveolar sacs are pocketlike structures made up of several individual alveoli.
The wall of each alveolus, lined by thin flat cells (Type I cells) and containing numerous capillaries, is the site of gas exchange, which occurs by diffusion. The relatively low solubility (and hence rate of diffusion) of oxygen necessitates the large internal surface area (about 80 square m [96 square yards]) and very thin walls of the alveoli. Weaving between the capillaries and helping to support them is a meshlike fabric of elastic and collagenous fibres. The collagen fibres, being more rigid, give the wall firmness, while the elastic fibres permit expansion and contraction of the walls during breathing.
Among the other cells found in the alveolar walls are a group called granular pneumocytes (Type II cells), which secrete surfactant, a film of fatty substances believed to contribute to the lowering of alveolar surface tension. Without this coating, the alveoli would collapse and very large forces would be required to re-expand them. Another type of cell, known as an alveolar macrophage, resides on the internal surfaces of the air cavities of the alveoli, the alveolar ducts, and the bronchioles. They are mobile scavengers that serve to engulf foreign particles in the lungs, such as dust, bacteria, carbon particles, and blood cells from injuries.
