Spermatogenesis,  the origin and development of the sperm cells within the male reproductive organs, the testes. The testes are composed of numerous thin tightly coiled tubules known as the seminiferous tubules; the sperm cells are produced within the walls of the tubules. Within the walls of the tubules, also, are many randomly scattered cells, called Sertoli cells, that function to support and nourish the immature sperm cells by giving them nutrients and blood products. As the young germ cells grow, the Sertoli cells help to transport them from the outer surface of the seminiferous tubule to the central channel of the tubule.
Sperm cells are continually being produced by the testes, but not all areas of the seminiferous tubules produce sperm cells at the same time. One immature germ cell takes as long as 74 days to reach final maturation, and during this growth process there are intermittent resting phases.
The immature cells (called spermatogonia) are all derived from cells called stem cells in the outer wall of the seminiferous tubules. The stem cells are composed almost entirely of nuclear material. (The nucleus of the cell is the portion containing the chromosomes.) The stem cells begin their process by multiplying in the process of cell duplication known as mitosis. Half of the new cells from this initial crop go on to become the future sperm cells, and the other half remain as stem cells so that there is a constant source of additional germ cells. Spermatogonia destined to develop into mature sperm cells are known as primary sperm cells. These move from the outer portion of the seminiferous tubule to a more central location and attach themselves around the Sertoli cells. The primary sperm cells then develop somewhat by increasing the amount of cytoplasm (substances outside of the nucleus) and structures called organelles within the cytoplasm. After a resting phase the primary cells divide into a form called a secondary sperm cell. During this cell division there is a splitting of the nuclear material. In the nucleus of the primary sperm cells there are 46 chromosomes; in each of the secondary sperm cells there are only 23 chromosomes, as there are in the egg. When the egg and sperm combine and their chromosomes unite, the characteristics of both individuals blend and the new organism starts to grow.
The secondary sperm cell still must mature before it can fertilize an egg; maturation entails certain changes in the shape and form of the sperm cell. The nuclear material becomes more condensed and oval in shape; this area develops as the head of the sperm. The head is covered partially by a cap, called the acrosome, which is important in helping the sperm to gain entry into the egg. Attached to the opposite end of the head is the tailpiece. The tail is derived from the secondary sperm cell’s cytoplasm. In the mature sperm, it consists of a long, slender bundle of filaments that propel the sperm by their undulating movement. Once the sperm has matured, it is transported through the long seminiferous tubules and stored in the epididymis of the testes until it is ready to leave the male body.
