Thalamus, plural thalami,  either of a pair of large ovoid organs that form most of the lateral walls of the third ventricle of the brain. The thalamus translates neural impulses from various receptors to the cerebral cortex. While the thalamus is classically known for its roles as a sensory relay in visual, auditory, somatosensory, and gustatory systems, it also has significant roles in motor activity, emotion, memory, arousal, and other sensorimotor association functions.
Anatomically, the thalamus lies deep within the brain, adjacent to the midline third ventricle. The paired thalami (one per hemisphere) are connected by the massa intermedia (interthalamic adhesion). The arterial supply to the thalami is predominantly by branches of the posterior cerebral arteries, as well as by the posterior communicating artery.
The thalamus is derived from the embryonic diencephalon and early in development becomes divided into two progenitor domains, the caudal domain and the rostral domain. The patterning of these domains is driven by the mid-diencephalic organizer (MDO), which sets a gradient of transcription factors to form distinct thalamic regions. Differential transcription of genes leads to neuronal differentiation. The caudal progenitor domain leads to the development of excitatory glutamatergic neurons (those that modulate glutamate and aspartate signaling), which contribute to the formation of the functionally and spatially distinct groups of neurons known as the thalamic nuclei. The rostral progenitor domain leads to the development of inhibitory gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) neurons that form the thalamic reticular nucleus.
The major nuclei of the thalamus include the relay nuclei, association nuclei, midline/intralaminar nuclei, and the reticular nucleus. With the exception of the reticular nucleus, these nuclear groups are divided regionally (i.e., anterior, medial, and lateral) by sheets of myelinated neural fibres known as the internal medullary lamina. The reticular nucleus is separated from the remainder of the thalamic nuclei by the external medullary lamina.
While there are numerous morphologies (shapes) to the neurons that compose the thalamic nuclei, thalamic neurons usually either project within the thalamus (interneurons) or project to the cerebral cortex. The physiology of thalamic cells is unique in that they show either a tonic pattern (regularly spaced, continuous action potentials) or a bursting pattern (intermittent groupings of action potentials, such as doublets or triplets), depending on physiological state and activity.
In general, the connections between the periphery (i.e., sensory organs) and the thalamus are contralateral (communicated with the opposite side of the body), while the connections between the thalamus and the cerebral cortex are ipsilateral (on the same side of the brain). Most thalamic nuclei project to the cortex, and all thalamic nuclei receive strong reciprocal connections from the cortex back to the thalamus.
Each nucleus is discussed in the following sections in relation to its inputs (afferents) and outputs (efferents) in the context of the function of the thalamic nucleus.
The inferolateral region is the predominant relay station for motor and sensory information in the central nervous system. It is composed of motor nuclei; the ventral anterior (VA) nucleus (ventral oralis) and ventral lateral (VL) nucleus (ventral intermediate); and the somatosensory nuclei (ventral caudal nuclei), ventral posterior medial (VPM), and ventral posterior lateral (VPL) nuclei.
The VA nucleus is involved in induction, execution, and control of aspects of voluntary movement. It predominantly receives topographically segregated input from the substantia nigra pars reticulata and from the globus pallidus pars interna (GPi), both of which are neuron clusters of the basal ganglia, located beneath the cerebral cortex. The output of VA nucleus is to the premotor cortex, the supplementary motor area, and the primary motor cortex.
The VL nucleus is involved in balance and fine motor control, with clinical significance as a target for the treatment of essential tremor. VL nucleus receives afferents predominantly from the cerebellum, again in a somatotopic organization, with additional input from the red nucleus and vestibular nuclei. The VL nucleus projects to cortical motor areas.
The VPM nucleus is involved in somatosensation for the head; as such, it receives input from the trigeminal nerve complex (nuclei of cranial nerve V). It projects to the face and head areas in the primary somatosensory cortex. A region adjacent to the VPM known as the ventral posterior parvocellular part (VPPC) is thought to convey gustatory (taste) sensation. The VPPC receives fibres from secondary taste fibres and autonomic afferents (from the cardiovascular and gastrointestinal systems), with projections to the sensory cortex region that lies adjacent to the areas respresenting the tongue, the insula, and the amygdala.
The VPL nucleus is involved in somatosensation for the body (trunk and extremities). It receives input from the medial lemniscal pathway (signaling light touch and proprioception) and from the spinothalamic tract (signaling temperature and pain stimuli). It projects in a topographically organized fashion to the primary somatosensory cortex.
The geniculate bodies are small nuclei on the posterior inferior aspect of the thalamus responsible for sensory relay of visual and auditory information. The lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) relays visual information, including representations of location in the visual field and colour. It receives input from the contralateral (opposite side) visual field, with contributions from both optic nerves. It is organized into ocular dominance layers maintaining retinotopy, the representation of the input eye and location in the visual field. The output of the thalamus is the white matter fibre tract known as the optic radiations, which project to the primary visual cortex.
The medial geniculate nucleus (MGN) relays auditory information. It receives input from the inferior colliculus as well as from the auditory cortex. The MGN is subdivided into three regions: ventral, dorsal, and medial. The ventral region relays frequency, intensity, and laterality, while the medial region encodes relative sound properties. The dorsal region relays information about complex sounds. The MGN has output reciprocally to the auditory cortex and is organized in a tonotopic (by sound frequency) fashion.
