Transient receptor potential channel, also called TRP channel,  superfamily of ion channels occurring in cell membranes that are involved in various types of sensory reception, including thermoreception, chemoreception, mechanoreception, and photoreception. TRP channels were discovered in the late 1970s and early 1980s on photoreceptors in fruit flies (Drosophila). Since then, a number of TRP channels have been identified in a variety of organisms, from nematodes to humans, and have been grouped based on similarities in gene sequence and protein structure. These channels are found in the outer membranes of different types of sensory cells, and their responses to various stimuli are manifested through their functions as ion channels, regulating the flow of ions, such as potassium, calcium, and sodium, into or out of cells. Ion flux can lead to cell membrane depolarization (less negative charge across the cell), which leads to an action potential—a brief electric polarization that results in a nerve impulse and physiological sensation or perception.
The major groups of TRP channels include TRPM (melastatin), TRPV (vanilloid), TRPC (canonical), TRPP (polycystin), TRPML (mucolipin), and TRPA (subfamily A). TRPM, TRPA, and TRPV channels can respond to changes in temperature, with TRPM and TRPA known to respond to cold and TRPV known to respond to warmth, noxious heat, and pain. TRPV channels have been identified on sensory neurons and on epithelial cells, and TRPM channels are primarily expressed on C-fibres in peripheral nerves. TRPC channels are expressed primarily on smooth muscle and heart cells and appear to regulate certain responses in the central nervous system and in the vasculature. TRPP channels are expressed on kidney cells and on the cells of the retina and may play a role in controlling the responses of cilia to fluid flow in the renal epithelium. In mice certain TRPC channels are pheromone-sensitive, and in humans some TRPM channels are capable of distinguishing among tastes, including sweet, bitter, and umami (meaty).
