Alla Pugacheva, in full Alla Borisovna Pugacheva,  (born April 15, 1949, Moscow, Russia, U.S.S.R.), Russian popular singer known for her unique combination of Slavic musical sensibility and Western musical aesthetics.
Pugacheva was a student at a music school in Moscow when she launched her popular-music career in 1965 with “Robot,” a rock song that proved a modest success. Disappointed with similarly styled songs that were written for her, Pugacheva traveled through the Soviet Union in search of a singing style that would both move audiences and make use of her vocal finesse and engaging stage presence. While performing in obscurity over the next decade, she developed a versatile pop style that was coloured by Western influences but quintessentially Slavic in its dramatic and emotional appeal.
In 1975 Pugacheva won the grand prize at the Golden Orpheus Song Festival in Bulgaria with her rendition of “Arlekino” ("The Harlequin"). Her performance of the song, which was broadcast on Soviet television and recorded a short time later for Melodiya, the Soviet record monopoly, finally brought her success and public recognition. Thereafter, hit followed hit, her concerts were sellouts, and she rapidly became every Russian’s favourite performer. During the late 1970s and the 1980s, Pugacheva not only performed regularly at European song festivals but also began to appear in films—such as Jenschina, Kotoraya poet  (1977; "The Woman Who Sings") and Prishla i govoryo (1985; "Came to Say")—and television productions throughout Europe. In 1981 she earned a degree from the Lunacharsky State Institute of Theatre Arts (later renamed the Russian University of Theatre Arts), Moscow, and in 1988 she was named artistic director of a Moscow studio theatre, the Theatre of Song. That same year she toured the United States for the first time. Pugacheva was proclaimed National Artist of the U.S.S.R. in 1991 by Pres. Mikhail Gorbachev.
By 1997 Pugacheva had reportedly sold as many as 250 million records, and that year she released a 13-volume set of her recordings titled Kollektsiya ("Collection"). Pugacheva found it difficult to attract an audience for her music outside the Russian-speaking area, however, and after a lukewarm reception at the 1997 Eurovision Song Contest in Dublin, she began to branch into other, nonmusical artistic activities. She launched a line of clothing and a perfume and developed a collection of footwear, which was received positively by the press and enthusiastically by her legions of Russian-speaking fans. Her subsequent albums include Zhivi spokoyno, strana! (2003; “Live Peacefully, Country!”) and Priglasheniye na zakat (2008; “Invitation to a Sunset”).
