Will Smith, byname of Willard Carroll Smith, Jr.,  (born September 25, 1968, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, U.S.), American actor and musician whose charisma, clean-cut good looks, and quick wit helped him transition from rap music to a successful career in acting.
Smith was given the nickname “Prince Charming” in high school, which he adapted to “Fresh Prince” in order to reflect a more hip-hop sound when he began his musical career. He formed an alliance with schoolmate and deejay Jeffrey Townes, whom he met in 1981. They began recording as DJ Jazzy Jeff and the Fresh Prince and released their first single, “Girls Ain’t Nothing but Trouble,” in 1986, later followed by the album Rock the House. In 1988 the group released the groundbreaking single “Parents Just Don’t Understand,” which went on to win a Grammy Award (the first Grammy ever presented in the rap performance category).
Smith’s act, notable for its wide crossover appeal, was sometimes characterized as “light rap” because of the lack of hard-core lyrics and themes in his compositions. Platinum-certified recordings and accompanying videos subsequently brought him to the attention of television producers. The television sitcom The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, which began in 1990 and was loosely based on Smith’s real-life persona, ran on NBC for six successful seasons, ending at the star’s request. During the series’ run, Smith garnered two Golden Globe Award nominations and served as an executive producer for the final season.
Buoyed by his small-screen success, Smith expanded into cinema with Where the Day Takes You (1992). His first leading role was in the film version of John Guare’s successful stage play Six Degrees of Separation (1993). The action comedy-thriller Bad Boys (1995), however, proved to be the turning point in his film career. While the movie was not a critical success, it made more than $100 million worldwide, proving Smith’s star power. In 1996 he starred in that year’s top-grossing movie, Independence Day. He was a hit at the box office again the next year with the science-fiction comedy Men in Black, for which he also recorded the Grammy-winning title song; sequels to the film appeared in 2002 and 2012. Also in 1997 Smith released his first solo album, Big Willie Style, which included the hit “Gettin’ Jiggy wit It,” and he followed it two years later with Willennium.
After starring in the dramatic thriller Enemy of the State (1998), Smith continued to demonstrate his remarkable versatility as an actor, playing an enigmatic golf caddy in The Legend of Bagger Vance (2000); the boxer Muhammad Ali in the biopic Ali (2001), for which he received an Academy Award nomination; a cop from the near future in I, Robot (2004); and a “date doctor” helping a romantically inept man find love in Hitch (2005). The next year he starred in The Pursuit of Happyness, and his performance as a single father who overcomes adversity earned him a second Oscar nomination for best actor. In I Am Legend (2007), Smith appeared as a scientist who is perhaps the last human on Earth following an epidemic. Hancock (2008) featured Smith as a superhero trying to revamp his unpopular image, and in Seven Pounds (2008) he played a man seeking redemption after accidentally killing seven people in a car accident.
Smith later starred—alongside his son Jaden—in the science-fiction epic After Earth (2013), which was based on an idea he conceived. In 2015 Smith portrayed a con artist in the thriller Focus and the doctor who discovered the epidemic of chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) among NFL players in Concussion. In 2016 he played the assassin Deadshot in the action thriller Suicide Squad and a grieving father in Collateral Beauty. The following year he starred as a police officer in the Netflix action film Bright, which is set in a Los Angeles inhabited by humans and mythical creatures. Smith then was cast as the genie in the family comedy Aladdin (2019). He played two roles in Gemini Man (2019): a retired assassin and his younger clone, the latter a digitally recreated version of Smith in his 20s. Smith’s other credits from 2019 included the animated Spies in Disguise, in which he supplied the voice of a spy who is turned into a pigeon. He then starred in Bad Boys for Life (2020), a sequel to his 1995 breakthrough film.
Smith continued his recording career with the albums Born to Reign (2002) and Lost and Found (2005), but they failed to match the success of his previous releases. In addition, in the early 21st century Smith served as a producer for several films, including some in which he acted, and with his wife, actress Jada Pinkett Smith (married 1997), he helped create and produce the sitcom All of Us (2003–07). In 2018 he hosted the documentary TV series One Strange Rock, about Earth.
