probiotic,  any of various live microorganisms, typically bacteria or yeast, that are ingested or otherwise administered as a means of potentially aiding the prevention and treatment of certain health conditions, primarily gastrointestinal disorders. The notion that the ingestion of certain microorganisms can benefit digestion as well as immune function emerged in the early 20th century, with the work of Russian-born zoologist and microbiologist Élie Metchnikoff. Interest in probiotics surged in the early 21st century, when more became known about the human microbiome.
Some of the most commonly used probiotics are lactic-acid bacteria, namely strains of Lactobacillus and Streptococcus, which are normal components of the human microbiome and have been used for centuries in the production of yogurt, cheese, and some pickled foods. Other types of probiotics include certain strains of Bifidobacterium bacteria and the yeast Saccharomyces boulardii. Often, the various probiotic microorganisms, in addition to occurring naturally in certain foods, are sold over the counter as capsules, powders, liquids, or chewable tablets.
Probiotics have been studied for the prevention and treatment of a variety of gastrointestinal conditions, including Crohn disease, ulcerative colitis, and pouchitis (inflammation of a surgically created rectum in patients who have had their large intestine and rectum removed). In general, these studies indicate that, for most people who are at risk of or who are affected by these conditions, probiotics have little or no detectable benefit. The most-convincing evidence for their effectiveness comes from studies of diarrheal diseases, particularly in children. For example, the use of S. boulardii has been associated with a reduction in the frequency of diarrheal episodes in children with acute diarrhea. Likewise, certain strains of probiotics, such as L. rhamnosus GG, may have modest effects in reducing the duration of infectious diarrhea. L. rhamnosus GG and S. boulardii may be effective in preventing antibiotic-associated diarrhea in children and adults.
Although generally considered to be safe, probiotics have been associated with severe bacteremia (bacterial infection of the blood) and fungemia (fungal infection of the blood) in patients whose immune systems are compromised. Probiotic-associated bacteremia has been reported in individuals with severe ulcerative colitis. In preterm infants, probiotics have proven beneficial, reducing the likelihood of necrotizing enterocolitis, but cases of probiotic-associated sepsis have been documented. In addition, although microorganisms are incorporated into commercial products that are marketed and sold as health-promoting probiotics, direct evidence is lacking for the ability of many such over-the-counter probiotics to promote well-being in otherwise healthy individuals.
