Al Green, byname of Albert Greene,  (born April 13, 1946, Forrest City, Arkansas, U.S.), American singer-songwriter who was the most popular performer of soul music in the 1970s. By further transforming the essential relationship in soul music between the sacred and the secular, Green followed the musical and spiritual path of his greatest inspiration, Sam Cooke. At the height of Green’s commercial success, however, he sacrificed his fame in order to fully dedicate himself to his religious faith.
In 1964, after his family moved from Arkansas to Michigan, Green and some friends formed the Creations and toured the chitlin circuit (venues that catered to African American audiences) in the South before renaming themselves Al Green and the Soul Mates three years later. They formed their own record label, releasing the single “Back Up Train,” which enjoyed moderate success on the rhythm-and-blues charts in 1968. The watershed moment for Green came in Texas in 1968 when he met Willie Mitchell, a former bandleader who served as chief producer and vice president of Hi Records in Memphis, Tennessee. Obscurity was threatening to end Green’s fledgling career, but with Mitchell’s help he became a star in short order. After releasing a cover version of the Beatles’ “I Want to Hold Your Hand” in 1969, which exhibited his awe-inspiring vocal agility, Green recorded a fine remake of the Temptations’ “I Can’t Get Next to You,” and it reached number one on the soul charts in 1971. But it was “Tired of Being Alone” (1971), written by Green, that suggested his extraordinary potential. It sold more than a million copies, preparing the way for “Let’s Stay Together,” the title track from Green’s first gold album.
“Let’s Stay Together” was his biggest hit, reaching number one on both the rhythm-and-blues and pop charts in 1972. Written by Green, Mitchell, and Al Jackson, the drummer for Booker T. and the MG’s, the song reflected Mitchell’s musical vision. In comparison with the grittier sound of Memphis neighbour Stax/Volt Records, Green’s recordings with Mitchell offered a sophisticated and softened melody cradled by a distinctive bass sound. Green delivered gospel intensity, effortlessly soaring to the highest falsetto or plunging into a husky groan cloaked in hushed sensuality. From the tender “I’m Still in Love with You” (1972) and “Call Me (Come Back Home)” (1973) to the earthy “Love and Happiness” (1973) and “Here I Am (Come and Take Me)” (1973), Green and Mitchell experienced a string of hits through the early 1970s.
In the mid-1970s Green became a minister, establishing his own church. By 1980 he had devoted himself completely to his ministry and to gospel music. Later in that decade he cautiously reemerged from his spiritual seclusion and resumed performances of his most celebrated works alongside his popular gospel recordings, several of which won Grammy Awards in the soul gospel category. After a commercially disappointing comeback effort in 1995, Green came close to recapturing his trademark 1970s sound on I Can’t Stop (2003), which he followed with Everything’s OK (2005). Green won a new generation of fans with Lay It Down (2008), featuring guest vocals by neo-soul artists John Legend, Anthony Hamilton, and Corinne Bailey Rae; the album earned him a pair of Grammy Awards. In 2018 he released a new single for the first time in nearly 10 years, a cover of “Before the Next Teardrop Falls.”
Green was the recipient of numerous honours. He was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1995 and was given a Grammy Award for lifetime achievement in 2002. In 2014 he received a Kennedy Center Honor.
