Amadou and Mariam,  Malian musical duo who achieved global success by combining West African influences with rhythm and blues.
Amadou Bagayoko (b. October 24, 1954, Bamako, French West Africa [now Mali]) and Mariam Doumbia (b. April 15, 1958, Bamako) met at the Bamako Institute for the Young Blind. Bagayoko, who had been blinded by cataracts as a teenager, enrolled at the school in 1975. He learned a number of instruments before focusing on the guitar. Early in his musical career he played alongside Salif Keita in the legendary band Les Ambassadeurs du Motel. Bagayoko later became a full-time music teacher at the school, and in 1977 he formed L’Eclipse, a band that featured Doumbia, who was a self-taught vocalist. Doumbia had lost her sight through measles as a young child and was one of the blind school’s first pupils in 1973. The two were married in 1980.
In 1986, after their music had become popular across Mali, they moved to Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire, to benefit from that city’s excellent music clubs and studios. There they recorded their first cassettes, with Doumbia’s soulful vocals matched against Bagayoko’s distinctive, sturdy guitar style, which was influenced by such English blues and rock performers as Eric Clapton and David Gilmour. The aim, Bagayoko said, was to “find a link between them and our Bambara culture.” The pair were both strong songwriters and became famous for their thoughtful and provocative lyrics.
Amadou and Mariam slowly built up a following, first across West Africa and then among the sizable Malian community in France. In 1998 the duo released Sou ni tilé (“Night and Day”), their first album for a major label in France, which contained their breakthrough hit single, “Mon amour, ma chérie.” Their blend of West African influences and Western R&B and funk was now backed by a full band. The globalization of their music began in earnest when French singer Manu Chao began working with the duo. He not only produced Dimanche à Bamako (2005) but also cowrote and sang on some of the songs, adding his slinky, rhythmic style to the duo’s rousing blend of African R&B. The result was a crossover success that appealed to both pop fans and followers of African music. Subsequent albums Welcome to Mali (2008) and Folila (2012) featured lavish production and a host of international collaborators, including Somali-born rapper K’Naan and members of the American rock band TV on the Radio. The uplifting La Confusion (2017) recalled the Afro-pop sounds of the late 1980s.
