Abba P. Lerner, in full Abba Ptachya Lerner,  (born October 28, 1903, Bessarabia, Russian Empire—died October 27, 1982, Tallahassee, Florida, U.S.), Russian-born economist whose contributions included theoretical works on inflation, unemployment, and international trade.
Lerner’s family immigrated to England when he was three. By age 16 he had begun a succession of jobs (as a machinist, commercial printer, and teacher, among others), and in 1929 he enrolled in a night course at the London School of Economics (LSE) to better understand why one of his businesses had failed. He stayed at LSE, earning his B.A. in economics in 1932 and teaching there through 1936. During a brief period of study at the University of Cambridge, Lerner mastered John Maynard Keynes’s The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money (1936) and is credited with having surpassed Keynes in writing a clear and straightforward discussion of Keynesianism.
Throughout his life he was sympathetic to socialist arguments and frequently made the case for planned economies. Indeed, his text The Economics of Control: Principles of Welfare Economics (1944) has been referred to as a handbook for planning and managing a socialist economy. Lerner demonstrated how high employment rates can contribute to inflation (supply fails to meet high demand, causing prices to rise), and he created a method of grading monopoly power that became known as the Lerner Index. Later in the 20th century, Lerner proposed a highly theoretical remedy for stagflation (a condition of high inflation and high unemployment) through what he called a Market Anti-Inflation Plan. The plan would have rationed the right of firms to raise their effective prices (calculated as the sum of wages and the price of goods or services), and it would have allowed firms to trade those rights. While more elegant than straightforward price controls, the rationing plan also illustrated Lerner’s occasional weakness for theoretical over practical economic applications.
Some of his economist peers considered Lerner somewhat of an eccentric, and his wanderlust (which included a visit to the exiled Leon Trotsky in Mexico) prevented him from establishing a permanent base of operations—he taught at more than six American universities (including the University of Chicago and the University of California, Berkeley) during his career but was never fully associated with any of them. He concluded his teaching career at Florida State University.
