Armen A. Alchian, in full Armen Albert Alchian,  (born April 12, 1914, Fresno, California, U.S.—died February 19, 2013, Los Angeles, California), American economist whose teachings countered some of the popular economic theories of the late 20th century, such as those regarding labour costs or the implications of property ownership.
Alchian studied at Stanford University, earning a B.A. (1936) and a Ph.D. (1943). In 1946 he began teaching at the University of California, Los Angeles, where he became professor emeritus in 1984, and from 1947 to 1962 he was also associated with the RAND Corporation. He had served in the U.S. Army Air Force during World War II and at that time developed an interest in the cost curve; specifically, he studied how the unit costs of construction relate to accumulated output. One of his resulting papers, “Costs and Outputs” (1959), showed that a faster rate of production will raise the unit costs because it will be accompanied by diminishing rates of return.
Throughout his career Alchian argued for the need to use precise historical data as a way to prove hypotheses. This approach led him to debunk many widely held economic views. For example, many economists believed that the labor market did not work like other markets with regard to inflation. The prevailing view held that monetary inflation raised output prices but did not simultaneously raise wages. Alchian argued there was little empirical data to support these views, and he instead presented price-related evidence showing that inflation did affect wages, meaning that price increases do not benefit firms at the expense of workers.
Alchian’s work showed that the markets ultimately reward efficient behaviour. He consistently demonstrated that companies that maximize profits will thrive, while inefficient players will not survive. He also proposed that private property ownership led to greater risk bearing and efficiency, while common property ownership tended to create inefficiencies.
In the 1970s he began working on organization and firm theories and also published papers on employment. Alchian influenced a number of economists, including 1990 Nobel Memorial Prize winner William F. Sharpe.
