Command economy,  economic system in which the means of production are publicly owned and economic activity is controlled by a central authority that assigns quantitative production goals and allots raw materials to productive enterprises. In such a system, determining the proportion of total product used for investment rather than consumption becomes a centrally made political decision. After this decision has been made, the central planners work out the assortment of goods to be produced and the quotas for each enterprise. Consumers may influence the planners’ decisions indirectly if the planners take into consideration the surpluses and shortages that have developed in the market. The only direct choice made by consumers, however, is among the commodities already produced.
Prices are also set by the central planners, but they do not serve, as in a market economy, as signals to producers of goods to increase or decrease production. Instead, they are used mainly as instruments of the central planners in their efforts to reconcile the total demand for consumer goods with the supply available, allowing also for revenues to the state.
The central authority in a command economy assigns production goals in terms of physical units and allocates physical quantities of raw materials to enterprises. The process for a large economy with millions of products is extremely complex and has encountered a number of difficulties in practice.
Central planning of this kind is not without apparent advantages, however, since it enables a government to mobilize resources quickly on a national scale during wartime or some other national emergency. But the costs of centralized policies are real and quite high. Moreover, it is often the case that much of the burden of these costs is shifted away from the government. One example is the military draft, which largely shifts the cost of mobilizing troops from the government to the draftees, who could be employed at a higher rate of pay elsewhere.
Command economies were characteristic of the Soviet Union and the communist countries of the Eastern bloc, and their inefficiencies were among the factors that contributed to the fall of communism in those regions in 1990–91. Almost all remaining communist countries (except North Korea) incorporated market elements into their economies to varying degrees while maintaining one-party rule. Command economies were famously criticized as inherently unworkable in the early 20th century by two economists of the Austrian school, Ludwig von Mises and F.A. Hayek.
