Consumption,  in economics, the use of goods and services by households. Consumption is distinct from consumption expenditure, which is the purchase of goods and services for use by households. Consumption differs from consumption expenditure primarily because durable goods, such as automobiles, generate an expenditure mainly in the period when they are purchased, but they generate “consumption services” (for example, an automobile provides transportation services) until they are replaced or scrapped. (See consumer good.)
Neoclassical (mainstream) economists generally consider consumption to be the final purpose of economic activity, and thus the level of consumption per person is viewed as a central measure of an economy’s productive success.
The study of consumption behaviour plays a central role in both macroeconomics and microeconomics. Macroeconomists are interested in aggregate consumption for two distinct reasons. First, aggregate consumption determines aggregate saving, because saving is defined as the portion of income that is not consumed. Because aggregate saving feeds through the financial system to create the national supply of capital, it follows that aggregate consumption and saving behaviour has a powerful influence on an economy’s long-term productive capacity. Second, since consumption expenditure accounts for most of national output, understanding the dynamics of aggregate consumption expenditure is essential to understanding macroeconomic fluctuations and the business cycle.
Microeconomists have studied consumption behaviour for many different reasons, using consumption data to measure poverty, to examine households’ preparedness for retirement, or to test theories of competition in retail industries. A rich variety of household-level data sources (such as the Consumer Expenditure Survey conducted by the U.S. government) allows economists to examine household spending behaviour in minute detail, and microeconomists have also utilized these data to examine interactions between consumption and other microeconomic behaviour such as job seeking or educational attainment.
