Eduard Bernstein,   (born Jan. 6, 1850, Berlin—died  Dec. 18, 1932, Berlin), Social Democratic propagandist, political theorist, and historian, one of the first Socialists to attempt a revision of Karl Marx’s tenets, such as abandoning the ideas of the imminent collapse of the capitalist economy and the seizure of power by the proletariat. Although he was not a distinguished theoretician, Bernstein, called “the father of revisionism,” envisaged a type of social democracy that combined private initiative with social reform.
Bernstein was born into a Jewish family that had come to the capital of Prussia from Danzig. His father was a railroad engineer, and his uncle Aaron Bernstein was the editor of the Berliner Volks-Zeitung, a newspaper widely read in progressive working-class circles. It was thus not surprising that at a young age Eduard shared the aspirations of many educated Germans for national unity and democracy. Of an engaging and candid disposition, he retained the goodwill of his superiors when, in 1872, as a young bank clerk, he announced that he had joined the Social Democratic Party. The turbulent years after Prussia’s 1871 defeat of France also contributed to the formation of his political beliefs. Yet the ever-genial Bernstein tended to be attracted more to socialism of an undogmatic, pragmatic kind than to radical Marxism. He preferred the democratic and pacifist Social Democrats to the somewhat authoritarian Allgemeiner Deutscher Arbeiterverein (“General German Workers’ Association”).
In joining the party, he became associated with the German socialist organ, Die Zukunft (“The Future”). The economic crisis of 1873, which continued into the 1890s, reinforced his belief in the fragility of capitalism. It was, however, Chancellor Otto von Bismarck’s anti-socialist laws that finally impelled him toward a more radical position. Exiled from Germany, he emigrated to Switzerland, abandoning the “ethical socialism” of Karl Höchberg, the wealthy patron of Die Zukunft. With Marx’s consent, he became the editor of the Zürich edition of Der Sozialdemokrat, a periodical that was the rallying centre of the underground socialist party. Expelled from Switzerland at the request of Bismarck in 1888, Bernstein continued the publication of the periodical in London. There he became a close friend of Friedrich Engels, Marx’s collaborator and patron, and also came to know intimately the leaders of the influential Fabian Society, which advocated a gradualist development of socialism. Bernstein set forth his revised views in a series of articles and in a letter to the Social Democratic Party meeting at Stuttgart in 1898. In the following year he published Die Voraussetzungen des Sozialismus und die Aufgaben der Sozialdemokratie (“The Preconditions of Socialism and the Tasks of Social Democracy”; Eng. trans., Evolutionary Socialism).
When Bernstein returned to Germany in 1901, he became the theoretician of the growing revisionist school of the reformist labour movement. He held that socialism is the final result of the liberalism inherent in human aspiration, not the mere product of a revolt against the capitalist middle class. He no longer believed in capitalism’s imminent collapse, nor did he any longer regard the bourgeoisie as exclusively parasitic and oppressive. He also believed that the concentration of productive industry was not taking place in all fields as thoroughly or as fast as Marx had predicted. Citing such reforms as factory legislation and the freeing of labour unions from legal restrictions, he pointed out that, under pressure from the socialist movement, a reaction had set in against the exploitive inclinations of capital. Thus, he argued, the prospects for lasting success lay in steady advance rather than violent upheaval.
In 1902 Bernstein was elected a member of the Reichstag, or Parliament, to which he was reelected several times. He remained a member of the Reichstag up to 1928. Eventually revisionism became Social Democratic ideology, while the dogmatic Marxism of the socialist theoretician Karl Kautsky and the eclectic Marxism of the German labour leader August Bebel faded into the background. Bernstein, however, who was opposed to violence between nations as well as between classes, lent his voice to that of the left to fight against militarism. During World War I, although a leading member of his party’s right wing, he sided with the Independent Socialists (Unabhängige Sozialdemocratische Partei Deutschlands; USPD) to protest his party’s support of the war. As soon as peace was restored, however, he returned to his old party and opposed those who wanted to transform the political revolution of November 1918 into a social revolution. He believed that the establishment of the parliamentary republic opened the way to uninterrupted progress, and after the war he served as secretary of state for economy and finance in 1919.
Social Democracy had finally become the great popular and reformist movement he had desired for more than 20 years, and, as an adviser respected by his party, he inspired much of its program. If he helped to discourage the Germans from following the Russian example of 1917, he could not dissuade them from imitating the Italian fascist model of 1922. He regarded the bloody outrages of the Nazis and their predecessors as the thoughtless actions of unbalanced minds; he was unable to comprehend the nature of National Socialism and remained powerless to prevent its seizure of power. Less than six weeks after his death, the democratic state on which he had set all his hopes was to give way to the dictatorship of Adolf Hitler.
