Extended producer responsibility,  a practice and a policy approach in which producers take responsibility for management of the disposal of products they produce once those products are designated as no longer useful by consumers. Responsibility for disposal may be fiscal, physical, or a combination of the two.
Motivations for extended producer responsibility practices include a mixture of economic, environmental, and social factors. Extended producer responsibility shifts the economic burden of the cost of disposal from the government to the producer of the product. Within an environmental context, products must be designed for recyclability, and extended producer responsibility encourages design for recycling while discouraging the use of toxic components in the product. Finally, extended producer responsibility meets increasing consumer demand for environmentally friendly products that can easily be recycled or are manufactured using recycled content. Extended producer responsibility is a product-focused strategy that encourages environmentally friendly design and disposal of products through transfer of this responsibility to product producers.
In extended producer responsibility, producers of products are responsible for product disposal at end of life, the point at which products are designated as no longer useful by consumers. The intergovernmental Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s (OECD) definition of extended producer responsibility identifies two specific features: the shifting of responsibility for disposal “upstream” from municipalities to producers and encouragement through incentives to make the design of products more environmentally friendly.
Rather than regulate disposal of products through traditional end-of-pipe command-and-control methods, extended producer responsibility is a preventive measure using a life-cycle or a “cradle-to-grave” perspective. Extended producer responsibility policies attempt to change how a product is produced—the “cradle”—to affect how a product may be disposed of—the “grave.”
The benefits of extended producer responsibility policies may be categorized as economic, environmental, and social. The cost for the management and coordination of the disposal of solid waste is most often the responsibility of local municipalities. Rising levels of waste generation, more stringent technical requirements for the operation of landfills and incinerators, and increasing difficulty in constructing new waste disposal facilities due to public opposition all contribute to the growing cost of waste disposal. The government—specifically, local municipalities—is generally fiscally and physically responsible for waste disposal. Extended producer responsibility is an attempt to provide an incentive to producers to design products with reduced environmental impacts while shifting the costs associated with disposal to the producer.
Environmental motivations for extended producer responsibility include increasing product recyclability, decreasing use of toxic components in products, and reducing the amount of material that is sent to a landfill or incinerator rather than reused or recycled. The recyclability of products is heavily dependent on product design. It is difficult to recycle products that are not designed for dismantling, have high levels of toxic ingredients, or have components such as composite resins that are problematic to recycle. With extended producer responsibility, designing products that can be easily recycled or reused is theoretically in the producer’s best interest because the producer is responsible for disposal. In addition to assigning responsibility for the disposal of products, most extended producer responsibility policies also require producers to recycle a specified percentage of the collected product by weight or volume. Product recycling can reduce the amount of energy needed to manufacture a product and the creation of associated air and water pollution in comparison with producing a product from raw virgin materials. Finally, requiring producers to take responsibility for the disposal of products reduces the volume of material disposed of through incineration or in a landfill. Decreasing landfill capacity is cited as a key motivator for extended producer responsibility policies in the European Union (EU).
Extended producer responsibility also has social benefits. The implementation of extended producer responsibility policies may improve the public image of a company. Consumer demand for environmentally friendly products that can be recycled at end of life and manufactured with fewer toxic materials is increasing.
Responsibility for the management of product disposal may be economic or physical. The producers can be individuals, companies, or collectives organized through a number of companies. With extended producer responsibility, the producer of a product finances the cost of product disposal. This may take the form of physically collecting the products at the end of their life or by using a producer responsibility organization (PRO). A PRO is a third-party organization that collects and processes material. With a PRO, producers do not physically take back the product but instead support the process financially. In the German Duales System Deutschland (DSD) system, for example, manufacturers are required to assume responsibility for financing the disposal, through recycling, of created consumer packaging waste. They do not physically collect the products.
Extended producer responsibility practices may be voluntary or regulatory. With voluntary practices, public and private sector departments and organizations, often in cooperation with nongovernmental organizations, work to develop practices of extended producer responsibility in the place of formal regulation.
Both the German and Swedish governments were noted as early adopters of extended producer responsibility policies, having adopted them in the 1990s. Early extended producer responsibility policies in European countries and in Japan targeted consumer packaging. The German Packaging Ordinance of 1991, establishing the DSD, is considered one of the first national-level extended producer responsibility policies. In 1994 the EU adopted the Packaging Directive, creating union-wide targets for recycling while allowing individual countries discretion in implementation. Japanese consumer packaging policies designated responsibility for the collection and processing of packaging waste to local governments, while manufacturers were responsible for the financial cost of recycling.
By the second decade of the 21st century, extended producer responsibility policies existed for a wide range of products. Many targeted waste electric and electronic equipment because of its growing volume and the disposal and toxicity concerns. The EU issued extended producer responsibility directives for end-of-life vehicles, waste electrical and electronic equipment, use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment, and waste batteries and other energy storage devices.
Whereas voluntary extended producer responsibility practices in the United States existed on the national level for several products, coordinated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the majority of states enacted regulatory extended producer responsibility legislation for products such as electronics, batteries, and mercury thermometers.
Practices and policies of extended producer responsibility assign responsibility for disposal to producers while encouraging environmentally friendly product design. Extended producer responsibility does not reduce the volume of waste created but rather attempts to reduce the volume of material disposed of through landfilling or incineration. Unless specifically mandated, extended producer responsibility does not necessarily result in the creation of a more durable, longer-lasting product or address waste creation due to practices of planned obsolescence. Although there is a focus on reducing toxics in production, extended producer responsibility is in general directed specifically toward the disposal of a product. It is not a strategy to reduce the environmental impact of production or consumption of a product. Extended producer responsibility has been criticized as a concept that works well in theory but has yet to show strong quantifiable influence on green product design.
