Gary S. Becker, in full Gary Stanley Becker,  (born December 2, 1930, Pottsville, Pennsylvania, U.S.—died May 3, 2014, Chicago, Illinois), American economist who was awarded the Nobel Prize for Economics in 1992. He applied the methods of economics to aspects of human behaviour previously considered more or less the exclusive domain of sociology, criminology, anthropology, and demography.
Becker was educated at Princeton University and the University of Chicago, where he earned his Ph.D. in 1955. He taught economics at the University of Chicago until 1957, when he began teaching at Columbia University. In 1970 he returned to the University of Chicago as a professor of economics, and in 1983 he became a professor of sociology as well.
Becker’s central premise is that rational economic choices, based on self-interest, govern most aspects of human behaviour—not just the purchasing and investment decisions traditionally thought to influence economic behaviour. In his dissertation, published in 1957 as The Economics of Discrimination, Becker examined racial discrimination in labour markets, concluding that discrimination has costs for both the victim and the perpetrator. In Human Capital (1964), he argued that an individual’s investment in education and training is analogous to a company’s investment in new machinery or equipment. In studies such as A Treatise on the Family (1981), Becker analyzed the household as a sort of factory, producing goods and services such as meals, shelter, and child care. Applying theories of production to household behaviour, he was able to make predictions about family size, divorce, and the role of women in the workplace. Subsequent work focused on such subjects as criminal behaviour and addiction.
From 1985 to 2004 Becker served as a columnist for Business Week, an international business news publication. In 2000 he was awarded the National Medal of Science, and in 2007 he received the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the country’s highest civilian award.
