Gennady Andreyevich Zyuganov,  (born June 26, 1944, Mymrino, Oryol, Russia, U.S.S.R.), Russian politician who served as leader of the Communist Party of the Russian Federation (KPRF) in the 1990s, following the disintegration of the Soviet Union, and into the 21st century.
Zyuganov was born in a farming village in the Oryol oblast (region), south of Moscow. His parents were schoolteachers, and Zyuganov followed in their footsteps after graduating from the regional teacher-training school. He joined the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) in the early 1960s while stationed in East Germany with the army. He rose through the ranks of the CPSU in Oryol, becoming the head of the Komsomol and the regional chief for ideology and propaganda. In 1983 he was given a high-level position in Moscow in the CPSU propaganda department, a hotbed of opposition to reform. He emerged as a leading critic of Mikhail Gorbachev’s efforts at reform and wrote several influential papers in the early 1990s attacking Gorbachev and calling for a return to the authoritarian ways of the pre-glasnost era.
Of the independent states that emerged after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia appeared to be among the most eager to embrace the free market. For many Russians, however, the promises of a capitalist society never materialized, and many longed for a return to the days of communism, when a strong central regime had guaranteed personal and economic security. Thus, in the 1995 parliamentary elections, the newly revitalized KPRF made a strong showing, and Zyuganov, as the party’s leader, emerged as a serious challenger to Pres. Boris Yeltsin in the 1996 presidential election. During his campaign Zyuganov attacked the infiltration of Western ideals into Russian society. He portrayed Russia as a natural empire that had been dismantled from within by traitors and from without by capitalists, who sought the dissolution of Russia’s authority in order to exploit its resources. These themes were central to his book Derzhava (1994; Great Power).
In the first round of voting on June 16, 1996, Zyuganov finished second, with 32 percent of the vote. He trailed only Yeltsin, who captured 35 percent. Although Zyuganov prepared for the July 3 runoff election with confidence, the sitting president profited from the elimination of the many smaller parties and from the support of Aleksandr Lebed, the third-place candidate. Yeltsin won the two-man showdown comfortably.
Making another bid for the presidency in 2000, Zyuganov gained nearly 30 percent of the vote but lost the election to acting president Vladimir Putin. He did not participate in the 2004 election but chose to run again in 2008. With the KPRF fractured and his influence wavering, Zyuganov garnered only about 18 percent of the vote, roughly 53 percentage points behind Putin’s preferred successor, Dmitry Medvedev. Zyuganov again stood for the presidency in 2012, emphasizing his commitment to the renationalization of resources and banking and calling for a reduction in influence of international organizations such as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the World Trade Organization. Zyuganov again lost to Putin (who, according to Russian election officials, garnered more than 60 percent of the vote), but, in capturing some 17 percent of the vote, Zyuganov won much greater support than independent candidate Mikhail Prokhorov, far-right Liberal Democratic Party leader Vladimir Zhirinovsky, and social democrat Sergey Mironov, leader of A Just Russia.
