Health Savings Account (HSA),  in the United States, a tax-advantaged savings account for individuals who are enrolled in high-deductible health insurance plans. HSAs came into existence with the passage of the Medicare Modernization Act of 2003 (MMA). The MMA, federal legislation that introduced a pharmacy benefit for Medicare enrollees, also included provisions for private fee-for-service health plans.
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) laid out guidelines for HSAs in its 2004 tax year documents. To enroll in an HSA, individuals must have a trustee—either a bank, employer, or insurance company or the IRS. The advantages of HSAs include (a) the ability to claim a tax deduction; (b) the ability to exclude the amount put into the HSA from gross income, if the amount is contributed by an employer; (c) the contributions can remain in the account until the money is used; (d) the interest accrued on the account is tax free; (e) the contributions are portable and can be moved, if there is a job change; (f) the monies can be transferred to an heir; and (g) the funds can be used for nonhealthcare purposes by paying income taxes.
The prospective HSA member enrolls with an IRS-designated trustee. The enrollee pays into the plan on an annual basis. The contribution is limited to a preset deductible amount. The HSA member can contribute this amount each year until the close of the tax year, which is April 15. When the HSA member files his or her taxes for the preceding year on the Form 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, he or she must also file the Health Savings Account Form 8889. When enrolling in an HSA, the enrollee must designate a beneficiary in case of death so that the account can be transferred to an heir.
Some have criticized HSAs because they tend to attract a more affluent and educated population who are more willing to take responsibility for their own health. This takes a healthy population away from insurance pools, leaving those who are less healthy and less willing to take responsibility for their health, which increases the premium dollars for those left in the insurance pools. While HSAs move the responsibility to the individual, the account does nothing to control healthcare costs. The individual takes advantage of the insurer’s negotiated rates, but this does not address the cost escalation in healthcare. The enrollee has to manage with these predetermined rates. Yet for those HSA members who remain vigilant and mindful of their healthcare purchases, the HSA may work well.
