Income inequality,  in economics, significant disparity in the distribution of income between individuals, groups, populations, social classes, or countries. Income inequality is a major dimension of social stratification and social class. It affects and is affected by many other forms of inequality, such as inequalities of wealth, political power, and social status. Income is a major determinant of quality of life, affecting the health and well-being of individuals and families, and varies by social factors such as sex, age, and race or ethnicity.
On a global level, income inequality is extreme by any measure, with the richest 1 percent of people in the world receiving as much as the bottom 56 percent in the early 21st century. Within the United States, income inequality is much greater than in most other developed countries. In 2014, the richest 1 percent received 22 percent of total income, and the top 10 percent of U.S. households received about 60 percent of total income.
One’s occupation is a central basis for differences in income for most people. In more-developed countries such as the United States, wages and salaries are the major source of income for most households, while property, including capital gains, is the major source for the most affluent. Income inequality can be studied within countries, between countries, or across the world’s population without regard to national boundaries.
Despite popular belief that income inequality largely reflects individual differences in talent and motivation, there are also significant structural and cultural causes, such as segmented labour markets, discrimination, institutionalized racism and sexism, gender roles, and family responsibilities. Other legal, political, and economic factors—such as corporate power, degree of private versus public (or common) ownership and control of resources, collective-bargaining frameworks, and minimum-wage laws—also affect income levels independently of individual traits. Income inequalities can have different implications for levels of well-being in different countries, depending on whether other basic needs such as housing, health care, and food are largely market-based and on whether people have access to productive resources such as land, water, and technology.
In 2010, the top 5 percent of U.S. households received more than 24 percent of total after-tax income, while the lowest 20 percent received slightly more than 6 percent. Income inequality in the United States has been rising since 1979. From 1979 to 2007, average after-tax income increased by 18 percent for the bottom fifth of the population and by 275 percent for the top 1 percent. During that period, the share of total after-tax income received by the top fifth of the population increased by 10 percent (most of that amount went to the top 1 percent), while the share received by the bottom four-fifths decreased by 2 to 3 percent. There are also sharp income disparities by race, age, and sex. While the male-female wage gap in the United States has been decreasing, in part because of declining wages for men, disparities still persist: black and Hispanic families and female-headed households are more likely to be poor or near-poor than other households.
A principal cause of rising income inequality in the United States has been the erosion of wages for less-educated workers, along with tax cuts disproportionately benefiting the richest households. This decline in real wages is linked to a number of factors, such as the loss of manufacturing jobs in the United States, the decline in the percentage of unionized jobs with benefits, the decline in the real value of the minimum wage, and the growth of service-sector jobs, many of which are low-paying.
Data comparing the United States and other countries on income and other measures of inequality show an often startling picture. Although in 2015 the United States was the seventh-richest country on Earth based on gross domestic product (GDP) per capita, it has the greatest level of income inequality among the 20 highest-ranking countries listed in the United Nation’s Human Development Index. With a Gini coefficient of more than 41 in 2013, the United States ranked 63rd in income inequality. (The Gini coefficient is a measure of income inequality that ranges between 0, indicating perfect equality, and 100, indicating complete inequality.)
Levels of global inequality remain extreme, with persistent high numbers of people in absolute poverty. According to the World Bank, in 2012 nearly 13 percent of the world’s population received less than $1.90 per day, and some 2.1 billion people, about 35 percent, lived on less than $3.10 per day. Such poverty produces low levels of education, sanitation, nourishment, and medical care and high rates of child labour and exploitation as well as child and infant mortality. Approximately 29,000 children die daily from mainly preventable causes. Wealth is even more unequally distributed. The richest 1 percent of the world’s population owns more wealth than the rest of the world combined. The assets of the 10 richest billionaires are greater than the GDPs of most countries, including Norway, Austria, and Belgium.
