Joseph E. Stiglitz, in full Joseph Eugene Stiglitz,  (born February 9, 1943, Gary, Indiana, U.S.), American economist who, with A. Michael Spence and George A. Akerlof, won the Nobel Prize for Economics in 2001 for laying the foundations for the theory of markets with asymmetric information.
After studying at Amherst College (B.A., 1964) in Massachusetts and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Ph.D., 1967), Stiglitz taught at several universities, including Yale, Harvard, and Stanford. He was an active member of U.S. Pres. Bill Clinton’s economic policy team; a member of the U.S. Council of Economic Advisers (1993–97), of which he became chairman in June 1995; and senior vice president and chief economist of the World Bank (1997–2000). In 2000 he was appointed a university professor at Columbia University. Stiglitz later served as president of the International Economic Association (2011–14).
Stiglitz’s research concentrated on what could be done by ill-informed individuals and operators to improve their position in a market with asymmetric information. He found that they could extract information indirectly through screening and self-selection. This point was illustrated through his study of the insurance market, in which (uninformed) insurance companies lacked information on the individual risk situation of their (informed) customers. The analysis showed that by offering incentives to policyholders to disclose information, insurance companies were able to divide them into different risk classes. The use of a screening process enabled companies to issue a choice of policy contracts in which lower premiums could be exchanged for higher deductibles.
In addition to the Nobel Prize, Stiglitz was the recipient of many honours and awards, including the John Bates Clark Medal (for outstanding contributions to economic thought by a U.S.-based economist under the age of 40) in 1979 and the Gerald Loeb Award for distinguished business journalism in 2010. Among his many books were The Roaring Nineties: A New History of the World’s Most Prosperous Decade (2003), The Three Trillion Dollar War: The True Cost of the Iraq Conflict (2008; written with Linda J. Bilmes), The Price of Inequality (2012), Rewriting the Rules of the American Economy: An Agenda for Growth and Shared Prosperity (2016), The Euro: How a Common Currency Threatens the Future of Europe (2016), and People, Power, and Profits: Progressive Capitalism for an Age of Discontent (2019).
