Magnetohydrodynamic power generator,  any of a class of devices that generate electric power by means of the interaction of a moving fluid (usually an ionized gas or plasma) and a magnetic field. Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) power plants offer the potential for large-scale electrical power generation with reduced impact on the environment. Since 1970, several countries have undertaken MHD research programs with a particular emphasis on the use of coal as a fuel. MHD generators are also attractive for the production of large electrical power pulses.
The underlying principle of MHD power generation is elegantly simple. Typically, an electrically conducting gas is produced at high pressure by combustion of a fossil fuel. The gas is then directed through a magnetic field, resulting in an electromotive force within it in accordance with Faraday’s law of induction (named for the 19th-century English physicist and chemist Michael Faraday). The MHD system constitutes a heat engine, involving an expansion of the gas from high to low pressure in a manner similar to that employed in a conventional gas turbogenerator (see figure). In the turbogenerator, the gas interacts with blade surfaces to drive the turbine and the attached electric generator. In the MHD system, the kinetic energy of the gas is converted directly to electric energy as it is allowed to expand.
Interest in MHD power generation was originally stimulated by the observation that the interaction of a plasma with a magnetic field could occur at much higher temperatures than were possible in a rotating mechanical turbine. The limiting performance from the point of view of efficiency in heat engines was established early in the 19th century by the French engineer Sadi Carnot. The Carnot cycle, which establishes the maximum theoretical efficiency of a heat engine, is obtained from the difference between the hot source temperature and the cold sink temperature, divided by the source temperature. For example, if the source temperature is 3,000 K (about 2,700 °C, or 4,900 °F) and the sink temperature 300 K (about 30 °C, or 85 °F), the maximum theoretical efficiency would be 90 percent. Allowing for the inefficiencies introduced by finite heat transfer rates and component inefficiencies in real heat engines, a system employing an MHD generator offers the potential of an ultimate efficiency in the range of 60 to 65 percent. This is much better than the 35 to 40 percent efficiency that can be achieved in a modern conventional plant. In addition, MHD generators produce fewer pollutants than conventional plants. However, the higher construction costs of MHD systems have limited their adoption.
The basic structure of an MHD generator is shown in the figure. In an MHD generator the hot gas is accelerated by a nozzle and injected into a channel. A powerful magnetic field is set up across the channel. In accordance with Faraday’s law of induction, an electric field is established that acts in a direction perpendicular to both the gas flow and the magnetic field. The walls of the channel parallel to the magnetic field serve as electrodes and enable the generator to provide an electric current to an external circuit.
The power output of an MHD generator for each cubic metre of its channel volume is proportional to the product of the gas conductivity, the square of the gas velocity, and the square of the strength of the magnetic field through which the gas passes. For MHD generators to operate competitively with good performance and reasonable physical dimensions, the electrical conductivity of the plasma must be in a temperature range above about 1,800 K (about 1,500 °C, or 2,800 °F). The turbine blades of a gas-turbine power system are unable to operate at such temperatures. An adequate value of electrical conductivity—10 to 50 siemens per metre—can be achieved if an additive, typically about 1 percent by mass, is injected into the hot gas. This additive is a readily ionizable alkali material, such as cesium, potassium carbonate, or sodium, and is referred to as the “seed.” While cesium has the lowest ionizing potential (3.894 electron volts), potassium (4.341 electron volts) is less costly. Even though the amount of seed material is small, economic operation requires that a system be provided to recover as much of it as possible.
The hot gas with its seed is at a pressure of several million pascals. It is accelerated by a nozzle to a speed that may be in the range of 1,000 to 2,000 metres (about 3,300 to 6,600 feet) per second. The gas then enters the channel or duct, across which the magnetic field is applied. To produce a competitive MHD system, this magnetic field must have high intensity. Typically, a superconducting magnet is employed to provide a magnetic field in the range of three to five teslas across the channel. An electromotive force acting in a direction perpendicular to both the flow and the field is set up, and the walls parallel to the magnetic field serve as electrodes to provide current to an external electric circuit. The remaining two walls of the channel are electric insulators. Theoretically, an MHD system with a gas conductivity of 25 siemens per metre, an average magnetic field of three teslas, and an average gas velocity of 1,000 metres per second is capable of generating electric power with a density of about 250 million watts per cubic metre of channel volume.
A complicating feature of a plasma MHD generator is the occurrence of a pronounced Hall effect. This results from the behaviour of electrons in the presence of both magnetic and electric fields. Electrons in the plasma have a much higher mobility than ions. When electric load current flows across the channel, the electrons in this current experience a force directed along the channel. This is the Hall effect—named for its discoverer, the American physicist Edwin H. Hall. As a result of this effect, the electric current flows at an angle across the channel. An additional electric field, called the Hall field, is established along the axis of the channel. This in turn requires that either the electrode walls in a typical generator configuration (see figure) be constructed to support this Hall field or that the Hall field itself be used as the output to drive current through the electric circuit external to the MHD system.
A number of generator configurations have been devised to accommodate the Hall effect. In a Faraday generator, as shown in part A of the figure, the electrode walls are segmented and insulated from each other to support the axial electric field and the electric power is taken out in a series of loads. In the alternate configuration known as a Hall generator, as shown in part B of the figure, the Faraday field across each sector of the channel is short-circuited and the sectors are connected in series. This allows the connection of a single electric load between the ends of the channel. A further generator configuration is shown in part C of the figure. Consideration of the electric potentials at different points in the channel leads to the observation that an equipotential runs diagonally across the insulator walls and that electrodes may be appropriately staggered to match the equipotentials. The series connection of these electrodes in this diagonal generator permits a single electric load to be used.
An attractive alternative to the linear Hall generator in part B of the figure is the disk generator shown in part D of the figure. In this configuration the load current flows radially, and the short-circuited Faraday currents flow in closed circular paths. The Hall output appears between the centre and the periphery of the disk. This disk generator is attractive when nonequilibrium ionization is used.
