Mary Abby Van Kleeck,  (born June 26, 1883, Glenham, N.Y., U.S.—died June 8, 1972, Kingston, N.Y.), American social researcher and reformer, a dynamic and influential figure in the investigation and improvement of labour conditions in the first half of the 20th century.
Van Kleeck, the daughter of a minister, received her bachelor’s degree from Smith College in 1904 and joined the College Settlements Association, where she began her career as a social researcher by studying New York City’s female factory workers and child labourers. For decades she served as director of the Russell Sage Foundation’s department of industrial studies, where her work and that of her colleagues helped bring about legislative reform by shedding light on the conditions in various trades. By then an expert on women’s employment, during World War I van Kleeck set the War Labor Policies Board standards for women working in the war industries and was appointed head of the Women in Industry Service agency established within the Department of Labor. This agency later became the United States Women’s Bureau.
Returning to the Russell Sage Foundation after the war, van Kleeck broadened the focus of the department of industrial studies, which began to investigate the underlying causes of job insecurity and labour unrest. By the time of the Great Depression, van Kleeck had come to believe ardently in socialism and to feel that New Deal policies weakened workers and their unions. In August 1933 she resigned from a new position with the Federal Advisory Council of the United States Employment Service after just one day, citing her disenchantment with New Deal policies. Among her writings advocating industrial socialization are Miners and Management (1934) and Creative America (1936). She also became a supporter of Soviet socialism.
Believing that worldwide problems underlay economic disturbances, van Kleeck served from 1928 to 1948 as associate director of the International Industrial Relations Institute. After her retirement from the Russell Sage Foundation in 1948, she ran unsuccessfully for the New York state Senate on the American Labor Party ticket. Through such organizations as the Episcopal League for Social Action and the Church League for Industrial Democracy, she continued to pursue postwar interests such as disarmament and the peacetime uses of nuclear energy.
