Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK), Greek Panellinio Sosialistiko Kinima,  social democratic political party in Greece. The Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK) was founded in 1974 as a radical Marxist-inspired party that called for the dissolution of the country’s military alliances and for tighter government regulation of the economy, but since its founding it has transformed into a mainstream social democratic party. PASOK and New Democracy (ND) are Greece’s leading parties.
The party—or “movement,” as it calls itself—was founded in the wake of the collapse of the military dictatorship that had seized control in 1967 and abolished political parties. PASOK traces its roots to the Liberal Party, founded by Eleuthérios Venizélos prior to the 1910 elections, but its immediate antecedent was the moderate Centre Union, founded by Georgios Papandreou in 1961. PASOK was established by Papandreou’s son, Andreas, who had briefly served as a minister in his father’s pre-coup Centre Union government; Andreas Papandreou led PASOK until his death in 1996. After a period of imprisonment, he had been allowed to leave Greece. In exile he was a leading critic of the military regime and sought with limited success to launch a resistance movement, the Panhellenic Liberation Movement (Panellinio Apeleutherotiko Kinima; PAK), to bring about the overthrow of the military regime. PAK members formed a significant element in the newly established PASOK.
In its early years PASOK espoused radical, class-based, socialist policies. It sought to define a socialist “Third Way” that was different from social democracy, Eurocommunism, and the socialism that existed in the Soviet bloc. PASOK strongly opposed the restoration of the monarchy and favoured strict controls of U.S. military operations in Greece, Greece’s withdrawal from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and the renegotiation of Greece’s membership in the European Economic Community (EEC; renamed in 1993 the European Community and embedded within the European Union; EU).
Following its strong showing in the 1977 elections, PASOK began to moderate its agenda, seeking to appeal to centrist voters. Its combination of nationalist rhetoric (it was strongly anti-Turkish) and its promise of social reform helped PASOK win the 1981 elections, in which it captured nearly half of the popular vote and nearly three-fifths of the seats in parliament. Once in power, PASOK took no steps to end the country’s memberships in NATO and the EEC or to close the American bases in the country as it had threatened while in opposition. Implementing a socialist economic program proved problematic, particularly because such a large element of Greece’s workforce was self-employed. In power, PASOK proved to be more populist than socialist. Little structural change occurred during PASOK’s rule, but a number of measures were introduced that liberalized Greek society (civil marriage was permitted, and family law was amended in favour of women).
PASOK’s economic policies and political scandals helped end its eight years of rule in 1989. Nevertheless, four years later the party returned to power, despite the manifest ill health of Papandreou. In 1996, following a lengthy sojourn in the hospital, Papandreou resigned as prime minister in favour of Konstantinos Simitis, a leading figure in the technocratic, social democratic wing of the party. Later that year, after Papandreou’s death, Simitis was elected party leader and began to consolidate his power. Under his leadership, PASOK strongly favoured joining the European Monetary System (EMS) and having the drachma, Greece’s currency (and Europe’s oldest), replaced with the euro, the currency unit of the EU. In 2000, despite the implementation of austerity measures to align Greece’s economy with those of its EU partners—policies that aroused opposition within the populist wing of PASOK and within the country—PASOK narrowly won reelection. Greece subsequently qualified for the euro, and in 2002 it became Greece’s official currency.
Reflecting the dynastic nature of Greek politics, Andreas Papandreou’s son Georgios A. Papandreou was elected party leader in 2004 as public support for Simitis diminished. With a lack of progress on the economy and disenchantment with government preparation for the 2004 Summer Olympic Games to be held in Athens, PASOK was defeated decisively by the ND in the 2004 elections. PASOK’s election woes continued in 2007, when the party registered its worst poll results in 30 years.
As the economic situation in Greece soured over the next two years, PASOK experienced a dramatic reversal of fortunes. When ND Prime Minister Kostas Karamanlis called for snap elections in October 2009, PASOK swept into power, claiming 160 of the Greek parliament’s 300 seats, and party leader Papandreou became the third member of his family to hold the office of prime minister. Papandreou’s troubled tenure was defined by the country’s deepening debt crisis, which eventually resulted in a series of massive bailouts by the European Union and International Monetary Fund that required the imposition of draconian austerity measures that were widely unpopular with Greeks. In November 2011 Papandreou stepped down as prime minister to pave the way for the formation of a “unity” coalition government. PASOK fared badly in parliamentary elections in May 2012, finishing third with only some 13 percent of the total vote. Though the ND captured about 19 percent of the vote, no party was able to form a coalition to govern, and voters returned to the polls in June, with PASOK again finishing a weak third but joining the coalition government led by the ND.
In December 2014, when Prime Minister Antonis Samaras of the ND was unable to gather enough votes in parliament to elect his presidential nominee, parliament was dissolved. A snap parliamentary election held in January 2015 was won by Syriza, which took power in a coalition with the Independent Greeks. PASOK finished seventh, plummeting from 33 seats in the previous parliament to 13 in the new one.
