Price,   the amount of money that has to be paid to acquire a given product. Insofar as the amount people are prepared to pay for a product represents its value, price is also a measure of value.
It follows from the definition just stated that prices perform an economic function of major significance. So long as they are not artificially controlled, prices provide an economic mechanism by which goods and services are distributed among the large number of people desiring them. They also act as indicators of the strength of demand for different products and enable producers to respond accordingly. This system is known as the price mechanism and is based on the principle that only by allowing prices to move freely will the supply of any given commodity match demand. If supply is excessive, prices will be low and production will be reduced; this will cause prices to rise until there is a balance of demand and supply. In the same way, if supply is inadequate, prices will be high, leading to an increase in production that in turn will lead to a reduction in prices until both supply and demand are in equilibrium.
In fact, this function of prices may be analyzed into three separate functions. First, prices determine what goods are to be produced and in what quantities; second, they determine how the goods are to be produced; and third, they determine who will get the goods. The goods so produced and distributed may be consumer items, services, labour, or other salable commodities. In each case, an increase in demand will lead to the price being bid up, which will induce producers to supply more; a decrease in demand will have the reverse effect. The price system provides a simple scale by which competing demands may be weighed by every consumer or producer.
Of course, a totally free and unfettered price mechanism does not exist in practice. Even in the relatively free market economies of the developed Western world there are all kinds of distortions—arising out of monopolies, government interference, and other conditions—the effect of which reduces the efficiency of price as a determinant of supply and demand. In centrally planned economies, the price mechanism may be supplanted by centralized governmental control for political and social reasons. Attempts to operate an economy without a price mechanism usually result in surpluses of unwanted goods, shortages of desired products, black markets, and slow, erratic, or no economic growth.
