Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD), English National People’s Party,  regional political party in Bihar state, eastern India. It also had a presence in national politics in New Delhi.
The RJD was formed in July 1997 in New Delhi by Lalu Prasad Yadav, who had broken away from the Janata Dal (People’s Party). Raghuvansh Prasad Singh and Kanti Singh were the other principal founding members of the party, joined by an additional 17 members of the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament) and 8 members of the Rajya Sabha (upper chamber of the parliament). The RJD’s stated objective was to “carve out a society based on the premises of social justice and secularism.” To that end, the party espoused the socialist beliefs of Jaya Prakash Narayan—who championed the causes of the disadvantaged in Indian society—but it did not advocate communism. The RJD’s influence was largely in Bihar state politics, although it also had a presence at the national level as well as in the states of Jharkhand (which was calved off from Bihar in 2000) and Uttar Pradesh.
The RJD inherited its success and popularity as a party from that of Lalu Yadav, the party’s leader since its founding and Bihar’s chief minister (head of government) in 1990–97. The party’s political prospects were negatively affected, however, by Yadav’s alleged involvement in corruption scandals, the first of which (an alleged scam involving the misappropriation of government funds supposedly destined for animal feed) led to his resignation from the chief minister’s position in 1997 (the post was taken over by Rabri Devi, his wife). Thus, the party’s fortunes have risen and fallen dramatically at both the state and national levels.
The RJD’s first test nationally was relatively successful, when it won 17 seats in the March 1998 Lok Sabha elections. In elections to that chamber a year and a half later, however, it could retain only 7 members. Yadav himself lost his seat to Sharad Yadav (no relation), head of the Janata Dal (United) party, or JD(U), one of the successors to the original Janata Dal.
The RJD fared better in the 2000 Bihar assembly elections, winning 103 of 243 seats and forming a coalition government with the Indian National Congress (Congress Party). Rabri Devi was again named chief minister. The RJD’s good electoral performance continued in the 2004 Lok Sabha polls when it garnered 21 seats in alliance with the Congress Party. Yadav served as the minister of railways in the cabinet of the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance government (2004–09), generally to good reviews for his success in transforming the national railway system from losing money to turning a profit.
Years of RJD misrule in Bihar and allegations of corruption by Yadav, however, had weakened the party’s hold on its traditional support base, which included lower-caste Hindus and the minority Muslim population. At the same time, the rise of the JD(U) provided an alternative to voters seeking a respite from the RJD. In the February 2005 state assembly elections, the RJD won the largest number of seats (75) of any political party, but, since neither it nor any other party could form a government, the state was ruled by the national government for several months. A second election was held that October, in which the RJD managed to win only 54 seats. A coalition government headed by the JD(U) and including the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) was formed in the state. The 2010 assembly elections were a disaster for the RJD, which managed to retain only 22 seats while former chief minister Rabri Devi lost in both the constituencies she contested. The JD(U) again formed a coalition government with the BJP, the two parties combining for an overwhelming 206-seat majority.
The RJD’s declining political influence in Bihar led to a disruption in its ties with the Congress Party in the 2009 Lok Sabha elections. The RDJ, in alliance with the Bihar regional Lok Janshakti Party (LJP), saw its total reduced to four seats in the chamber. Lalu Yadav himself lost in one of the two constituencies in which he was a candidate. Yadav’s past caught up with him in late 2013 when he was convicted and sentenced to prison for his role in the animal-feed scam; he subsequently was removed from his seat in the Lok Sabha. The RJD forsook its association with the LJP and restored its ties with the Congress Party for the 2014 elections to the Lok Sabha, but it was again able to win only four seats in the chamber.
