sales tax,  levy imposed upon the sale of goods and services. Sales taxes are commonly classified according to the level of business activity at which they are imposed—at the manufacturing or import stage, at the wholesale level, or on retail transactions. Some excises, most notably those on motor fuels, are justified as “benefit taxes” related to costs of providing public services. Others, sometimes called “sin taxes,” may be intended to discourage consumption (e.g., of alcohol and tobacco) that may be injurious to the consumer or to society. The tax rates applied to commodities often vary based on whether the commodity is considered essential or nonessential. Although taxes on nonessential or “luxury” items are politically popular, luxury consumption is difficult to define for tax purposes. Often such taxes raise complex administrative problems while generating little revenue.
A sales tax levied on the manufacture, purchase, sale, or consumption of a specific type of commodity is known as an excise tax. Terminology in this matter tends to differ between countries. In the United States, for example, excises apply to imports as well as to domestic production, while in British terminology excises may be applied only to domestic output. Whereas excises may be based either on quantities of the taxed product (specific excises) or on value, general sales taxes are inherently value-based taxes.
Multistage sales taxes, which are imposed at more than one level of production and distribution, without relief for taxes paid at previous stages, are sometimes called turnover taxes. For reasons of administration and simplicity, such taxes are based on gross receipts; consequently, the taxable value at each stage includes amounts taxed at the previous stage (as well as the taxes already paid at previous stages).
In order to avoid such pyramiding of taxes, an increasing number of governments employ a value-added tax (VAT). This is a modified sales tax based on the net value added at each stage of production or distribution. Each enterprise’s net tax liability is commonly calculated as the sum of all taxes it collects on goods it sells minus the sum of all the taxes it has paid on goods it has bought. This is sometimes known as the “invoice” or “credit” method of implementing a value-added tax.
Excise taxes were common in the ancient world, just as excises of various kinds were important sources of public revenue in medieval Europe. In the United States, customs duties were the primary source of revenue for the federal government before World War I. General sales taxes, however, are a comparatively recent innovation. Multistage turnover taxes were developed during and after World War I in Europe. The large-scale use of value-added taxation began when France adopted a rudimentary form of it in 1954. The VAT was subsequently taken up in other European countries, largely as the result of a desire to harmonize tax systems in the European Union; it is now employed in over 100 countries. E-commerce has created significant challenges for the administration of sales taxes, especially when transactions cross national boundaries.
Excise tax revenue in most countries comes primarily from excises on automobiles, motor fuels, tobacco, and alcoholic beverages. Many other special excises are in use, such as taxes on coffee, sugar, salt, vinegar, matches, and amusements. Historically, communist countries derived much of their revenue through general turnover taxes, which were based on the difference between (1) production and distribution costs and (2) the retail prices set by planners. Revenues from taxes vary among countries with developing economies. Generally, domestic taxes on goods and services account for about one-fifth of total central government revenues in developing countries with relatively high income levels, one-quarter of revenues in middle-income developing countries, and one-third of revenues in the poorest of the developing countries.
In the United States, single-stage retail sales taxes—as well as excises on liquor, tobacco, and motor fuels—exist in virtually all the states. A few states have made use of multistage turnover taxes. Many local governments are also financed in part by taxes at the retail level. The United States is the only developed country without a VAT. The federal government does, however, impose special excises on liquor, tobacco, motor fuels, and other items. In Canada, both the federal government and the province of Quebec levy a VAT (the goods and services tax, or GST), while nearly all other provinces impose retail sales taxes.
Most Latin American countries rely heavily on excises and on sales taxes, with the most common being the VAT. In Brazil, both the federal and state governments levy variants of the VAT. In general, excise and turnover taxes have been more important in Latin America and in the less-developed world than in European countries. The latter have relied more on direct taxes (income taxes) than have the Latin countries, in which resistance to such direct taxation is traditionally strong. Some countries may prefer indirect taxation simply because excise and turnover taxes are easier and often less costly to administer and enforce.
