Theodore William Schultz,  (born April 30, 1902, near Arlington, South Dakota, U.S.—died February 26, 1998, Evanston, Illinois), American agricultural economist whose influential studies of the role of “human capital”—education, talent, energy, and will—in economic development won him a share (with Sir Arthur Lewis) of the 1979 Nobel Prize for Economics.
Schultz graduated from South Dakota State College in 1927 and earned his Ph.D. in 1930 at the University of Wisconsin, where he was influenced by John R. Commons and other reform-minded thinkers. He taught at Iowa State College (1930–43) and at the University of Chicago (1943–1972), where he was head of the economics department from 1946 to 1961.
In Transforming Traditional Agriculture (1964), Schultz challenged the prevailing view, held by development economists, that farmers in developing countries were irrational in their unwillingness to innovate. He argued that, to the contrary, the farmers were making rational responses to high taxes and artificially low crop prices set by their governments. Schultz also noted that governments in developing countries lacked the agricultural extension services critical for training farmers in new methods. He viewed agricultural development as a precondition for industrialization.
As an empirical economist, Schultz visited farms when he traveled to gain a better understanding of agricultural economics. After World War II, he met an elderly and apparently poor farm couple who seemed quite content with their life. He asked them why. They answered that they were not poor; earnings from their farm had allowed them to send four children to college, and they believed that education would enhance their children’s productivity and, consequently, their income. That conversation led Schultz to formulate his concept of human capital, which he concluded could be studied by using the same terms applied to nonhuman capital. Human capital, however, could be expressed in the form of productive knowledge.
Among his publications were Agriculture in an Unstable Economy (1945), The Economic Value of Education (1963), Economic Growth and Agriculture (1968), Investment in Human Capital (1971), and Investing in People: The Economics of Population Quality (1981).
