Thomas C. Schelling, in full Thomas Crombie Schelling,  (born April 14, 1921, Oakland, California, U.S.—died December 13, 2016, Bethesda, Maryland), American economist who shared the 2005 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences with Robert J. Aumann. Schelling specialized in the application of game theory to cases in which adversaries must repeatedly interact, especially in international trade, treaties, and conflicts. The cowinners were cited “for having enhanced our understanding of conflict and cooperation through game-theory analysis.”
Having studied economics at the University of California, Berkeley (A.B., 1944), and Harvard University (Ph.D., 1951), Schelling began his career working for federal agencies and programs such as the U.S. Bureau of the Budget (1945–46), the Marshall Plan in Europe (1948–50), and the Executive Office of the President (1951–53). He took his first academic appointment in economics at Yale University (1953–58) before moving to Harvard University (1958–90) and thereafter to the University of Maryland.
Schelling was also a senior staff member of the RAND Corporation (1958–59), where his analysis of the nuclear arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union led to his publication of The Strategy of Conflict (1960). His book promoted game theory as “the” mathematical technique for the social sciences. Among his insights were the efficacy of voluntarily limiting one’s options in order to make the remaining ones more credible, that uncertain retaliation can be a greater deterrent than certain retaliation, and that the ability to retaliate is more of a deterrent than the ability to resist an attack—i.e., a country’s best defense against nuclear war is the protection of its weapons rather than its people.
Schelling’s idea of limited or graduated reprisals—which he later set out in Arms and Influence (1966)—was adopted by the United States in 1965 as Operation Rolling Thunder, which involved the bombing of selected targets in North Vietnam in the expectation that it would deter the North Vietnamese from continuing the war. When this failed to deter North Vietnam, the bombing campaign was escalated, in spite of Schelling’s advice that the bombing should be abandoned if it did not succeed in the first three weeks.
While at Harvard, Schelling applied game theory to international trade negotiations, which led to two highly influential books: Micromotives and Macrobehavior (1978) and Choice and Consequence (1984). The former work explained the tendency of urban neighbourhoods toward absolute segregation.
Schelling was elected president of the American Economic Association in 1991, and, in his presidential address “Some Economics of Global Warming” (1992), he advanced an argument in favour of a carbon tax. He returned to the subject in 2002 with a controversial article in Foreign Affairs in which he argued that Pres. George W. Bush’s rejection of the Kyoto Protocol was justified on the grounds that the link between greenhouse gases and global warming was unproven and that such a multinational accord would be unenforceable. He was one of eight experts who drafted the United Nations’ Consensus of Copenhagen (2003), which suggested global priorities for the next millennium—reduction of greenhouse gases (17) falling far below treating and eradicating AIDS (1), fighting global malnutrition (2), and eliminating customs barriers (3).
Schelling’s analyses generally relied on clear logical argument rather than esoteric mathematics, which made his major works highly accessible and contributed to his strong influence both inside and outside economic circles. His book Strategies of Commitment and Other Essays was published in 2006.
