Water supply system,  infrastructure for the collection, transmission, treatment, storage, and distribution of water for homes, commercial establishments, industry, and irrigation, as well as for such public needs as firefighting and street flushing. Of all municipal services, provision of potable water is perhaps the most vital. People depend on water for drinking, cooking, washing, carrying away wastes, and other domestic needs. Water supply systems must also meet requirements for public, commercial, and industrial activities. In all cases, the water must fulfill both quality and quantity requirements.
Water was an important factor in the location of the earliest settled communities, and the evolution of public water supply systems is tied directly to the growth of cities. In the development of water resources beyond their natural condition in rivers, lakes, and springs, the digging of shallow wells was probably the earliest innovation. As the need for water increased and tools were developed, wells were made deeper. Brick-lined wells were built by city dwellers in the Indus River basin as early as 2500 bce, and wells almost 500 metres (more than 1,600 feet) deep are known to have been used in ancient China.
Construction of qanāts, slightly sloping tunnels driven into hillsides that contained groundwater, probably originated in ancient Persia about 700 bce. From the hillsides the water was conveyed by gravity in open channels to nearby towns or cities. The use of qanāts became widespread throughout the region, and some are still in existence. Until 1933 the Iranian capital city, Tehrān, drew its entire water supply from a system of qanāts.
The need to channel water supplies from distant sources was an outcome of the growth of urban communities. Among the most notable of ancient water-conveyance systems are the aqueducts built between 312 bce and 455 ce throughout the Roman Empire. Some of these impressive works are still in existence. The writings of Sextus Julius Frontinus (who was appointed superintendent of Roman aqueducts in 97 ce) provide information about the design and construction of the 11 major aqueducts that supplied Rome itself. Extending from a distant spring-fed area, a lake, or a river, a typical Roman aqueduct included a series of underground and aboveground channels. The longest was the Aqua Marcia, built in 144 bce. Its source was about 37 km (23 miles) from Rome. The aqueduct itself was 92 km (57 miles) long, however, because it had to meander along land contours in order to maintain a steady flow of water. For about 80 km (50 miles) the aqueduct was underground in a covered trench, and only for the last 11 km (7 miles) was it carried aboveground on an arcade. In fact, most of the combined length of the aqueducts supplying Rome (about 420 km [260 miles]) was built as covered trenches or tunnels. When crossing a valley, aqueducts were supported by arcades comprising one or more levels of massive granite piers and impressive arches.
The aqueducts ended in Rome at distribution reservoirs, from which the water was conveyed to public baths or fountains. A few very wealthy or privileged citizens had water piped directly into their homes, but most of the people carried water in containers from a public fountain. Water was running constantly, the excess being used to clean the streets and flush the sewers.
Ancient aqueducts and pipelines were not capable of withstanding much pressure. Channels were constructed of cut stone, brick, rubble, or rough concrete. Pipes were typically made of drilled stone or of hollowed wooden logs, although clay and lead pipes were also used. During the Middle Ages there was no notable progress in the methods or materials used to convey and distribute water.
Cast iron pipes with joints capable of withstanding high pressures were not used very much until the early 19th century. The steam engine was first applied to water-pumping operations at about that time, making it possible for all but the smallest communities to have drinking water supplied directly to individual homes. Asbestos cement, ductile iron, reinforced concrete, and steel came into use as materials for water supply pipelines in the 20th century.
In addition to quantity of supply, water quality is also of concern. Even the ancients had an appreciation for the importance of water purity. Sanskrit writings from as early as 2000 bce tell how to purify foul water by boiling and filtering. But it was not until the middle of the 19th century that a direct link between polluted water and disease (cholera) was proved, and it was not until the end of that same century that the German bacteriologist Robert Koch proved the germ theory of disease, establishing a scientific basis for the treatment and sanitation of drinking water.
Water treatment is the alteration of a water source in order to achieve a quality that meets specified goals. At the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th, the main goal was elimination of deadly waterborne diseases. The treatment of public drinking water to remove pathogenic, or disease-causing, microorganisms began about that time. Treatment methods included sand filtration as well as the use of chlorine for disinfection. The virtual elimination of diseases such as cholera and typhoid in developed countries proved the success of this water-treatment technology. In developing countries, waterborne disease is still the principal water quality concern.
In industrialized countries, concern has shifted to the chronic health effects related to chemical contamination. For example, trace amounts of certain synthetic organic substances in drinking water are suspected of causing cancer in humans. Lead in drinking water, usually leached from corroded lead pipes, can result in gradual lead poisoning and may cause developmental delays in children. The added goal of reducing such health risks is seen in the continually increasing number of factors included in drinking-water standards.
Water is present in abundant quantities on and under Earth’s surface, but less than 1 percent of it is liquid fresh water. Most of Earth’s estimated 1.4 billion cubic km (326 million cubic miles) of water is in the oceans or frozen in polar ice caps and glaciers. Ocean water contains about 35 grams per litre (4.5 ounces per gallon) of dissolved minerals or salts, making it unfit for drinking and for most industrial or agricultural uses.
There is ample fresh water—water containing less than 3 grams of salts per litre, or less than one-eighth ounce of salts per gallon—to satisfy all human needs. It is not always available, though, at the times and places it is needed, and it is not uniformly distributed over the globe, sometimes resulting in water scarcity for susceptible communities. In many locations the availability of good-quality water is further reduced because of urban development, industrial growth, and environmental pollution.
