Akiva ben Yosef, also called Akiba ben Joseph,  (born 40 ce—died c. 135, Caesarea, Palestine [now in Israel]), Jewish sage, a principal founder of rabbinic Judaism. He introduced a new method of interpreting Jewish oral law (Halakha), thereby laying the foundation of what was to become the Mishna, the first postbiblical written code of Jewish law.
The subject of numerous popular legends, Akiva is said to have been an illiterate shepherd who began to study after the age of 40. His devoted wife, Rachel, supported him both morally and materially during this arduous period of late learning (12 years, according to one account). His principal teachers were the great masters of the Law, Eliezer ben Hyrcanus and Joshua ben Hananiah. Akiva established his academy in Bene Beraq (Bnei Brak; near present-day Tel Aviv–Yafo), and the leading sages of the following generation, especially Meïr and Shimon bar Yochai, were his disciples.
Akiva perfected the method of biblical interpretation called “Midrash,” whereby legal, sacral, and ethical tenets that had been sanctioned by Jewish oral tradition were viewed as being implied in Scripture. Thus, Scripture, in addition to its overt meaning, is understood as replete with implied teaching; it is, in fact, all-encompassing. The “Written Law” of Scripture and the “Oral Law” of tradition are ultimately one. Many midrashic works of the 2nd century originated in Akiva’s school. In addition, he collected the oral traditions that regulated the conduct of Jewish personal, social, and religious life and arranged them systematically. (Akiva has been called “the father of the Mishna.”) His apprehension of Scripture was opposed by the contemporary exegete Rabbi Ishmael ben Elisha, who taught that “the Torah speaks in the language of men” and should not be forced to yield special meanings but instead should be interpreted exclusively by means of set, logical rules of interpretation.
Akiva’s importance lies both in his achievements as a rabbinic scholar and in the impact of his personality on his time. He was strict in matters of law (“No pity in judgment!”—i.e., compassion is irrelevant in establishing what the law is or means), but he opposed the death penalty. He respected the role of the woman in life and attributed the redemption of the Israelites from Egyptian bondage to the meritoriousness of women of that generation. He was modest in his personal life, and he was known for his concern for the poor.
As judge he addressed litigating parties: “Know before whom you are standing. You are standing before him whose word created the world, not before Akiva ben Yosef.”
His lectures were on legal subjects, scriptural exegesis, and religious thought. For him the central teaching of Judaism resided in the commandment “love your neighbour as yourself.” God’s love for man is expressed in that he created man in his image. Man has freedom of will (“Everything is foreseen, yet freedom of choice is given”); his deeds determine his fate, yet his true reward will be granted only in the world to come. In the present life there is much suffering, but “suffering is precious” and man should praise God for it. The people of Israel, who in a special sense are “God’s children,” have the task to “proclaim the glory of God to all the nations of the world.” Akiva interpreted the Song of Solomon as a dialogue of love between Israel and God. For the sake of this love, Israel withdraws from the affairs of the world. In these teachings—partly in answer to early Christian tenets—Akiva laid the basis for an ideology of Israel in dispersion among the nations of the world.
About the year 95, Akiva and other sages journeyed to Rome. Arriving at the seaport Puteoli, they beheld the power and grandeur of the empire. While his companions wept, remembering the victory of Rome over Judaea some two decades ago, Akiva remained calm. If God is so kind to the wicked Romans, he explained, he will, in the end, be even kinder to Israel. He was equally calm when he visited the ruins of the Jerusalem Temple, destroyed by the Romans in the year 70. The prophecies of doom have come true, he commented; now we may anticipate the fulfillment of the prophecies of reconstruction.
Scholarly opinion is divided on the extent of Akiva’s participation in an ill-fated rebellion against Rome (132–135) led by Bar Kokhba (originally Simeon bar Kosba). Some consider Akiva to have been the spiritual force behind the uprising. Others take note of the Talmudic report that Akiva considered Bar Kokhba to be the promised messianic king but see no evidence of further action on his part. Akiva was, it is true, apprehended by the Romans, imprisoned in Caesarea, and finally martyred (c. 135), but his offense is recorded as having been his continued public teaching rather than revolutionary activity. He accepted the agony of martyrdom serenely (he was flayed alive, according to tradition), grateful for the opportunity to fulfill the commandment to “love God…with all your life,” which he always interpreted to mean “even when he takes your life.” His last words were “the Lord is one,” the final words of the Jewish confession of faith (“Hear, O Israel! The Lord is our God, the Lord is one”).
