al-Sanūsī, in full Sīdī Muḥammad ibn ʿAlī al-Sanūsī al-Mujāhirī al-Ḥasanī al-Idrīsī,  (born c. 1787, Tursh, near Mostaganem, in northern Africa—died  September 7, 1859, Jaghbūb, Cyrenaica), North African Islamic theologian who founded a reformist Sufi movement, the Sanūsiyyah, which helped Libya win its independence in the 20th century.
During his formative years in his native Tursh (now in Algeria), which was incorporated in the Ottoman Empire, al-Sanūsī observed the corruption of the Ottoman administrators. To continue his religious studies, in 1821 he went to Fès, Morocco. Morocco was then nominally independent but actually a colony of France. Al-Sanūsī’s experiences under foreign rule and his observation of the inherent weakness of the Islamic states convinced him of the need for a revitalized Islamic community.
After a pilgrimage to Mecca in 1828, al-Sanūsī visited Egypt. Attracted to mysticism in Morocco, he joined many different orders while in Egypt and studied under prominent Sufi scholars in the Hejaz (now in Saudi Arabia) and Yemen, most notably Sayyid Aḥmad ibn Idrīs al-Fāsī. In 1837, after the death of Aḥmad ibn Idrīs, he founded his own order, which later became known as the Sanūsiyyah. His accommodating approach to tribal patterns of authority and religious beliefs endeared him to many Bedouin tribes of the area, but it unsettled the Ottoman officials, who sought to bring the tribes under their own political and religious authority. In 1841 he was expelled from the Hejaz, and in 1843 he moved the order to Cyrenaica, where it gained a powerful following among local tribes by offering education, arbitration in intertribal disputes, and other practical forms of guidance. About 1856 the order was moved to Jaghbūb, also in Cyrenaica but away from the sphere of Egyptian and Ottoman political control and near the caravan route from North Africa to the Hejaz and equatorial Africa. This location offered an excellent seat from which proselytization (daʿwah) could be carried out among the tribes.
The Sanūsiyyah became popular among the tribes of Cyrenaica. In the 20th century, under the leadership of al-Sanūsī’s grandson Idris, the Sanūsiyyah spearheaded the liberation movement against Italian colonization. After Libya gained independence, Idris ruled Libya as king from 1951 to 1969.
