Anthony of Kiev, also called Anthony of Pechersk,  (born, Ukraine—died 1073, Kiev), founder of Russian monasticism through the introduction of the Greek Orthodox ideal of the contemplative life.
Seeking a solitary life, Anthony became a monk about 1028 at the Greek Orthodox monastery of Esphigmenon on Mount Athos, in Greece. According to an account contained in the 12th-century The Russian Primary Chronicle (Povest vremennykh let), Anthony was counseled by his abbot to carry the Athonite monastic tradition to Russia. He consequently returned to his Ukrainian homeland, where he settled in a cave on the side of Mount Berestov, overlooking the Dnieper River. His fame as a holy hermit and wonder worker spread throughout the region, and by the mid-11th century the number of his disciples warranted a larger cave on the same site to house them. When the community of hermits had grown to 15, requiring the construction of a church and refectory, Anthony resigned as spiritual leader and retired to another grotto. Soon the prince of Kiev, Izyaslav, ceded Mount Beretsov to the monks, and Anthony laid the foundation for the Kiev-Pechersk Lavra (Monastery of the Caves), an institution that later acquired a reputation as the cradle of Russian monasticism. Reverting to his Athonite training, he sent to Constantinople (modern Istanbul) for architects to construct the new monastery complex at the mountain.
By such a foundation Anthony established the basis for the Russian assimilation of the three elements of Byzantine monasticism: the writings of the early Egyptian and Palestinian monks, the eremitical practices of Mount Athos, and the communal spirituality in the rule of Constantinople’s Stoudion monastery. As described by The Russian Primary Chronicle, he favoured the solitary life, marked by superhuman efforts to suppress human passions in a demon-haunted world. Reflecting the Byzantine ascetic tradition, Anthony expressed the basic tension, never fully resolved, between the contemplative’s search for God through asceticism and the social responsibilities of the hermit. He realized the moral and psychological pitfalls of solitude and consequently provided hermitages near the monastery. Anthony’s institution exerted a wide influence on the Russian Orthodox church and later evolved into the cenobitic (community life) ideal out of which some 50 monks became bishops by the year 1250.
The latter part of Anthony’s life was marked by a strained relationship with Izyaslav, who suspected him of conspiring with a rival lord during the stormy years following the death, in 1054, of the forceful grand prince of Kiev, Yaroslav I the Wise.
