Archibald Campbell Tait,  (born Dec. 21, 1811, Edinburgh, Scot.—died  Dec. 3, 1882, Addington, Surrey, Eng.), archbishop of Canterbury, remembered primarily for his efforts to moderate tension in the Church of England at the height of the Oxford Movement.
The son of Presbyterian parents, Tait became an Anglican while a student at the University of Oxford, where in 1835 he became a tutor at Balliol College. A year later he was made a deacon, and for five years he was also a curate at two nearby village parishes. In March 1841 he joined others in a written protest against Tract 90 of the Tractarian (or Oxford) Movement, which was devoted to recovering the High Church ideals of the later 17th-century church. In 1842 Tait succeeded Thomas Arnold as headmaster of Rugby School, where he improved the prefect system. He became dean of Carlisle Cathedral in 1849, was active in 1850–52 in the royal commission that advised reform at Oxford, and in 1856 was made bishop of London. Stressing reconciliation, he avoided partisan issues and thus faced opposition from both evangelical and high churchmen, who, following the program of the Oxford Movement, often offended the evangelicals by introducing liturgical elaborations that appeared to be inspired by Roman Catholic practice.
As bishop of London, Tait strengthened the diocese by supporting efforts to construct new churches and by founding the Bishop of London’s Fund to finance additional clergy.
Becoming archbishop of Canterbury in 1868, Tait faced at once the bill to disestablish the (Anglican) Church of Ireland; his statesmanship largely accounted for its smooth passage through Parliament. High Church opposition continued, notably to his support of the Burials Act (1880), which legalized non-Anglican burial services in Anglican churchyards, and to his dislike for the sternness of the Athanasian Creed’s clauses regarding salvation.
Tait’s major successes were in his work on the royal commissions on ritual (1867) and as spokesman for the Anglican church, a role in which he commanded esteem in the House of Lords. His numerous writings include The Dangers and Safeguards of Modern Theology (1861) and Harmony of Revelation and the Sciences (1864).
