Arthur Peacocke, in full Arthur Robert Peacocke,  (born Nov. 29, 1924, Watford, Eng.—died Oct. 21, 2006, Oxford), British theologian, biochemist, and Anglican priest who claimed that science and religion were not only reconcilable but complementary approaches to the study of existence.
Peacocke attended the prestigious Watford Grammar School for Boys. In 1942 he entered Exeter College at the University of Oxford, graduating in 1946 with a bachelor’s degree in chemistry. Peacocke then received a doctorate in physical biochemistry from Oxford in 1948. During the 1950s, while working at the virus laboratory at the University of California, he was part of a team that identified properties of the recently discovered DNA molecule. He received a doctorate of science from Oxford in 1962. A self-described mild agnostic during his college years, Peacocke later found himself searching for answers to questions he considered too broad for science alone to answer. He began theology studies and received a bachelor of divinity degree from the University of Birmingham in 1971, when he was also ordained a priest in the Church of England. Beginning in 1973, he taught biochemistry and theology and served as dean of Clare College at the University of Cambridge before returning to Oxford, where he served two terms (1985–88; 1995–99) as director of the Ian Ramsey Centre, which promoted teaching and research in science and religion. He received a doctorate in divinity from Oxford in 1982. Peacocke became honorary chaplain of Christ Church Cathedral in 1988 and in 1995 became honorary canon. He also founded the Science and Religion Forum (1972) and the Society of Ordained Scientists (1985).
An early adherent of the anthropic principle—the notion that the universe contains conditions ideal for the development of living beings—Peacocke concluded that a likely explanation for the existence of life was the existence of a supreme being. As advances in astronomy shed new light on what scientists knew about the creation of the universe and advances in genetics forced scientists to grapple with new ethical considerations, Peacocke maintained that it was time for science and theology to work together to draw meaning and guidance from what was being learned. Most scientists dismissed attempts to integrate faith and science because of a lack of proof of a supreme being, but Peacocke countered that theologians had successfully used supporting evidence for their claims in the same fashion that scientists did for theirs. Peacocke compared the relationship between science and religion to that of two helical strands of DNA. He felt that the searches for intelligibility and for meaning were necessary, complementary approaches to answering the same questions about the nature of existence.
Peacocke promulgated these views, among others, in books that include Science and the Christian Experiment (1971), Intimations of Reality: Critical Realism in Science and Religion (1984), Theology for a Scientific Age (1990), From DNA to DEAN: Reflections and Explorations of a Priest-Scientist (1996), and Paths from Science Towards God: The End of All Our Exploring (2001). The posthumously published All That Is: A Naturalistic Faith for the Twenty-first Century (2007), composed as he was dying of cancer, contains a summation of Peacocke’s beliefs, as well as responses from noted theologians and scientists.
In 1993 Peacocke was made a member of the Order of the British Empire. He was awarded the Templeton Prize for Progress in Religion in 2001.
