Ātmārāmjī,  (born 1837, Lahera, Punjab—died 1896, Gujranwala, Punjab), , important Jain reformer and revivalist monk. He was born a Hindu but as a child came under the influence of Sthānakavāsī Jain monks and was initiated as a Sthānakavāsī monk in 1854. He was renowned for his prodigious memory and intellectual skills. He pursued an independent study of Jain texts, in particular the Sanskrit commentaries on the Jain canon, commentaries which at that time Sthānakavāsī monks were discouraged from studying. As a result of his studies he became convinced that the Mūrtipūjak position on the worship of images of the Jinas (also called Tīrthaṅkaras, considered in Jainism to be godlike saviors who have succeeded in crossing over life’s stream of rebirths and have made a path for others to follow) was correct, and the iconoclastic position taken by the Sthānakavāsī was wrong. In 1876, along with 18 monk followers, he was reinitiated as a Mūrtipūjak monk in the Tapā Gacch in Ahmedabad, the major city of Gujarat, and given the new name Muni Ānandavijay. He was made ācārya (monastic leader) in a public ceremony in 1887 in Palitana—a center of Mūrtipūjak pilgrimage in Gujarat—and he was given the name Ācārya Vijayānandasūri.  Ātmārāmjī came into contact with European scholars of Jainism, and as a result he was invited to the 1893 World’s Parliament of Religions in Chicago—an invitation he declined, as any mode of travel besides walking barefooted would have violated monastic rules.
Ātmārāmjī was a prolific author and tireless reformer. He defended the Mūrtipūjak position on image-worship against the Sthānakavāsīs; defended the position of full-fledged saṃvegī monks against the house-holding monks known as yatis who owned monasteries, traveled in vehicles, handled money, and followed many other practices perceived as lax by orthoprax Jains; and he argued in favor of the Tapā Gacch against other Mūrtipūjak gacchs (lineages) on a variety of details of monastic practices. The movement he helped spearhead led to a predominance of the Mūrtipūjak Tapā Gacch among Gujarati Jains. Monks in his direct disciplic lineage now number well over 500.
