Augusta Emma Simmons Stetson, née Augusta Emma Simmons,  (born Oct. 12, 1842, Waldoboro, Maine, U.S.—died Oct. 12, 1928, Rochester, N.Y.), American religious leader whose success and popularity as a leader in New York’s Christian Science community was considered a threat by the Mother Church.
In 1864 Augusta Simmons married Captain Frederick J. Stetson, with whom she lived in England, India, and British Burma (now Myanmar) before his retirement for reasons of health. They settled in Boston, where in 1882 she enrolled in the Blish School of Oratory with the idea of becoming a professional lecturer and elocutionist.
In 1884 she attended a lecture by Mary Baker Eddy, the founder of Christian Science, and was persuaded by Eddy herself to attend her Massachusetts Metaphysical College. On completing the three-week course Stetson went to Maine to practice Christian Science. She reported a number of remarkable cures in her practice, and in 1885 she was called back to Boston as one of five preachers in Eddy’s own church. In 1886 she was sent to organize a Christian Science church in New York City and was formally ordained pastor (a title later changed to “first reader”) of the First Church of Christ, Scientist, New York City, in 1890.
In 1891 Stetson established the New York City Christian Science Institute to train practitioners. Her tall, stately figure, elegant appearance, rich speaking voice, and magnetic personality attracted a large and rapidly growing following, a considerable portion of which was personally devoted to her. As the congregation grew it moved several times to larger quarters, and in 1899 work was begun on a new building, a huge granite edifice at 96th Street and Central Park West that cost more than a million dollars (it was completed without a mortgage) and that was larger than Eddy’s Mother Church in Boston. It was dedicated in November 1903, and the next year Stetson moved into an adjoining home, an opulently furnished mansion built for her by her congregation.
These and other evidences of Stetson’s success created anxieties in the Mother Church, where she was soon suspected of wanting to supplant Eddy. In 1902 an edict limiting the terms of all Christian Science readers to three years was issued. Stetson duly resigned as first reader in New York, but her influence was undiminished. In September 1909 her license as a Christian Science teacher and practitioner was revoked on grounds that she had taught various heresies, including that sex and procreation were evil, and had attempted to use mental means to cause harm to others. In November she was excommunicated, along with an inner circle of her followers. She continued to live in her home, however, and retained her post as principal of the New York City Christian Science Institute. She continued also to proclaim her entire loyalty to Eddy. Gradually she came to interpret her trials as a call to lead the way to a higher form of Christian Science, the “Church Triumphant.” After Eddy’s death in 1910, Stetson predicted her resurrection. (She later also announced her own immortality.) Supported by wealthy followers, she continued to preach her version of Christian Science until her death.
