Belle Harris Bennett, in full Isabel Harris Bennett,  (born Dec. 3, 1852, Whitehall, near Richmond, Ky., U.S.—died July 20, 1922, Richmond),  American church worker whose energetic efforts on behalf of Christian education and missions culminated in the granting of full lay status to women in the Southern Methodist Church.
Bennett was educated privately in Kentucky and Ohio. She became a member of the Southern Methodist Church in 1876 and soon began teaching in a Sunday school. In 1889, having obtained information from the Chicago Training School for City, Home, and Foreign Missions (founded by Lucy R. Meyer for the Northern Methodist Church a few years earlier), she won adoption by the Southern Methodist Woman’s Board of Foreign Missions of a plan to establish a similar training school. Appointed agent to collect funds, she traveled and spoke widely throughout the South for that purpose. In 1892 the Scarritt Bible and Training School (named for a major benefactor) was dedicated in Kansas City, Missouri. In all, her efforts raised more than $130,000 for building and endowing the school. (In 1924 the school was relocated to Nashville, Tennessee, and renamed Scarritt College for Christian Workers.) In 1897 she opened the Sue Bennett Memorial School, named for an older sister, in London, Kentucky.
In 1892 Bennett was named to the central committee of the Woman’s Parsonage and Home Mission Society; in 1896 she was chosen president, and in 1898 she was named to the presidency of the newly organized Woman’s Board of Home Missions. Under her the board became active in the field of urban missions, and a system of more than 40 segregated community houses was established throughout the South. In 1902 she successfully urged the board to set up a program of lay deaconesses to staff the houses and other home mission projects. In 1910 she became president of the unified Woman’s Missionary Council, responsible for both home and foreign mission work, and she retained the post until her death. She was particularly active in the establishment of a woman’s college (later named for her) in Rio de Janeiro and of the Woman’s Christian Medical College in Shanghai. When her campaign of a dozen years finally resulted in the admission of women to full lay status in the Southern Methodist Church in 1919, she became the first woman to be elected a delegate to the church’s General Conference. She died before the conference convened.
