Charles de Lorraine, 2nd cardinal de Lorraine,  (born Feb. 15, 1524, Joinville, Fr.—died  Dec. 26, 1574, Avignon), one of the foremost members of the powerful Roman Catholic house of Guise and perhaps the most influential Frenchman during the middle years of the 16th century. He was intelligent, avaricious, and cautious.
The second son of Claude, 1st Duke de Guise, and Antoinette de Bourbon, Charles was from the first destined for the church and studied theology at the College of Navarre in Paris. He attracted notice for his oratorical skills, and in 1538 King Francis I made him archbishop of Reims. Soon after King Henry II’s accession, he became cardinal de Guise (1547). When his uncle Jean died in 1550, he took over his title of cardinal de Lorraine as well as his numerous benefices, which included the see of Metz and the abbeys of Cluny and Fécamp. His ecclesiastical patronage was extensive. He was easily the wealthiest prelate in France.
The cardinal was also very important politically: as a member of the king’s council he actively supported the policy of French intervention in Italy, and in 1559 he helped negotiate the Peace of Cateau-Cambrésis. With the weak Francis II as king, he was, with his brother François, Duke de Guise, virtual head of government in 1559–60. Their policy provoked the Huguenots’ abortive conspiracy of Amboise, and with the accession of Charles IX (1560), the regent, Catherine de Médicis, in hopes of reducing the Guise influence, brought Michel de L’Hospital into the government. The cardinal became less influential in state affairs but continued to exert religious influence over Catherine.
Although he persecuted the Huguenots, he proposed a French national council to seek a compromise with them. Rather than an expression of toleration, this was a means of threatening Pope Pius IV in order to secure liberties and privileges for the Gallican (French) church. In 1561 he defended the Catholic viewpoint against the Calvinist Theodore Beza at a colloquy at Poissy. In 1562–63 he championed the Gallican cause at the Council of Trent, but in 1564 he was unable to secure the promulgation of the council’s decrees in France. He retired from court in 1570.
