Cornelia Connelly, née Cornelia Augusta Peacock,  (born Jan. 15, 1809, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.—died  April 18, 1879, St. Leonards, Sussex, Eng.), Roman Catholic abbess who founded the Society of the Holy Child Jesus and became the subject of an acrimonious ecclesiastical controversy.
Cornelia Peacock was orphaned at an early age and reared in the strongly Episcopalian household of her older half sister. In 1831 she married Pierce Connelly, an Episcopalian clergyman, and moved with him to Natchez, Mississippi, where he was rector of Trinity Church. In 1835 both she and her husband became interested in the Roman Catholic church, and they soon became converts. They spent two years in Rome and then moved to Grand Coteau, Louisiana, where they taught in Catholic schools.
When in 1840 her husband announced his intention to enter the priesthood, Connelly agreed to give him the requisite deed of separation and to enter a convent. The separation was granted in 1844, and their two children were placed in convent schools, whereupon Cornelia Connelly entered the Sacred Heart Convent of Trinità dei Monti in Rome. Her husband was ordained the following year, and in 1845 Connelly took her first vow.
In 1846 she was chosen to establish an order of teaching nuns among English Catholics and Irish immigrants in England. The order was established in 1846, and in 1847 she took vows and was made first superior of the Society of the Holy Child Jesus. Pierce Connelly subsequently attempted to gain control of the order through her and, failing in that, left the church and instituted civil proceedings for the restitution of his conjugal rights. This action also failed, and for the rest of his life he conducted a public campaign of vilification against her. She bore all such trials with equanimity, devoting her energies to the expansion of her order, which grew apace. After the original school at Derby was moved to St. Leonards-on-Sea, Sussex, in 1848, a number of other schools were opened in such cities as London, Liverpool, and Preston, England, and in Toul, France. In 1959 she was proposed for beatification.
