Cosmo Gordon Lang, Baron Lang, in full William Cosmo Gordon Lang, Baron Lang of Lambeth,  (born October 31, 1864, Fyvie Manse, Aberdeen, Aberdeenshire, Scotland—died December 5, 1945, Kew Gardens, Surrey, England), influential and versatile Anglican priest who, as archbishop of Canterbury, was a close friend and adviser to King George VI. He also played a role in the abdication in 1936 of King Edward VIII, whose relationship with the American divorcée Wallis Simpson would, Lang feared, divide the country and diminish the British monarchy.
Abruptly abandoning a legal career on the eve of his appointment to the bar, Lang enrolled at Cuddesdon Theological College. After an assistant curacy in a Leeds slum, he became dean of divinity at Magdalen College, Oxford (1893–96), and vicar of the university church (1894–96). He then served successively as vicar of Portsea, Hampshire; suffragan bishop of Stepney, London; and archbishop of York. He was archbishop of Canterbury from 1928 until his retirement in 1942, when George VI created him Baron Lang of Lambeth and granted him a home at Kew.
A prominent member of the House of Lords, Lang was an ardent ecumenicist and was active in the ministry to slum and industrial areas. Following Edward VIII’s abdication, Lang delivered a radio address in which he censured the former king for having maintained a social circle “whose standards and ways of life are alien to all the best instincts of his people.” Widely perceived as ungracious and sanctimonious, the speech was roundly condemned by the king’s supporters and in the press. Although he was long regarded as a mere bystander to the events leading up to the abdication, Lang in fact was closely involved, as scholarly research in the 21st century determined. In private correspondence with Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin in November 1936, Lang warned that Edward’s romance with Simpson could no longer be concealed from the British public and urged Baldwin to convince Edward that he must abdicate, adding that “the announcement should appear as a free act.” Baldwin did so, and Edward accordingly abdicated, officially on December 10, 1936, stating in a radio broadcast the following day that “the decision I have made has been mine and mine alone.”
