Ebbo of Reims,  Ebbo also spelled Ebo,  (born c. 775—died  March 20, 851, Hildesheim, Saxony [Germany]), archbishop whose pioneering missions to the North helped prepare the ground for the Christianization of Denmark and who exercised significant influence on contemporary arts.
Born a royal serf, Ebbo was educated and ordained a priest in the Carolingian court, where he became a close friend of Charlemagne’s son and successor, Louis I the Pious, who made him director of the imperial library at Aachen, and then counselor. In 816 Louis appointed Ebbo archbishop of Reims, where the latter commissioned (c. 817–834) the famous Ebbo gospel book, or Evangeliarium of Ebbo, and promoted the arts, including the building of the cathedral. Appointed apostolic legate (822) by Pope St. Paschal I, he led into Denmark a Frankish mission (822–823) that was temporarily successful. He returned to the North twice, making converts and founding a monastery in Holstein, but the evangelization of the Danes was finally accomplished later under St. Ansgar.
By 833 Ebbo, with other leading prelates, had joined the emperor’s opponents who, led by his son Lothar I, accused Louis of having destroyed Frankish unity. Ebbo headed those bishops who endorsed Louis’s deposition and imprisonment. For supporting Lothar, Ebbo received handsome benefices. Upon Lothar’s downfall and Louis’s restoration (Easter 834), Ebbo took refuge near Paris. A year later he was seized, and he was later imprisoned in the Abbey of Fulda.
On Louis’s death, in 840, Lothar reclaimed his rights to the Frankish succession and unlawfully reinstated Ebbo. On June 25, 841, however, Lothar was defeated in battle by his brothers Charles II the Bald and Louis the German; thereafter, the Frankish empire was jointly ruled by all three kings. Banished by Charles, Ebbo fled to Rome, where he pleaded his case to Pope Sergius II, who reduced him to the laity. Discarded by Lothar, he was eventually protected by Louis the German, who between 845 and 847 made him archbishop of Hildesheim.
