Edward Irving,  (born August 4, 1792, Annan, Dumfries [now in Dumfries and Galloway], Scotland—died December 7, 1834, Glasgow, Strathclyde [now in City of Glasgow council area]), Church of Scotland minister whose teachings became the basis of the religious movement known as Irvingism, later called the Catholic Apostolic Church.
After working as a mathematics teacher and studying theology part time, Irving was called in 1822 to the Caledonian chapel in London as a preacher. His chapel congregation grew so rapidly that in 1827 a new and larger church was built for him in Regent Square. His popularity waned, however, because of his increasing stress on apocalypticism and eschatology, including his prediction in 1825 that the Second Coming of Christ would occur in 1864.
From 1826 he was the centre of a “school of the prophets,” which published the Morning Watch, or Quarterly Journal of Prophecy periodically from 1829 to 1833. In 1828 his Doctrine of the Incarnation Opened aroused opposition for its denigration of the human side of Christ’s nature. After a similar work by him appeared in 1830, he was charged in ecclesiastical courts with maintaining “the sinfulness of Christ’s humanity.” Despite his protest that he had been misinterpreted, he was excommunicated by the London presbytery, and in 1833 he was deposed from his ministry by the Church of Scotland.
By then a convinced believer in such pentecostal phenomena as speaking in tongues, Irving preached throughout Great Britain, returning to London to assume a minor position in the evolving Catholic Apostolic Church. Formed shortly after his death by several disciples and associates, the sect sought to emphasize the unity of all Christians in a universal church and to prepare for the Second Coming. The church flourished until the end of the 19th century, though later members rejected the name “Irvingites” for their group. A close friend of the English authors Thomas Carlyle, Charles Lamb, and Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Irving was honoured by burial in the Glasgow Cathedral crypt.
