Edward White Benson,  (born July 14, 1829, Birmingham, Warwickshire, Eng.—died October 11, 1896, Hawarden, Cheshire), archbishop of Canterbury (1883–96), whose Lincoln Judgment (1890), a code of liturgical ritual, helped resolve the Church of England’s century-old dispute over proper forms of worship.
After serving as assistant master at Rugby School, Warwickshire, from 1852 to 1858, Benson was made headmaster at Wellington College, Berkshire, in 1859. In 1873 he became chancellor of the diocese of Lincoln, where he founded a seminary and established night schools and university extension lectures. He was consecrated in 1877 as bishop of the new diocese of Truro, Cornwall, where he was mainly responsible for the building of a cathedral. He was enthroned as archbishop of Canterbury in 1883 after being appointed to that post by his friend, Prime Minister William E. Gladstone. As archbishop, Benson sought reforms of church patronage and discipline, secured by acts of Parliament in 1892 and 1898, and he successfully resisted efforts to disestablish the Anglican church in Wales.
The most significant episode of Benson’s archbishopric occurred during 1888–90, when he heard arguments in the case of Edward King, bishop of Lincoln, who had been charged with improper ritualism in the celebration of the Eucharist. Benson concluded the case with the Lincoln Judgment, a definition of liturgical practices sanctioned by a tradition of usage. Based on historical analysis of ritualistic practices, the judgment held that certain forms of observance, such as altar lights and the singing of the Agnus Dei, were legitimate but that manual acts by the clergy not visible to the congregation and the sign of the cross in the blessing were illegal.
Benson facilitated a reconciliation among the various factions within the English church and virtually brought to an end the prosecutions relating to ritualism that had plagued Anglicanism during the 19th century. His writings include a study of Cyprian (published posthumously in 1897), the martyred 3rd-century bishop of Carthage.
