Elena Cornaro, in full Elena Lucrezia Cornaro Piscopia,  (born June 5, 1646, Venice [Italy]—died July 26, 1684, Padua), Italian savant who was the first woman to receive a degree from a university.
Cornaro’s father, Giovanni Battista Cornaro Piscopia, was a nobleman. Her mother, Zanetta Boni, was a peasant and was not married to Giovanni (by whom she had four other children) at the time of Elena’s birth. When Elena was seven, a friend of her family, the priest Giovanni Fabris, encouraged her father to begin lessons for her in Greek and Latin. She later became fluent in French, Spanish, and Hebrew, and she also studied mathematics, astronomy, philosophy, music, and theology. In 1669 she translated from Spanish into Italian Colloquio di Cristo nostro Redentore all’anima devota (“Dialogue between Christ Our Redeemer and a Devoted Soul”), a book by the Carthusian monk Giovanni Laspergio. The fame of her intellectual accomplishment spread, and she was invited to join several scholarly societies. In 1670 she became president of the Venetian society Accademia dei Pacifici (the Academy of the Peaceful).
In 1672—upon the recommendation of Carlo Rinaldini, her tutor in philosophy—Felice Rotondi, her tutor in theology, petitioned the University of Padua to grant Cornaro the degree of doctor of theology. Gregorio Cardinal Barbarigo, the bishop of Padua, assumed that Cornaro was seeking a degree in philosophy and supported her pursuit of a degree. However, when he discovered that Cornaro sought a degree in theology, he refused to grant her the degree because she was a woman. He did allow her to pursue a doctor of philosophy degree, however. On June 25, 1678, because of the immense interest in Cornaro, her defense was held in the cathedral of Padua rather than at the university. Cornaro’s defense, which consisted of explaining two passages chosen at random from Aristotle, was successful, and she was presented with the traditional laurel wreath, ermine cape, gold ring, and book of philosophy.
Cornaro had become an oblate (lay monastic) in the Benedictine order in 1665, and after receiving her degree she divided her time between further studies and ministering to the poor. She was in poor health for much of her life, and the extensive charitable work, the rigorous penances she performed, and her extreme dedication to her studies took their toll on her weak physical condition. Her death in 1684 was marked by memorial services in Venice, Padua, Siena, and Rome.
