Ellen Gould Harmon White, née Ellen Gould Harmon,  (born Nov. 26, 1827, Gorham, Maine, U.S.—died July 16, 1915, St. Helena, Calif.), American religious leader who was one of the founders of the Seventh-day Adventist Church and whose prophecies and other guidance were central to that denomination’s early growth.
Ellen Harmon sustained a serious injury at the age of nine that left her facially disfigured and for some time unable to attend school. Her education ended with a brief period at the Westbrook Seminary and Female College of Portland, Maine, in 1839. The following year she underwent a religious experience at a Methodist camp meeting, and she was baptized in 1842. A short time later she followed her family in becoming a follower of William Miller, the Adventist prophet who was preaching the imminent return of Christ (fixed for October 22, 1844). Undismayed later by the apparent failure of Miller’s prophecy, Harmon retained the Adventist view.
In December 1844 Harmon experienced the first of what she would later claim were some 2,000 visions. She began an itinerant ministry to discouraged Millerites, bringing news of the future and messages of encouragement gained from her visions. In 1846 she married the Reverend James S. White, another Adventist minister. They traveled together through New England and gradually moved farther afield, spreading the Adventist faith. She published A Sketch of the Christian Experience and Views of Ellen G. White (1851) and then her Supplement to the Experience and Views of Ellen G. White (1854).
After the Whites moved to Battle Creek, Michigan, in 1855, that city became the centre of Adventist activity. Representatives of scattered Adventist congregations met there in 1860 and adopted the name Seventh-day Adventists. Three years later the church adopted a formal denominational structure. Throughout the work of organization and the establishment of an Adventist orthodoxy, Ellen White’s visions were a guiding force. The scriptural interpretations that came to her were promptly accepted. Much of the church program thus revealed was published in her Testimonies for the Church, which eventually grew from 16 pages in its 1855 edition to fill nine volumes. Her views on health, especially her opposition to the use of coffee, tea, meat, and drugs, were incorporated into Seventh-day Adventist practice.
In 1866 White helped establish the Western Health Reform Institute in Battle Creek; later, as the Battle Creek Sanitarium, it became famous for its work in the field of diet and health food and was the model for many other sanatoriums. In 1874 White helped found Battle Creek College, an Adventist institution of which her husband was named president.
Under her influence the Adventist movement was actively abolitionist before the Civil War, and during the 1860s and ’70s White was a prominent temperance advocate. In 1880 she and her husband published Life Sketchesof Elder James White and His Wife, Mrs. Ellen G. White. After her husband’s death the following year, White lived for four years in Healdsburg, California. She traveled and lectured in Europe (1885–88) and was an Adventist missionary in Australia (1891–1900), where she established a school that later became Avondale College. After her return to the United States, White led a movement to remove Adventist institutions from Battle Creek. The college moved to Berrien Springs, Michigan, as Emmanuel Missionary College (from 1960 Andrews University), and in 1903 the church headquarters and newspaper relocated to Takoma Park, Maryland. From that year White lived mainly in St. Helena, California.
