Emil Brunner, in full Heinrich Emil Brunner,  (born December 23, 1889, Winterthur, Switzerland—died April 6, 1966, Zürich), Swiss theologian in the Reformed tradition who helped direct the course of modern Protestant theology.
Ordained in the Swiss Reformed Church, Brunner served as a pastor at Obstalden, Switzerland, from 1916 to 1924. In 1924 he became professor of systematic and practical theology at the University of Zürich, where he taught continuously, except for extensive lecture tours in the United States and in Asia. He was concerned with ecumenism from the 1930s and was a delegate to the first assembly of the World Council of Churches (Amsterdam, 1948). In retirement he was professor of Christian philosophy at the International Christian University of Tokyo (1953–55).
Among Brunner’s earlier works are The Mediator (1927), a study of Christology; The Theology of Crisis (1929), a repudiation of post-World War I European culture; and The Divine Imperative (1932), on Christian ethics. With Natur und Gnade: Zum Gespräch mit Karl Barth (“Nature and Grace: A Conversation with Karl Barth”; published in 1946 as Natural Theology), Brunner broke with Barth’s theology by asserting that man has borne the “image of God” since creation and has never wholly lost it, a view that provoked Barth’s vigorous disagreement. A decisive shift occurred in Brunner’s theology with The Divine-Human Encounter (1937) and Man in Revolt (1937), in which he reflected the position of Martin Buber in I and Thou (1923) that a fundamental difference exists between knowledge of impersonal objects and knowledge of other persons. Brunner saw this doctrine as a key to the biblical conception of revelation and further developed his views in several books, among them Revelation and Reason (1941), Dogmatics, 3 vol. (1946–60), Justice and the Social Order (1945), and Christianity and Civilization (1948–49).
A leading exponent of neoorthodoxy, the American term for the Protestant “theology of crisis” arising from the despair of post-World War I culture, Brunner sought to reaffirm the central themes of the Protestant Reformation against the liberal theologies of the late 19th century. While seeking a continuing dialogue between theology and humanistic culture, Brunner considered idealism, scientism, evolutionism, and liberalism as indicative of human pride and self-deification, the conditions that he regarded as at the root of all evil in the modern world. Brunner also felt that a common ground had to be found, which he saw in human reason or natural theology, in order to make Christianity attractive to modern unbelievers.
