Evagrius Ponticus,  (born 346, Ibora, Pontus—died 399, Cellia, Nitrian Desert, Egypt), Christian mystic and writer whose development of a theology of contemplative prayer and asceticism laid the groundwork for a tradition of spiritual life in both Eastern and Western churches.
Evagrius was a noted preacher and theological consultant in Constantinople when a personal spiritual crisis prompted him to leave for Jerusalem to become a monk. He soon withdrew into the Egyptian desert, where he spent the rest of his life evolving his mystical theology in theory and practice while he supported himself by copying manuscripts.
Historical research since 1920 has suggested that Evagrius produced the first major philosophical–theological exposition of monastic mysticism by developing the Neoplatonic biblical theology of the 3rd-century Christian teacher Origen. Evagrius’ Gnostic Centuries emphasized that the essential function of spiritual beings is to experience union with God, the transcendent One, expressed as pure light. Because of an original, alienating fault, the intellectual world, notably man, can find reconciliation only by an ascetical, self-mortifying process whereby the spirit regains its rule over matter and realizes its capacity to experience the divine simplicity. Evagrius’ other written works, only fragments of which are extant in the original Greek, survive mainly in Syriac and Latin translations. They include the Monachikos (“The Monastic Life”), a treatise, “On the Eight Principal Vices,” and several biblical commentaries.
His spiritual doctrine affected Christianity in the Greek tradition through the 6th-century Neoplatonic philosopher-mystic Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, the 7th-century mystical theologian Maximus the Confessor, and the 14th-century Byzantine monastic centre at Mt. Athos in northeastern Greece. In the Latin culture, he inspired the 5th-century monastic writer John Cassian. Western Christianity, however, has long suspected Evagrius of heresy. His teachings were denounced by the second general Council of Constantinople in 553 as permeated with Origenist errors, viz., subordinationist views on the Trinity, and the doctrine of the preexistence of souls. Nevertheless, he is considered the great doctor of mystical theology among the Syrians and other Eastern Christians, and his philosophy is sometimes seen as the Christian analogue of Zen Buddhism. 
