Feisal Abdul Rauf,  (born October 23, 1948, Kuwait), Kuwaiti-born Egyptian American imam, author, and interfaith leader. He led an effort to build an Islamic community centre in Manhattan, New York, a few blocks from the World Trade Center site—one of the targets of the September 11 attacks by Islamic extremists in 2001—which sparked a national debate over religious tolerance and sensitivity.
Abdul Rauf was born in Kuwait, the son of an Egyptian Islamic scholar who served in a series of teaching and administrative posts at universities and Islamic institutions throughout the world. Abdul Rauf’s devout upbringing, travels, and early exposure to theological debate did much to shape his later views on Islam and religious pluralism. Educated in the United Kingdom, Egypt, and Malaysia, Abdul Rauf moved to New York City with his family in 1965. He earned a bachelor’s degree in physics at Columbia University in 1969 and a master’s degree in plasma physics from the Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey, in 1972. Still deeply interested in religion, in 1983 he became the imam of Masjid al-Farah, a progressive Sufi mosque in Manhattan. Hoping to promote interfaith dialogue about Islam in the United States, he founded the American Society for Muslim Advancement in 1997. Following the September 11 attacks, Abdul Rauf wrote a book on the relationship between Islam and the West, provided cultural training to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and traveled to Muslim countries on outreach tours funded by the U.S. State Department during the administrations of Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama.
In July 2009 a group of Muslim investors purchased a vacant building two blocks from the site of the World Trade Center and began to develop plans for an Islamic community centre to be headed by Abdul Rauf. Developers said that the 13- to 15-story community centre, to be called Park51, would house a Muslim prayer area, athletic facilities, a day-care centre, and a memorial to the September 11 attacks that would serve as a nondenominational space for prayer and meditation. Abdul Rauf emphasized that the centre would be open to non-Muslims as well as Muslims and that it would host interfaith programs and events.
Plans for the community centre were praised as a symbol of religious tolerance by some, including New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, but also met with significant opposition, led by conservative activists and politicians who argued that placing the Islamic community centre near the site of the World Trade Center attack would offend the victims’ memory and would signify a victory for Islamic extremists. Families of the victims were split on the proposed centre. At the proposed site, demonstrations for and against the Islamic community centre peaked in the summer of 2010, drawing heavy national media coverage to the controversy. Abdul Rauf defended the community centre, saying that if the project were moved to a different location, it would strengthen Islamic extremist groups by seeming to confirm their claims that Muslims are subject to discrimination in the United States.
In 2011 Abdul Rauf was dismissed as head of Park51 by the community centre’s developer, Sherif el-Gamal, after disagreements between the two over the project’s name and size and the extent of its interfaith outreach programs.
