Fernando Lugo, in full Fernando Armindo Lugo Méndez,  (born May 30, 1951, San Pedro del Paraná, Paraguay), former Roman Catholic bishop who became president of Paraguay (2008–12). His inauguration ended the conservative Colorado Party’s 62-year hold on power.
Lugo was the nephew of Epifanio Méndez Fleitas, a Colorado Party leader who was forced into exile in 1956, during Gen. Alfredo Stroessner’s 35-year dictatorship (1954–89). After briefly working as a primary-school teacher, in 1970 Lugo began a novitiate with the Divine Word Missionaries. In 1977 he earned a degree in religious studies from the Catholic University in Asunción and was ordained a priest. He worked the following five years in Ecuador’s Andean region under the bishop of Riobamba, Leonidas Proaño, a leading South American liberation theologist. After a brief return to Paraguay, Lugo was sent to Rome in 1983 for further studies. He returned to Paraguay in 1987, and in 1992 he was appointed the provincial superior, or head, of the Divine Word community there. He was consecrated bishop of San Pedro in 1994.
Lugo rose to prominence in Paraguay as the “bishop of the poor,” leading landless peasants in his economically disadvantaged rural diocese of San Pedro Apóstol de Ycuamandiyú in a campaign for agrarian reform against wealthy landowners backed by the Colorado Party. After 11 years Lugo resigned his bishopric in January 2005 to step more directly into politics. In Paraguay, a country infamous for corruption and in which one-third of the population lives in poverty, his reputation for honesty and his work for the poor made the priest, who invariably campaigned in sandals and open-necked shirts, enormously popular. Unions, agrarian groups, and others opposing Colorado Party rule united behind him, as did the centre-left opposition coalition Patriotic Alliance for Change (Alianza Patriótica para el Cambio; APC), which he had helped form. After Lugo defied a December 2006 canonical admonition against becoming a presidential candidate, the Vatican suspended him a divinis in January 2007, barring him from practicing as a priest. Lugo had renounced his position as bishop in December 2006, but the Vatican did not accept his resignation until July 2008.
Lugo defeated Blanca Ovelar of the Colorado Party in the country’s 2008 elections and was inaugurated in August, promising to push for land redistribution, political and economic transparency, and new social programs to help the poor. Venezuelan Pres. Hugo Chávez, a close ally, joined Lugo at the ceremony. Lugo has called for renegotiating Paraguay’s share of revenues from Brazil for power from the huge Itaipú hydroelectric dam and for reforming the country’s military.
In 2009 Lugo announced that, while still recognized as a bishop by the Vatican, he had fathered a son. His admission came on the heels of a paternity suit filed by the child’s mother. His tainted reputation was slightly restored that July, however, when months of negotiation with Brazil over the Itaipú Dam resulted in an agreement benefiting Paraguay. In 2010 Lugo’s relationship with Chávez and his support for Venezuela’s ascent into Mercosur prompted strong opposition from Vice Pres. Federico Franco, who previously had been an important ally in the coalition that Lugo led into power in 2008. Lugo’s attempts at land redistribution were rejected by large landowners and blocked by his opponents in the legislature. Many in Congress were quick to blame Lugo when a clash between peasant farmers and police who were evicting them from land in eastern Paraguay resulted in 17 deaths on June 15, 2012. On June 21 Lugo was impeached by the Chamber of Deputies and the next day convicted of incompetence by the Senate (39–4) and removed from office. He was replaced by Franco. After initially acquiescing to his removal, Lugo soon fought back, claiming that he had been ousted by a “parliamentary coup.” The governments of several South American countries, including Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay, and Venezuela, were quick to question Lugo’s removal.
Lugo remained involved in politics, and in 2013 he was elected to the Senate.
