Gustavo Gutiérrez,   (born June 8, 1928, Lima, Peru),  Roman Catholic theologian and Dominican priest who is considered the father of liberation theology, which emphasizes a Christian duty to aid the poor and oppressed through involvement in civic and political affairs.
Ordained a priest in 1959, Gutiérrez had previously earned a degree in medicine from the National University of Peru in Lima (1950). He also studied philosophy and psychology at the Catholic University of Leuven (Louvain [Belgium]) and theology at the Catholic University of Lyon (France) and at the Gregorian University in Rome. He earned a doctorate in theology at Lyon in 1985. Gutiérrez served as parish priest in the Iglesia Cristo Redentor (Christ the Redeemer church) in Rimac, Peru, and in 1974 he founded and directed the Bartolomé de Las Casas Institute in Lima to minister to the poor. He also taught at the Pontifical University of Peru and at many colleges and universities in Europe and North America, including the University of Notre Dame in Indiana.
The author of numerous books and articles, Gutiérrez is perhaps best known for his Teología de la liberación (1971; A Theology of Liberation), the foundational text of liberation theology. In that work, Gutiérrez developed a new spirituality based on solidarity with the poor and called on the church to help change existing social and economic institutions to promote social justice. Although liberation theology had great impact, especially in Latin America, it was less welcome in Rome because of its Marxist overtones, and Pope John Paul II accordingly sought to limit its influence in the 1980s.
Gutiérrez was granted numerous honorary degrees and awards from institutions throughout the world. In 1993 he was made a member of the French Legion of Honour, in 1995 he was named to the Peruvian Academy of Language, and in 2002 he was inducted into the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Gutiérrez’s other books included El Dios de la vida (1983; The God of Life), Beber en su propio pozo: en el itinerario espiritual de un pueblo (1983; We Drink from Our Own Wells: The Spiritual Journey of a People), Hablar de Dios desde el sufrimiento del inocente: una reflexión sobre el libro de Job (1986; On Job: God-Talk and the Suffering of the Innocent), and En busca de los pobres de Jesucristo: el pensamiento de Bartolomé de Las Casas (1992; Las Casas: In Search of the Poor of Jesus Christ).
