Hans Tausen,  (born 1494, Birkende, Island of Fyn, Den.—died  Nov. 11, 1561, Ribe), religious Reformer known as “the Danish Luther” for his major role in bringing the Reformation to Denmark.
Originally a Roman Catholic, Tausen became a monk in the order of Knights Hospitalers at Antvorskov, near Slagelse, and studied and taught (1516–21) at Rostock and at Copenhagen (1521–22). At the Catholic University of Leuven (Louvain) in 1522, he encountered Flemish humanism and became a language scholar, acquiring a knowledge of both Greek and Hebrew.
The next year Tausen went to Wittenberg, where he studied under Luther. His superiors recalled him to Denmark in 1525 because of his growing sympathy with the Reformation, and at Viborg, in Jutland, he was briefly confined in his order’s priory. From his prison he preached to the people assembled outside until his prior lent him the pulpit of the church. Soon, Tausen joined with citizens of Viborg in securing a local church for services that included hymns sung in Danish rather than in Latin. The manuals for church services that he published were of great importance in creating a Reformed liturgy in Denmark. Having left his order, in 1526 he was made a Lutheran chaplain by King Frederick I.
Tausen was transferred to Copenhagen in 1529 and rapidly furthered the Reformation as well as his own reputation as a preacher. After the death of Frederick I in 1533, however, he was accused of blasphemy by Bishop Joachim Rønnow and expelled from the dioceses of Sjaelland and Skåne. The citizens then rose in arms against the bishop, who might have been murdered but for Tausen’s intervention. Bishop Rønnow rescinded his condemnation, permitting Tausen to preach in the diocese on condition that he moderate his tone. After the final triumph of the Reformation in Denmark in 1536, Tausen was made a lecturer of Hebrew at the University of Copenhagen and in 1542 became Lutheran bishop of Ribe. Among his literary works are sermons, hymns, and a translation from Hebrew to Danish (1535) of the Pentateuch, the first five books of the Old Testament.
