Henry of Ghent, French Henri de Gand, byname Doctor Solemnis (“Exalted Teacher”),  (born c. 1217, Ghent, Flanders [now in Belgium]—died  June 29, 1293, Tournai), Scholastic philosopher and theologian, one of the most illustrious teachers of his time, who was a great adversary of St. Thomas Aquinas and whose controversial writings influenced his contemporaries and followers, particularly postmedieval Platonists.
After studying at Tournai, where he became a canon in 1267, he studied theology at Paris; there, from 1276 (when he was archdeacon of Bruges) to 1292 he became famous as a lecturer. In 1278 he was archdeacon of Tournai and was a member of the commission that drafted the famous condemnation (1277) of Averroism (after the interpretation of Aristotle by the Muslim philosopher Averroës). His violent opposition (1282–90) to the mendicant orders led to his being censured in 1290 by Cardinal Benedict Caetani, later Pope Boniface VIII. Among the several councils that he attended were those of Lyon (1274), Cologne, and Compiègne, Fr.
Henry was an eclectic, neither Aristotelian nor Augustinian. He taught that matter could be created by God to exist independent of form. He denied a real distinction between essence and existence and between the soul and its faculties. A voluntarist, he regarded reason as being related to will as servant to master and declared that conscience is entirely in the will, being a choice of the will that never disagrees with right reason.
Henry has been generally neglected by historians because of the inaccessibility of his works. Significant for the development of ethical theory in the European Middle Ages, however, is the fact that the great British philosopher John Duns Scotus devoted much of his energy to answering Henry’s arguments. Despite attacks from other eminent thinkers, such as William of Ockham and Durandus of Saint-Pourçain, Henry’s writings were widely read between the 14th and 18th century. During the 16th century the Servites erroneously adopted him as their official doctor.
