Ibn ʿAqīl, in full Abū al-Wafāʾ ʿAlī ibn ʿAqīl ibn Muḥammad ibn ʿAqīl ibn Aḥmad al-Baghdādī al-Ẓafarī,  (born 1040, Baghdad [now in Iraq]—died  1119), Islamic theologian and scholar of the Ḥanbalī school, the most traditionalist of the schools of Islamic law. His thoughts and teachings represent an attempt to give a somewhat more liberal direction to Ḥanbalism.
In 1055–66 Ibn ʿAqīl received instruction in Islamic law according to the tenets of the Ḥanbalī school. During these years, however, he also became interested in liberal theological ideas that were regarded as reprehensible by his orthodox Ḥanbalī teachers. These ideas represented two diverse trends within Islamic thought—that of the Muʿtazilites, those who sought to understand and interpret religion according to the canons of logical inquiry and reason, and that of the teachings of the mystic al-Ḥallāj, especially his concept of waḥdat ash-shuhūd (unity of phenomena), a doctrine that attempted to accommodate the idea of unity (tawḥīd) of Sufism (Islamic mysticism) and the orthodox theologians’ concern with the revealed law (sharʿ).
Ibn ʿAqīl’s attraction to these ideas weakened his standing in the conservative Ḥanbalī community of Baghdad. He aroused further animosity when in 1066, at the relatively young age of 26, he attained a professorship at the important mosque of al-Manṣūr, at least partly as a result of patronage. The professional jealousy of those theologians who had been passed over, coupled with his espousal of innovative and controversial doctrines, led to Ibn ʿAqīl’s persecution. After the death of his influential patron, Abū Manṣūr ibn Yūsuf, in 1067 or 1068, he was forced to retire from his teaching position. Until 1072 he lived in partial retirement under the protection of Abū Manṣūr’s son-in-law, a wealthy Ḥanbalī merchant. The controversy over his ideas came to an end in September 1072, when he was forced to retract his beliefs publicly before a group of orthodox theologians. This retraction may have been based on expediency and was in keeping with the recognized practice of taqīyah (precautionary dissimulation).
Ibn ʿAqīl spent the rest of his life in the pursuit of scholarship. His most famous work was the Kitāb al-funūn (“Book of Sciences”), an encyclopaedia of knowledge dealing with a large variety of subjects. This work was said to have included between 200 and 800 volumes, all but one of which have been lost.
