Ignacio Ellacuría,  (born 1930, Portugalete, Spain—died November 16, 1989, San Salvador, El Salvador), Spanish-born El Salvadoran Jesuit priest, academic, philosopher, theologian, and human rights activist who was a major contributor to the development of liberation theology in Latin America.
Ellacuría joined the Jesuits at their novitiate in Loyola, Spain, at the age of 17. He was sent to the Jesuit Novitiate in El Salvador, where he was guided by the prophetic figure of Miguel Elizondo. He studied philosophy in Quito, Ecuador, and theology at Innsbruck, Austria, where the German theologian Karl Rahner had an enormous influence on him. Ellacuría was ordained a priest in 1961, and he studied under the Basque philosopher Xavier Zubiri and completed his doctorate in philosophy at the Complutense University of Madrid in 1965. In 1967 he returned to El Salvador and joined the philosophy faculty of the Universidad Centroamericana José Simeón Cañas (UCA). He became renowned for his commitment to academic excellence and attracted notice for his political activism. He founded a centre for theological reflection at the university, stressing service to the needs of the poor. Because of his activism, Ellacuría received many death threats, and UCA was subject to night raids and destruction of property by the Salvadoran army. He briefly left El Salvador after the assassination of the Jesuit priest Rutilio Grande in 1977 and again after the assassination of Archbishop Óscar Arnulfo Romero in 1980.
In 1984 he cofounded the Revista Latinoamericana de Teología (“Latin American Review of Theology”) with Jon Sobrino, another Spanish-born Jesuit theologian. In 1985 he helped to mediate the release of the daughter of Pres. José Napoleón Duarte, who had been held by leftist guerrillas. In early November 1989 he received the International Alfonso Comín Award in Barcelona from the Fundación Alfonso Comín in recognition of his human rights advocacy. Because of escalating violence in El Salvador, however, he decided to return as soon as possible, in order to help with any possible mediation between the government and the guerrillas. He and five other Jesuits were murdered by an elite army unit shortly thereafter. Among his books is Conversión de la iglesia al reino de Dios: para anunciarlo y realizarlo en la historia (1984; “Conversion from the Church to the Kingdom of God: Announce It and Carry It Out in History”).
