Isabella Thoburn,  (born March 29, 1840, near St. Clairsville, Ohio, U.S.—died Sept. 1, 1901, Lucknow, India), American missionary to India whose work in education there culminated in the founding of an important woman’s college in Lucknow.
Thoburn attended local schools and the Wheeling Female Seminary in Wheeling, Virginia (now West Virginia). In 1866, after she had taught for several years, Thoburn was invited by her brother James, a Methodist missionary in India, to join him in his work there. She delayed until 1869, when the formation of the Women’s Foreign Missionary Society of the Methodist Church enabled her to undertake missionary work under denominational auspices. Sailing from New York, she arrived in Bombay in January 1870 and made her way thence to Lucknow. She immediately began evangelizing among the women of the zenanas (harems), and in April she opened a girls’ school in the Lucknow bazaar. In 1871 the Women’s Foreign Missionary Society bought for her the seven-acre Lal Bagh estate, formerly the palace of a nobleman of the kingdom of Oudh, and she began operating a boarding school.
In 1880–82 Thoburn took a furlough in the United States, and, although she was recuperating from a bout of ill health, she traveled throughout the country lecturing on behalf of missionary work in India. After four more years as principal at Lal Bagh, she was forced by illness to take another furlough from 1886 to 1890. During that period, in 1887–88, she served as informal head of the deaconess house organized in Chicago by Lucy Rider Meyer and taught in the Chicago Training School for City, Home and Foreign Missions.
Late in 1890 she returned to Lucknow. The Lal Bagh school had become the Girls’ High School in 1887 and, following her suggestion, added a collegiate department. In 1893 a teachers’ course and a kindergarten were added. While serving as principal, Thoburn also edited the semimonthly Hindi-language Rafiq-i-Niswan (Woman’s Friend) newspaper. A charter for a full woman’s college was granted by the Indian government in 1895, and her efforts thereafter were devoted to its establishment and support. She fell ill and died in Lucknow in 1901. The Lucknow Woman’s College was renamed Isabella Thoburn College in 1903 and later became the woman’s college of Lucknow University.
