Isidore Of Kiev,   (born c. 1385, southern Greece—died  April 27, 1463, Rome), Greek Orthodox patriarch of Russia, Roman cardinal, Humanist, and theologian who strove for reunion of Greek and Latin Christendom but was forced into exile because of concerted opposition, particularly from the Byzantine and Russian Orthodox churches, and by the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Turks in 1453.
Abbot of St. Demetrius monastery in Constantinople and recognized for his cultured rhetoric, Isidore was sent abroad as envoy of the Byzantine emperor John VIII Palaeologus to arrange for a council to unite the Eastern and Western churches. Unsuccessful, he returned to Constantinople and in 1436 was named patriarch of Kiev and of all Russia; his mission was to convince the Russian grandduke Vasily II to participate in the movement for reunion set by Pope Eugenius IV as the agenda for the general Council of Ferrara-Florence (Italy). Failing to gain Vasily II’s support, Isidore attended the council, first in Ferrara (1438), then in Florence (1439), at which he was one of six Greek spokesmen. Together with the Greek cardinal John Bessarion, he drew up the document of unification that was proclaimed on July 5, 1439; soon after, he was made a Roman cardinal, thenceforth referred to as “the Ruthenian (Ukrainian Roman Catholic) cardinal.” Commissioned papal legate by Eugenius IV, Isidore successfully implemented the decree of union at Kiev, but, by energetically attempting to introduce it in Moscow, he encountered the hostility of Vasily II and the Russian Church. He was convicted by an ecclesiastical court of apostasy to the Orthodox faith and imprisoned but escaped on Easter 1444 and received sanctuary from King Ladislas of Hungary-Poland. From Siena, Isidore was dispatched by Pope Nicholas V to Constantinople and in December 1452, on the eve of the city’s fall to the Turks, solemnly announced to the hard-pressed Byzantines in the basilica of Hagia Sophia (“Holy Wisdom”) the union of the Greek and Latin churches. Although the court and hierarchy were agreeable, the people rejected relations with the papacy. Isidore and his staff then joined in the futile defense of Constantinople. Wounded, he escaped capture by fleeing to Crete. Returning to Rome in 1454, he wrote of the traumatic experience of Constantinople’s collapse in his Epistula lugubris (“The Mournful Letter”). After resigning his other ecclesiastical offices in 1459, he received the honorary title Greek Patriarch of Constantinople from Pope Pius II, at whose election he assisted.
