Jean-François-Paul de Gondi, cardinal de Retz,  (born September 1613, Montmirail, France—died August 24, 1679, Paris), one of the leaders of the aristocratic rebellion known as the Fronde (1648–53), whose memoirs remain a classic of 17th-century French literature.
Of Florentine origin, the family into which Gondi was born had risen to prominence in the French court in the 16th century. Destined by his family for an ecclesiastical career, he received his early education under the Jesuits and completed his theological studies at the Sorbonne in 1638. While still a student, he sympathized with the opposition to Cardinal de Richelieu, chief minister of Louis XIII from 1624 to 1642, who sought to weaken the power of the nobility. In 1643 Gondi was ordained a priest and was appointed coadjutor (acting deputy and successor-designate) to his uncle, Jean-François de Gondi, who was the archbishop of Paris.
Gondi received the opportunity to play a major political role with the outbreak of the Fronde, a rebellion against the government of Anne of Austria (who was regent for her son, Louis XIV) and her chief minister, the Italian-born Cardinal Mazarin. Throughout the Fronde, Gondi worked primarily to advance his own interests, shifting his allegiance between the rebels and the government. During an interlude in the civil war he was persuaded to support the government’s arrest of the powerful Prince de Condé in January 1650. But, reversing his position and that of his followers, he helped obtain the release of Condé and the temporary exile of Mazarin (February 1651). In an attempt to win his support, Anne nominated Gondi to the cardinalate on September 22, 1651. His nomination was accepted by Pope Innocent X on February 19, 1652, and from that time Gondi styled himself Cardinal de Retz. But his political maneuvering cost him his popularity in Paris, while the government mistrusted him and waited for revenge.
With the government victorious over the rebels, Retz was arrested on December 19, 1652, and taken to the prison at Vincennes. Upon his uncle’s death in March 1654, Retz was immediately appointed archbishop of Paris but was pressured to resign this office a few days later. Pope Innocent, however, refused to accept Retz’s resignation, and Retz, who had escaped from prison in August 1654, waged a battle for control of the diocese from exile. After Mazarin’s death in 1661, Retz returned to France and in February 1662 agreed to resign the archbishopric of Paris in return for the abbacy of Saint-Denis and a substantial income.
Unable to gain favour with King Louis XIV, Retz lived away from court, on his estates or in his French abbeys. Claiming a religious conversion, he lived his last years in penance.
Retz’s Mémoires, written during his retirement, is an account of his life to 1655 and contains a description of his role in the events of the Fronde, portraits of contemporaries, and maxims drawn from his experiences.
