Jean Vanier,  (born September 10, 1928, Geneva, Switzerland—died May 7, 2019, Paris, France), Swiss-born social activist, theologian, and philosopher who was involved in efforts to provide congenial living communities for the intellectually disabled. He was the recipient of the 2015 Templeton Prize.
Vanier spent part of his childhood in Canada, which his father, Georges, served as a Canadian military officer and a diplomat and later as governor-general. Vanier also lived in London and Paris. In 1942 he entered the Britannia Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, England. He served in the Royal Navy throughout World War II, but in 1949 he transferred to the Canadian navy. After Vanier resigned (1950) his naval commission, he went to Paris to pursue university studies, earning a Ph.D. in philosophy (1962) from the Institut Catholique de Paris. His 2001 book, Made for Happiness: Discovering the Meaning of Life with Aristotle, was based on his doctoral dissertation on the concept of happiness in Aristotle’s Ethics. Vanier taught philosophy for a term at the University of Toronto.
While in France, Vanier encountered L’Eau Vive, a spiritual and theological centre founded in the village of Soisy-sur-Seine by Dominican priest Thomas Philippe. Vanier joined Philippe in the village of Trosly-Breuil when Philippe was posted there. There, in 1964, Vanier founded L’Arche (“the Ark” or “the Arch”), a small home that he shared with two mentally disabled men. Thereafter L’Arche communities, which included both intellectually disabled and nondisabled individuals, were started in 34 other countries. In 1971 Vanier and special-needs teacher Marie-Hélène Mathieu founded Faith and Light, a movement that grew into a network of hundreds of communities that brought together people with intellectual disabilities and their families and friends for a monthly meeting. Once every 10 years Faith and Light led pilgrimages to the town of Lourdes or to Rome. In 1988 Pope John Paul II invited Vanier to participate in the Synod of the Laity in Rome. Vanier was the author of numerous books on philosophy, theology, and intellectual disability.
In 2015 Vanier received the Templeton Prize “for his innovative discovery of the central role of vulnerable people in the creation of a more just, inclusive and humane society.” The honour, which included a nearly $1.7 million monetary award, was bestowed on a “living person who has made exceptional contributions to affirming life’s spiritual dimension.”
