Karl Barth,  (born May 10, 1886, Basel, Switzerland—died December 9/10, 1968, Basel), Swiss Protestant theologian, probably the most influential of the 20th century. Closely supported by his lifelong friend and colleague, the theologian Eduard Thurneysen, he initiated a radical change in Protestant thought, stressing the “wholly otherness of God” over the anthropocentrism of 19th-century liberal theology. Barth recovered the centrality of the doctrine of the Trinity within the dynamic and rational structure of Christian dogmatics; of particular importance was his reappropriation of the Christology of the ancient church. His vigorous opposition to German National Socialism led to his suspension as professor of theology at the University of Bonn. Subsequently, at Basel, he continued work on his monumental Church Dogmatics (completing four volumes) and delivered more than 500 sermons.
Barth was born in Basel, the son of Fritz Barth, a professor of New Testament and early church history at Bern, and Anna Sartorius. He studied at the universities of Bern, Berlin, Tübingen, and Marburg. At Berlin he attended the liberal theologian Adolf von Harnack’s seminar, and at Marburg he came under the influence of Wilhelm Herrmann and became deeply interested in the thought of the early 19th-century German theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher and in the nature of scientific method. After serving a curacy in Geneva from 1909 to 1911, he was appointed to the working-class parish of Safenwil, in Aargau canton. In 1913 he married Nelly Hoffman, a talented violinist; they had one daughter and four sons.
The 10 years Barth spent at Safenwil as a minister of the Gospel were the formative period of his life. Deeply shocked by the disaster that had overtaken Europe in World War I and disillusioned by the collapse of the ethic of religious idealism, he questioned the liberal theology of his German teachers and its roots in the rationalist, historicist, and dualist thought that stemmed from the Enlightenment. Through study of the teaching of St. Paul in the Epistle to the Romans, he struggled to clarify the relation between justification and social righteousness, which governed all he had to say in later life about the relation of the Gospel to the power of the state and the oppression of the poor. Particularly important during this period were his visits to Bad Boll, where he met the Moravian preacher Christoph Blumhardt and gained an overwhelming conviction about the victorious reality of Christ’s resurrection, which ever afterward constituted for him both the starting point and the bedrock of his theology. His understanding of divine revelation was radically changed with the realization that the risen Christ meets and speaks to people in the Biblical revelation, for God himself incarnate in Jesus Christ is the content of his revelation. This resulted in a transformation of his interpretation and exposition of the Scriptures. Out of this experience came a series of passionate addresses, sermons, and popular expositions of the faith, in which he called for a return to the message of the Bible and to the theology of the Reformation. Some of these were later collected under the title Das Wort Gottes und die Theologie (1924; The Word of God and the Word of Man).
His first major work, Der Römerbrief (1919; The Epistle to the Romans), established his position as a notable theologian with a new and arresting message about the sheer Godness of God and the unlimited range of his grace. Barth’s style was vividly lit up by brilliant similes and turns of phrase and by irrepressible humour. The first of six heavily revised editions followed in 1922. The critical and explosive nature of his theology came to be known as “dialectical theology” or “the theology of crisis”; it initiated a trend toward neoorthodoxy in Protestant theology.
On the basis of this publication, Barth in 1921 was appointed professor of Reformed theology at the University of Göttingen; he was later appointed to professorial chairs at Münster (1925) and Bonn (1930). In Göttingen he began an exhaustive study of the great Protestant scholastic theologians as well as the Church Fathers as the basis for his lectures on instruction in the Christian religion. While at Münster he gave a course of lectures on Die protestantische Theologie im 19. Jahrhundert (Protestant Theology in the Nineteenth Century), which he was to enlarge and revise at Bonn but was not able to publish until 1947. It was also at Münster that he wrote his first attempt at dogmatics, Die Lehre vom Worte Gottes; Prolegomena zur christlichen Dogmatik (1927; The Doctrine of the Word of God: Prolegomena to Church Dogmatics), in which his characteristic account of the Word of God, divine revelation, and the Trinity, Incarnation, and the Holy Spirit were clearly adumbrated. However, his engagement with epistemological issues made him dissatisfied with what he had done, so that, when he moved to Bonn, he rethought the problem of theological method in critical discussion with the philosopher of science Heinrich Scholz. It was in this connection that he produced his celebrated study of St. Anselm, Fides quaerens intellectum (1931; Faith in Search of Understanding).
In the following year there appeared the first part of his massive Church Dogmatics. During his years in Germany, Barth also wrote several small commentaries, expositions of the Apostles’ Creed, and the Heidelberg and Geneva catechisms, together with a series of essays directed toward the renewal of theology, such as Die Theologie und die Kirche (1928; Theology and Church) and Offenbarung, Kirche, Theologie (1934; God in Action).
In 1934 he published Nein! Antwort an Emil Brunner (Eng. trans. “No!” in Natural Theology [1946]), a response to Emil Brunner’s essay “Nature and Grace.” In his response, Barth traced the religious syncretism and support of anti-Semitism of the “German Christians” to natural theology and the perversion of historic Christianity. This brought him into conflict with those who wanted to bring theology into line with the new ideology of National Socialism. With the accession of Adolf Hitler to power in 1933, Barth became deeply involved in the church struggle. He was one of the founders of the so-called Confessing Church, which reacted vigorously and indignantly against the attempt to set up a “German Christian” church supported by the Nazi government. The famous Barmen Declaration of 1934 (see Barmen, Synod of), largely based on a draft that Barth had prepared, expressed his conviction that the only way to offer effective resistance to the secularizing and paganizing of the church in Nazi Germany was to hold fast to true Christian doctrine. Although a Swiss citizen, Barth was not immune from persecution; his refusal to take the oath of allegiance to Hitler—as was required of all professors—cost him his chair in Bonn in 1935. He was quickly offered the chair of theology in his native Basel, however. From that date until the end of the war, he continued to champion the cause of the Confessing Church, of the Jews, and of oppressed people generally.
