Kaufmann Kohler,  (born May 10, 1843, Fürth, Bavaria [Germany]—died  Jan. 28, 1926, New York, N.Y., U.S.), German-American rabbi, one of the most influential theologians of Reform Judaism in the United States.
Although his upbringing and early schooling were Orthodox, Kohler was strongly affected by the teachings of Abraham Geiger, one of the most prominent German leaders of Reform, the branch of Judaism that takes a broad, liberal attitude toward ritual and custom. Kohler’s quest for the reconciliation of traditional faith with modern knowledge is reflected in his doctoral dissertation, Der Segen Jacobs (1867; “Jacob’s Blessing”), on the story of Jacob found in chapter 49 of the Book of Genesis. The radicalism of this thesis, one of the earliest examples of the higher criticism of the Bible (analyzing Scripture in light of modern knowledge), excluded Kohler from the Jewish pulpit in Germany. He emigrated to the United States and was welcomed by the eminent Reform rabbi David Einhorn, whose daughter he married. He then became rabbi of Reform congregations in Detroit (1869–71), Chicago (1871–79), and, finally, New York City (1879–1903).
In 1885 Kohler convened the Pittsburgh rabbinical conference, which adopted a platform drafted by him. This platform, setting forth Reform positions on such topics as the idea of God, the Jewish mission, and social justice, remains the classic expression of Reform principles and is a landmark in the history of American Judaism.
From 1901 to 1906 Kohler served as a department editor of the monumental Jewish Encyclopedia, to which he contributed some 300 articles, including the principal ones on theological subjects. In 1903 he became president of the Hebrew Union College (now Hebrew Union College–Jewish Institute of Religion) in Cincinnati, Ohio, a position he retained until 1921. It was during this period that he wrote his most profound work, Jewish Theology Systematically and Historically Considered (1918). Prior to Kohler’s work, the philosophical literature of the Middle Ages and the rabbinical writings were the only available materials to serve the needs of the student. Kohler’s book methodically and succinctly sets forth the teachings of Jewish theology. Although Reform principles are promulgated, Orthodox and Conservative concepts are also sympathetically treated.
A posthumous work, The Origins of the Synagogue and the Church (1929), concerns the relationship of the Jews and the early Christians and speculates that Jesus and John the Baptist were Essenes—members of a Jewish sect that believed that the messianic era was imminent.
