Macarius the Egyptian, also called Macarius the Great,  (born  300 ce, Upper Egypt—died  390 ce, Scete Desert, Egypt; feast day January 15), monk and ascetic who, as one of the Desert Fathers, advanced the ideal of monasticism in Egypt and influenced its development throughout Christendom. A written tradition of mystical theology under his name is considered a classic of its kind.
About the age of 30 Macarius retired to the desert of Scete, where for 60 years he lived as a hermit among the scattered settlements of other solitaries. He won the confidence of numerous followers who, because of his unusual judgment and discernment, called him “the aged youth.”
He was ordained priest c. 340 after gaining a reputation for extraordinary powers of prophecy and healing. In his priestly function of presiding at the monks’ worship, Macarius also acquired fame for his eloquent spiritual conferences and instructions. Contemporary commentators referred to his proficiency in asceticism and contemplative experience, rivaling in influence the monastic patriarch of the East, Saint Anthony of Egypt.
About 374 Bishop Lucius of Alexandria banished Macarius to an island in the Nile for his determined opposition to Arianism, the heretical doctrine holding that Christ was essentially a composite of created natures, human and spiritual (demigod). He returned from exile and remained in the desert until his death.
The only literary work ascribed to Macarius is a letter, To the Friends of God, addressed to younger monks. His spiritual doctrine is not the cultivated speculative thought circulated by the eminent 3rd-century theologian Origen of Alexandria, but, as with the doctrine of the monk Anthony, it is a learning derived from primitive monasticism’s “book of nature.” The essence of his spiritual theology is the doctrine (with Neoplatonic traces) of the mystical development of the soul that has been formed in the image of God. By physical and intellectual labour, bodily discipline, and meditation, the spirit can serve God and find tranquillity through an inner experience of the divine presence in the form of a vision of light.
A body of literature incorrectly ascribed to Macarius alone is found in later manuscripts. The most popular of these “Macarian writings” is a collection of 50 Spiritual Homilies. They possibly were recorded in expanded form by a monastic colleague and attributed to Macarius after his death.
The Macarian literature appealed to certain Lutheran devotional writers, such as Johann Arndt in the 16th century and Arnold Gottfried in the early 18th century. John Wesley, the 18th-century founder of the Methodist Church, published an English version of 22 of the Spiritual Homilies, which influenced his hymn writing.
The Macarian literature is contained in Patrologia Graeca (ed., J.-P. Migne; vol. 34, 1857–66). Pseudo-Macarius, The Fifty Spiritual Homilies and the Great Letter (ed. and trans., George A. Maloney, S.J.; 1992), is another important collection of the Macarian writings.
