Marcus Whitman,  (born September 4, 1802, Rushville, New York, U.S.—died November 29, 1847, Waiilatpu, Oregon Territory [now in Washington, U.S.]), American physician, Congregational missionary to the Indians in the territories of present-day Washington and Oregon, and a pioneer who helped open the Pacific Northwest to settlement.
After practicing medicine in Canada and New York, Whitman in 1835 offered his services to the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions. With another missionary, Samuel Parker, he was sent to investigate the possibilities for establishing missions in Oregon country, then jointly occupied by the United States and Great Britain. The friendly interest of the Flathead, Nez Percé, and other Indians they encountered in the territory of present-day Wyoming greatly encouraged the missionaries. Parker continued west, while Whitman returned to New York for additional recruits and assistance. There he married his fiancée, Narcissa Prentiss, who was also registered with the mission board. When the Whitmans set out for the West, they were accompanied by another married couple, the Reverend Henry H. Spalding and his wife, Eliza, and two single men. The two wives were the first white women to cross the continental divide. The party reached Fort Vancouver (now Vancouver, Washington) in September.
In 1836 Whitman founded a mission among the Cayuse Indians at Waiilatpu, 6 miles (10 km) west of present-day Walla Walla. The Spaldings established a mission among the Nez Percé at Lapwai, Idaho, 125 miles (200 km) northeast of Waiilatpu. The men helped the Indians build houses, till their fields, and irrigate their crops. They also taught them how to erect mills for grinding corn and wheat. The wives established mission schools. Progress was slow, however, and the board in 1842 decided to abandon its missions at Waiilatpu and Lapwai and concentrate on those in what is now the area of Spokane, Washington.
In response, Whitman in the winter of 1842–43 made a 3,000-mile (4,830-km) journey on horseback to Boston to protest the board’s decision. After persuading mission authorities to continue support of the Waiilatpu and Lapwai missions, he went to Washington to inform federal officials of conditions in Oregon country and the possibilities for settlement. Assured of federal aid for immigration, Whitman began his return journey. En route he joined a caravan of some 1,000 immigrants that later became known as the “great migration.” It was through his determination and courage that the first wagons crossed the mountains to the Columbia River.
Although Whitman resumed his missionary work at Waiilatpu, he found the Indians apathetic. The more ceremonial form of worship conducted by Roman Catholic missionaries was attractive to the Indians, and competition for their conversion was introduced. Whitman’s task was further complicated by the influence of lawless white newcomers.
Sensing a growing coldness toward him on the part of the Cayuse, Whitman resolved to relocate his family, but, before he could do so, an epidemic of measles broke out. Both white and Indian children were afflicted, and Whitman cared for them with equal concern. Because the white children recovered and many of the Indians (lacking any degree of immunity) died, he was suspected of practicing sorcery, in order to remove the Indians to make way for white settlers. On November 29, 1847, the Indians attacked, killing 14 whites, including the Whitmans, and kidnapping 53 women and children. The Whitman Massacre directed national attention to the difficulties faced by settlers in the Far West and contributed to early passage of a bill to organize the Oregon Territory (1848). It also led directly to the Cayuse War, which did not end until 1850. Whitman Mission National Historic Site, near Walla Walla, commemorates these pioneers.
