Martin Niemöller, in full Martin Friedrich Gustav Emil Niemöller,  (born January 14, 1892, Lippstadt, Germany—died March 6, 1984, Wiesbaden, West Germany), prominent German anti-Nazi theologian and pastor, founder of the Confessing Church (Bekennende Kirche) and a president of the World Council of Churches.
The son of a pastor, Niemöller was a naval officer and commander of a German U-boat in World War I before beginning theological studies at Münster. In 1931 he became a pastor in Dahlem, a fashionable suburb of Berlin. Two years later, as a protest against interference in church affairs by the Nazi Party, Niemöller founded the Pfarrernotbund (“Pastors’ Emergency League”). The group, among its other activities, helped combat rising discrimination against Christians of Jewish descent caught in the tension between a religious definition as Christian and the German racial definition of Jews based on the identity of people’s grandparents.
As founder and a leading member of the Bekennende Kirche within the larger Evangelical Church (Lutheran and Reformed) of Germany, Niemöller was influential in building opposition to Adolf Hitler’s efforts to bring the German churches under control of the Nazis and the so-called German Christians. The resistance of the Confessing Church was openly declared and solidified at its Synod of Barmen in 1934. Niemöller continued to preach throughout Germany and in 1937 was arrested by Hitler’s secret police, the Gestapo. Eventually sent to the concentration camps at Sachsenhausen and then Dachau, he was moved in 1945 to the Tirol in Austria, where Allied forces freed him at the end of World War II. He helped rebuild the Evangelical Church in Germany, becoming head of its foreign-relations office in 1945 and a member of the Council of the Church in 1948, and from 1947 until 1964 he served as president of the Hesse-Nassau regional church.
Because of his experiences in the Nazi era, Niemöller became convinced of the collective guilt of the Germans and was responsible to a large extent for the Evangelical Church’s declaration of such in 1945 with the Stuttgarter Schuldbekenntnis (“Stuttgart Confession of Guilt”). In 1961 he was elected one of the six presidents of the World Council of Churches, a position that he held until 1968.
Increasingly disillusioned with the prospects for demilitarization, both in his own country and in the world, Niemöller became a controversial pacifist. Lecturing widely, he spoke freely in favour of international reconciliation and against armaments. He stood up against the Federal Republic of Germany’s military alliance with the West, fought against the nuclear arms race, and sought contact with Eastern bloc countries. He traveled in 1952 to Moscow and in 1967 to North Vietnam. His writings include several volumes of sermons and an autobiography, Vom U-Boot zur Kanzel (1934; From U-Boat to Pulpit). In recognition of his struggle in the interest of world peace, Niemöller received the Lenin Peace Prize in 1967 and the Grand Cross of Merit, West Germany’s highest honour, in 1971.
Niemöller is perhaps best remembered for his oral admission of personal guilt and condemnation of the bystander. The exact words are in dispute; their sentiment is not:
