Mary Mills Patrick,  (born March 10, 1850, Canterbury, N.H., U.S.—died Feb. 25, 1940, Palo Alto, Calif.), American missionary and educator who oversaw the evolution of a girls’ high school into a major college for Turkish women.
Patrick graduated from the Lyons Collegiate Institute in Lyons (now part of Clinton), Iowa, in 1869. In 1871, by appointment of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, she became a teacher in a mission school in Erzurum in what is now eastern Turkey. In her four years there Patrick learned ancient and modern Armenian. In 1875 she was transferred to the American High School for Girls (also known as the Home School) in Scutari (Üsküdar), an Asiatic suburb of Constantinople (now Istanbul), and she became principal of the school in 1889. During her summers she lived in Greek villages. She thus was able to add Greek and Turkish to her repertoire of languages. After a study furlough in the United States she received a master’s degree from the University of Iowa in 1890.
In that year, after much planning and the securing of a charter from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the American High School became the American College for Girls at Constantinople, later known as Constantinople Woman’s College. Patrick served as president of the college from its opening. Her summer studies at the Universities of Heidelberg, Zürich, Berlin, Leipzig, Paris, and Oxford resulted in a Ph.D. from the University of Bern, Switzerland, in 1897. Her dissertation was published in 1899 as Sextus Empiricus and Greek Scepticism. When the college was destroyed by fire in 1905, a new site was acquired in Arnavutköyü on the European side of the Bosporus. A new charter in 1908 ended the college’s ties to the mission board, and in 1914 the new campus was occupied.
Patrick kept the school open through the Balkan Wars, the Turkish revolution, and World War I, and through those changes it evolved from a school primarily for minority Greek, Armenian, and Bulgarian Christian women into a leading centre of higher education for Turkish women. She remained president until her retirement in 1924, after which she moved back to the United States. The American College for Girls later affiliated with nearby Robert College for men.
Patrick’s books include Sappho and the Island of Lesbos (1912); The Greek Skeptics (1929); Under Five Sultans (1929), an autobiography; and A Bosporus Adventure (1934), a history of the college.
