Mary Elizabeth Wood,  (born August 22, 1861, Elba, New York, U.S.—died May 1, 1931, Wuchang, China),  American librarian and missionary, whose efforts brought numerous libraries to China and established a strong program in that country to train librarians.
Wood grew up and attended public schools in Batavia, New York, where she was later librarian of the Richmond Library (1889–99). In 1899 she traveled to Wuchang to visit a brother who was a missionary there. At his suggestion Wood prolonged her visit to take charge of an elementary English class in the small, missionary-run Boone School. By 1904, when she received formal appointment as a lay missionary, the school had grown to include a collegiate department. Wood began slowly to build a much-needed library from donations. The building ultimately opened in 1910.
On subsequent furloughs in the United States, Wood studied library science at the Pratt Institute in New York City and Simmons College in Boston. In order to extend the Boone School library’s usefulness, she established branches at several locations in Wuchang and in Hankou (Hankow), and eventually she organized a system of traveling libraries that took books in both Chinese and English to a wide area. Beginning in 1915 she helped send Chinese students to the United States for training in librarianship, and in 1920 she opened a library school at Boone College. Before the college was closed by the communist regime in 1949, the library school had graduated nearly 500 librarians, many of whom went on to advanced training in the United States.
In 1923 Wood circulated a petition among Chinese leaders asking that a portion of the $6 million still unassigned from the U.S. indemnity imposed after the Boxer Rebellion be allocated to the development of public libraries in China. In 1924 she traveled to Washington, D.C., to lobby personally for the cause. Congress passed a bill remitting funds (eventually nearly $12 million) for the development of “educational and other cultural activities” under the guidance of the China Foundation for the Promotion of Education and Culture. The foundation allotted sums for the establishment of the National Library in Beijing and for scholarships and expenses at the Boone Library School. Wood devoted her remaining time to building up a permanent endowment for the school under the control of a U.S.-based board (later known as the Mary Elizabeth Wood Foundation).
