Mother Alphonsa Lathrop, original name Rose Hawthorne,  (born May 20, 1851, Lenox, Mass., U.S.—died  July 9, 1926, Hawthorne, N.Y.), U.S. author, nun, and founder of the Servants of Relief for Incurable Cancer, a Roman Catholic congregation of nuns affiliated with the Third Order of St. Dominic and dedicated to serving victims of terminal cancer.
The daughter of the author Nathaniel Hawthorne, Rose was an infant when her family moved to Liverpool, where her father served as consul. After two years in Italy, the family went to Concord, Mass., in 1860. Eleven years later Rose married George Parsons Lathrop, who later was assistant editor of The Atlantic Monthly, Boston. Their son, Francis, born in 1876, died five years later. During that period Rose wrote short stories and verse, including a book of poems, Along the Shore (1888). Although a Unitarian of Puritan heritage, she converted to Roman Catholicism in 1891.
Legally separated from her husband, Rose trained at Memorial Hospital, New York City, so that she could help cancer patients. In the midst of a campaign to procure funds for her cause, she wrote Memories of Hawthorne (1897). She acquired a house on the city’s Lower East Side, opening it to victims of cancer. In the spring of 1899, a year after her husband’s death, she moved to larger quarters, which she named St. Rose’s Free Home for Incurable Cancer. Having joined the Dominicans, she made her vows on Dec. 8, 1900, taking the religious name Alphonsa. With the aid of her first companion, Sister M. Rose, she founded the Dominican Congregation of St. Rose of Lima, later called the Servants of Relief for Incurable Cancer. She became her order’s first superior general.
In 1901 Mother Alphonsa opened Rosary Hill Home, Hawthorne (now the motherhouse), where she directed the growth of the Servants, founding the magazine Christ’s Poor. Subsequent homes were established in New York, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, Georgia, and Minnesota. Biographies of Mother Alphonsa include K. Burton’s Sorrow Built a Bridge: A Daughter of Hawthorne (1937) and M. Joseph’s Out of Many Hearts (1961).
