Muḥammad ibn ʿAbd al-Wahhāb,  (born 1703, ʿUyaynah, Arabia [now in Saudi Arabia]—died  1792, Al-Dirʿiyyah), theologian and founder of the Wahhābī movement, which attempted a return to the principles of Islam as practiced by its early forebears (salaf).
Having completed his formal education in the holy city of Medina, in Arabia, ʿAbd al-Wahhāb lived abroad for many years. He taught for four years in Basra, Iraq, and in Baghdad he married an affluent woman whose property he inherited when she died. In 1736, in Iran, he began to teach against what he considered to be the extreme ideas of various exponents of Sufi doctrines. On returning to his native city, he wrote the Kitāb al-tawḥīd (“Book of the Oneness [of God]”), which is the main text for Wahhābī doctrines. The centrality of the tawḥīd principle to his way of thinking led adherents to characterize themselves as muwaḥḥidūn, meaning “unitarians” or “those who assert tawḥīd.”
ʿAbd al-Wahhāb’s teachings have been characterized as puritanical and traditional, representing the early era of the Islamic religion. He rejected sources of doctrine (uṣūl al-fiqh) apart from the Qurʾān and the Sunnah (traditions of Muhammad). He made a clear stand against traditions and practices not rooted in these two sources, characterizing them as innovations (bidʿah) in Islamic faith. He insisted that the original grandeur of Islam could be regained if the Islamic community would return to the principles enunciated by the Prophet Muhammad. Wahhābī doctrines, therefore, do not allow for an intermediary between the faithful and God and condemn any such practice as polytheism (shirk). The decoration of mosques, the veneration of saints, and even the smoking of tobacco were condemned.
When the preaching of these doctrines led to controversy, ʿAbd al-Wahhāb was expelled from ʿUyaynah in 1744. He then settled in Al-Dirʿiyyah, capital of Muhammad ibn Saud, a ruler of the Najd (now in Saudi Arabia) and the progenitor of the Saud dynasty.
The spread of Wahhābīsm originated from the alliance that was formed between ʿAbd al-Wahhāb and Muhammad ibn Saud, who, by initiating a campaign of conquest that was continued by his heirs, made Wahhābīsm the dominant force in Arabia from 1800.
