Myrtle Page Fillmore, original name Mary Caroline Page,  (born August 6, 1845, Pagetown, Ohio, U.S.—died October 6, 1931, Lee’s Summit, Missouri), American religious leader who, with her husband, founded Unity, a new religious movement that propounded a pragmatic healing and problem-solving faith.
Mary Caroline Page, who later took the name Myrtle, grew up in a strict Methodist home. After a year at Oberlin College (1868–69), she became a schoolteacher in Clinton, Missouri, and then in Dennison, Texas. In Dennison she met Charles Fillmore, whom she married in 1881. She suffered from incipient tuberculosis but could find no relief in orthodox medical treatment. In 1886 she turned to mental healing as described in a series of lectures by E.B. Weeks, a student of the ex-Christian Scientist Emma Curtis Hopkins. Fillmore found her health greatly improving. Her husband, skeptical at first, soon joined in her enthusiasm as he found his leg, which had been stunted and weak since a childhood accident, growing stronger. They resolved to devote themselves to evangelizing for “practical Christianity,” an active faith able to effect solutions to physical, mental, financial, and other problems.
In 1889 they began publication of a magazine called Modern Thought (after 1895 called Unity). In 1893 they began publishing a second magazine, Wee Wisdom, for children. In 1890 they organized the Society of Silent Unity, which offered the service of effective prayer on behalf of beset persons who wrote to request it. Though it was not their intention, the organizational structure came to closely resemble that of a denomination, with a training school turning out ministers and with hundreds of separate Unity “churches” throughout the Midwest and in California. A basic text, Lessons in Truth, was published in 1908 by one of their most influential converts, Harriette Emilie Cady of New York City, a former homeopathist.
Unity grew rapidly, and after World War I the Fillmores built a permanent home for the movement at Lee’s Summit. After Myrtle Fillmore’s death, Unity continued to prosper under her husband, who was succeeded in turn by their sons.
