Nāṣer-e Khusraw, in full Abū Muʿīn Nāṣer-e Khusraw al-Marvāzī al-Qubādiyānī,  (born 1004, Qubādiyān, Merv, Khorāsān [Iran]—died c. 1072/77, Yumgān, Badakhshān, Central Asia [now in Afghanistan]), poet, theologian, and religious propagandist, one of the greatest writers in Persian literature.
Nāṣer-e Khusraw came of a family of government officials who belonged to the Shīʿite branch of Islam, and he attended school for only a short while. In 1045 he went on a pilgrimage to Mecca and continued his journey to Palestine and then to Egypt, which was ruled at that time by the Fāṭimid dynasty. The Fāṭimids headed the Ismāʿīlī sect, an offshoot of Shīʿism, and they sent missionaries to propagate their beliefs throughout the Islamic world. Nāṣer-e Khusraw became such a missionary, though it is not certain whether he became an Ismāʿīlī before his trip to the Fāṭimid capital or after. He returned to his homeland in what is now Afghanistan, but his vigorous advocacy of the Ismāʿīlī ideology within Sunni territory forced him to flee to Badakhshān, where he spent the rest of his days, lamenting in his poetry that he was unable to be an active missionary.
Nāṣer-e Khusraw’s poetry is of a didactic and devotional character and consists mainly of long odes that are considered to be of high literary quality. His philosophical poetry includes the Rawshanāʾī-nāmeh (“Book of Light”). Nāṣer-e Khusraw’s most-celebrated prose work is the Safar-nāmeh (“Book of Travel”; Eng. trans. Diary of a Journey Through Syria and Palestine), a diary describing his seven-year journey. It is a valuable record of the scenes and events that he witnessed. He also wrote more than a dozen treatises expounding the doctrines of the Ismāʿīlīs, among them the Jāmiʿ al-ḥikmatayn (“Union of the Two Wisdoms”), in which he attempted to harmonize Ismāʿīlī theology and Greek philosophy. Nāṣer-e Khusraw’s literary style is straightforward and vigorous. In his verse he displays great technical virtuosity, while his prose is remarkable for the richness of its philosophical vocabulary.
