Novatian, Latin Novatianus,  (born c. 200, Rome [Italy]—died c. 258), the second antipope in papal history, in 251. He was the first Roman theologian to write in Latin and inspired the Novatian Schism—a break from the Christian church by rigorists who condemned apostasy. (His name was certainly Novatianus, not Novatus, as given by the Greeks.)
Novatian was ordained at Rome and about 250 became a leader of the Roman clergy, in whose name he wrote two letters to Bishop Cyprian of Carthage concerning the lapsi—i.e., those early Christians who renounced their faith during the persecutions. He had shared with Cyprian a moderate attitude toward apostates, but, when Cornelius was elected pope in 251, Novatian became the champion of rigorism. By then he had a high reputation as a learned theologian. While a majority favoured Cornelius as pope, a minority declared itself for Novatian, and he set himself up as antipope. His rigorist doctrine was uncompromising, and, by denying the administration of penance, he refused to admit the lapsi into the church. Novatian and his followers were excommunicated at a synod convened by Cornelius in 251.
Although Cyprian and Cornelius joined forces against the Novatianists, the schism developed into a sect that spread across the empire and lasted for several centuries. Despite opposition, Novatian managed to build his own church with his own bishops throughout Christendom. During the persecution of Christians from 251 to 253, he fled Rome. The assertion of the church historian Socrates (d. c. 445) that Novatian was martyred about 258 under the Roman emperor Valerian appears confirmed by the inscription “novatiano . . . martyri” found in a cemetery near San Lorenzo, Rome, in 1932.
Novatian’s apologetic De trinitate (“On the Trinity”), considered to be his most important work, summarizes and defends the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity against contemporary heresies. In De cibis Judaicis (“Concerning Jewish Foods”), he points out that dietary laws and other practical prohibitions of the Old Testament must be understood spiritually rather than literally. In De spectaculis (“On Spectacles”), he condemns Christians who attend public games, and, in De bono pudicitiae (“Concerning the Value of Chastity”), he praises chastity.
