Philip Schaff,   (born Jan. 1, 1819, Chur, Switz.—died  Oct. 20, 1893, New York, N.Y., U.S.), Swiss-born American ecumenical leader and theologian whose works, especially the Creeds of Christendom (1877), helped set standards in the United States for scholarship in church history.
Schaff was educated at the universities of Tübingen, Halle, and Berlin and was made a lecturer in 1842 at Berlin, where his interest in church history was aroused by the famed church historian Johann Neander. Schaff emigrated to the United States in 1844 and in the same year became professor of church history and biblical literature at the Theological Seminary of the German Reformed Church at Mercersburg, Pa. On his installation he delivered a controversial address, published as The Principle of Protestantism, in which he expressed his view that the positive values of both Roman Catholicism and Protestantism would eventually be blended in an ecumenical, evangelical Catholicism. The address provoked criticism and charges of heresy, but Schaff was exonerated by the Eastern Synod of his church in 1845.
The so-called Mercersburg Theology, formulated by Schaff and his theological colleague John W. Nevin (1803–86), implemented some of the themes and principles elucidated in his speech at Mercersburg and generated equal controversy. It resisted revivalist theology, which stressed the life of the individual, in favour of an affirmation of the institutional church. In 1864 Schaff was made secretary of the New York Sabbath Committee, which opposed the commercialization of Sunday. The following year he resigned his position at Mercersburg and moved to New York City, where in 1870 he became a professor at Union Theological Seminary and changed his church affiliation to the Presbyterian denomination.
In addition to his seven-volume History of the Christian Church (1858–92), Schaff’s works include his edition of the translation and revision of Johann Peter Lange’s Commentary (1864–80) and a revised, condensed version of Johann Jakob Herzog’s 22-volume religious encyclopaedia (published in English as The Schaff-Herzog Encyclopaedia of Religious Knowledge, 1884). Schaff participated in the preparation of the Revised Version of the Bible and in 1888 founded the American Society of Church History, which he served as its first president.
