Pierre d’Ailly,  (born 1350, Compiègne, France—died  Aug. 9, 1420, Avignon), French theologian, cardinal, and advocate of church reform whose chief aim was to heal the Great Schism of the Western church (1378–1417). He advocated the doctrine of conciliarism—the subordination of the pope to a general council—and in 1381 he suggested convoking such a council in an effort to end the schism.
D’Ailly studied at the College of Navarre of the University of Paris, where he became a doctor of theology (1380). He became master of the college in 1384 and later was made chancellor of the university and the king’s confessor and almoner (1389). He displeased the university, however, by supporting the antipope Benedict XIII, who appointed him bishop of Le Puy (1395) and then bishop of Cambrai (1397). He gradually broke with Benedict, who, with the Roman pope Boniface IX, refused to abdicate to heal the schism. D’Ailly then returned to his earlier conciliar doctrine, which steadily became more extreme.
D’Ailly played a prominent part in the Council of Pisa (1409), which declared Benedict and the new Roman pope Gregory XII deposed and elected a third, the conciliar pope Alexander V, who was succeeded the following year by John XXIII. John made d’Ailly a cardinal (1411), bishop of Orange, and his legate to Germany (1413). The schism nevertheless persisted, there being now three popes instead of two, and d’Ailly favoured calling a new general council, which was convened at Constance (1414–18). He was influential in the decisions of the Constance council, which called for the abdication of John XXIII, condemned the Hussites (heretical followers of the Bohemian reformer Jan Hus), supported conciliarism, and accepted a compromise on the roles of the council and the cardinals in order to elect a new pope, Martin V (November 1417). The possibility that d’Ailly might be elected pope was ruled out by a hostile coalition of Italians, Germans, and English. He subsequently retired to Avignon, where he was legate for Martin.
D’Ailly was the author of several influential works. Although many of his views on the constitution of the church were later rejected as heretical, particularly inasmuch as they were echoed by Protestant reformers, they were adopted in his time as the only apparent way of ending the Great Schism. D’Ailly was interested in science, and he advocated calendar reforms that were later effected by Pope Gregory XIII. D’Ailly’s treatise Image of the World, which supported the idea that the East Indies could be reached by sailing west, was studied and annotated by Christopher Columbus before he made his epochal voyages.
