Pierre-Jean de Smet,  (born January 30, 1801, Termonde [now in Belgium]—died May 23, 1873, St. Louis, Missouri, U.S.), Belgian-born Jesuit missionary whose pioneering efforts to Christianize and pacify Indian tribes west of the Mississippi River made him their beloved “Black Robe” and cast him in the role of mediator in the U.S. government’s attempt to secure their lands for settlement by whites.
Arriving in the United States in July 1821, de Smet entered the Jesuit novitiate at White Marsh, Maryland. Two years later he traveled with eight companions to Missouri, where he was ordained priest in 1827. His association with the Roman Catholic St. Louis College (later University) continued throughout his lifetime.
Among the Potawatomi, de Smet founded (1838) his first mission, near present-day Council Bluffs, Iowa. In 1839 he journeyed along the Missouri River to pacify the Yankton Sioux and the Potawatomi, his first recorded negotiation in what was to become a celebrated career as peacemaker. Learning of the friendly Flathead Indians and their desire for a priest, he left in 1840 on the first of his numerous trips to their homeland in the Bitterroot mountain area in Montana Territory. For them he founded St. Mary’s Mission, near present Missoula, Montana, in 1841. Between 1842 and 1844 he toured several European countries to solicit funds. In 1844 he helped establish St. Ignatius’s Mission, about 30 miles (48 km) north of Missoula.
In midsummer of 1845, de Smet began his yearlong search for the powerful Blackfeet, who had been preying upon the Flatheads and other weaker tribes. He traveled thousands of tortuous miles to Fort Edmonton, in what is now Alberta, Canada. Although his dangerous quest was unsuccessful, the Blackfeet came to him in September 1846, seeking not Christianity but his “great medicine” to help them acquire more enemy scalps and horses.
Between sojourns among the Indians, de Smet carried out administrative duties at St. Louis College. Throughout his lifetime he traveled some 180,000 miles (290,000 km), including 16 crossings to Europe. He became a familiar figure in Washington, D.C., and other cities in the United States and abroad, seeking funds and recruits for the college and support for his missions.
As a friend of the Indians, de Smet was persuaded to go to Fort Laramie, in present-day Wyoming, to attend a government-sponsored peace council (1851), where the Plains chiefs granted white men the rights to travel along the main trails and to construct military forts. Abrogation of that treaty paved the way for future Indian uprisings.
As chaplain in the U.S. Army, a disillusioned de Smet accompanied General William S. Harney’s punitive mission to Fort Vancouver (in present-day Washington state) in 1858. He secured the release of the Coeur d’Alenes accused of killing several army officers, and he visited, for the last time, his favourite charges, the Flatheads. He found St. Mary’s Mission abandoned; most of those whom he had known were dead and their children victimized by white exploitation. The aging missionary’s talent for Indian diplomacy was again utilized by the federal government when, in 1868, he visited Sitting Bull, chief of the Hunkpapa Sioux, through whose Powder River country the United States wanted to build a road to the Montana goldfields. Although Sitting Bull refused to attend the treaty conference, he did send emissaries, who, with other tribal leaders, granted the United States rights to build its road, providing it abandoned its forts. That treaty, too, was violated, but de Smet did not live to see Sitting Bull driven into exile and the last of the nomadic Indians crowded onto reservations.
Included among de Smet’s published works are Western Missions and Missionaries: A Series of Letters (1863) and New Indian Sketches (1865).
