Prudentius, in full Aurelius Clemens Prudentius,  (born ad 348, Caesaraugusta, Spain—died  after 405), Christian Latin poet whose Psychomachia (“The Contest of the Soul”), the first completely allegorical poem in European literature, was immensely influential in the Middle Ages.
Prudentius practiced law, held two provincial governorships, and was awarded a high position by the Roman emperor Theodosius. Tiring of court life, he devoted the rest of his time, from about 392, to writing poems on Christian themes. He published a collection of his poems with an autobiographical preface in 405.
The Cathemerinon (“Book in Accordance with the Hours”) comprises 12 lyric poems on various times of the day and on church festivals. The symbolism of light and darkness occasionally develops into sustained allegory. The Peristephanon (“Crowns of Martyrdom”) contains 14 lyric poems on Spanish and Roman martyrs. Three long didactic poems give a polemical exposition of Christian doctrine in a form agreeable to those steeped in the old classical literary tradition. The Apotheosis is directed against disclaimers of the Trinity and the divinity of Christ. The Hamartigenia (“The Origin of Sin”) attacks the Gnostic dualism of Marcion and his followers. The Psychomachia describes the struggle of faith, supported by the cardinal virtues, against idolatry and the corresponding vices. The two Contra Symmachum (“Books Against Symmachus”) were written in reply to that pagan senator’s requests that the altar of Victory be restored to the Senate house. The Dittochaeon (“The Double Testament”), 49 quatrains intended as captions for the murals of a basilica in Rome, is of interest mainly to art historians.
Prudentius gave classical literary form to Christian doctrines. His poetry’s content was derived from early Christian authors, such as Tertullian and St. Ambrose, and from the Bible and the Acts of the Martyrs. Familiar to moderns is the beautiful Christmas plainsong hymn Divinum Mysterium (“Of the Father’s Love Begotten”) and the hymn for Epiphany, “Earth Has Many a Noble City,” both from the Cathemerinon. 
