Richard Mather,  (born 1596, Lowton, Lancashire, Eng.—died  April 22, 1669, Dorchester, Massachusetts Bay Colony [U.S.]), English-born American Congregational minister, father of Increase Mather and three other Puritan ministers. After joining the Great Migration of Puritans from England to New England (1635), he was elected “teacher” minister at Dorchester, Mass., and became locally celebrated as a preacher and formulator of Congregational creed and policy.
At age 15 he decided to enter the ministry and entered Brasenose College, Oxford, where he greatly enjoyed the pursuit of learning. In 1618, at the request of the people of Toxteth, he left the university to become their minister and, bowing to their wishes, was ordained by the Bishop of Chester.
As a thorough Puritan, Richard Mather had rejected all pomp and ceremony retained by the Church of England from its Catholic origins, and he preached at Toxteth without a surplice for 15 years before authorities discovered it. Suspended, and then reinstated, he returned to his dissenting practices and was tried before a court, before which he admitted without apology the matter of the surplice.
Permanently “silenced from Publick Preaching the Word,” he retired to private life and resolved to leave for America, where he would be free to preach and do good according to his own convictions. He and his wife (Katherine Holt, whom he had married in 1624) and their four sons sailed for America in June 1635 and arrived at Boston in August. His journal of the voyage is one of his best written works. His reputation had preceded him to New England, where several towns asked for his services. He chose Dorchester, Mass., a post he held until his death. Two more sons, Eleazar and Increase, were born there.
Of Richard Mather’s six sons, four became ministers. Samuel and Nathaniel, after being educated at Harvard College, returned to the British Isles in 1650, where Samuel received a degree, became a fellow at Trinity College, Dublin, and later became minister in Dublin, a post he held until his death. Nathaniel preached at Barnstaple and later succeeded Samuel in Dublin. Eleazar became minister of Northampton. Richard’s first wife, Katherine, died in 1655; a year later he married Sarah Cotton, the widow of John Cotton, an eminent Puritan minister.
Richard’s most respected work is his summation of principles as adopted at the Cambridge Synod of 1648 and considered to be the clearest statement of Puritan Congregationalism.
He is remembered for his part, with other ministers, in the literal translation of the Psalms for the Bay Psalm Book (1640), which were set to already accepted tunes; in his preface to that work, Richard excused the terrible results by explaining that the editors would not take “poeticall licence to depart from the true and proper sence of David’s words.”
On his deathbed, Richard Mather was troubled about two things: he was not back in his study, and he had not convinced his son Increase of the rightness of the so-called Half-Way Covenant, a plan that provided modified church membership for those who were unable to meet the rigorous tests for full membership.
