Rick Warren,  (born Jan. 28, 1954, San Jose, Calif., U.S.), American pastor who, as founder of Saddleback Church and as the author of The Purpose-Driven Life (2002), became one of the most influential Evangelical Christians in the United States.
Warren, a fourth-generation Southern Baptist pastor, earned a Bachelor of Arts degree from California Baptist College, a Master of Divinity from Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary in Fort Worth, Texas, and a Doctor of Ministry from Fuller Theological Seminary in Pasadena, Calif. Turning down an offer to become pastor of a 5,000-member church in Texas during his last year in seminary, he and his family arrived in California’s Saddleback Valley in January 1980 to establish a church.
On Easter Sunday, 1980, Saddleback Church held its first public service in Lake Forest, Calif., with 205 people, most of whom had never been churchgoers. Less than three decades later, the church numbered more than 20,000 members and conducted Sunday services at 6 times and 10 locations on its 120-acre (49-hectare) campus. The congregation subsequently started more than 30 daughter churches and sent nearly 5,000 members on mission projects around the world.
Warren’s 1995 book, The Purpose-Driven Church, won him renown by focusing on worship, evangelism, fellowship, discipleship, and ministry. It was translated into more than 20 languages and used in more than 120 countries by hundreds of thousands of pastors who adapted its principles to their cultural and denominational settings. His next work, The Purpose-Driven Life, encouraged individuals to ask, “What am I here for?” and told them that they were planned for God’s pleasure, formed for God’s family, created to become like Christ, shaped for serving God, and made for a mission. Within six years of its publication, the book sold some 25 million copies and spurred 40-day studies (one day for each chapter) in more than 20,000 congregations representing 80 denominations. In addition to churches, the message was popular with a wide range of readers, including members of Pres. George W. Bush’s administration and corporate officials.
In 2003 Warren stopped taking his $110,000 annual salary from Saddleback and returned the money the church had paid him for the previous 23 years. He pledged to donate 90 percent of his book royalties to the church and the three foundations he had created with his wife to promote evangelism and to fight poverty, illiteracy, and disease. His influence was noted in 2008, when he held a church forum attended by John McCain and Barack Obama, the Republican and Democratic presidential nominees, respectively. On Jan. 20, 2009, Warren delivered the invocation at the inauguration of President Obama.
