Robert Duncan, in full Robert William Duncan,  (born July 5, 1948, Fort Dix, New Jersey, U.S.), American Anglican clergyman who was the first archbishop and primate of the Anglican Church in North America, serving from 2009 to 2014.
Duncan was raised in Bordentown, New Jersey, and attended Bordentown Military Institute, where he was valedictorian of his class in 1966. He graduated with a bachelor’s degree from Trinity College in Hartford, Connecticut, in 1970 and with a Master of Divinity degree from the General Theological Seminary in New York City in 1973. He was ordained a priest in the Episcopal Church of the United States of America (ECUSA) in 1972. Between 1974 and 1978 he held assistant positions in parishes in Edinburgh and Merchantville, New Jersey, and was assistant dean of the General Theological Seminary. He was appointed Episcopal chaplain at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 1978 and rector at St. Thomas’s Episcopal Parish in Newark, Delaware, in 1982.
In 1992 Duncan moved to Pennsylvania, where he served Bishop Alden Hathaway of Pittsburgh as canon to the ordinary, the bishop’s chief administrative officer. In 1995 he was appointed bishop coadjutor, a position that prepared him to take over as diocesan bishop upon Hathaway’s retirement in 1997. A major initiative of Duncan’s episcopacy was the creation of the Anglican Relief and Development Fund, an international charity, of which he served as president.
In the first decade of the 21st century, as divisions between traditionalists and liberals emerged within the church over such theological issues as the interpretation of Scripture and the ordination of homosexuals, Duncan assumed a leadership role among traditionalists.  He served as moderator of the conservative Common Cause Partnership, a conglomeration of dissenting Anglican organizations from various countries that united in opposition to liberal trends in the ECUSA and the Anglican Church of Canada, from its founding in 2004 until 2009. In 2007 he led a movement advocating the secession of the diocese of Pittsburgh from the ECUSA, and the following year the bishops of the church voted to ban him from ministry. However, he was immediately elected a bishop of the Anglican Church of the Southern Cone, a South American church within the Anglican Communion that had reached out to theologically conservative Anglicans in North America, and his diocese subsequently left the ECUSA for that church. After the Common Cause Partnership voted to ratify the constitution and canons of the Anglican Church in North America in June 2009, Duncan became the new denomination’s first archbishop and primate, a position he held until 2014. He then served as bishop  of the Anglican Diocese of Pittsburgh before retiring in 2016.
