St. Charles Borromeo, Italian San Carlo Borromeo,  (born October 2, 1538, Arona, duchy of Milan—died November 3, 1584, Milan; canonized 1610; feast day November 4), cardinal and archbishop who was one of the most important figures of the Counter-Reformation in Italy. He is the patron saint of bishops, cardinals, seminarians, and spiritual leaders.
Borromeo received a doctorate in civil and canon law from the university of Pavia in 1559. The following year his uncle, Pope Pius IV, appointed him a cardinal and archbishop of Milan. Chief among his curial functions was heading the Consulta, a position that made him secretary of state to Pius. The pope leaned upon him heavily in directing the third convocation of the Council of Trent (1562–63). When the council closed, Borromeo served in executing its decrees and was largely instrumental in bringing out the Roman catechism in 1566. Also at this time he was actively sponsoring the conversion of Swiss Protestants. Upon the death of his uncle, Borromeo took part in the conclave that elected Pius V (1566).
Thereafter Borromeo resided at Milan, where serious administrative problems confronted him. He regularly visited his more than 1,000 widely scattered parishes, which fell under the jurisdictions of King Philip II of Spain and also of Venice, Genoa, and Novara. Seeking to apply the edicts of the Council of Trent to his own diocese, Borromeo worked diligently to eradicate the sale of indulgences, to reform monasteries, and to simplify the ornate interiors of many of the churches. He fostered clerical education to combat the threat of Protestantism and established seminaries and colleges at Milan and in the Italian cities of Inverigo and Celano. Colleges for lay students also were erected and entrusted to the Jesuits. His last undertaking was the opening of the college at Ascona, Switzerland, in 1584.
Political and other turmoils beset Borromeo. He became embroiled with the Milanese Senate and with the viceroy, Luis de Requesens y Zúñiga, as well as with the rebellious canons of Santa Maria della Scala and the order of the Humiliati (“The Humble Ones”). Borromeo nevertheless had the support of many religious congregations, including his own Oblates of St. Ambrose. In 1569 one of the Humiliati, the priest Girolamo Donato Farina, attempted to assassinate Borromeo. Despite the archbishop’s pleas for leniency, Farina and his accomplices were tortured and executed.
Borromeo’s heroic behaviour during the plague of 1576–78 won him much respect, and he gave away much of his wealth to feed the hungry and care for the sick in Milan. He was canonized by Pope Paul V in 1610.
