St. Damien of Molokai, also called Father Damien, original name Joseph de Veuster,  (born January 3, 1840, Tremelo, Belgium—died April 15, 1889, Molokai, Hawaii [U.S.]; canonized October 11, 2009; feast day May 10), Belgian priest who devoted his life to missionary work among the Hawaiian lepers and became a saint of the Roman Catholic Church.
Joseph de Veuster was born in rural Belgium, the youngest of seven children. He was educated at the college of Braine-le-Comte, and in 1858 he joined the Society of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary (Picpus Fathers) at Leuven, Belgium. In place of his brother, Father Pamphile, who had been stricken by illness, he went as a missionary to the Sandwich (Hawaiian) Islands in 1863. He reached Honolulu in 1864 and was ordained a priest the same year. Moved by the miserable condition of the lepers whom the Hawaiian government had deported to Kalaupapa on the island of Molokai, he volunteered to take charge of the settlement.
Damien, known for his compassion, provided spiritual, physical, and emotional comfort to those suffering from the debilitating and incurable disease. He served as both pastor and physician to the colony and undertook many projects to better the conditions there. He improved water and food supplies and housing and founded two orphanages, receiving help from other priests for only 6 of his 16 years on Molokai. In 1884 he contracted leprosy and refused to leave for treatment. He was originally buried at the colony, as he requested, but his remains were transferred to Leuven in 1936. His right hand was returned to his original grave in 1995.
Rumours before and after Damien’s death accused him of immorality, but he was exonerated by an investigation held shortly after his death. Scottish author Robert Louis Stevenson wrote a famously passionate 6,000-word defense of Damien after interviewing local Hawaiians during his travels in 1889. In 1965 Hawaii placed a statue of Damien in the National Statuary Hall of the U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C. He was beatified by Pope John Paul II in 1995 and canonized by Pope Benedict XVI in 2009.
