Saint Benedict Biscop, also called Benet Biscop, orBiscop Baducing,  (born c. 628, Northumbria, Eng.—died  Jan. 12, 689/690, Wearmouth, Northumbria; feast day January 12; for English Benedictines and dioceses of Liverpool and Hexham February 13), founder and first abbot of the celebrated twin monasteries of SS. Peter (at Wearmouth) and Paul (at Jarrow on Tyne, nearby); he is considered to be the father of Benedictine monasticism in England.
Of noble birth, he was a thane of King Oswiu (Oswy) of Northumbria before renouncing (653) a worldly life. In that year he went to Rome, and after a second Roman journey, he became a monk at Lérins, Fr. (666–667), where he took the name of Benedict.
Once more in Rome, he conducted (668–669) St. Theodore of Tarsus, who had just been consecrated archbishop of Canterbury, to England. In 669 Benedict was appointed abbot of SS. Peter and Paul (later St. Augustine’s), Canterbury, Kent. He made a fourth journey to Rome in 671 to receive instructions in monastic practices, and in 674 he built on land granted to him by King Ecgfrith of Northumbria the monastery of St. Peter at Wearmouth, where he introduced the Benedictine Rule. With St. Ceolfrith, prior and later his successor at Wearmouth, Benedict went to Rome c. 678, returning with an instructor in ecclesiastical music. In 682 he built the sister foundation of St. Paul at Jarrow, returning in 687 to Rome.
These repeated Roman visits enabled him to make a splendid collection of manuscripts, relics, and pictures with which he endowed his monasteries, so that by the late 7th and early 8th century they comprised one of the most flourishing centres of Christian scholarship and art in western Europe. Among his pupils was the celebrated historian the Venerable Bede. The fine library that Benedict had assembled made possible the work of Bede, whose Historia abbatum (“Lives of the Abbots”) is the best source on Benedict’s life.
From the monastic foundations laid by Benedict came a tradition of learning and artistic achievement that influenced the whole of northwestern Europe. Crippled c. 686, he remained bedridden until his death. His relics reportedly were translated in 970 to the abbey of Thorney, Isle of Ely.
