St. Blaise, Latin Blasius, also called Blazey,  (born, Sebastia, Cappadocia, Asia Minor [now Sivas, Turkey]—died c. 316, Sebastia?; Western feast day, February 3; Eastern feast day, February 11), early Christian bishop and martyr, one of the most popular medieval saints. He is venerated as the patron saint of sufferers from throat diseases and of wool combers and as one of the Fourteen Holy Helpers.
According to tradition, Blaise was of noble birth and, after being educated in the Christian faith, was made bishop of Sebastia. Although Christianity had been adopted about 300 ce as the state religion in Armenia, the Roman emperor Licinius began a persecution of the Christians, and Blaise was discovered and apprehended. While imprisoned, he miraculously cured a boy from fatally choking. After being torn with wool combers’ irons, Blaise was beheaded.
Subsequent legends, notably the apocryphal Acts of St. Blaise, claim that, before Blaise was made bishop, he was a physician possessed of wonderful healing power. Numerous miracles were attributed to him, including the cure of diseased beasts during his refuge, thus accounting for his also being the patron saint of wild animals. He was venerated as the patron of sufferers from throat diseases in the East by the 6th century and in the West by the 9th century. Blaise’s cult spread throughout Christendom from the 8th century, and many churches, such as that in Dubrovnik (a city of which he is the patron saint), Croatia, are dedicated to him.
Begun in the 16th century, the blessing of St. Blaise is a ceremony still practiced and celebrated on his feast day in many places. Two candles are consecrated and crossed before the congregation; or a wick, consecrated in oil, is touched to the throats of the faithful. This blessing may be administered by a priest, a deacon, or a lay minister. Blaise’s emblems are wax, taper, iron combs (the supposed instruments of his passion), or two crossed candles; in art he is sometimes represented in a cave with animals.
