Saint Gilbert of Sempringham,  Gilbert also spelled Guilbert,  (born c. 1083, Sempringham, Lincolnshire, Eng.—died  Feb. 4, 1189, Sempringham; canonized 1202; feast day February 4, feast day in Northampton and Nottingham February 16), English priest, prelate, and founder of the Ordo Gilbertinorum Canonicorum or Ordo Sempringensis (Order of Gilbertine Canons, or Sempringham Order), commonly called Gilbertines, the only medieval religious order of English origin.
After studies in Paris, he was ordained priest in 1123 and became parson of Sempringham. There, in 1131, he founded a home for girls, whom he spiritually guided and to whom he assigned a rule of life fashioned after that of St. Benedict of Nursia. To perform heavy work, such as cultivation, he formed a number of labourers into a society of brothers attached to the convent. Later he added lay sisters in the domestic offices and ministering clerics and priests, who, as canons regular, followed the Rule of St. Augustine of Hippo. Thus, the Gilbertines were structured with four levels of nuns, lay sisters, canons, and lay brothers.
Similar establishments grew elsewhere, and, after failing in 1147 to incorporate them in the Cistercian order, Gilbert received encouragement from Pope Eugenius III to continue as before. In the following year, the Pope approved the new order, confirming Gilbert as its first master general. The Sempringham Canons were a double community of men and women, the property belonging to the nuns and the superior being head of the establishment. There were also houses for canons only, all under the master of Sempringham. During Gilbert’s lifetime the order reached several thousand members, all associated with such institutions as orphanages, hospitals, and almshouses.
In 1165 Gilbert fell out of royal favour; he was charged by officials of King Henry II with having assisted in the escape of Thomas Becket, archbishop of Canterbury, who had taken refuge in France from the King’s wrath. Affirming ecclesiastical rights, Gilbert refused to deny the charges, and the case was eventually dropped. Subsequent revolt among his lay brothers, however, caused a scandal that was finally judged at Rome; Gilbert was vindicated of the slander he had suffered. Forced by old age (he reputedly lived 106 years) to resign his generalship, Gilbert retired to the simple rule of his order. Except for one Scottish house, the Gilbertines never spread beyond England. They were brutally dissolved (1538–40) by King Henry VIII.
