St. Gerard, also called St. Gerard of Csanád, Hungarian Szent Gellért, Italian Gerardo di Sagredo,  (born c. 980, Venice [Italy]—died August 29, 1046; feast day September 24), Venetian Benedictine monk, one of the chief Christian evangelizers of Hungary. He was a scion of the Morosini family and served as bishop of Csanád in southern Hungary. In the struggle for the throne that followed the death of Stephen I, Gerard became a martyr. He is one of the patron saints of Hungary.
In his youth Gerard studied at the Benedictine monastery at San Giorgio Maggiore near Venice. In 1015 he was chosen to be abbot of the monastery. He soon retired from this position, however, first to live in seclusion in Istria, then to make a pilgrimage to Jerusalem. During his travels he arrived in Hungary, where at the request of Stephen I he undertook the education of the king’s only son, the young prince Emeric (Imre). In 1030 the king appointed Gerard first bishop of Marosvár (Csanád), where Gerard founded a monastery, a cathedral, and a school for priests. Gerard converted many Hungarians to Christianity. It was probably in this period that Gerard wrote his Deliberatio supra hymnum trium puerorum (“Meditation on the Hymn of the Three Young Men”), the oldest surviving work of Hungarian theological literature.
When Emeric was killed in a hunting accident in 1031, Stephen appointed his nephew, Peter Orseolo, to be his successor. But when Stephen died in 1038, anarchy ensued as various parties vied for the crown. Gerard stood up against both Peter and the usurper Samuel Aba, a native Hungarian, for control of the throne. Peter reclaimed the throne, however, with the help of the Holy Roman Emperor Henry III.
During the pagan uprising of 1046, Gerard and Peter were both killed. In one common account of his death, Gerard’s carriage was pushed down the side of Kelen Hill (today Gellért [Gerard] Hill, in central Budapest on the right bank of the Danube), his body was pierced with a lance, and his head was beaten on rocks. He was revered as a martyr by his supporters. He was first buried in Pest, but his body was moved to Csanád in 1053. He was canonized in 1083 by Pope Gregory VII.
The original legendary account of Gerard’s martyrdom was written about the time of his canonization, but no record of it remains. Later accounts include the 12th-century Minor Legend and, after a number of revisions, the 14th-century Major Legend; both are valuable sources for Hungarian history. Árpád-kori legendák és intelmek (1983; “Árpád, Legends, and Admonitions”) includes translations of these retellings. Gerard’s name is immortalized by the place of his martyrdom, the Gellért Hill in Budapest.
