Saint Theophanes the Confessor,  (born c. 752—died c. 818, island of Samothrace, Greece; feast day March 12), Byzantine monk, theologian, and chronicler, a principal adversary of the heterodox in the Iconoclastic Controversy (concerning the destruction of sacred images). The annals he wrote are the leading source for 7th- and 8th-century Byzantine history.
Of a noble family related to the Macedonian dynasty, Theophanes became a monk shortly after marrying a patrician woman; he founded a monastery near Cyzicus. Advocating the early Christian tradition of using religious art to ornament worship, Theophanes, at the second general Council of Nicaea (787), argued for its continued practice in the Eastern Church. He ridiculed Iconoclastic Byzantine emperors. After being imprisoned in Constantinople (814–815) by Emperor Leo V, he was banished to the island of Samothrace, where he died. The Greek and Latin churches revere him as a saintly defender of orthodox faith; hence the title Confessor.
Between the years 810 and 814 Theophanes, at the invitation of a friend, the noted historian George Syncellus, wrote his chief work, the Chronographia (“Chronography”), a series of annals on Byzantine, Arabic, and Latin history, which is particularly valuable because it used older sources now lost and is the only comprehensive chronicle of 7th- and 8th-century Byzantium. According to modern historians, Theophanes lacked depth of scholarship, historical insight, and objectivity. His Chronographia, however, presents the sole detailed account of the Byzantine victory over the Arab besiegers of Constantinople (674–678) and describes the famous “Greek fire,” an explosive mixture that could be hurled great distances and enabled the Byzantines to destroy the Arab fleet. Theophanes also graphically recorded the disastrous defeat of Emperor Nicephorus I by the Bulgarians near Pliska, July 26, 811, in which the emperor was slain, the first Byzantine ruler to be killed by barbarians since Emperor Valens at the Battle of Adrianople in 378.
