Saint Nilus of Ancyra, also called Nilus The Ascetic,  (died c. 430, Ancyra, Galatia; feast day November 12), Greek Byzantine abbot and author of extensive ascetical literature that influenced both Eastern and Western monasticism. He also participated in the prevalent theological controversies concerning the Trinity and the person and work of Christ.
A protégé of the staunchly orthodox and reform patriarch of Constantinople, St. John Chrysostom, Nilus consistently supported him during his conflicts with ecclesiastical rivals and the imperial court. Thus influenced, Nilus composed several letters to leaders of the Goths in which he strongly refuted Arianism, the heretical doctrine that teaches the created nature of the Son and Holy Spirit in the Christian Trinity. In the letters he contended that Christ is God and man in one individual person; his mother is therefore Theotokos (God-bearer).
After leaving Constantinople, Nilus became a monk and eventually abbot of a monastery near Ancyra and soon won a reputation as a wonder-worker and spiritual counselor. He wrote a number of tracts on moral and monastic subjects, including De monastica exercitatione (“On Monastic Practice”) and De voluntaria paupertate (“On Voluntary Poverty”), which stress the essence of monastic obedience as the renunciation of the will and all resistance to the religious superior, whose duty is to guide the prayer life of the monk and put him on guard against the wiles of Satan. The greatest poverty, Nilus states, is the exclusive dedication to the service of God; consequently, the ascetic life is led more effectively in the wilderness than in the city because, among other reasons, it avoids vainglory.
Supplementing these longer studies, Nilus wrote approximately 1,000 letters, which survive in a mutilated collection, to varied recipients. His letters are written in a blunt, sometimes coarse style, which established his reputation as an early master of Christian spirituality, balancing religious insight with worldly astuteness. He seems to have coined the term “spiritual philosophy” to indicate his central theme of casting Christ as man’s effective exemplar for controlling his impulses. The object of this discipline, initiated by a divine gift or grace, is union with God. Moreover, Nilus criticized exaggerated asceticism, particularly that of the Stylite monks, contemplative solitaries who sat atop rocks or pillars, whence they sometimes dispensed advice. Throughout his writings are frequent interpretations of biblical texts, commentaries following the literal or historical sense, as is characteristic of the Antiochian school, although he occasionally used allegory. In another essay he discussed the expression of religious art in mosaics.
Certain works attributed to Nilus in the standard collection of early Greek Christian authors edited by J.-P. Migne, Patrologia Graeca (vol. 79, 1861; “Greek Patrology”), including treatises De oratione (“On Prayer”), a standard work on the subject, and De malignis cogitationibus (“On Evil Thoughts”) are the work of the Greek theologian Evagrius Ponticus (346–399). Many authors suspected of heresy have hidden behind Nilus’ reputation in the history of monasticism by affixing his name to their works. The sifting of the spurious from the genuine is still in process. The account, under Nilus’ name, “Concerning the Capture of the Monks on Mount Sinai,” depicting an invasion of the monastery by Saracens in 410, and the ransom of a certain Nilus of Sinai and his son Theodulus, refers to a legendary figure. This story has given rise to the “Nilus Question” in historical scholarship. The account, surprisingly for a Christian author, describes the cultic practice of animal sacrifice.
