Saint Wilfrid, also called Wilfrid of York,  (born 634, Northumbria, Eng.—died  April 24, 709/710, monastery of Oundle, Mercia, Eng.; feast day October 12), one of the greatest English saints, a monk and bishop who was outstanding in bringing about close relations between the Anglo-Saxon Church and the papacy. He devoted his life to establishing the observances of the Roman Church over those of the Celtic Church and fought a stormy series of controversies on discipline and precedent.
In 648 Wilfrid entered the celebrated monastery of Lindisfarne, off the coast of Northumberland. Later he went to Canterbury and then set out in 652 for Rome. Having spent three years in Lyon, Fr., he returned to Northumbria in 657/658. Soon he received a monastery at Ripon, Yorkshire, from King Oswiu’s son, Alhfrith. He was ordained a priest in 663/664 by the Gaulish bishop Agilbert, for whom he acted as spokesman at the Synod of Whitby (664), successfully advocating the rejection of Celtic practices in favour of Roman. Alhfrith had him elected bishop of York, but Wilfrid refused to be consecrated by Celtic bishops and was therefore consecrated at Compiègne, Fr.
Meanwhile, Oswiu appointed St. Chad as bishop of York instead, and Wilfrid on his return lived (666–669) at Ripon. He was restored in 669, when Archbishop St. Theodore of Canterbury deposed Chad, and he thereby became primate of Northumbria. He built a monastery at Hexham and introduced the Benedictine Rule to the kingdom. In 677 Theodore divided Wilfrid’s diocese, and Wilfrid appealed to Rome (the first English ecclesiastic to do so), where he arrived in 679 after having helped convert the Frisians (winter of 677–678). Pope St. Agatho and a Roman synod (October 679) ordered his restoration but accepted the division of his diocese on condition that he, with a local council, appoint the new bishops.
King Ecgfrith, Oswiu’s successor, refused to obey the papal mandate, however, and apparently imprisoned Wilfrid, who finally took refuge in Sussex, Christianizing its people and founding a monastery at Selsey. In 685 he joined King Caedwalla of Wessex, who gave him a quarter of his conquests in the Isle of Wight. Aldfrith, Ecgfrith’s successor, recalled him in 686/687. Although his deposition and its nullification following Agatho’s injunctions were reissued by popes SS. Benedict II and Sergius I, Wilfrid still remained improperly restored. Demanding the fulfillment of his rights granted by Agatho, he spent 11 years in exile, acting as bishop in Mercia. A council was held in 702, but Wilfrid, refusing to promise unconditional acceptance of the Archbishop’s rulings, went again to Rome, where his case was debated during 704. Though the Roman synod cleared Wilfrid of charges against him, it referred the question back to an English synod that met in Yorkshire in 705. Wilfrid, no longer insisting on York, was given his monasteries of Ripon and Hexham, becoming bishop of Hexham in 705 and retaining his monasteries in Mercia. He was buried at Ripon.
Wilfrid spread the knowledge of the Benedictine Rule, brought religious treasures from the Continent, and helped improve the chanting of the liturgy. He was a great builder at York, Ripon, and Hexham. He was one of the first to conceive the idea of Anglo-Saxons evangelizing the Germanic peoples. St. Willibrord, the apostle of Friesland and patron saint of Holland, was his devoted pupil, and he also consecrated St. Swithberht. In ecclesiastical policies, he fought steadily against the setting aside of papal authority by a local church subjected to secular power; rare for his time and place, he upheld utter papal supremacy. A life of Wilfrid by his disciple Eddi was translated into English in 1927 by B. Colgrave.
