Sergius I,  (died Dec. 9, 638, Constantinople [now Istanbul, Tur.]), Greek Orthodox theologian and patriarch of Constantinople (610–638), one of the most forceful and independent churchmen to hold that office, who not only supported the emperor Heraclius (610–641) in the victorious defense of the Eastern Roman Empire against Persian and Avar invaders but also strove in the Christological controversy to achieve doctrinal unity throughout Eastern Christendom by submitting a compromise formula, later condemned as unorthodox.
Assisting Heraclius in his campaigns of 622–28 with moral support and with the donation of the church treasury, Sergius functioned as regent and galvanized Byzantine resistance to enemy attacks west and east of Constantinople while the emperor was taking the field against the Persians in the outer provinces.
In religious matters, particularly concerning Christology, Sergius was preoccupied in reconciling dissident monophysite Christians with the orthodox decrees of the general council of Chalcedon (451). The monophysites, however, steadfastly resisted Sergius’ indoctrination because he continued to maintain a functional humanity in Christ. About 633 Sergius won recognition for his theory of monoenergism (that though Christ had two natures, there was but one operation or energy) from Heraclius, who then ordered that doctrine propagated throughout the Byzantine Empire. Further support came about 633 from Cyrus, patriarch of Alexandria, Egypt. Though at first tolerated by Pope Honorius I (625–638), who responded to Sergius’ appeal that the terminology needed clarification, monoenergism met strong opposition led by Sophronius, patriarch of Jerusalem, and later was definitively rejected by both the Latin and Greek churches at the third Council of Constantinople (680/681). Still seeking a mediatory solution, Sergius formulated in 638 the doctrine of monothelitism, which asserted that Christ has both divine and human natures but only one (divine) will. Although this teaching was incorporated in Heraclius’ imperial edict, the Ecthesis, that same year, it was repudiated by both monophysite and Orthodox parties, and later the Latin church declared it heretical at a Roman council in 649.
