Smohalla, also called Smowholla, Shmoqula, or Smuxale,  (born c. 1815 or 1820,  Upper Columbia River, Oregon Country [United States], near present-day Wallula, Wash.—died 1895, Satus Creek, Yakama Reservation, Wash., U.S.), North American Indian prophet, preacher, and teacher, one of a series of such leaders who arose in response to the menace presented to Native American life and culture by the encroachment of white settlers. He founded a religious cult, the Dreamers, that emphasized traditional Native American values.
Smohalla belonged to the Wanapum, a small Sahaptin-speaking tribe closely related to the Nez Percé and centring on the Priest Rapids area of the Columbia River in what is now eastern Washington state. He grew up to become a locally celebrated medicine man and a warrior of distinction. After a fight with a rival, he left his home and went south, traveling perhaps as far as Mexico, and was away for several years. When he returned, he announced that he had died and been resurrected by God. He began to preach, becoming known to his own people as Yuyunipitquana (“Shouting Mountain”), and by 1872 he had a large following.
White settlers had been coming into the Northwest in large numbers, and the completion of the Northern Pacific Railway increased the flow. The U.S. government was trying to persuade Native Americans to move to reservations or to take up homesteads and become farmers. The Plateau Indians had been largely fishermen and hunters, but many of them accepted the government’s proposals and turned to agriculture. Smohalla taught that the Native Americans alone were real people, the first created, and that whites, blacks, and Chinese had been created later by God to punish the Native Americans for leaving their ancient ways. They had to live as their fathers had done, and, above all, not plow land (i.e., wound Mother Earth) or sign papers for land, which was against nature.
If they lived as their fathers had, and followed the ritual of his Dreamer cult, they would be aided by the forces of nature, as well as by hordes of Native American dead, who would be resurrected. God would drive away the non-Native Americans. The Dreamers got their name from the emphasis Smohalla placed on dreams sent to himself and his priests by God to direct them in the right ways. The ritual emphasized drumming, ringing of bells, and ecstatic dancing, all of which combined to bring on visions and exaltation.
Smohalla’s influence spread among the Plateau Indians, Chief Joseph and the Nez Percé being among his most devoted followers. The cult was for a generation the greatest barrier to the U.S. government’s efforts to settle the Native Americans of the region and to convert them to white people’s ways, and it persisted for several years after Smohalla’s death.
