Tawadros II, original name Wagih Sobhi Baki Soliman,  (born November 4, 1952, Mansoura, Egypt), 118th pope of Alexandria and patriarch of the see of St. Mark (2012– ) and leader of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria, an autocephalous (ecclesiastically independent) church of the Oriental Orthodox communion.
Soliman was born into a devout Christian family outside Cairo. After graduation from the University of Alexandria in 1975 with a bachelor’s degree in pharmacy, he managed a pharmaceutical factory while studying at the church’s Clerical College in Alexandria. Soliman graduated from there in 1983 with a bachelor’s degree in theology. Two years later he was awarded a fellowship with the World Health Organization (WHO) by the British International Health Institute. In 1988 he completed a two-year course of monastic study at St. Pishoy Monastery in Egypt, and in 1989 he was accepted into monastic orders with the name Theodorus (Tawadros is the Coptic form). In 1990 he was ordained a priest. In 1997 he was appointed bishop of Beheira by Pope Shenouda III (reigned 1971–2012). Balancing clerical duties with personal study, he earned degrees in Singapore two years later in pharmaceutical engineering, Christian education, and business administration.
In 2012 Tawadros was one of three final candidates to succeed Shenouda. On November 3, in a traditional ceremony, a blindfolded boy chose his name from an urn; Tawadros was enthroned on November 18. He succeeded as pope the long-reigning Shenouda, who had overseen worldwide growth of the Coptic church but had drawn criticism both within and outside the church for his ties to the autocratic regime of Egyptian Pres. Hosni Mubarak. Although Tawadros hoped to take a less overtly political role than his predecessor, he faced the immediate challenge of defending Egypt’s sizable Coptic Christian minority against what the church perceived as a threat to religious and civil liberties posed by the government of the Islamist Pres. Mohammed Morsi. Tawadros, who had supported the popular demonstrations of the Arab Spring that resulted, in Egypt, in the ouster of Mubarak in 2011, was among prominent Christians who denounced a proposed constitution (eventually adopted in December 2012) that declared Sharīʿah (Islamic law) to be the foundation of Egyptian government.
