Theodore Beza, French Théodore de Bèze,  (born June 24, 1519, Vézelay, France—died October 13, 1605, Geneva, Switzerland), author, translator, educator, and theologian who assisted and later succeeded John Calvin as a leader of the Protestant Reformation centred at Geneva.
After studying law at Orléans, France (1535–39), Beza established a practice in Paris, where he published Juvenilia (1548), a volume of amorous verse that earned him a reputation as a leading Latin poet. On recovering from a serious illness, he underwent a conversion experience and in 1548 traveled to Geneva to join Calvin, then deeply involved with his reforms of Swiss political and educational institutions. A year later Beza became a professor of Greek at Lausanne, where he wrote in defense of the burning of the anti-Trinitarian heretic Michael Servetus (died 1553). For several years Beza traveled throughout Europe defending the Protestant cause. He returned to Geneva in 1558.
There, in 1559, with Calvin, he founded the new Geneva academy, destined to become a training ground for promotion of Calvinist doctrines. As its first rector, Beza was the logical successor to Calvin upon the reformer’s death in 1564. Beza remained the chief pastor of the Geneva church for the rest of his life, contributing numerous works that influenced the development of Reformed theology.
In most matters, he reiterated Calvin’s views, though with greater stress on ecclesiastical discipline and rigid obedience to authority. Beza’s sermons and commentaries were widely read in his time; his Greek editions and Latin translations of the New Testament were basic sources for the Geneva Bible and the King James Version (1611). His De jure magistratum (1574; “On the Rights of the Magistrate”), defending the right of revolt against tyranny, grew out of the Massacre of St. Bartholomew’s Day (1572), from which many surviving French Protestants were welcomed by Beza in Geneva. Beza’s book overthrew the earlier Calvinist doctrine of obedience to all civil authority and subsequently became a major political manifesto of Calvinism. In 1581 Beza donated to the University of Cambridge from his library the celebrated Codex Bezae (D), an important manuscript from about the 5th century bearing Greek and Latin texts of the Gospels and Acts and supplemented by Beza’s commentary based on the Calvinist viewpoint. Other works among Beza’s own writings include anti-Catholic tracts, a biography of Calvin, and the Histoire ecclésiastique des Églises réformées au royaume de France (1580; “Ecclesiastical History of the Reformed Church in the Kingdom of France”). Both as a theologian and as an administrator, despite occasional charges of intolerance made against him, Beza is considered not only Calvin’s successor but also his equal in securing the establishment of Calvinism in Europe.
