Thomas Cranmer,  (born July 2, 1489, Aslacton, Nottinghamshire, England—died March 21, 1556, Oxford), the first Protestant archbishop of Canterbury (1533–56), adviser to the English kings Henry VIII and Edward VI. As archbishop, he put the English Bible in parish churches, drew up the Book of Common Prayer, and composed a litany that remains in use today. Denounced by the Catholic queen Mary I for promoting Protestantism, he was convicted of heresy and burned at the stake.
Cranmer was the second son of Thomas Cranmer and Agnes (née Hatfield). His father seems to have belonged to the lowest rank of the gentry; at any rate, he had only enough property to endow his eldest son, John, so that Thomas and his younger brother were destined for the church. After experiencing the teaching of a “marvellous severe and cruel schoolmaster,” whose ministrations Cranmer later maintained instilled in him a permanent uncertainty and pliability, the boy went on to Cambridge in 1503. In 1510 or 1511 he was elected to a fellowship at Jesus College but was soon compelled to vacate because he married a relative of the landlady of the Dolphin Inn. During this time he earned his living by teaching at Buckingham (later Magdalene) College, leaving his wife to lodge at the Dolphin; out of this arrangement grew a later story that he had started out in life as a hostler.
His wife died in childbirth soon after their marriage, however, and Jesus College restored Cranmer to his fellowship. He now entered the church and threw himself into his studies, becoming one of the outstanding theologians of his time, a man of immense, though not very original, learning. From about 1520 he belonged to a group of scholars who met regularly to discuss the theological problems raised by Martin Luther’s revolt; known to be inclined to the new way of thinking, they were dubbed “Little Germany.” Among the group that was to lead the English Reformation were William Tyndale, Robert Barnes, Thomas Bilney, and, above all, Cranmer, who by 1525 included among his prayers one for the abolition of papal power in England.
Cranmer’s ambitions for reform would have remained academic had it not been for the political events into which he was soon drawn, however contrary they were to his upbringing and tastes. From 1527 onward, Henry VIII pursued his desire to be freed from his first wife, Catherine of Aragon, in order to marry Anne Boleyn, and in 1529 the grips of the “divorce” controversy seized also upon Cranmer. In August a plague known as the sweating sickness swept the country and was especially severe in Cambridge. To escape the sickness, Cranmer left the town with two of his pupils—brothers who were related to him through their mother—and went to their father’s house at Waltham in Essex. The king was visiting in the immediate neighbourhood at the time, and two of his chief councillors, Stephen Gardiner and Edward Fox, met Cranmer in those lodgings soon afterward. Not surprisingly, they were led to discuss the king’s meditated divorce.
Henry, who was willing to secure the help of any likely head and hand, however obscure, summoned Cranmer for an interview and commanded him to lay aside all other pursuits in order to devote himself to the question of the divorce. Cranmer accepted a commission to write a propaganda treatise in the king’s interest, stating the course he proposed and defending it by arguments from Scripture, the Fathers, and the decrees of general councils. He was commended to the hospitality of Anne Boleyn’s father, the earl of Wiltshire, in whose house at Durham Place he resided for some time; was appointed archdeacon of Taunton; became one of the king’s chaplains; and also held a parochial benefice, the name of which is unknown. When the treatise was finished, Cranmer was called upon to defend its argument before the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge; but in the end the debates, which on the whole endorsed his position, took place in his absence. He had already been sent to plead the cause before a more powerful if not a higher tribunal. An embassy, with the earl of Wiltshire at its head, was dispatched to Rome in 1530, and Cranmer was an important member of it. He was received by the pope with marked courtesy and was appointed grand penitentiary of England, but his argument, if discussed, did not lead to any practical decision of the divorce question.
In 1532 he was sent to Germany, officially as ambassador to the emperor Charles V but with instructions to establish contact with the Lutheran princes. At Nürnberg he made the acquaintance of Andreas Osiander, whose theological position midway between Luther and the old orthodoxy appealed to Cranmer’s cautious temperament, while Osiander’s niece Margaret appealed even more strongly to one who had for too long remained in uncongenial celibacy. Despite his priest’s orders, he married her in 1532; at the same time, his theological views underwent a further decided change in the direction of Reformed opinion.
