Thomas, Cardinal Wolsey,  (born c. 1475, Ipswich, Suffolk, Eng.—died  Nov. 29, 1530, Leicester, Leicestershire), cardinal and statesman who dominated the government of England’s King Henry VIII from 1515 to 1529. His unpopularity contributed, upon his downfall, to the anticlerical reaction that was a factor in the English Reformation.
The son of a butcher of Ipswich, Wolsey was educated at the University of Oxford. In 1498 he was ordained a priest, and five years later he became chaplain to Sir Richard Nanfan, deputy lieutenant of Calais, who recommended him to King Henry VII (reigned 1485–1509). When Nanfan died in 1507, Wolsey became Henry VII’s chaplain and, shortly before the king’s death in April 1509 he was appointed dean of Lincoln. His energy and self-confidence soon won him the favour of Henry VII’s son and successor, Henry VIII (reigned 1509–47).
Appointed royal almoner in November 1509, Wolsey easily persuaded the pleasure-loving young monarch to surrender more and more of the unwelcome cares of state. The ties between the two men became particularly close after Wolsey organized Henry’s successful expedition against the French in 1513. On Henry’s recommendation Pope Leo X made him bishop of Lincoln (February 1514), archbishop of York (September 1514), and cardinal (1515). In December 1515 Wolsey became lord chancellor of England. Three years later the pope appointed him a special papal representative with the title legate a latere. Wolsey used his vast secular and ecclesiastical power to amass wealth second only to that of the king.
The first priority for both Wolsey and Henry was to make England the arbiter of power in Europe. At that time western Europe was split into two rival camps, with France, England’s traditional enemy, on the one side and the Holy Roman Empire of the Habsburgs on the other. Wolsey attempted to make peace with France by promoting a European-wide peace treaty in 1518 and by arranging meetings between Henry and the French king Francis I and between Henry and the emperor Charles V in 1520. Nevertheless, war broke out between France and the Empire in 1521, and two years later Wolsey committed English troops against France. In order to finance this campaign Wolsey raised taxes, thereby arousing widespread resentment. In 1528 he sided with the French against Charles, but by August 1529 France and the emperor had made peace, and England was diplomatically isolated.
Although Wolsey had obtained his legatine commission with the intent of reforming the English church, his incessant diplomatic activities left him little time for ecclesiastical concerns. Besides, he was worldly, greedy for wealth, and unchaste—he had an illegitimate son and daughter. Nevertheless, he did at least propose some monastic reforms and even suppressed about 29 monasteries, mainly to obtain the revenues that he needed to found Cardinal’s College (later Christ Church) at the University of Oxford.
Wolsey’s influence on England’s judicial institutions was far more substantial. Possessed of a great legal mind, he extended the jurisdiction of the Star Chamber—the King’s Council sitting as a court—and used it to impose Henry’s justice on lawless nobles. The conciliar committee that he delegated to hear suits involving the poor soon evolved into the Court of Requests (1529).
The immediate cause of Wolsey’s fall from power was his failure to persuade Pope Clement VII to grant Henry an annulment of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon. There had long been a party of nobles who hated the lowborn, overbearing cardinal. When his final attempt to obtain the annulment collapsed in July 1529, these enemies easily turned the king against him. In October Wolsey was indicted on a praemunire charge of having overstepped his legatine authority. Stripped of all his offices and preferments except York, he left London for York in April 1530. Nevertheless, Henry was led to believe that he was conspiring to recover his position. Wolsey was arrested on November 4 on charges of treason (for corresponding with the French court), but he died at the end of the month while on his way south to face the king.
