Wilton Cardinal Gregory, in full Wilton Daniel Gregory,  (born December 7, 1947, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.), American Roman Catholic prelate, archbishop of Washington (2019– ), and the first African American cardinal. He previously served as archbishop of Atlanta (2005–19) and as bishop of Belleville, Illinois (1994–2005). Wilton also was the first Black president of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops (2001–04).
As a student at St. Carthage Grammar School, a Catholic parochial school in Chicago, Gregory decided that he wanted to be a priest even though he was not Catholic. He converted at age 11 and later attended Niles College (now St. Joseph’s College Seminary) of Loyola University and Saint Mary of the Lake Seminary, both in the Chicago area. He was ordained a priest on May 9, 1973. In 1980 he earned a doctorate in sacred liturgy at the Pontifical Liturgical Institute (Sant’Anselmo) in Rome. He served as an associate pastor, seminary instructor, and assistant to John Cardinal Cody and Joseph Cardinal Bernardin. He was ordained auxiliary bishop of Chicago on December 13, 1982, and installed as bishop of Belleville, Illinois, on February 10, 1994.
As bishop, Gregory played an active role in the life of the Roman Catholic Church in America. He wrote extensively on church issues, served on several church committees, and was vice president of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops (1998–2001). He was elected to a three-year term as president of the conference on November 13, 2001. His greatest challenge as president was the sex abuse scandal then plaguing the church, a problem he had dealt with successfully as bishop. Having recognized the criminal nature of the sex abuse long before the scandal burst into public view, Gregory helped to define a policy that would protect children from abuse. He also strove to improve the religious life of African American Catholics.
In December 2004 Gregory was appointed archbishop of Atlanta by Pope John Paul II, and he was installed the following year. Gregory drew praise for his continued work to prevent sex abuse. However, in 2014 he faced harsh criticism for constructing a $2.2. million residence. He subsequently apologized and said that the home would be sold. In April 2019 Pope Francis appointed Gregory archbishop of Washington, to succeed Donald Cardinal Wuerl, who resigned amid allegations that he had covered up sexual misconduct. Gregory was installed the following month, becoming the first African American to hold the post.
In October 2020 Pope Francis named Gregory cardinal, elevating him as the first African American to the Catholic Church’s highest governing body. The appointment, which came during a turbulent year in which calls for racial justice again echoed across the United States, was seen as a message of inclusion.
