Zacharias Frankel,  (born Sept. 30, 1801, Prague, Bohemia, Austrian Empire [now in Czech Republic]—died  Feb. 13, 1875, Breslau, Ger. [now Wrocław, Pol.]), rabbi and theologian, a founder of what became Conservative Judaism.
After graduation from the University of Budapest in 1831, Frankel served as rabbi in several German communities, becoming chief rabbi of Dresden in 1836. During this period he developed a theology that he called positive-historical Judaism. It differed from Orthodoxy in its acceptance of scientific and historical research and in its willingness to make some liturgical changes. It differed from Reform Judaism in that it sought to maintain traditional customs and adhere to the national aspects of Judaism.
In 1854 Frankel was chosen president of the newly organized Jewish theological seminary at Breslau, which became and remained one of the most important modern European institutions for the training of rabbis until the Nazi period. Through the faculty and students of Breslau seminary, Frankel’s viewpoint became highly influential in central Europe. In the 20th century it took root in the United States, where, under the name of Conservative Judaism, it attained its greatest growth. Frankel’s first major work, Die Eidesleistung der Juden (1840; “Oath-Taking by Jews”), attacked discrimination against Jews who testified in courts in Saxony. It effectively helped disprove the notion that Jews were untrustworthy in swearing oaths. Frankel also published Vorstudien zur Septuaginta (1841; “Preliminary Studies in the Septuagint”), in which he, the only major 19th-century Jewish scholar who wrote on the Septuagint (the first Greek version of the Old Testament), sought to show the necessary connection between Talmudic and Septuagintic exegesis. It is considered a classic work. Two works he wrote in Hebrew, Darke ha-Mishnah (1859; “Introduction to the Mishna”) and Mebo ha-Yerushalmi (1870; “Introduction to the Palestinian Talmud”), were major contributions to Jewish religious thought.
