Francisco J. Ayala, in full Francisco José Ayala,  (born March 12, 1934, Madrid, Spain), Spanish-born American evolutionary geneticist and molecular biologist best known for expounding the philosophical perspective that Darwinism and religious faith are compatible.
Ayala was raised in Madrid by his parents, Francisco and Soledad Ayala. He received a B.S. in physics from the University of Madrid in 1955. Between 1955 and 1960, he studied theology at the Pontifical Faculty of San Esteban in Salamanca, where he was ordained a priest in the Dominican order in 1960. He left the priesthood the same year.
Ayala received a Ph.D. (1964) in genetics from Columbia University, having carried out his doctoral work under the guidance of geneticist Theodosius Dobzhansky. His thesis examined the genetic fitness of fruit flies (Drosophila) and revealed that the pace of evolution was dependent on the amount of genetic variation in a population. After early appointments at Rockefeller University and Providence College, he became a professor of genetics at the University of California, Davis, in 1971.
In the 1970s Ayala investigated the process of genetic variation and natural selection at the molecular level.  Later he made significant contributions to public health through his research into the population structure, mode of reproduction, and evolution of parasitic protozoans.
In 1987 he became a professor of biological sciences at the University of California, Irvine (UCI); he was named professor of philosophy there in 1989. Ayala also made significant financial donations to the school. In 2018, however, he was forced to resign after an investigation supported allegations that he had sexually harassed four women. In addition, UCI announced that his name would be removed from buildings and various honours, such as endowed chairs.
Throughout his career, Ayala defended the teaching of evolution in public schools in the United States, and his efforts served to strengthen evolutionary theory. He served as an expert witness in McLean v. Arkansas Board of Education (1981), which overturned a state law that required the teaching of creationism alongside evolution in science classes. In 1984 and again in 1999, he was the principal author of Science and Creationism: A View from the National Academy of Sciences. In Darwin’s Gift to Science and Religion (2007), he argued that creationist beliefs run counter to theological concepts. For example, orthodox Christian beliefs posit the existence of an omnipotent benevolent Creator despite the fact that the world is filled with predators, diseases, and other so-called “evils.” He notes that attributing these defects to an “intelligent designer” calls into question the Creator’s omnipotence and benevolence. However, by attributing these defects to the trial-and-error process of natural selection, the Creator is absolved of the responsibility of evil in the world.
Ayala was a member of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, serving as chair of its board of directors between 1993 and 1996. He was also an adviser to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the National Science Foundation, and the National Institutes of Health. Among his many honours for his scientific contributions, Ayala was awarded the National Medal of Science in 2002 and the Templeton Prize in 2010.
