George Ledyard Stebbins, Jr.,  (born January 6, 1906, Lawrence, New York, U.S.—died January 19, 2000, Davis, California), American botanist and geneticist known for his application of the modern synthetic theory of evolution to plants. Called the father of evolutionary botany, he was the first scientist to synthesize artificially a species of plant that was capable of thriving under natural conditions.
Stebbins was educated at Harvard University, receiving a Ph.D. in biology in 1931. He taught at Colgate University in Hamilton, New York, and until 1973 was a member of the faculty at the University of California, Berkeley. In 1950 he transferred to the Davis campus of the University of California, where he founded the department of genetics. He made an extensive study of the distribution of plants in that area.
Stebbins shares the credit for formulating and applying the modern synthetic theory of evolution to higher organisms. This theory distinguishes the basic processes of gene mutation and recombination, natural selection, changes in structure and number of chromosomes, and reproductive isolation. The publication of his Variation and Evolution in Plants (1950) established Stebbins as one of the first biologists to apply this theory to plant evolution. Working with several species of flowering plants, Stebbins and his coworker, Ernest B. Babcock, studied polyploid plants, which are new species of plants that have originated from a spontaneous doubling of the chromosomes of an existing species. When a technique was developed for doubling a plant’s chromosomal number artificially, Stebbins used it to produce polyploids from several species of wild grass, of which the new species Ehrharta erecta was established in a natural environment in 1944.
Stebbins wrote numerous books, including Processes of Organic Evolution (1966), as well as some 250 journal articles. Among his later works are Flowering Plants: Evolution Above the Species Level (1974) and Evolution (1977; with T. Dobzhansky, F. Ayala, and J. Valentine).
