Karl Ernst von Baer, in full Karl Ernst, Ritter (knight) von Baer, Edler (lord) von Huthorn,  (born February 17 [February 28, New Style], 1792, Piep, Estonia, Russian Empire—died November 16 [November 28], 1876, Dorpat, Estonia), Prussian-Estonian embryologist who discovered the mammalian ovum and the notochord and established the new science of comparative embryology alongside comparative anatomy. He was also a pioneer in geography, ethnology, and physical anthropology.
Baer, one of 10 children, spent his childhood with an uncle and aunt before he returned at the age of seven to his own family. His parents, of Prussian descent, were first cousins. After private tutoring Baer spent three years at a school for members of the nobility. In 1810 he entered the university at Dorpat to study medicine, receiving his medical degree in 1814.
Dissatisfied with his medical training, Baer studied in Germany and Austria from 1814 to 1817. The crucial year of his education was the academic year 1815–16, when his training in comparative anatomy at the University of Würzburg with Ignaz Döllinger introduced him to a new world that included the study of embryology.
In 1817 Baer began his teaching in Königsberg (now Kaliningrad, Russia), where he remained until 1834. In 1820 he married Auguste von Medem of Königsberg, by whom he had six children. Although Döllinger had suggested that Baer begin a study of chick development, he was unable to meet the expense of purchasing the eggs and paying an attendant to watch the incubators. This work was done instead by Baer’s more affluent friend Christian Pander, who in 1817 described the early development of the chick in terms of what are now known as the primary germ layers—that is, ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm.
From 1819 to 1834 Baer devoted most of his time to embryology, extending Pander’s concept of germ-layer formation to all vertebrates. In so doing Baer laid the foundation for comparative embryology. He made many important technical discoveries. In 1827 he described his discovery of the mammalian ovum (egg) in his De Ovi Mammalium et Hominis Genesi (“On the Mammalian Egg and the Origin of Man”), thereby establishing that mammals, including human beings, develop from eggs. He opposed the popular idea that embryos of one species pass through stages comparable to adults of other species. Instead, he emphasized that embryos of one species could resemble embryos, but not adults of another, and that the younger the embryo the greater the resemblance. This was in line with his epigenetic idea—basic to embryology ever since—that development proceeds from simple to complex, from homogeneous to heterogeneous.
One of the most important books in embryology is Baer’s Über Entwickelungsgeschichte der Thiere (vol. 1, 1828; vol. 2, 1837; “On the Development of Animals”), in which he surveyed all existing knowledge on vertebrate development and from which he derived his far-reaching conclusions. He identified the neural folds as precursors of the nervous system, discovered the notochord, described the five primary brain vesicles, and studied the functions of the extra-embryonic membranes. This pioneering work established embryology as a distinct subject of research, at least in its descriptive aspects. He marked out the main lines of descriptive and comparative study that had to be accomplished before the modern approach—the causal analysis of development—could emerge.
In 1834 Baer moved to St. Petersburg, Russia, where he became a full member of the Academy of Sciences; he had been a corresponding member since 1826. His first duties were as librarian of the foreign division, but he eventually served the academy in a variety of administrative positions. He retired from active membership in 1862 but continued to work as an honorary member until 1867. After moving to Russia, Baer abandoned embryology. Particularly interested in the Russian north, he became a courageous explorer there; he was the first naturalist to collect specimens from Novaya Zemlya, which was then uninhabited. During his extensive travels throughout Russia, Baer developed a great scientific and practical interest in its fisheries. He made significant discoveries in geography, including one concerning the nature of the forces responsible for the configuration of riverbanks in Russia.
Baer’s travels also increased his long-standing interest in ethnography. He contributed to the Academy at St. Petersburg by establishing an extensive skull collection. As a result of his interest in skull measurements, he called a meeting of craniologists in Germany in 1861, which led to the establishment of the German Anthropological Society and to the founding of the journal Archiv für Anthropologie. He was also responsible for the founding of the Russian Geographical Society and the Russian Entomological Society, of which he was the first president.
In his early days as an embryologist Baer had begun to consider possible relationships, in terms of kinship, between animals. In 1859, the year that Charles Darwin’s Origin of Species appeared, Baer published a work on human skulls suggesting that stocks now distinct might have originated from one form; the ideas of the two men were formulated completely independently. Baer, however, was no strong adherent to the doctrine of transformation (the pre-Darwinian term for evolution). Although he believed that some very similar animals, such as goats and antelopes, might be related, he was vehemently against the concept expressed in the Origin of Species that all living creatures might have evolved from one or a few common ancestors.
In his philosophical writings—and all his embryological writings were philosophical to some degree—Baer saw nature as a whole, even though not in terms of modern evolutionary theory. He viewed the development of organisms and of the cosmos in the same light, and his all-encompassing view of the universe brought together what might otherwise have seemed diverging threads in his thought.
