Lancelot Thomas Hogben,  (born December 9, 1895, Portsmouth, England—died August 22, 1975), English zoologist, geneticist, medical statistician, and linguist, known especially for his many contributions to the study of social biology.
Hogben’s birth was premature by two months, an event that convinced his evangelical family that he should become a medical missionary after his “miracle” survival. (He later described himself as the son of “poor but intellectually dishonest parents.”) In 1905 the Hogben family moved to London, where Lancelot attended public schools and, at age 17, won a scholarship for disadvantaged youths to attend Trinity College, Cambridge. (In later years, Hogben would defend such programs against the British eugenicists, such as Leonard Darwin, son of Charles Darwin and president of the 1912 First International Congress of Eugenics, who publicly claimed that the poor were genetically inferior and that spending for their education was a waste of public funds.) By the time Hogben took up his scholarship in 1913, he had graduated from the University of London. At Cambridge, Hogben became a member of the socialist Fabian Society and was generally uncomfortable with the typical upper-class students at the school.
By the time World War I began in 1914, Hogben had fulfilled all the requirements for a science degree with the exception of residency, which could be fulfilled through military service. At first he volunteered for noncombat duty with a Quaker organization, but, when military conscription was enacted in 1916, Hogben was inspired by the public pacifist statements of mathematician and philosopher Bertrand Russell and refused further service on conscientious grounds. Hogben was given a three-month prison sentence after he refused to submit to a medical examination or to make an appeal based on religious convictions.
After his discharge from prison, Hogben worked as a journalist until he obtained a position in 1917 as a lecturer in zoology at Birbeck College, University of London. At that time he met and soon married Enid Charles, a mathematician, feminist, socialist, and organizer for the trade union movement. In 1918 Hogben accepted a position at Imperial College in London, where he furthered his mathematical education and published a series of papers on cytology that earned him a D.Sc. (Doctor of Science, an advanced postdoctoral degree) from the University of London in 1921.
Hogben’s cytology research led him to accept an offer to join the Animal Breeding Research Laboratory in Edinburgh, Scotland. Once there, he cofounded (with J.B.S. Haldane, Julian Huxley, and F.A.E. Crew) the Journal of Experimental Biology and the Society for Experimental Biology, with financial backing from novelist H.G. Wells. In 1925 Hogben accepted a professorship in medical zoology at McGill University in Montreal, Canada. His experience with teaching students scientific names led to an interest in linguistics and to his creation of an artificial language, Interglossa. (In 1943 Hogben edited The Loom of Language, by Frederick Bodmer, which includes a description of Interglossa.) In 1927 Hogben accepted a chair in zoology at the University of Cape Town, South Africa. His lectures at the school led to his publication of Principles of Evolutionary Biology (1927). Off campus, Hogben gave biology lectures to school teachers and out of these experiences wrote Mathematics for the Millions (1936) and Science for the Citizen (1938) in order to disseminate fundamental mathematical and scientific ideas to a broader audience. Always active for social causes, in Dangerous Thoughts (1939) he wrote of his resistance to the racist (pre-apartheid) policies in South Africa, where he admitted “coloured” students to his classes and home. Hogben’s discomfort with the racism in South Africa led him to accept a position in 1930 at the London School of Economics and Political Science, University of London, which had just created a new chair in social biology. During the 1930s Hogben helped find academic positions for many Jews seeking to escape persecution in Germany. Dangerous Thoughts also includes a scathing indictment of his homeland:
In 1936 Hogben was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of London, and in 1937 he became the Regius Professor of Natural History at the University of Aberdeen in Scotland. In 1940 Hogben was in Norway lecturing on the absurdities of the racist ideology of the Nazi Party when Germany invaded the country. Unable to return directly to Great Britain, he traveled across the Soviet Union via the Trans-Siberian Railroad, by ship to Japan, and finally by ship across the Pacific to reach San Francisco. He taught for one semester at the University of Wisconsin, where one of his sons was enrolled, before returning to Aberdeen in 1941. In 1942 he accepted a position as a professor of zoology at the University of Birmingham. In 1943, following his recovery from thyroid surgery, Hogben worked for Crew on medical statistics related to the treatment of soldiers. Hogben’s demonstration that indiscriminate use of antibiotics was leading to resistant strains induced the British Medical Association to found the British Journal of Social Medicine, with Hogben as the first editor, in order to spread the news.
In 1947 Hogben’s wife finally returned from Canada, where she had stayed throughout the war. The couple had trouble reuniting, however; they soon separated and then divorced in 1957 so that Hogben could marry Sarah Evans, a Welsh schoolteacher and political activist. Hogben retired from Birmingham in 1961, but he came out of retirement in 1963 at the invitation of Cheddi Jagan, premier of British Guiana (now Guyana), to become the vice chancellor of a new University of Guiana. He helped raise funds for the new school before retiring again in 1964. After retiring to Wales, Hogben continued his linguistic research, publishing The Vocabulary of Science (1969), before his health began to deteriorate.
Hogben’s other publications include A Short Life of Alfred Russel Wallace (1918), Exiles of the Snow, and Other Poems (1918), Comparative Physiology (1926), Principles of Animal Biology (1940), An Introduction to Mathematical Genetics (1946), and Mathematics in the Making (1961). His autobiography, Lancelot Hogben: Scientific Humanist (1998), was edited and published posthumously by his son Adrian Hogben and daughter-in-law Anne Hogben. A chapter from Mathematics for the Millions, “Mathematics, the Mirror of Civilization,” is included in Encyclopædia Britannica’s Gateway to the Great Books (1963).
