Richard B. Goldschmidt, in full Richard Benedict Goldschmidt,  (born April 12, 1878, Frankfurt am Main, Germany—died April 24, 1958, Berkeley, California, U.S.), German-born American zoologist and geneticist, formulator of the theory that chromosome molecules are the more decisive factors in inheritance (rather than the qualities of the individual genes). His experimental work in genetics led to the recognition that genes control important factors in embryonic development and thus in evolution.
Goldschmidt interbred various geographical races of the gypsy moth Lymantria dispar. The moths that resulted from this cross showed that characters distinguishing local varieties were transmitted to the offspring and, therefore, could be explained in terms of Mendelian laws as being determined by genes. This was the first genetic explanation of geographic variety and of the role of genes in controlling the timing of events in embryonic development.
In crosses between certain strains of Lymantria, Goldschmidt discovered the occurrence of what he called intersexuality, in which some individuals experienced intermingling of male and female characteristics. From this, he developed his so-called time law of intersexuality, which stated that an intersex is an individual that begins development under the influence of one of the two sex factors but ends its development, after a turning point, under the influence of the opposite sex factor.
Later, Goldschmidt studied phenocopies of fruit flies. Phenocopy was a term he used to designate changes in the outward appearance of an organism caused by temperature shocks and other drastic changes in environmental factors. Goldschmidt was able to produce nonhereditary copies of almost all known mutations. This proved that genes were not the sole determiners of phenotypic character.
Goldschmidt suggested other genetic theories, including one stating that genes control enzymatic activity. Many of his theories were rejected by other scientists, but these theories were still instrumental in causing a major reevaluation of the concepts governing gene function. In addition, his views of chance variations that arose during embryonic development, which produced what he called “hopeful monsters,” suggested that new evolutionary genetic combinations could arise prior to their actual utility in a given environment.
