Abraham Zevi Idelsohn,  (born July 14, 1882, Felixberg, Latvia, Russian Empire—died  Aug. 14, 1938, Johannesburg, S.Af.), Jewish cantor, composer, founder of the modern study of the history of Jewish music, and one of the first important ethnomusicologists.
Trained as a cantor from childhood, Idelsohn later studied music in Berlin and Leipzig. Before emigrating to Jerusalem in 1905, he was a cantor in Leipzig and Regensberg, Ger., and in Johannesburg, S.Af. In Jerusalem he served as a cantor and in 1910 founded the Institute for Jewish Music. The previous year, funded by the Vienna Academy of Sciences, he had begun collecting from oral tradition the music of various European, Asian, and North African Jewish groups. The result was Thesaurus of Hebrew Oriental Melodies, 10 vol. (1914–32). This work and the more than 1,000 recordings made by Idelsohn provided a basis for the first comparative study of Jewish biblical cantillation (intoned recitation) and demonstrated an underlying unity in the religious chants, even among groups that were widely separated geographically. His studies, especially those of the chants of the Yemenite Jews, led to his further research demonstrating the close relationship of Jewish and early Christian chants. He also did important early studies of the nature of the maqāmāt, the melodic frameworks used in Middle Eastern music.
Idelsohn composed the first Hebrew opera, Yiftaḥ (1922; “Jephthah”), which incorporates traditional melodies, and an unfinished opera, Eliyahu (“Elijah”). Although the song “Hava nagila” (“Come, Let’s Rejoice”) traditionally has been attributed to Idelsohn as a setting of his own text to a tune that he adapted from a Hasidic (a pietistic Jewish movement) melody, more-recent scholarship has suggested that the words to the song actually were composed by Idelsohn’s student, Moshe Nathanson.
Idelsohn’s books include Jewish Music in Its Historical Development (1929); Jewish Liturgy (1932); and Sefer ha-shirim, 2 vol. (1913–22; “Book of Songs”), the first Hebrew songbook published in Palestine.
