Cindy Sheehan,  (born July 10, 1957, Los Angeles, California, U.S.), American peace activist whose public opposition to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan began after her son was killed in Iraq in 2004. Sheehan’s vigil outside U.S. Pres. George W. Bush’s ranch in Texas in 2005 received international media coverage and established her as one of the most visible and controversial figures in the antiwar movement at that time.
In her writings, Sheehan described her life prior to the combat death of her son Casey Sheehan, a 24-year-old army mechanic, as apolitical and focused largely on the raising of her four children. Within months of Casey’s death in Baghdad, however, she began to give interviews and speeches in which she questioned the Bush administration’s motives for invading and occupying Iraq and demanded an immediate withdrawal of all U.S. troops. In January 2005 Sheehan and several other parents who had lost children in Iraq established Gold Star Families for Peace, an antiwar group for the families of fallen service men and women.
In August 2005 Sheehan set up a vigil outside Bush’s ranch in Crawford, Texas, where he was spending a five-week summer vacation. She vowed to remain until Bush agreed to meet with her or until he returned to Washington, D.C. She was joined at the protest site, which soon became known as Camp Casey, by various peace groups, including Veterans for Peace, Military Families Speak Out, Code Pink, and Iraq Veterans Against the War. The presence of the White House press corps in Crawford guaranteed that her vigil received extensive media coverage.
Bush acknowledged the protest but refused to meet with Sheehan, on the grounds that he had previously met with her as part of a larger event in which he addressed a number of grieving military families in Fort Lewis, Washington, in June 2004. Sheehan remained in Crawford for the duration of Bush’s time there, and at the end of August she and other Camp Casey activists took part in an antiwar bus tour from Crawford to Washington, D.C.
Sheehan subsequently staged protests around the country against what she characterized as the violent, imperialistic nature of U.S. foreign policy. In 2008 she ran for the U.S. House of Representatives in California, mounting an unsuccessful challenge to the long-serving Democrat Nancy Pelosi. As a candidate of the Peace and Freedom Party, Sheehan was Roseanne Barr’s vice-presidential running mate in the 2012 presidential election. On the ballot in three states, the ticket received a total of about 50,000 votes. Sheehan then ran for governor of California in 2014, but her bid failed.
Sheehan’s first book, Not One More Mother’s Child (2005), recounts the events at Camp Casey. In Peace Mom (2006) she told the story of her earlier life and her path to political activism.
