David Trimble, in full William David Trimble,  (born Oct. 15, 1944, Belfast, N.Ire.), politician who served as first minister of the Northern Ireland Assembly (1998–2002), leader of the Ulster Unionist Party (UUP; 1995–2005), and a member of the British Parliament (1990–2005). In 1998 Trimble and John Hume, leader of the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP), were awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace.
While a professor of law at Queen’s University of Belfast, Trimble was elected to the Northern Ireland Constitutional Convention for the Vanguard Unionist Progressive Party (VUPP) in 1975. The VUPP opposed direct rule of Northern Ireland by the British government and pushed for stringent measures against the Irish Republican Army (IRA). Trimble became deputy leader of the VUPP, supporting a coalition with the SDLP. In 1977 he joined the Official (now Ulster) Unionist Party, and he eventually became an executive member of the UUP and, in 1990, a member of the British Parliament. He succeeded James Molyneaux as leader of the UUP in 1995, defeating the preelection favourite, John Taylor.
Trimble’s election was regarded as a victory for the right wing of the UUP, primarily because of his association with Ian Paisley, the militant leader of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP). In 1995 Trimble negotiated a compromise that permitted the Orange Order, a Protestant fraternal organization, to march through the Roman Catholic neighbourhood of Portadown. After the march, Trimble and Paisley were seen celebrating their victory over Catholic residents.
Despite his association with hard-line unionists, Trimble proved willing to depart from traditional unionist demands when he represented the UUP in multiparty peace talks beginning in September 1997. These talks, which included members of Sinn Féin, the political wing of the IRA, culminated in the Good Friday Agreement (Belfast Agreement) of April 1998 on steps aimed at restoring self-government in Northern Ireland. Defying opposition from Paisley and the DUP as well as the conservative wing of his own party, Trimble signed the agreement and was later vindicated when it was accepted in referenda passed in Northern Ireland and the Irish republic in May. In elections for the new Northern Ireland Assembly held the following month, the UUP won the largest number of seats, and Trimble was subsequently elected first minister.
Conflict over the timing and extent of IRA decommissioning (disarmament) blocked implementation of the Good Friday Agreement until Trimble, buoyed by IRA concessions, persuaded the Ulster Unionist Council, the UUP’s governing body, to allow him to share governmental authority with Sinn Féin in 1999 and again in 2000. In July 2001 Trimble briefly resigned as first minister, charging that the IRA had not fulfilled its decommissioning agreement. He continued to serve as first minister until October 2002, when the Northern Ireland Assembly was suspended by the British government.
Despite facing internal dissension over his policies and the UUP’s being eclipsed in the assembly elections of 2003 by the DUP as Northern Ireland’s largest unionist party, Trimble was reelected party leader in 2004. In 2005, however, Trimble was defeated in his bid for reelection to the House of Commons, and the UUP won only a single seat while the DUP won nine. Shortly after the election Trimble resigned as UUP leader. In 2006 he was elevated to the House of Lords. The following year he left the UUP to join the Conservative Party.
