Max Factor, original name Max Faktor,  (born 1877, Łódź, Pol., Russian Empire—died Aug. 30, 1938, Beverly Hills, Calif., U.S.), dean of Hollywood makeup experts. He was a pioneer in developing makeup specifically for motion-picture actors and was given a special Academy Award in 1928 for his achievements.
Amid the increasing anti-Semitism in tsarist Russia, Factor—a Polish Jew—emigrated  to the United States in 1904, moving first to St. Louis, Mo., and arriving in Los Angeles by 1909. At that time actors had no makeup that met the special requirements of filmmaking. Makeup is used by actors for cosmetic purposes and as an aid in taking on the appearance appropriate to the characters they play. (See also cosmetic.) In theatre, powerful stage-lighting systems may remove all colour from a performer’s complexion and will eliminate shadows and lines. Makeup restores this colour and defines the facial features to ensure a natural appearance. It also helps the player to look and feel the part, a consideration especially helpful in character interpretations. Stage makeup, however, proved to be wholly unsatisfactory for the motion-picture medium. Necessarily heavy applications made it impossible to appear natural in close-ups, and the range of colours developed for theatre failed to meet the quite different requirements of motion-picture lighting and film emulsions. In 1910 Factor created the first makeup designed expressly for motion pictures. It was a light semiliquid greasepaint available in a wide range of skin tones, and it effectively augmented actors’ appearances in an era when filmmaking was dominated by the use of arc lighting and orthochromatic film emulsion. It was also the first makeup to be packaged in tubes.
The introduction of panchromatic film and incandescent lighting on movie sets in the 1920s eventually made it possible to standardize the film, lighting, and colours of makeup that were most effective for motion pictures. The Society of Motion Picture Engineers conducted a special series of tests for this purpose in 1928. As a result of these experiments, Factor created a new line of compatible makeup colours called panchromatic makeup, an achievement for which he won a special Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences Award.
Factor’s original product, Supreme Greasepaint, was the forerunner of today’s foundation cream. In the 1920s, as women aspired to achieve the look of movie stars for themselves, Factor began selling his makeup outside the theatre and movie industry. He marketed his most successful products under the Society Make-Up brand name. Although the glamorous association with Hollywood gave the brand consumer recognition, Factor had chosen a name that would not be too “showbiz” or unladylike.
Factor wrote the article “Make-Up” for Encyclopædia Britannica’s 14th edition (1929–73). As he explained, makeup is both “corrective and creative”:
After Factor’s death, his son, Max Factor, Jr., took over as head of the business, Max Factor & Co., and expanded it internationally.
