Kebara,  paleoanthropological site on Mount Carmel in northern Israel that has yielded a trove of Neanderthal bones and associated artifacts.
The Kebara cave was occupied by humans and various other animals from the Middle Paleolithic Period (approximately 200,000 to 40,000 years ago) through the Upper Paleolithic Period (about 40,000 to 10,000 years ago). The more-recent Upper Paleolithic and Holocene levels of the site, known as the Kebaran and Natufian levels, were excavated in the 1930s. They contained a series of human burials plus a number of partially cremated remains. The Middle Paleolithic levels were excavated in the 1960s and 1980s. They are exceptionally rich in archaeological remains, including multiple layers of large flat hearths, Middle Paleolithic tools, and animal bones, in addition to two infant skeletons, a young adult skeleton (known as Kebara 2) that dates to about 60,000 years ago, and fragments of many more individuals. The infant and adult skeletons were clearly interred intentionally, although burial pits could not be discerned. Of the fragile fragmentary infant fossils, only their teeth indicate that they were Neanderthals. Kebara 2, on the other hand, has provided interesting details on several debated aspects of Neanderthal biology. It shows exceptional preservation of the lower jaw, trunk, arms, hands, and pelvis, but the legs were lost through erosion. The upper face and braincase are curiously absent; it is likely that these missing skull pieces protruded upward and were removed after the body had decomposed. Notably, however, Kebara 2 includes a preserved bone from the base of the tongue (hyoid bone), which indicates a large mouth with the possibility of fully modern human speech capabilities. The lower jaw is massive for a Neanderthal, but it follows the same pattern of facial proportions seen in other Neanderthal specimens. The teeth are modest in size except for the relatively large front teeth, which were wearing down quickly. Body proportions indicated by the skeleton are relatively robust, similar to those of the cold-adapted European Neanderthals, despite the location of the cave in the more-temperate eastern Mediterranean. The arms and especially the hands of Kebara 2 were massively muscled, with proportions that further increased their power. The pelvis, though exhibiting the broad front seen in other Neanderthals, shows proportions similar to those of modern humans.
