Daniel Goldin, in full Daniel Saul Goldin,  (born July 23, 1940, New York City, New York, U.S.), American engineer who was the longest-serving National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) administrator (1992–2001) and who brought a new vision to the U.S. space agency and a concentration on “faster, better, cheaper” programs to achieve that vision.
Goldin received a B.S. in engineering from the City College of New York in 1962 and joined NASA’s Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, where he worked on advanced propulsion technology. He left NASA in 1966 to join the TRW Space and Technology Group in Redondo Beach, California, where for 25 years he primarily worked on classified national security space programs and became vice president and general manager of the group.
Goldin became NASA administrator on April 1, 1992, with an explicit mandate to reform what the White House had concluded was an excessively bureaucratic and technologically stagnant space agency. He combined an intense, sometimes abrasive, management style with a strong commitment to the values of space exploration. In addition to his emphasis of the “faster, better, cheaper” approach to scientific spacecraft, Goldin was a leader in the 1993 redesign of the space station program and the invitation to Russia to become a central partner in that program. He stressed the need to develop and use new capabilities in areas such as biotechnology, nanotechnology, and information technology in the planning of future space programs. Goldin left NASA in 2001.
Goldin was selected in 2003 as president of Boston University, but a conflict in views between Goldin and the university’s board led to his contract being terminated just prior to his inauguration. He subsequently turned to private-sector consulting related to cutting-edge technological innovation and joined various corporate boards. In 2005 he became founding CEO of Intellisis Corporation (later renamed KnuEdge), a company that developed products based on neural computing.
