Dassault Industries,  French company with major aerospace-related subsidiaries specializing in the production of military and civil aircraft; computer-based design, manufacturing, and product-management systems; and aviation simulators. Its primary subsidiary, founded by French aircraft designer Marcel Dassault at the end of World War II, is Dassault Aviation, which adopted its current name in 1990.  Headquarters are in Vaucresson, France.
Dassault Industries is a holding company for the Dassault family. It has a 49 percent stake in Dassault Aviation; the European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company (EADS) owns about 46 percent. Products of Dassault Aviation include the Mirage 2000 jet fighter and the Alpha Jet trainer and strike aircraft, both of which are flown by armed forces around the world; Rafale, an advanced-generation multirole jet fighter for the French armed forces; the twin-turboprop Atlantique ATL2 maritime patrol aircraft, used by the French navy; and the Falcon family of business jets. In 2000 Dassault Aviation employed about 11,000 people.
Other main subsidiaries of Dassault Industries are Dassault Falcon Jet in the United States, in charge of sales, marketing, and worldwide support of Falcon business jets; Sogitec, a developer of aerospace simulators and a provider of technical documentation services; and Dassault Systemes, whose products include software systems for computer-aided design, manufacturing, and engineering (CAD/CAM/CAE) and product development management (PDM). Created as a subsidiary in 1981, Dassault Systemes is the world leader in the CAD/CAM/CAE and PDM markets; its aerospace customers include Boeing, Lockheed Martin, and Airbus Industrie.
Marcel Dassault, under his given name Marcel-Ferdinand Bloch, created the aircraft firm Société des Avions Marcel Bloch in 1945. Bloch had designed and built planes in World War I-era France and again in the 1930s. He was imprisoned in Germany’s Buchenwald concentration camp for his activity in the Resistance during World War II. After the war he changed his surname to Dassault, a change reflected in his company’s adoption of the title Générale Aéronautique Marcel Dassault in 1955. Although company sales grew quickly, its employment level remained relatively low because most of the actual production was subcontracted to the state-owned company Sud Aviation.
Dassault introduced several successful aircraft, including the Ouragan jet fighter (first flown in 1949) and the family of supersonic Mystère fighters (from 1952), which together revolutionized France’s national defense. The Mirage family of delta-wing fighters (from 1955), which included the first European aircraft to exceed twice the speed of sound, became not only a highly successful product but also, through its sales, a means for strengthening France’s political alliances with other countries. In 1963 the company introduced the Falcon business jet, and in 1969 it purchased a majority stake in Breguet Aviation (founded in 1911 by the French aircraft builder Louis-Charles Bréguet), the French partner in the joint French-German Jaguar fighter program. In the late 1970s the twin-engine, subsonic Alpha Jet, developed as a joint project by Dassault and Germany’s Dornier, was introduced in trainer and light ground-attack versions. Dassault first flew the original versions of its supersonic multirole fighters, the single-engine Mirage 2000 and twin-engine Rafale, in 1978 and 1986, respectively. Between 1977 and 1981 the French government accumulated a 45.76 percent interest in Dassault, which it transferred to the French aerospace firm Aerospatiale (a forerunner of EADS) in 1998.
