George Low, in full George Michael Low, original name George Wilhelm Low,  (born June 10, 1926, Vienna, Austria—died July 17, 1984, Troy, New York, U.S.), Austrian-born American aerospace engineer and manager who made major contributions to the U.S. program of human spaceflight. Throughout his career, Low was noted for his attention to detail, his commitment to technical excellence, and his leadership.
Low’s family emigrated to the United States in 1938 after Austria was annexed by Nazi Germany. He became a U.S. citizen while serving in the army during World War II and changed his middle name from Wilhelm to Michael. Low received a bachelor’s degree in aeronautical engineering in 1948 and a master’s degree in the same subject in 1950, both from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) in Troy, N.Y. He then joined the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), working at Lewis Research Center in Cleveland. When NACA was transformed in 1958 into the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), Low helped plan that transition and then became NASA’s first chief of manned spaceflight at its Washington headquarters, where he was closely involved in the planning and management of the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs.
Low became deputy director of NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston in February 1964. After the January 1967 Apollo 1 accident in which three astronauts were killed, he took over responsibility for the redesign of the Apollo spacecraft. In August 1968 he proposed that the first crew-carrying Apollo mission to be launched by the Saturn V rocket go all the way into lunar orbit. This proposal was accepted, and the Apollo 8 mission in December 1968 sent back the dramatic images of the blue Earth rising above the barren lunar surface.
Low became NASA deputy administrator in December 1969 and stayed in that position (with a short period in 1970–71 as acting administrator) until he left NASA in June 1976 to become president of RPI, a position he held until his death. Between 1969 and 1976 he had a major role in the political and management aspects of Skylab, the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and space shuttle development.
