Mary Jackson, née Mary Winston,  (born April 9, 1921, Hampton, Virginia, U.S.—died February 11, 2005, Hampton), American mathematician and aerospace engineer who in 1958 became the first African American female engineer to work at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).
She was born and raised in Hampton, Virginia. After graduating from high school with highest honours, she earned a dual degree in mathematics and physical science at the Hampton Institute (now Hampton University) in 1942. She worked as a math teacher in Maryland for a year before returning to Hampton. She later married Levi Jackson.
In 1951 she started working at the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), where she was a member of its West Area Computing unit—the West Computers, comprising African American female mathematicians—and Jackson’s supervisor was Dorothy Vaughan. The women provided data that were later essential to the early success of the U.S. space program. At the time, NACA was segregated, with Black employees required to use separate bathrooms and dining facilities.
In 1953 Jackson left the West Computers to work for engineer Kazimierz Czarnecki, conducting experiments in a high-speed wind tunnel. He suggested that Jackson enter a training program that would allow her to become an engineer. Since Virginia’s schools were still segregated, she had to obtain special permission to take classes with white students. Jackson ultimately completed the necessary courses, and in 1958 she became the first Black female engineer at NASA, which had been established earlier that year; NACA had been incorporated into it.
Jackson worked as an aerospace engineer for some 20 years. Much of her work centred on the airflow around aircraft. Despite early promotions, she was denied management-level positions, and in 1979 she left engineering and took a demotion to become manager of the women’s program at NASA. In that post, she sought to improve the opportunities for all women at the organization. She retired in 1985.
Jackson’s contributions to the space program received greater recognition after her death in 2005. She and other West Computers—including Vaughan and Katherine Johnson—were the inspiration for Margot Lee Shetterly’s book Hidden Figures: The American Dream and the Untold Story of the Black Women Mathematicians Who Helped Win the Space Race, which was made into an acclaimed film; both were released in 2016.
