Northrop Grumman Corporation,  major American manufacturer specializing in defense and commercial aerospace, electronics, and information-technology products and services. The current company was formed in 1939 as Northrop Aircraft, Inc., and was renamed Northrop Corporation in 1958. Its present name was adopted in 1994 following the acquisition of Grumman Corporation. Headquarters are in Los Angeles.
Northrop Grumman served as the prime contractor for and currently maintains the B-2 stealth bomber fleet for the U.S. Air Force. It is also the prime contractor for the Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (Joint STARS), an advanced airborne surveillance and target-acquisition system supplied to the U.S. Air Force and U.S. Army. The company makes military radar systems, including airborne fire-control and early-warning radars; electronic countermeasures systems; the E-2C Hawkeye early-warning aircraft; and unmanned drone and decoy aircraft. It is a key supplier to Boeing Company’s military aircraft programs. Northrop Grumman is also a leading provider of airspace management systems, having produced civilian air traffic control systems for airports in countries around the world. Its wholly owned subsidiary Logicon, Inc., provides information-technology services to U.S. government agencies and commercial customers and management support for U.S. military weapons systems. Its Litton Sector (formerly Litton Industries) is the largest maker of nonnuclear ships for the U.S. Navy and designs, builds, and overhauls surface ships for government and commercial customers worldwide. It is also a major provider of defense and commercial electronics technology, components, and materials. In 2001 Northrop Grumman employed about 80,000 people, predominantly in the United States.
The early history of Northrop Grumman is closely tied to the career of the pioneering American aeronautical designer John Knudsen Northrop. After working as an engineer for various American aircraft makers, Northrop founded his first company, Avion Corporation, in 1928. A year later, lacking sufficient capital, he agreed to join Avion with United Aircraft and Transport Corporation (see Boeing Company), where it operated as a division under the name Northrop Aircraft Corporation. In 1932 an unfavourable business situation prompted John Northrop to break with United Aircraft and Transport and form Northrop Corporation, with Douglas Aircraft Company holding 51 percent of the stock. As part of Douglas, Northrop and his company built the Gamma and Delta series of single-engine, all-metal aircraft.
In 1937, following labour disputes, John Northrop parted with Douglas Aircraft. Douglas acquired the remaining shares of Northrop Corporation, dissolved the company, and operated its facilities as Douglas’s El Segundo (California) division. Two years later Northrop reestablished his company as Northrop Aircraft, Inc., which he directed until his retirement in 1952. During World War II he developed the radar-equipped, twin-engine P-61 Black Widow, the first American aircraft specifically designed as a night interceptor, and also subcontracted with other aircraft manufacturers in order to finance his experimental flying-wing bombers. After the war these were rejected in favour of more conventional designs, but Northrop’s wartime experiments with jet-powered flying bombs were continued throughout the 1950s, leading to the development of the Snark cruise missile.
In the 1950s Northrop Aircraft—which became Northrop Corporation in 1958—successfully applied the concept of low life-cycle cost to the development and marketing of the N-156 (first flown in 1959), a lightweight, supersonic jet fighter built for simple maintenance and economy of operation. As the T-38 Talon, it became a standard trainer for the U.S. Air Force, and in its F-5 Freedom Fighter and F-5E Tiger II versions it was sold around the world. While continuing to build accessories and subassemblies for other aerospace companies, Northrop also became the principal American manufacturer of pilotless target drones and a major supplier of guidance systems for tactical and strategic missiles. In 1981 it received a U.S. government contract to build the B-2 Spirit stealth bomber, based on John Northrop’s flying-wing concept. The B-2 was first flown in 1989 and entered operational service in 1993.
Northrop Grumman’s other line of heritage dates to 1929 when the American aeronautical engineer Leroy R. Grumman and two partners founded Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corporation. The company, which began by designing floats that allowed U.S. Navy land planes to function as seaplanes, grew to become a key supplier of aircraft for the Navy for the next half century. From the mid 1930s through World War II, Grumman’s increasingly capable radial piston-engine fighters, such as the F6F Hellcat, and torpedo bombers were the standard planes for U.S. aircraft carriers until supplemented by jets during the Korean War. No other aircraft manufacturer received more praise from the U.S. military during World War II.
In 1969 Grumman received a contract to build the carrier-based air-superiority fighter F-14 Tomcat. The twin-engine, variable-wing aircraft, which entered service in 1973, became the West’s most advanced and costliest fighter of the time. Other notable Grumman naval aircraft included the small, long-range, twin-engine A-6 Intruder jet attack aircraft (operational in 1963) and the twin-turboprop E-2 Hawkeye (1964), the first aircraft to be designed specifically for airborne early-warning surveillance. In the civil aviation sector, in response to the demand for turbine-powered executive transports, Grumman introduced the twin-turboprop G-159 Gulfstream I in 1958 and later developed it into a family of popular business jets. In 1978 the company sold its Gulfstream operation to American Jet Industries (now Gulfstream Aerospace, a subsidiary of General Dynamics Corporation). Grumman’s space activities derived from its design and construction of the Apollo Lunar Modules, the craft that carried American astronauts to the surface of the Moon.
Following a decline in aircraft projects beginning in the late 1980s, Grumman became the subject of takeover attempts by both Martin Marietta Corporation (see Lockheed Martin Corporation) and Northrop, the latter succeeding in 1994 with the formation of Northrop Grumman. Two years earlier Northrop had acquired 49 percent of the Vought Aircraft division of LTV (Ling-Temco-Vought) Corporation; in 1994 it bought the remaining portion. In 1996 Northrop Grumman added the defense and electronics systems businesses of Westinghouse Electric Corporation to its assets, and a year later it acquired Logicon, Inc., a defense information-technology firm. In 2000 the company sold its commercial aerostructures business to the Carlyle Group in order to focus on its defense electronics and information-technology segments. It acquired Litton Industries (founded 1953) in 2001.
