Raymond Loewy, in full Raymond Fernand Loewy,  (born November 5, 1893, Paris, France—died July 14, 1986, Monaco), French-born American industrial designer who, through his accomplishments in product design beginning in the 1930s, helped to establish industrial design as a profession.
Loewy studied electrical engineering at the University of Paris, graduating in 1910. His studies in advanced engineering at the École de Lanneau were interrupted by World War I, in which he served in the French Army; he received his degree in 1918.
Loewy immigrated to the United States in 1919 and worked as a fashion illustrator for Vogue magazine and later as a designer of window displays for New York City department stores. Loewy’s first major success came when he redesigned the Gestetner copier, giving it a form that was to remain unchanged for 40 years. He started his own design organization in 1929. His design in 1934 of a refrigerator for Sears, Roebuck and Co. was a great commercial triumph and won first prize at the Paris International Exposition of 1937. During the 1930s and ’40s Loewy designed a wide variety of household products with rounded corners and simplified outlines. In 1945 he formed Raymond Loewy Associates with five partners; it became the largest industrial design firm in the world.
In the years that followed, Loewy’s vision of beauty through the use of “streamlined,” highly functional forms shaped modern industrial design in the United States, and the images of his work permeated the nation’s lifestyle. Working closely with client engineers, he made notable designs for Studebaker automobiles, locomotives and passenger cars for the Pennsylvania Railroad, and buses for Greyhound. He also made important contributions to the design of such products as electric shavers, toothbrushes, ballpoint pens, office machines, soft-drink bottles, radios, and packages, including that for Lucky Strike cigarettes. Perhaps his best-known design was that of the Coca-Cola bottle.
In the 1960s and ’70s Loewy applied his expertise and his formula of sleek and simplified lines to objects used in aerospace technology. He designed the graphics and the interior of Air Force One for Pres. John F. Kennedy, and from 1967 to 1973 he worked for the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration, producing interior designs for the Apollo and Skylab orbiters.
Loewy wrote The Locomotive (1937), Never Leave Well Enough Alone (1951), and Industrial Design (1979).
