Richard Ten Eyck,  (born March 30, 1920, Marseilles, Illinois, U.S.—died January 1, 2009, Illinois), industrial designer whose career was integral to the development of American industry and its products after World War II.
From 1938 to 1939 Ten Eyck attended the University of Illinois, where he studied industrial design. He left school to work for a tool company in Aurora, Illinois, as well as at the Chicago office of designer David Chapman. In 1945 he accepted an offer of employment from the Beech Aircraft Company in Wichita, Kansas. He worked for Beech until 1948, when he opened his own design practice, located in Wichita. It flourished for almost 50 years, until his retirement to Orlando, Florida.
Ten Eyck’s contributions to industrial design included a number of important American manufactured products, from Hesston tractors to Westinghouse air conditioners, but he is probably best remembered for his designs related to the aerospace industry. While at Beech, he was an instrumental part of the team that designed the famous Beechcraft Model 35 Bonanza (first flown 1945); with its many variations, this airplane has one of the longest periods of continuous production in aviation history. Ten Eyck also designed the Vornado fan for the O.A. Sutton Corporation in Wichita (c. 1945–59), with later reincarnations by Vornado Air Circulators, Inc. (after 1988). These fans pushed a concentrated funnel of air in emulation of the turbines in jet engines and became an icon of the so-called Atomic Age of design (c. 1940–60).
Ten Eyck’s early experiences at Beech led him to become a design consultant for other aircraft producers as well. His more notable consultancies included a long period with the Cessna Aircraft Company (1950–80), particularly on single-engine planes and private jets, and another with the Bell Helicopter Company (approximately 1970–90), where he helped develop the Bell-Boeing V-22 Osprey, a tilt-rotor helicopter. His work with these firms included creating the aircraft colour schemes, designing the interiors, solving ergonomics issues, and consulting on the styling of exterior components. He also worked with Cessna and Bell to develop illustrations, models, and conceptual studies for future vehicles.
