Rockwell International Corporation, formerly (1967–73) North American Rockwell Corporation,  diversified American corporation that was formerly one of the country’s leading aerospace contractors, making launch vehicles and spacecraft for the U.S. space program.
The main company was incorporated in 1928 as North American Aviation, Inc., a holding company for a number of aviation companies, but it switched to aircraft manufacturing when it received a contract from the Army Air Corps for 42 planes. The contract was fulfilled by the development and construction of the BT-9. By the start of World War II, North American had produced the B-25 Mitchell bomber, and it went on to manufacture the P-51 Mustang, one of the most successful fighter aircraft of the war. After the war the company manufactured the F-86 Sabre and other jet aircraft for the U.S. military. It also developed the powerful Thor, Redstone, Jupiter, and Atlas rockets, which launched U.S. satellites and space capsules into orbit in the late 1950s and ’60s.
In 1967 North American merged with Rockwell-Standard Corporation to become North American Rockwell Corporation. The company assumed its present name in 1973. Rockwell traced its origins to a small axle plant founded in Oshkosh, Wis., by Colonel Willard Rockwell in 1919. The company produced truck axles for military use during World War I and in 1928 merged with the Timken-Detroit Axle Company, a leader in the heavy-duty axle field. During the 1930s Rockwell worked with the U.S. War Department to design truck and tank transmissions and eventually expanded into all types of automotive parts. In 1958 Rockwell moved into aircraft manufacturing by acquiring Aero Design and Engineering.
After the merger Rockwell continued to be a major government contractor, making the Saturn V rocket engines that lifted the Apollo astronauts to the moon; the Space Shuttle orbiters and their main engines; and the airframe of the B-1B bomber. The company changed its name to Rockwell International in 1973. Despite these successes, Rockwell in the 1980s diversified into such fields as electronics and automotive products in an effort to reduce its dependence on U.S. government-contracted space systems and weapons. Rockwell had become a major manufacturer of modem chips, commercial avionics, and factory automation equipment by the time it sold its defense electronics and aerospace businesses to The Boeing Company in 1996.
