Play School Movement,  educational movement founded in the early 20th century by progressive American educator Caroline Pratt and based on the belief that children create and test their knowledge of the world through play. Approaching education as a multisensory endeavour, Pratt opened the Play School in New York City in the autumn of 1914.
Pratt’s philosophy of intrinsic motivation and belief in allowing children to construct meaning through play was influenced by Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget and his cognitive-interactionist theory, which supported the principle that not only inherited traits but also environmental opportunities to engage in the world around them contributed to children’s learning and development. American philosopher and educator John Dewey, Pratt’s friend and mentor, also inspired her to extend the notion of teaching children about democracy to include allowing them to create a democratic society through play. Joining Pratt in the work at her school and also supporting her pragmatist philosophy of child-directed learning was Lucy Sprague Mitchell, who began the Bureau of Educational Experiments (BEE). Dedicated to the scientific study of children’s nature and growth, the BEE (now Bank Street College of Education) used the natural setting of Pratt’s Play School as its laboratory. Together, Pratt and Mitchell collected extensive data regarding childhood development.
The Play School (now the City and Country School) originally opened in a three-room apartment in Greenwich Village and later moved to its present location on West 12th and 13th streets, using funds from Mitchell. It is the oldest continuously operating progressive elementary school in New York state. City and Country School serves children aged 2 to 13, who learn to solve problems by using an integrated curriculum with an emphasis on community and democratic citizenship. As the foundation of the curriculum, social studies is integrated with math, language arts, science, foreign language, music, and art. Other offerings include the Rhythms Program, which allows children to act out what they are learning through movement; the Jobs Program, which assigns a specific job to each child (aged 8 through 13) that is pertinent to the school’s functioning as a whole; and the Block Yard Program, designed to strengthen gross motor skills as well as to provide an opportunity for children to practice good sportsmanship as they build with large blocks, which were created by Pratt. She also is credited with designing the smaller wooden unit blocks that are a staple of many early childhood education programs throughout the world today.
