Big Star,  American band that during its brief existence in the early 1970s helped define power pop, a style in which bright melodies and boyish vocal harmonies are propelled by urgent rhythms. The original members were Alex Chilton  (b. Dec. 28, 1950, Memphis, Tenn., U.S.—d. March 17, 2010, New Orleans, La.), Chris Bell (b. Jan. 12, 1951, Memphis—d. Dec. 27, 1978, Memphis), Andy Hummel  (b. Jan. 26, 1951, Memphis—d. July 19, 2010, Weatherford, Texas), and Jody Stephens  (b. Oct. 4, 1952, Memphis).
Founded in Memphis, Big Star was the proverbial “band ahead of its time.” Its records sold poorly but were championed by subsequent generations of rockers, including the Replacements, R.E.M., the Bangles, the Posies, and Teenage Fanclub. Chilton had tasted pop success as the teenage lead singer of the Box Tops, a blue-eyed soul group also from Memphis. Despite scoring seven hit singles with the Box Tops, the singer chafed against the limited opportunities for him as a songwriter, and the group broke up in 1970. He joined with Bell, and they briefly forged a Paul McCartney–John Lennon style songwriting partnership in Big Star, while Hummel and Stephens anchored a formidable rhythm section. Bell and Chilton were fans of both British Invasion rock and Southern soul, and they brought an unusual depth to the three-minute pop song on Big Star’s 1972 debut album, #1 Record. Although the record was subsequently hailed as a masterpiece, it initially sold so poorly that a discouraged Bell left the group. The follow-up, Radio City (1974), included a few Bell songs but was largely driven by Chilton, who pursued a slightly tougher-sounding but equally brilliant direction. Among the album’s riches was the cult hit “September Gurls.” But again the band was disappointed by negligible sales and began drifting apart.
Recording sessions for a third album were begun with producer Jim Dickinson in the mid-1970s. By this time the band consisted of only Chilton and Stephens, and the record took on a dark, disturbing tone that reflected the group’s disintegration. By the time Third (also known as Sister Lovers) was released in 1978, Chilton had begun a solo career that would cement his reputation as one of rock’s most mercurial talents. Chilton’s early solo albums (particularly the 1979 release Like Flies on Sherbert) and production work for the Cramps and for Tav Falco and Panther Burns won him new recognition with the punk generation. Bell, who was killed in a car accident in 1978, had a similar mystique; his post-Big Star solo recordings finally surfaced in 1992 to critical acclaim.
Chilton recorded with less frequency in subsequent decades, but he was persuaded to reunite with Stephens to play a Big Star show in 1993. The band’s lineup was fleshed out by Big Star acolytes Jon Auer and Ken Stringfellow of the Posies. The quartet continued to tour sporadically as Big Star and even recorded a solid but unremarkable studio album, In Space (2005). A box set of Big Star’s early work was released in 2009, and the band was to be featured at the South by Southwest Music Conference in Austin, Texas, in 2010. But Chilton died on the second day of the conference, and the final Big Star show instead became a tribute concert, with guest vocalists such as Evan Dando, M. Ward, and R.E.M.’s Mike Mills taking turns singing Chilton’s songs.
