Eddie Cochran, original name Ray Edward Cockran,  (born Oct. 3, 1938, Albert Lea, Minn., U.S.—died April 17, 1960, near Chippenham, Wiltshire, Eng.), a first-generation rock-and-roll singer, guitarist, and songwriter who died at age 21 in a car crash while on tour in England.
Cochran’s family lived in Oklahoma and Minnesota before settling in California in 1950, and the young Cochran sang and played country music—touring and recording as part of the Cochran Brothers, with the unrelated Hank Cochran—until the arrival of Elvis Presley persuaded him to change his style. His good looks made him a perfect swivel-hipped rock-and-roll idol, which is evident in his appearances in a series of exploitation movies: The Girl Can’t Help It (1956), Untamed Youth (1957), and Go Johnny Go (1959).
The echo-laden “Sittin’ in the Balcony” gave him his first hit in 1957, but nothing about it suggested that the singer was anything other than just another handsome kid who had gotten lucky. It was his inherent talent, however, that turned “Summertime Blues” (1958) and “C’mon Everybody” (1958) into perfect examples of early rock, blending the driving, riffing rhythms of Cochran’s own acoustic guitar with witty lyrics devoted to the pleasures (sun, girls, parties) and tribulations (parents, school) of being a teenager in the California of the 1950s. He had cowritten both songs, the first with Jerry Capehart, his producer, and the second with Sharon Sheeley, his girlfriend. Sheeley, a successful professional songwriter, was another passenger in the car taking Cochran and Gene Vincent back to London after a concert in Bristol on the fateful night in 1960; the crash killed Cochran, put Sheeley into the hospital, and left Vincent a semi-cripple. Cochran’s “Three Steps to Heaven” was issued shortly after his death, reaching number one in the United Kingdom, where the intensity of the mourning was greater and more enduring than in his homeland, whose citizens have always mysteriously undervalued his contribution to rock music. Nevertheless, Cochran’s handful of great records continue to evoke a mood of teenage abandon with rare humour, precision, and vitality.
