Grateful Dead, byname the Dead,  American rock band that was the incarnation of the improvisational psychedelic music that flowered in and around San Francisco in the mid-1960s. Grateful Dead was one of the most successful touring bands in rock history despite having had virtually no radio hits. The original members were lead guitarist and vocalist Jerry Garcia (b. August 1, 1942, San Francisco, California, U.S.—d. August 9, 1995, Forest Knolls, California), guitarist and vocalist Bob Weir (b. October 16, 1947, San Francisco), keyboard player Ron (“Pigpen”) McKernan (b. September 8, 1945, San Bruno, California—d. March 8, 1973, San Francisco), bassist Phil Lesh (b. March 15, 1940, Berkeley, California), and drummer Bill Kreutzmann (also called Bill Sommers; b. May 7, 1946, Palo Alto, California). Later members included drummer Mickey Hart (b. September 11, 1943, Long Island, New York, U.S.), keyboard player Tom Constanten (b. March 19, 1944, Longbranch, New Jersey, U.S.), keyboard player Keith Godchaux (b. July 19, 1948, San Francisco—d. July 21, 1980, Marin county, California), vocalist Donna Godchaux (b. August 22, 1947, San Francisco), and keyboard player and vocalist Brent Mydland (b. October 21, 1952, Munich, West Germany [now in Germany]—d. July 26, 1990, Lafayette, California).
Settling on their name in late 1965, Grateful Dead coalesced from jug bands and musicians in the San Francisco area in the early 1960s. In their previous incarnation as the Warlocks, they had performed at novelist Ken Kesey’s Acid Tests—sound-and-light celebrations of the psychedelic experience produced by the hallucinogen LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide, or “acid”). Remarkably eclectic—their backgrounds ranging from electronic experiments and jazz to bluegrass, blues, and folk—the Dead provided a key part of the free live music filling San Francisco during 1967’s Summer of Love, when the city became a magnet for hippie baby boomers.
Even before they recorded their first album, the Dead were building an underground network of diehard fans. By the late 1960s the fans were legion and followed the band on the road. The Deadheads, as they were known, were the epitome of the counterculture. Draped in flowing scarves and granny dresses, they danced arrhythmically while the band onstage jammed for hours and hours. Thanks to them, the Dead eventually triumphed over standard music business wisdom, which assumed that an act had to have hit records to be a popular concert attraction. The unparalleled loyalty of the Deadheads made the band millionaires and endured until the Dead split up following the 1995 death of the group’s leader, Jerry Garcia.
Although their studio sessions ranged from the amphetamine blues of The Grateful Dead (1967) to the jaggedly exploratory Aoxomoxoa (1969) to the lilting folk of American Beauty (1970), the Dead’s strengths—and weaknesses—came most to the fore onstage. Their most artistically successful albums, Live/Dead (1969) and Grateful Dead Live (1971), were live recordings. A popular bumper sticker read, “There is nothing like a Grateful Dead concert.” For better or worse, that was true. Pooling their eclectic talents, the Dead pioneered an energizing blend of rock instrumentation and jazzy improvisation; thanks to their laissez-faire and often drug-fueled stage attitudes, they often fell apart.
Few bands of any genre, however, could match the Dead at their best—fluid open-eared interchanges, ecstatic mood swings, visceral impact. The Dead created a new form of American music. Like Jimi Hendrix, though they had imitators, they remained sui generis. Grateful Dead were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1994.
While Grateful Dead had ceased to exist following the death of Garcia, the remaining band members continued their “long, strange trip.” Weir, Lesh, Kreutzmann, and Hart enlisted Bruce Hornsby, who had originally filled in on keyboards after Brent Mydland’s death in 1990, to form the Other Ones. The band took its name from “That’s It for the Other One,” a 1968 Grateful Dead song dedicated to the bus that was used by Kesey’s Merry Pranksters. The Other Ones produced their debut studio album, The Strange Remain (1999), and toured regularly. In 2003 the band dubbed itself the Dead (dropping “Grateful” out of respect for Garcia) and added former Allman Brothers Band guitarist Warren Haynes to the lineup the following year. Personality conflicts surfaced during the 2004 tour season, however, and a four-year hiatus for the band followed. The Dead reunited in 2008 to headline a fund-raiser for the presidential campaign of Barack Obama, and the success of that performance led to a tour the following year.
In 2015 Weir, Lesh, Kreutzmann, and Hart came together again for the Fare Thee Well tour, a commemoration of Grateful Dead’s 50th anniversary that they announced would also be their final performance as the Dead. Phish guitarist and vocalist Trey Anastasio played lead guitar and contributed vocals, and Jeff Chimenti, who had performed in other bands with both Weir and Lesh, joined Hornsby on keyboards. After two shows in Santa Clara, California, the Dead performed three shows during the Independence Day weekend at Soldier Field in Chicago, which had been the venue of Garcia’s final concert. The final show was held on July 5, almost 10 years to the day since Garcia last fronted the band. However, a month later Weir, Kreutzmann, and Hart announced that they were joining with singer and guitar player John Mayer to create a new band, Dead & Company, which included bassist Oteil Burbridge and Chimenti on keyboards. The group began performing in late 2015.
