Green Day,  American rock band that infused the raw power of punk with a melodic pop sensibility and lyrics that captured the angst-ridden restlessness of American teenagers at the end of the 20th century and into the 21st. The principal members were Billie Joe Armstrong (b. February 17, 1972, Rodeo, California, U.S.), Mike Dirnt (byname of Michael Ryan Pritchard, b. May 4, 1972, Berkeley), and Tré Cool (byname of Frank Edwin Wright III, b. December 9, 1972, Willits, California). Other members included Al Sobrante (byname of John Kiffmeyer).
Armstrong and Dirnt met while attending grade school in Crockett, California, and bonded over their love of classic punk groups such as the Ramones and the Dead Kennedys. In 1987 they and drummer Sean Hughes formed their first band, a punk outfit called Sweet Children. Hughes was later replaced by Sobrante, a member of local group Isocracy. Sweet Children became a popular live act in the San Francisco Bay area. In 1989 the group recorded an album, 39/Smooth, that was released by local label Lookout Records under the new band name Green Day (it was later repackaged as part of the band’s 1991 release, 1,039/Smoothed Out Slappy Hours). Not long afterward, Sobrante was replaced by Tré Cool, a drummer from the mountains around Mendocino, California, who had been playing in the punk band the Lookouts since age 12.
Green Day built a cult following and found a foothold in California’s burgeoning punk revival scene, of which they were one of the main engines. The band’s next album, Kerplunk (1992), was also released by Lookout Records, but it drew attention from bigger labels, including Reprise, which released Green Day’s major-label debut, Dookie, in 1994. The album carried the band’s catchy pop-punk sound and Armstrong’s apathetic lyrics into the mainstream, earning a Grammy Award for best alternative music performance and selling more than 15 million copies worldwide.
Green Day’s next two albums, Insomniac and Nimrod (1997), did well commercially but failed to match the smash success of Dookie, and Warning (2000) marked a waning in the band’s popularity. After a four-year break from recording, Green Day released the stylistic gamble American Idiot (2004), a politically charged album with operatic scope. The hugely successful release combined the large-scale political commentary of Green Day’s punk forebears with the charged intimate observations of their own previous albums and in doing so achieved unexpected relevancy and acclaim. American Idiot sold more than 12 million copies worldwide and received the 2005 Grammy Award for best rock album. Moreover, a single from the album, “Boulevard of Broken Dreams,” won the Grammy Award for record of the year in 2006.
In 2009 a rock opera based on—and scored with the songs from—the album was produced at a theatre in Berkeley, California. Depicting the dead-end efforts of a trio of teenagers to escape the conventional life of their parents’ suburb, the musical American Idiot made a triumphant move to Broadway the following year, gaining rave reviews and two Tony Awards, for scenic design and lighting design of a musical. Additionally, the Broadway cast album was awarded a Grammy in 2011.
Green Day received a second Grammy Award for best rock album for 21st Century Breakdown (2009), another ambitious song cycle. It was followed in 2012 by a trilogy—the separately released ¡Uno!, ¡Dos!, and ¡Tré!—that found the band returning to the high-energy immediacy of its punk roots while also drawing inspiration from its classic-rock forebears. Green Day’s next release, Revolution Radio (2016), was a more-focused return to basics. Father of All… (2020) featured throwback garage rock.
In 2015 the band was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.
