Guns N’ Roses,  American band that invigorated late 1980s heavy metal music with its raw energy. The principal members were Axl Rose (original name William Bailey; b. February 6, 1962, Lafayette, Indiana, U.S.), Slash (original name Saul Hudson; b. July 23, 1965, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire, England), Duff McKagan (original name Michael McKagan; b. February 5, 1964, Seattle, Washington, U.S.), Izzy Stradlin (original name Jeff Isbell; b. April 8, 1962, Lafayette, Indiana), Steve Adler (b. January 22, 1965, Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.), Matt Sorum  (b. November 19, 1960, Long Beach, California, U.S.), Dizzy Reed (original name Darren Reed; b. June 18, 1963, Hinsdale, Illinois, U.S.), and Gilby Clarke (b. August 17, 1962, Cleveland, Ohio).
Guns N’ Roses was formed in Los Angeles in 1985 by Rose and Stradlin. After changes in personnel, the band’s lineup stabilized with Rose as the vocalist, McKagan on bass, Adler on drums, and Slash and Stradlin on guitar. Signing with Geffen Records, they released the extended-play recording Live ?!*@ Like a Suicide in 1986, followed by the landmark album Appetite for Destruction in 1987. The music’s sizzling fury, with Rose’s wildcat howls matched by Slash’s guitar pyrotechnics, made the album a smash hit, with sales of more than 17 million.
After that high point the band was dogged by a changing lineup, violence at their concerts, substance abuse, and allegations of racism and homophobia stemming from the lyrics to their song “One in a Million.” The band’s two 1991 albums, Use Your Illusion I and II, sold well but were generally regarded as less compelling than their previous work. The 1993 album The Spaghetti Incident? generated further controversy by including a song written by mass murderer Charles Manson.
Despite the departures of Adler, Stradlin, and Slash and the absence of new product, Rose carried on with the band into the early 21st century. The “new” Guns N’ Roses played a handful of live shows in 2000 and 2001, with Rose leading a lineup that included former members of Primus and Nine Inch Nails. Meanwhile, Slash, Stradlin, and Matt Sorum (who had replaced Adler on drums prior to the Use Your Illusion recording sessions) recruited former Stone Temple Pilots lead singer Scott Weiland to form Velvet Revolver. Velvet Revolver’s debut album, Contraband (2004), topped the Billboard charts and received solid marks from both fans and critics. Rose returned to the studio to continue working on the next Guns N’ Roses full-length album, a process that began in 1994 with a completely different set of musicians. As the production entered its second decade, comparisons were made to the Beach Boys’ Brian Wilson’s lost-and-found masterpiece Smile, and many expressed doubts that the album would ever be released.
In August 2008, nine tracks from the album, tentatively titled Chinese Democracy, were leaked to the Internet. After some 14 years, an estimated $13 million in production costs, and an exclusive distribution deal with electronics retailer Best Buy, Chinese Democracy hit store shelves in November 2008. It was greeted with generally positive reviews, but it was ultimately the band’s worst-selling studio album by a wide margin. Rose was quick to blame his record label for Chinese Democracy’s poor performance, but the changing music industry climate was likely a significant factor. Albums simply no longer sold in the quantities that they did in the early 1990s, when the band was at the height of its popularity. Guns N’ Roses remained popular in concert, however. In 2016 Slash and McKagan rejoined the band for a concert tour that concluded in 2019.
In 2012 Guns N’ Roses was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.
