Jackson Browne, in full Clyde Jackson Browne,  (born October 9, 1948, Heidelberg, Germany), German-born American singer, songwriter, pianist, and guitarist who helped define the singer-songwriter movement of the 1970s.
Born in Germany to a musical family with deep roots in southern California, Browne grew up in Los Angeles and Orange county. His interest in music led to his membership in the fledgling Nitty Gritty Dirt Band and to late-1960s stints in New York City as a backing musician for Nico of the Velvet Underground and for Tim Buckley. He was first noticed as a songwriter, and his compositions were recorded by performers such as Tom Rush, the Byrds, and Linda Ronstadt before he recorded his eponymous debut album in 1972 (featuring the Top Ten hit “Doctor My Eyes”). Part of a coterie of musicians that established Los Angeles as the home of country rock, Browne cowrote several songs for the Eagles (most notably “Take It Easy”).
Profoundly influenced by Bob Dylan and in the tradition of Jack Kerouac and Thomas Wolfe, Browne created a protagonist whose quest for love, understanding, and justice was a mythic extension of his own experience. After winning a cult following with his first three albums—the last two, including the highly regarded Late for the Sky, featured instrumentalist David Lindley—Browne had million-selling hits with The Pretender (1976) and the live album Running on Empty (1978); the title tracks from both recordings are among his best-known songs. His musical style ranged from romantic folk-rock ballads to up-tempo rock and reggae.
In the 1980s his music took a political turn that mirrored his activism, especially on Lives in the Balance (1986), which evidenced his vehement opposition to U.S. policy in Central America. His albums in the 1990s and 2000s largely reflected a return to more personal concerns, though political activism and political songs remained central to his identity.
In 2004 Browne was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. He returned to his coffeehouse folk roots on Solo Acoustic Vol. 1 (2005) and Solo Acoustic Vol. 2 (2008), a pair of recordings of live performances of many of his signature songs. In 2008 he also released a collection of new songs, Time the Conqueror. Love Is Strange, another live recording that documented Browne’s acoustic tour of Spain with Lindley in 2006, was released in 2010. The later studio album Standing in the Breach (2014) was a well-reviewed mix of personal and political songs.
