Jim Morrison, original name James Douglas Morrison,  (born December 8, 1943, Melbourne, Florida, U.S.—died July 3, 1971, Paris, France), American singer and songwriter who was the charismatic front man of the psychedelic rock group the Doors.
Morrison’s father was a naval officer (ultimately an admiral), and the family moved frequently, though it settled down in the Washington, D.C., suburb of Alexandria, Virginia, where Morrison attended high school and was a good but rebellious student. He began his college education in 1961 at St. Petersburg Junior College (now St. Petersburg College) in Florida and developed his talents as a performer by reciting poetry at the local Beaux Arts coffeehouse. He subsequently transferred to Florida State University and then to the University of California, Los Angeles, where he studied film. There he met Ray Manzarek, who played the organ in the rock group that the two formed in 1965 with guitarist Robby Krieger and drummer John Densmore. They called themselves the Doors, taking their name from Aldous Huxley’s book on mescaline, The Doors of Perception (1954), which was itself titled after a line by William Blake.
For a brief period in the mid-1960s, the Doors were the house band of the Whisky-a-Go-Go, a much-storied club on the Sunset Strip in Los Angeles. At about the same time, the group signed with Elektra Records, for which they released a string of hit singles, including “Light My Fire” (1967) and “Hello, I Love You” (1968), and critically acclaimed albums such as The Doors (1967) and L.A. Woman (1971). The dark-edged eroticism of Morrison’s baritone voice and poetic lyrics helped make the band one of rock music’s most potent, controversial, and theatrical acts. Morrison was known for his drinking and drug use and outrageous stage behaviour. During a 1969 concert in Miami, he allegedly exposed himself onstage, and he was later convicted on indecent exposure and profanity charges. He was sentenced to six months in prison but was granted bail pending his appeal (in 2010 he was posthumously pardoned).
In 1971 Morrison left the Doors to write poetry and moved to Paris, where he died later that year. The cause of death was officially listed as heart failure, but there was no autopsy, leading to various conspiracy theories. His grave in the Père-Lachaise Cemetery became a mecca for music fans and one of Paris’s most unlikely tourist attractions. In 1978 the remaining former Doors gathered again to record backing tracks for poetry Morrison had recorded before his death, releasing the result as An American Prayer by “Jim Morrison, music by the Doors.” The band and Morrison’s story came to the motion picture screen as The Doors (1991), directed by Oliver Stone. The Collected Works of Jim Morrison: Poetry, Journals, Transcripts and Lyrics was published in 2021.
