Joy Division/New Order,  British rock group who, as Joy Division, refined the external chaos of 1970s punk into a disquieting inner turmoil, ushering in the postpunk era, and later, as New Order, pioneered the successful fusion of rock and 1980s African American dance music styles. The principal members were Ian Curtis (b. July 15, 1956, Macclesfield, Cheshire, England—d. May 18, 1980, Macclesfield), Bernard Albrecht (later Bernard Sumner; b. January 4, 1956, Salford, Manchester), Peter Hook (b. February 13, 1956, Manchester), Stephen Morris (b. October 28, 1957, Macclesfield), and Gillian Gilbert (b. January 27, 1961, Manchester).
Inspired by seeing the Sex Pistols perform in Manchester, guitarist Albrecht, bassist Hook, and vocalist Curtis formed Warsaw in the spring of 1977 to play thrashing punk music. By early 1978 they had replaced their original drummer with Morris and changed the band’s name to Joy Division (slang for female concentration camp prisoners forced into prostitution by the Nazis). Their trademarks were already in place: prominent, melodic bass; guitar and drums as rhythm and texture; complex, literary lyrics; and mediumistic live performances (Curtis’s spastic hyperactivity was sometimes actually the result of onstage epileptic seizures). The group’s debut album, Unknown Pleasures (1979), was produced by Martin Hannett for Manchester’s Factory Records with a prescient ambience and sonic atmosphere that anticipated production conventions to come. It marked the viability of the independent bands and labels that had arisen in response to punk and made Joy Division one of the hottest live draws in the United Kingdom. Later covered by disco diva Grace Jones, “She’s Lost Control,” from Unknown Pleasures, became a signature tune.
Working at a dizzying pace, the group incorporated drum machines and synthesizers in their move from rock to a measured European electronic sound influenced by Kraftwerk and producer Giorgio Moroder. In concert Curtis held nothing back, giving nightmare visions such as “Dead Souls” and “Atrocity Exhibition” an existential authority. Along with a troubled private life and worsening epilepsy, this intensity drove Curtis to the brink. On the eve of Joy Division’s first U.S. tour in 1980, he committed suicide at the home of his estranged wife. Success followed tragedy; the single “Love Will Tear Us Apart” and the band’s second album, Closer, made the top 10 and top 20, respectively, in the United Kingdom.
Following Curtis’s death, the three remaining band members—joined by keyboardist Gilbert—continued as New Order, with Sumner (formerly Albrecht) becoming the vocalist. With singles such as “Everything’s Gone Green” (1981) and the best-selling “Blue Monday” (1983), New Order moved toward a more thorough exploration of dance music. Their 1989 single “Fine Time” incorporated elements of the then-current U.K. club sound called acid house, and “World in Motion,” the official national theme for the 1990 World Cup, gave them their first U.K. number one hit. “Regret,” released in 1993, was nearly as successful.
After an eight-year hiatus from recording, New Order returned with Get Ready (2001), a solid collection of guitar-driven tracks that eschewed the dance anthem model that had typified their later releases. Less well-received was Waiting for the Sirens’ Call (2005), an unremarkable return to the disco sound of the mid-1990s. Bassist Hook, who had drifted apart from his bandmates over the years, finally left New Order in 2007. Although other members announced in 2009 that they had formed a new band, called Bad Lieutenant, New Order began to tour again two years later, notably performing at a massive concert in Hyde Park, London, to mark the end of the 2012 Olympic Games. Lost Sirens, which salvaged additional songs recorded during the sessions that produced Waiting for the Sirens’ Call, was released in 2013. The band returned to its signature synth-heavy sound with Music Complete (2015). A live album, NOMC15, followed two years later. Another live album, Σ(No,12k,Lg,17Mif) New Order + Liam Gillick: So it goes.., appeared in 2019.
