Kelly Clarkson, in full Kelly Brianne Clarkson,  (born April 24, 1982, Fort Worth, Texas, U.S.), American singer and songwriter who emerged as a pop-rock star after winning the popular television talent contest American Idol in 2002.
Clarkson grew up in Burleson, Texas, a suburb of Fort Worth, where her vocal prowess was first recognized by her school’s choir teacher when she was a seventh grader. Upon finishing high school, Clarkson moved to Los Angeles, where she unsuccessfully tried to break into show business. In 2002, after returning to Texas, she became a contestant on the first season of the Fox Broadcasting Company’s American Idol, a singing competition that allowed viewers to vote for their favourite performer. Viewers were smitten with Clarkson’s arresting voice, charisma, and humour. Her prize for winning the contest was $1 million and a recording contract with RCA.
Just two weeks after her American Idol win, Clarkson released her first single, “A Moment like This,” which quickly became a hit. Thankful, her debut album of pop songs, followed in 2003. Her second full-length album, Breakaway (2004), which moved beyond Clarkson’s initial pop sound into a rock vein, sold more than 11 million copies worldwide and featured the hit singles “Because of You,” “Behind These Hazel Eyes,” and “Since U Been Gone.” Breakaway won a Grammy Award for best pop vocal album, and “Since U Been Gone” was honoured with the award for best female pop vocal performance. Clarkson’s third album, My December (2007), marked a new era in her career; even more rock-oriented than her previous releases, it was also more confessional, with each track cowritten by its performer.
Clarkson balanced her rock and pop tendencies on All I Ever Wanted (2009) and Stronger (2011), the latter of which earned her another Grammy Award for best pop vocal album. Powerfully produced singles such as “My Life Would Suck Without You” and “Stronger (What Doesn’t Kill You)” extended her string of hits. Additionally, with the popular ballad “Don’t You Wanna Stay” (2010), a duet with Jason Aldean, she pursued an interest in country music that was previously made apparent on a 2007 version of “Because of You” that she recorded with Reba McEntire. After the holiday album Wrapped in Red (2013), Clarkson made Piece by Piece (2015), which was noted for its ballads. She then ventured into soul and R&B with Meaning of Life (2017), her eighth studio album and first released by Atlantic Records.
In 2018 Clarkson became a coach on the televised singing competition The Voice. The following year she lent her voice to the animated comedy UglyDolls. In 2019 her eponymous daytime talk show debuted, and the next year she won a Daytime Emmy Award for best entertainment talk show host.
