Melissa Etheridge, in full Melissa Lou Etheridge,  (born May 29, 1961, Leavenworth, Kansas, U.S.), American musician known for her raspy-voiced rock-and-roll singing. She also was noted for her early openness about her sexual orientation.
Etheridge began playing the guitar at age 8 and writing songs by age 11. She honed her skills playing in local bands throughout her teens (emulating influences such as Bruce Springsteen and Pete Townshend of the Who) and briefly attended the Berklee College of Music in Boston before returning to Kansas. On her 21st birthday, Etheridge left home for Los Angeles, where she played in clubs and bars until 1986, when Chris Blackwell, founder of Island Records, signed her to a recording contract. Her first album, Melissa Etheridge (1988), with its hit single “Bring Me Some Water,” earned her a Grammy Award nomination. Success continued with the release of Brave and Crazy (1989) and Never Enough (1992), which garnered a Grammy for the single “Ain’t It Heavy.”
In early 1993, at a gay-and-lesbian celebration of the inauguration of Pres. Bill Clinton, Etheridge announced to the crowd what many of her most devoted fans had assumed: she was a lesbian. The album Yes I Am followed later that year, with the hit singles “Come to My Window” (another Grammy winner) and “I’m the Only One.” Soon Etheridge’s relationship with film director Julie Cypher became a matter of public record. The couple, who had been together since 1990, appeared on the cover of Newsweek magazine in 1996, and in 2000 they revealed in an article in Rolling Stone that musician David Crosby had supplied the sperm for the two children Cypher had borne. When she separated from Cypher later that same year, Etheridge chronicled the details of their relationship and breakup in her memoir, The Truth Is…My Life in Love and Music, and on her album Skin, which were both released in 2001.
In 2004 Etheridge was diagnosed with breast cancer, and after undergoing treatment she made a memorable appearance during the 2005 Grammy Awards ceremonies. Still bald from chemotherapy treatments, Etheridge sang a characteristically heartfelt rendition of Janis Joplin’s “Piece of My Heart,” bringing many in the audience to tears. Etheridge returned to touring the following year. She also wrote and performed the Academy Award-winning song “I Need to Wake Up” for the 2006 Oscar-winning documentary An Inconvenient Truth.
Following the release of her album The Awakening (2007), an audio autobiography of her career in music, Etheridge staged a concert tour in 2008 that was similarly designed to tell the story of her life through a progression of highly personal songs. That same year she released the holiday-themed A New Thought for Christmas. Her later albums included 4th Street Feeling (2012), on which she played all the guitar parts; Memphis Rock and Soul (2016), a collection of classic covers; and The Medicine Show (2019), her 15th studio album.
In 2020 Beckett Cypher, Etheridge’s eldest son, died after struggling with opioid addiction.
