Mumford & Sons,  British folk-rock band noted for its raucous, fast-paced, sonically dense instrumentation and for lyrics that had a spiritual focus subtly grounded in Christianity. The group’s members were Marcus Mumford (b. January 31, 1987, Anaheim, California, U.S.), Ben Lovett (b. September 30, 1986, London, England), Winston Marshall (b. December 20, 1987, London, England), and Ted Dwane (b. August 15, 1984, London, England).
The band had its beginnings in 2006 in a small bar and music venue in London called Bosun’s Locker, where a number of musicians who had an affinity for earthy acoustic music hung out and played with each other in fluid lineups. The band members came from varied musical backgrounds: Mumford had founded a free-form jazz band; Lovett played in an indie rock band; and Dwane was a member of a punk band. At Bosun’s Locker, Marshall, Dwane, and Mumford (on drums) sometimes played backup to singer-songwriter Laura Marling and, with Lovett, occasionally performed under the name Marcus Mumford & His Merry Men. By late 2007 Mumford & Sons had coalesced, with Mumford as lead vocalist and guitarist, Lovett on keyboards, Marshall on banjo, and Dwane playing the upright bass. The band released an eponymous EP in July 2008, about the same time it made its first appearance at the Glastonbury Festival in Pilton, England, and later that year a second EP, Love Your Ground, came out.
In 2009 Mumford & Sons signed with Island Records. The single “Little Lion Man,” released that fall, shot up the charts, and the band’s first studio album, Sigh No More, which contained that track, debuted at number 11 on British charts and climbed upward. Sigh No More was released in the United States in 2010 and was equally well received there. The album won the prize for British album of the year at the BRIT Awards in 2011, and later that year the band received a Grammy Award nomination for best new artist.
In 2012 Mumford & Sons released their second album, Babel, and it was an immediate hit in both England and the United States. Babel and the track “I Will Wait” earned numerous Grammy nominations, with Babel winning album of the year. “Lover of the Light” was also a hit song. In addition, the one-hour film Big Easy Express, documenting part of a 2011 American tour Mumford & Sons made with two other bands, won the Grammy for best long-form music video. Later in 2013 the group had a scare when Dwane had to undergo emergency surgery for a blood clot in his brain. Although he returned to performing in time for the band’s appearance at Glastonbury, in September 2013, after ending a lengthy world tour, the band announced that it was going on hiatus. The following year Mumford & Sons returned to the recording studio, and the single “Believe” was released in March 2015. It and the album Wilder Mind, which was released two months later, signaled a new direction for the group, which largely eschewed folk for a more classic rock sound.Delta (2018) continued in that vein but was more experimental.
