Sleater-Kinney,  American rock band that arose from the feminist punk rock movement known as “riot grrrl” and was acclaimed for recordings that combined a lean and aggressive sound with passionate socially conscious lyrics. Sleater-Kinney originated in Olympia, Washington, as a collaboration between friends Corin Tucker (b. November 9, 1972, State College, Pennsylvania, U.S.) and Carrie Brownstein (b. September 27, 1974, Seattle, Washington), of the early 1990s riot grrrl bands Heavens to Betsy and Excuse 17, respectively. (Sleater-Kinney was named after a street in Olympia.) The two singer-guitarists recruited drummer Lora MacFarlane (February 20, 1970, Glasgow, Scotland) to record their self-titled debut album, released in 1995. Though the songs on the recording were somewhat unrefined, the band’s essential musical elements—Tucker’s fierce, often caterwauling lead vocals and chugging rhythm guitar, as well as Brownstein’s jagged lead guitar—were already in place. Janet Weiss (b. September 24, 1965, Los Angeles, California) became the band’s drummer in 1996.
Sleater-Kinney’s sophomore release, Call the Doctor (1996), brought the band attention with its sharp attacks on consumer culture and gender inequality. On songs such as “I Wanna Be Your Joey Ramone,” the group even skewers the very indie rock scene in which it had become widely celebrated. With Dig Me Out (1997), Sleater-Kinney moved to influential independent label Kill Rock Stars and also introduced new drummer Weiss. By this time Brownstein had also emerged as a strong secondary songwriter and vocalist. The Hot Rock (1999) further raised Sleater-Kinney’s profile, and All Hands on the Bad One (2000), with its intimations of 1960s girl-group vocal harmonies, showed a marked turn toward pop songcraft while maintaining the band’s distinct edge.
One Beat (2002) proved to be an even more expansive affair, incorporating classic rock song structures as well as instruments such as horns and synthesizers. Tucker’s lyrics drew inspiration from her newfound role as a mother, as well as the aftermath of the September 11 attacks. Perhaps the group’s most radical departure, however, was The Woods (2005). Working with noted producer Dave Fridmann, the band displayed a new sense of open-ended improvisation, along with its most dense and bombastic arrangements. Having earned a reputation that far outpaced its moderate commercial success, Sleater-Kinney disbanded at the conclusion of its 2006 concert tour.
Tucker subsequently released solo albums under the name the Corin Tucker Band. Weiss, meanwhile, drummed for the indie rock groups the Jicks (the backing band of former Pavement front man Stephen Malkmus) and Quasi. In addition, she and Brownstein—who had spent the intervening years as a writer and an actress—helped found the band Wild Flag, which debuted with a self-titled album in 2011. In addition, Brownstein was a creator, writer, and actress on the popular television show Portlandia (2011–18).
In 2013 Sleater-Kinney reunited for a surprise performance at a Pearl Jam concert. They followed that appearance with a well-received album, No Cities to Love (2015), after which they resumed touring. The band took a new, experimental direction with their next album, The Center Won’t Hold (2019), which was produced by Annie Clark (byname St. Vincent). Just before its release, Weiss announced that she was leaving the band.
