Spice Girls,  British pop group whose infectious dance songs dominated the global charts in the late 1990s. They cultivated a playful sex appeal under the banner of “Girl Power” to create a feminist alternative to the boy bands of the day. The band’s members were Ginger Spice (byname of Geraldine Estelle Halliwell; b. August 6, 1972, Watford, England), Sporty Spice (byname of Melanie Jayne Chisholm; b. January 12, 1974, Liverpool, England), Posh Spice (byname of Victoria Adams [later Victoria Beckham]; b. April 7, 1975,  Hertfordshire, England), Scary Spice (byname of Melanie Janine Brown; b. May 29, 1975, Yorkshire, England), and Baby Spice (byname of Emma Lee Bunton; b. January 21, 1976, London, England).
The group was formed when Halliwell, Brown, Chisholm, Bunton, and Adams responded to a 1993 advertisement in a trade magazine for a “manufactured” female pop group. The five, who had backgrounds in dance and acting, were chosen from the hundreds of women who auditioned, and they worked so well together that they became housemates. Personality conflicts led them to break with their original manager, a decision that united them and signaled the first stirrings of the “Girl Power” ethic. The group was signed to Virgin Records in 1995, but a lack of effective management hampered the band’s development. The Spice Girls’ first single, “Wannabe,” was finally released in July 1996. It soared to the top of the British singles chart, and it held that position for most of the summer. Around this time, an article in Top of the Pops magazine anointed the women Ginger, Sporty, Posh, Scary, and Baby, and the names were embraced by the band, its fans, and the media. “Wannabe” went on to hit number one in some 30 countries, and the music video that accompanied the song made the Spice Girls an international sensation. The follow-up single, “Say You’ll Be There,” paved the way for the band’s debut album, Spice (1996), which sold some 19 million copies worldwide in its first year.
In 1997 the Spice Girls made their debut in the United States, quickly establishing dominance over the Billboard singles and album charts. In March of that year, the band published Girl Power!, a collection of photographs, lyrics, and biographical snippets. The group’s second full-length album, Spiceworld, accompanied Spice World: The Movie in late 1997. While the film was greeted with a harsh critical reception, fans filled the theatres and made it a minor box-office success.
By the beginning of 1998, however, the Spice Girls’ fortunes began to wane. The celebrity power of individual members took precedence over the group’s music, a fact that became apparent when Posh announced her engagement to association football (soccer) star David Beckham. Ginger left the group in the middle of the Spiceworld tour in May 1998, and Posh became a fixture in tabloids and fashion magazines after she married Beckham in 1999. The Spice Girls’ final album, ironically titled Forever, was released in 2000. It peaked at number two on the British album chart, but it barely entered the top 40 in Billboard. In February 2001 the band officially broke up, and the individual members pursued solo projects. Rumours of a reunion circulated for some years, and in 2007–08 the Spice Girls once again took the stage for a world tour. The group also reunited for a performance at the closing ceremony of the London 2012 Olympic Games. In 2019 the Spice Girls, minus Posh (Beckham), staged a European tour.
