The Jesus and Mary Chain,  Scottish alternative rock band whose landmark debut album, Psychocandy (1985), mixed cheery power-pop melodies with feedback-distorted guitar playing and the drone of sombre lyrics. Influenced by the Sex Pistols and the Velvet Underground as well as by the Beach Boys and Phil Spector-produced 1960s pop, the Jesus and Mary Chain created an arresting hybrid that was much celebrated by critics and that influenced numerous noise-pop bands but was only marginally successful commercially. The original members were William Reid (b. 1958, East Kilbride, Scotland), Jim Reid (b. 1961, East Kilbride), Douglas Hart, and Murray Dalglish. Later members included Ben Lurie, Bobby Gillespie, John Moore, and Steve Monti.
Brothers Jim and William Reid, guitarist-vocalists, formed the Jesus and Mary Chain in suburban Glasgow, Scotland. In 1984 they moved to London, where, under the tutelage of provocative promoter Alan McGee, they released a string of innovative postpunk singles beginning with “Upside Down” and elicited riotlike responses to truncated live performances that seldom exceeded 20 minutes. Multitracked guitar distortion and rudimentary snare and tom-tom drumming dominated Psychocandy, which was heralded by some critics as one of pop music’s most auspicious debuts. In 1986 the band’s “Some Candy Talking” cracked the British top 20, and the next year “April Skies” made the British top 10. Suffused in moody echoes, their follow-up album, Darklands (1987), marked a departure from the manic distortion of Psychocandy. Automatic (1989), notable for its synthesized drum accompaniment and the single “Blues from a Gun,” was followed by Honey’s Dead (1992), featuring their comeback hit “Reverence.”
The Reid brothers, with various bassists and drummers, veered between styles in the 1990s, even tapping an acoustic vein for Stoned and Dethroned (1994). Munki (1998) was an underperforming return to form, but the members of the band were by then at odds, and the Jesus and Mary Chain broke up in 1999. The Reid brothers revived the band in time to perform at the Coachella music festival in 2007. After recording the song “All Things Must Pass” for the television series Heroes the following year, the Jesus and Mary Chain began touring again, and in 2017 they released Damage and Joy, a satisfying if not groundbreaking evolution of their sound.
