The Smiths,  one of the most popular and critically acclaimed English bands of the 1980s. The original members were lead singer Morrissey (original name Steven Patrick Morrissey; b. May 22, 1959, Manchester, England), guitarist Johnny Marr (original name John Maher; b. October 31, 1963, Manchester), bassist Andy Rourke (b. 1963, Manchester), and drummer Mike Joyce (b. June 1, 1963, Manchester).
Prime exponents of British alternative rock, the Smiths were based around the unlikely partnership of singer-lyricist Morrissey (a reclusive bookworm inspired as much by Oscar Wilde as by his glam-rock heroes the New York Dolls) and budding guitar hero Marr. With drummer Joyce and bassist Rourke completing the lineup, the band burst onto the Manchester scene and quickly won a cult following with sessions recorded for British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) radio, live shows, and the plangent folk-punk of their debut single, “Hand in Glove.” Signed to the prominent independent label Rough Trade, the Smiths scored several U.K. hits, notably “This Charming Man” and “What Difference Does It Make?” Morrissey’s flamboyant stage presence, forlorn croon, and compellingly conflicted persona (loudly proclaimed celibacy offset by coy hints of closeted homosexuality) made him a peculiar heartthrob, and songs such as “Still Ill” sealed his role as spokesman for disaffected youth. But Morrissey’s “woe-is-me” posture inspired some hostile critics to dismiss the Smiths as “miserabilists.”
After their brilliant eponymous debut and the sparkling radio-session collection Hatful of Hollow (both released in 1984), the Smiths released Meat Is Murder (1985), an uneven album ranging from the ponderous title track’s vegan rage to the poignant “Well I Wonder.” The group’s marked shift from the personal to the political, combined with Morrissey’s carefully fashioned outsider image, made the Smiths into champions for those alienated by Tory materialism and disgusted by its pop music reflection (glossy, lyrically inane funk and soul). The Smiths’ non-rhythm-and-blues, whiter-than-white fusion of 1960s rock and postpunk was a repudiation of contemporary dance pop, a stance emblazoned in the hit single “Panic,” with its controversial chorus, “Burn down the disco / Hang the blessed DJ.” After 1986’s The Queen Is Dead, their most perfect balance of private angst and public anger, the Smiths—frustrated at the failure of their singles to hit the top 10—abandoned Rough Trade for the marketing muscle of the major label EMI (in the United States they remained with Sire Records). Shortly before the release of their last album for Rough Trade, Strangeways, Here We Come (1987), the group broke up unexpectedly.
Morrissey’s solo career started promisingly with 1988’s Viva Hate (on which guitar virtuoso Vini Reilly proved a capable Marr surrogate); however, on subsequent singles and Kill Uncle (1991), Morrissey, backed by an undistinguished rockabilly band, dwindled into tuneless self-parody. His muse rallied with the glam-rock-influenced Your Arsenal (1992) and the delicate Vauxhall and I (1994). These albums, and the less impressive Southpaw Grammar (1995) and Maladjusted (1997), testified to a growing homoerotic obsession with criminals, skinheads, and boxers, a change paralleled by a shift in the singer’s image from wilting wallflower to would-be thug sporting sideburns and gold bracelets. A seven-year hiatus followed, and fans and critics warmly greeted the politics and pathos of You Are the Quarry (2004), the solid craftsmanship of Ringleader of the Tormentors (2006), and the self-assuredness of Years of Refusal (2009). His subsequent albums, including Low in High School (2017) and I Am Not a Dog on a Chain (2020), however, were less well received. Despite Morrissey’s aesthetic fluctuations in the decades following the demise of the Smiths, the cult of this true pop original endured.
Marr’s post-Smiths career was equally productive, even if it lacked the theatricality of Morrissey’s. Drawn once again to a charismatic vocalist with a penchant for dark lyrics, Marr joined Matt Johnson in The The, where his signature sound drove two of that band’s most successful albums—Mind Bomb (1989) and Dusk (1991). Marr teamed with Bernard Sumner of New Order in the supergroup Electronic. Although Marr and Sumner had initially conceived their partnership to be temporary, the success of the 1989 single “Getting Away with It” inspired the pair to record three well-received dance albums. More than a decade after the demise of the Smiths, Marr formed his own group, the Healers. Distribution issues plagued the band’s debut effort, however, and three years passed before it hit stores as Boomslang (2003). Marr subsequently joined American alternative rock act Modest Mouse—he contributed to its hit album We Were Dead Before the Ship Even Sank (2007)—and British rockers the Cribs before issuing his first official solo release, The Messenger, in 2013. His solo career continued with Playland (2014) and Call the Comet (2018).
