Tinariwen,  Tuareg music group, active from about 1979, whose update of traditional Tuareg styles captured the spirit of that nomadic culture and spoke to its disaffection. In the early 21st century the band also attracted sizeable Western audiences who were mesmerized by its innovative brand of electric-guitar-based “desert blues.”
Tinariwen’s membership was fluid throughout its existence. At its centre, however, was the Tuareg musician Ibrahim Ag Alhabib (b. c. 1960, near Tessalit, Mali). Ag Alhabib was born in the mountainous region of northeastern Mali about the time of the country’s independence and lived through the 1962–64 rebellion of the Tuareg people against a central government from which they felt politically alienated. After his father was executed for having participated in the uprising, the family found refuge in Algeria. As a youth Ag Alhabib fashioned makeshift guitars, and in the late 1970s, while dwelling in the southern Algerian town of Tamanrasset, he began to play with other young Tuareg migrants, including Inteyeden Ag Ablil and Hassan Ag Touhami. With the acquisition of conventional acoustic and electric guitars, the nebulous group developed a sound rooted in Tuareg folk traditions but also influenced by the recorded music it encountered, from Malian guitarist Ali Farka Touré and Algerian raï performers to Western rock acts such as Jimi Hendrix and Santana.
In the early 1980s the group’s founding members were recruited, along with other Tuaregs, into Muammar al-Qaddafi’s military training camps in Libya. There they wrote melancholy songs that reflected their people’s suffering and displacement—as a result of famine as well as repression—and called for freedom. The songs resonated with fellow speakers of Tamashek (the Tuareg language), and within several years, cassette recordings of the music had privately circulated throughout the region, where, in the absence of official Tamashek-language media, they helped promote cultural solidarity. When renewed Tuareg-led insurgencies broke out in both Mali and Niger in 1990, several members of the band, which had grown beyond its original core, actively participated in the fighting.
After peace agreements were reached in the mid-1990s, the musicians continued to perform, and in 1998 they forged an association with Lo’Jo, a French band then on tour in Mali, that resulted in wider exposure. Following a vaunted performance in 2001 at the first annual Festival au Désert (“Festival in the Desert”) in northern Mali, the group—by then known as Tinariwen (meaning “deserts” or “empty spaces”)—released its first professional recording, The Radio Tisdas Sessions (2002). The album introduced Tinariwen to a broad international audience, with many listeners finding in the band’s spare electric-guitar rhythms and aching vocals an inadvertent echo of American blues music. Working with the English producer Justin Adams, Tinariwen returned with Amassakoul (“Traveler”; 2004) and Aman Iman: Water Is Life (2007), which found acclaim for their evocative hypnotic sound.
By 2009, when Imidiwan: Companions was released, Tinariwen routinely toured beyond Africa. The group harked back to its roots with the album Tassili (2011), which was recorded in the Algerian desert on mostly acoustic instruments; at the same time, it skillfully incorporated several American guest musicians, including members of TV on the Radio. The recording won a Grammy Award for best world music album. In early 2012, as the Malian government collapsed in a military coup, members of Tinariwen on tour abroad voiced their support for the secessionist Tuareg rebels whose activities contributed to the country’s destabilization.
