Tom Petty, in full Thomas Earl Petty,  (born October 20, 1950, Gainesville, Florida, U.S.—died October 2, 2017, Santa Monica, California), American singer and songwriter whose roots-oriented guitar rock arose from the new-wave movement of the late 1970s and resulted in a string of hit singles and albums.
At age 10, Petty was introduced by his uncle to Elvis Presley, who was filming Follow That Dream (1962) in Florida, where Petty grew up. Within two years Petty had taken up the guitar. He dropped out of high school to tour with his band Mudcrutch in the early 1970s. After arriving in Los Angeles, the band quickly disintegrated, but in 1975 Petty and two former members, Mike Campbell and Benmont Tench, joined Ron Blair and Stan Lynch to form Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers. The band’s eponymous debut album, released in 1976, initially caused little stir in the United States, but the single “Breakdown” was a smash in Britain, and, when it was re-released in the U.S., the song made the Top 40 in 1978. Damn the Torpedoes (1979), featuring the hits “Don’t Do Me Like That” and “Refugee,” shot to number two, and, though the group’s success in the 1980s leveled off, there were several hits, including Petty’s duet with Stevie Nicks, “Stop Draggin’ My Heart Around” (1981), and the Heartbreakers’ “Don’t Come Around Here No More” (1985). The band also gained notice for its music videos.
In 1984 Petty shattered his hand after punching a studio wall in frustration, but, to the surprise of doctors, he recovered to play guitar again. The Heartbreakers backed Bob Dylan on tour in 1986, and later Petty joined Dylan, former Beatle George Harrison, Roy Orbison, and Jeff Lynne (formerly of the Electric Light Orchestra) in the supergroup the Traveling Wilburys, with whom Petty garnered his first Grammy Award in 1989. That year Lynne produced Petty’s first solo album, Full Moon Fever, putting Petty back on the charts with the hit single “Free Fallin’.” This renewed popularity was followed in the 1990s with more group and solo albums, including the multimillion-selling Wildflowers (1994), which was presented as a solo album but featured contributions from the Heartbreakers, most notably guitarist Campbell, ever Petty’s essential collaborator.
Petty’s divorce in 1996 from his wife of more than 20 years took a heavy toll on him psychologically and contributed to his descent into heroin use. That period of emotional anguish and ultimately introspection led to the creation of one of his most deeply personal albums, Echo (1999). In 2001 Petty remarried, with Little Richard performing the ceremony. The next year he and the Heartbreakers were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and released The Last DJ, the title song of which was a scathing indictment of music industry greed. Petty’s third solo album, Highway Companion (2006), and the Heartbreakers’ blues-drenched Mojo (2010) followed. Hypnotic Eye, another Heartbreakers’ effort, topped the Billboard album chart in 2014.
In 2008 Petty and the Heartbreakers reached another benchmark of exalted status as pop music icons by performing during the Super Bowl halftime show. Petty, who was known for his devotion not only to the roots of rock and roll but also to his own musical roots, reunited with Mudcrutch to produce new albums and undertake tours in 2007 and 2016. In October 2017, in the midst of celebrating the 40th anniversary of the Heartbreakers, Petty died after suffering full cardiac arrest  that was brought on by an accidental overdose of medications, including opioids, sedatives, and an antidepressant. Petty had been beset by a fractured hip, knee problems, and emphysema.
