Until 1964, almost a decade after Bill Haley’s “Rock Around the Clock” had introduced a new musical era to British youth, pop music fans found few stations to set their dial to. Apart from the record-company-sponsored, evenings-only broadcasts of Radio Luxembourg, pop was represented essentially by two weekend shows on the British Broadcasting Corporation’s (BBC’s) Light Programme: Saturday Club and Sunday morning’s Easy Beat. Both were presented by the avuncular Brian Matthew and blighted by a bewilderingly broad musical base and an imbalance between studio sessions and recorded music. The restriction on records played was a result of the “needle time” agreement with record companies; prompted by the Musicians’ Union, some of whose members were employed by the BBC as live performers, the agreement limited the amount of recorded music that could be played each day.
In spring 1964, Radio Caroline began broadcasting from a ship anchored in international waters off the coast of Essex. Its nonstop pop was presented by young, effusive disc jockeys, punctuated by previously unheard American Top 40-style jingles and commercials, and unhindered by needle-time restrictions or royalty payments. A pirate radio armada gathered around the British coast, luring listeners from the BBC and belatedly provoking a Marine Broadcasting (Offences) Bill, which became law on August 15, 1967, silencing all but Caroline among the major players. Radio 1, the BBC’s answer to its offshore competition, boasted ex-pirate disc jockeys, Top 40 hits, and the now familiar jingles and station identifications and continued to satisfy some pop fans and frustrate others until the next radio age began.
That age began in October 1973 with the licensing of London’s Capital Radio, followed by commercial stations in other major cities. The slick, seamless format of their daytime programming disappointed those listeners who had been looking forward to a rekindling of the spirit of pirate radio, but it made rapid inroads into Radio 1’s audience. With the ending of the government’s freeze on franchises and the splitting of FM and AM frequencies in the 1980s, commercial radio continued to grow, expanding the network of 19 Independent Local Radio stations to more than 10 times that number in 20 years. Some stations, however, became delocalized by group ownership. Moreover, the disc jockey’s role evolved irreversibly from the dream career of a music enthusiast with an unstoppable desire to share his or her tastes with the widest possible audience to an apprenticeship for would-be TV entertainers—in the sparkling wake of Kenny Everett, Noel Edmonds, and, most recently and spectacularly, Chris Evans—for whom the records matter less than their on-air personalities.
