Thomas Rymer,  (born 1641, near Northallerton, Yorkshire, Eng.—died  Dec. 14, 1713, London), English literary critic who introduced into England the principles of French formalist Neoclassical criticism. As historiographer royal, he also compiled a collection of treaties of considerable value to the medievalist.
Rymer left Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, without taking a degree and began to study law at Gray’s Inn, London. Although called to the bar in 1673, he almost immediately turned his attention to literary criticism. He translated René Rapin’s Réflexions sur la poétique d’Aristote as Reflections on Aristotle’s treatise of Poesie, in 1674. He required that dramatic action be probable and reasonable, that it instruct by moral precept and example (it was Rymer who coined the expression “poetic justice”), and that characters behave either as idealized types or as average representatives of their class. In 1678 he wrote The Tragedies of the Last Age, in which he criticized plays by the Jacobean dramatists Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher for not adhering to the principles of classical tragedy. He himself published in the same year a play in rhyming verse, Edgar; or, The English Monarch. In 1693 he published A Short View of Tragedy, in which his Neoclassicism was at its narrowest (and in which he criticized Shakespeare’s Othello as “a . . . Bloody farce, without salt or savour”). In A Short View, Rymer rejected all modern drama and advocated a return to the Greek tragedy of Aeschylus. Rymer’s influence was considerable during the 18th century, but he was ridiculed in the 19th century; Thomas Babington Macaulay called him “the worst critic that ever lived.”
In 1692 Rymer was appointed historiographer royal, and, when William III’s government decided to publish for the first time copies of all past treaties entered into by England, Rymer was appointed editor of the project. The first volume, which covered the years 1101–1273, was published in 1704. The 15th volume, covering 1543–86, appeared in 1713, the year of Rymer’s death. His successor brought out a further five volumes. Despite its deficiencies, the work, whose short title is Foedera (“Treaties”), is a considerable and valuable achievement.
