John D. Rockefeller, Jr., in full John Davison Rockefeller, Jr.,  (born January 29, 1874, Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.—died May 11, 1960, Tucson, Arizona), American philanthropist, the only son of John D. Rockefeller, Sr., and heir to the Rockefeller fortune, who built Rockefeller Center in New York City and was instrumental in the decision to locate the United Nations in that city.
After graduation from Brown University in 1897, he joined his father in business but never assumed complete management of Standard Oil, eventually choosing to focus his efforts on philanthropy. What business interests he pursued were associated with his father’s long-standing opposition to strikes by organized labour; he was one of those blamed for the so-called Ludlow Massacre (April 20, 1914), in which sit-in strikers at the Rockefeller-controlled Colorado Fuel and Iron Company were fired on by militiamen, resulting in 17 deaths. The tragedy was said to have solidified Rockefeller’s devotion to humanitarian causes.
In association with his father, he created major philanthropic institutions, including the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research (renamed Rockefeller University) in New York City (1901), the General Education Board (1902), and the Rockefeller Foundation (1913). In funding construction of Rockefeller Center in Manhattan—one of few large privately funded development projects occurring in the Great Depression—Rockefeller created 75,000 jobs at a time of widespread unemployment in the 1930s. During World War II he helped establish the United Service Organizations (USO), an agency for the aid of members of the U.S. military and their dependents.
After the war, he donated land for the United Nations headquarters, a gift that figured prominently in the decision to locate the world organization in the United States. In 1958 he donated $5 million for the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts in New York City. His other philanthropic works included restoration of colonial Williamsburg, Virginia, construction of low-rent housing in poor sections of New York City, and donations to the city’s Riverside Church and the Museum of Modern Art.
In 1901 Rockefeller married Abby Greene Aldrich (1874–1948), daughter of U.S. Senator Nelson W. Aldrich. As an art collector, she was instrumental in the founding of the Museum of Modern Art. They had six children—a daughter, Abby (1903–76), and five sons: John D. III, Nelson A., Laurance S., Winthrop, and David.
