Alfred V. Kidder, in full Alfred Vincent Kidder,  (born Oct. 29, 1885, Marquette, Mich., U.S.—died  June 11, 1963, Cambridge, Mass.), foremost American archaeologist of his day involved in the study of the southwestern United States and Mesoamerica, and the force behind the first comprehensive, systematic approach to North American archaeology.
Kidder began his career of fieldwork in 1907, with studies in Utah, Colorado, and New Mexico. He received a Ph.D. from Harvard University (1914) for developing the first effective pottery typology relating to the prehistory of the Southwest Indians. During expeditions to Utah and Arizona (1914) and as director (1915–29) of excavations for Phillips Academy, Andover, Mass., at the large pueblo at Pecos, N.M., he did much to further the study of anthropology and archaeology in southwestern universities and to establish scientific societies and museums. With Samuel J. Guernsey, the curator of archaeology at Harvard’s Peabody Museum, he wrote two books on northeastern Arizona (1919 and 1921). Kidder’s Introduction to the Study of Southwestern Archaeology (1924), which became a standard work, details the origin and development of the Ancestral Pueblo (Anasazi) culture. In 1927 he proposed the Pecos classification system, a regional archaeological timescale widely used by later workers in the Pueblo region.
Kidder remained with Phillips Academy until 1935. He was also a member of the Carnegie Institution of Washington in Washington, D.C. (1927–50), and of the faculty of the Peabody Museum (1939–50). For the Carnegie Institution he organized one of the first interdisciplinary research teams for the investigation of prehistory; he included cultural anthropologists, linguists, archaeologists, physical anthropologists, geographers, and even medical professionals—an approach that is now standard, albeit in various permutations, in essentially all archaeological investigations. As director of this group, he led a far-reaching survey that produced a culture history of the Maya of Mexico and Central America.
The American Anthropological Association instituted the A.V. Kidder Award for Eminence in the Field of American Anthropology in 1950 as an homage to his innovative and enduring accomplishments.
