Jōmon culture,  earliest major culture of prehistoric Japan, characterized by pottery decorated with cord-pattern (jōmon) impressions or reliefs. For some time there has been uncertainty about assigning dates to the Jōmon period, particularly to its onset. The earliest date given is about 10,500 bce, which is described by scholars favouring it as the beginning of the Incipient Jōmon period that lasted until approximately 8000 bce. Others prefer a later start date, which may range between 7500 and 4500 bce, depending on the interpretation of archaeological evidence. Most generally agree that the period ended about 300 bce, coinciding approximately with the rise of the Yayoi culture.
The origins of Jōmon culture remain uncertain, although similarities with early cultures of northeastern Asia and even America are often cited. The artifacts of this Neolithic (New Stone Age) culture have been uncovered in numerous sites from the northern island of Hokkaido to the southern Ryukyu archipelago, but they appear most commonly in east-central and eastern Honshu, where the culture survived longest. The Jōmon people lived in small communities, mainly in sunken pit dwellings situated near inland rivers or along the seacoast, and subsisted primarily by hunting, fishing, and gathering. Excavations suggest that an early form of agriculture may also have been practiced by the end of the period.
The distinctive Jōmon pottery, first made during the Incipient period, was shaped from unrefined low-fired clay. Because the potter’s wheel was unknown, manual methods were utilized, particularly the coiling method—that is, preparing the clay in the shape of a rope and coiling it spirally upward. Vessels were simply heaped up and baked in open fires. Early forms were limited to simple jars and bowls, but later Jōmon pottery, including figurines that probably represented fertility symbols, were more varied in style and function. Figurines dating from the Middle, Late, and Final periods (c. 2500–300 bce) demonstrated increasing technical and artistic skill and the rising importance of ritual practices, and they often surpassed the craftsmanship of other Stone Age cultures.
Stone and bone tools as well as wooden bows have also been found in Jōmon sites. Knives, axes, and grinding rocks have been dated at least as far back as the Initial Jōmon period (c. 8000–5000 bce). By the Early Jōmon period (c. 5000–2500 bce), woven baskets, bone needles, and earthenware cooking and storage vessels were being made for regular use. There is evidence that during this time the inhabitants of the Japanese islands traded regularly with those on the Korean peninsula. Excavated refuse heaps suggest that by the Middle Jōmon period (c. 2500–1500 bce), more permanent settlements were starting to form, and as people moved toward the coast in the Late Jōmon period (c. 1500–1000 bce), fishing implements and techniques such as deep-sea fishing and toggle harpoons were developed. The Final Jōmon period (c. 1000–300 bce), which transitions into the Yayoi period, is believed to be the time in which rice cultivation was introduced to Japan.
