V. Gordon Childe, in full Vere Gordon Childe,  (born April 14, 1892, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia—died October 19, 1957, Mount Victoria, New South Wales), Australian-born British historian, linguist, and archaeologist whose study of European prehistory of the 2nd and 3rd millennia bce sought to evaluate the relationship between Europe and the Middle East and to examine the structure and character of the preliterate cultures of the Western world in antiquity. He also directed the excavations at the important Neolithic site Skara Brae in Scotland’s Orkney Islands.
Childe was professor of prehistoric archaeology at the University of Edinburgh (1927–46) and then director of the Institute of Archaeology, University of London, until 1956. In many publications he presented a synthesis of knowledge covering a vast and complex field in an authoritative and unique manner. His works include The Dawn of European Civilization, 6th ed. (2003; originally published in 1925), and The Danube in Prehistory (1929), both classics of European prehistory. His books that are aimed at a general readership include Man Makes Himself, 4th ed. (2003; originally printed in 1936), an exposition of the parallel evolution of society and technology, and What Happened in History (1942), an introduction to prehistoric archaeology.
Childe’s scholarship invoked the materialist perspectives of Marxism. His insistence on an international, comparative, and materialist approach to culture change was highly influential in both archaeology and cultural anthropology. Childe also became one of the first scholars to describe the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture. To decouple his theories from the implicit racism of earlier, unilineal perspectives of cultural evolution, he dubbed this transition the agricultural revolution, also known as the Neolithic revolution. Childe also coined the term urban revolution to denote the shift from small, village-based societies to those with towns and cities. Both terms have retained their currency in archaeology.
