Georgy Yevgenyevich, Prince Lvov,  (born Oct. 21 [Nov. 2, New Style], 1861, Popovka, near Tula, Russia—died March 7, 1925, Paris, France), Russian social reformer and statesman who was the first head of the Russian provisional government established during the February Revolution (1917).
An aristocrat who held a degree in law from the University of Moscow, Lvov worked in the civil service until 1893, when he resigned. He became a member of the Tula zemstvo (local government council), and during the Russo-Japanese War (1904–05) he organized voluntary relief work in the Orient. In 1905 he joined the newly founded liberal Constitutional Democratic (Kadet) Party, was elected to the first Duma (Russian parliament; convened May 1906), and in 1906 was informally nominated for a ministerial post.
During World War I Lvov became chairman of the All-Russian Union of Zemstvos (1914) and a leader of Zemgor (the Union of Zemstvos and Towns; 1915), which provided relief for the sick and wounded and procured supplies for the army. Although his activities were often obstructed by bureaucratic officials who objected to voluntary organizations that encroached upon their areas of responsibility, Lvov’s groups made significant contributions to the war effort, and he won the respect of many political liberals and army commanders. When the imperial government fell, he became the prime minister (with Tsar Nicholas II’s subsequent approval) of the provisional government (March 2 [March 15], 1917).
Lvov also served as minister of the interior, but his government, composed initially of liberals and, after May 5 (May 18), of moderate socialists as well, was unable to satisfy the increasingly radical demands of the general population. In July, after a major left-wing demonstration threatened to overthrow the provisional government, Lvov resigned his posts (July 7 [July 20]), allowing Aleksandr Kerensky to succeed him as prime minister. When the Bolsheviks seized power in October, Lvov was arrested, but he escaped and eventually settled in Paris.
