Hearst Castle, also called La Casa Grande (“The Big House”),  main residence of an estate in San Simeon, California, that originally belonged to William Randolph Hearst. The Mediterranean Revival mansion was designed by Julia Morgan in 1919–47 and is known for its opulence. Since 1958 the castle and estate have been part of the Hearst San Simeon State Historical Monument.
In 1865 American gold-mine owner George Hearst purchased some 40,000 acres (16,200 hectares) of land in the area around San Simeon Bay. He continued to acquire property in the vicinity, eventually amassing some 250,000 acres [101,150 hectares]). In 1919 his son, William Randolph, inherited the land, which was then known as Camp Hill and offered little in the way of amenities. That year he commissioned Morgan “to build a little something.” The project evolved into a series of luxurious buildings and gardens on a 127-acre (51-hectare) estate that Hearst named La Cuesta Encantada (“The Enchanted Hill”). Working in collaboration with Hearst, Morgan sought to capture the grandeur of European architecture, and many features were inspired by foreign buildings and artworks. Construction continued into the late 1940s.
The centrepiece of the estate is the main residence, which became known as Hearst Castle. It was designed in the Mediterranean Revival style, and its facade suggests a Spanish cathedral with its bell towers and ornate decorations. The main entrance is flanked by bas-reliefs of knights, and a sculpture of Mary holding the infant Jesus is perched in a niche over the massive door. The splendor of the exterior continues inside the mansion. Covering 68,500 square feet (6,360 square metres), Hearst Castle contains 115 rooms, including 38 bedrooms, more than 40 bathrooms, a theatre, and a beauty salon. Typifying the mansion’s opulence is the Doge’s Suite, which was inspired by the Doges’ Palace in Venice and was reportedly reserved for Hearst’s most important guests. The sitting room features walls adorned with velvet fabric, and the 18th-century painted ceiling was originally in an Italian palazzo. The suite’s marble balcony includes an elaborate loggia. In addition, Hearst’s extensive collection of antiques and artworks is prominently displayed in the suite as well as throughout the rest of the mansion.
La Cuesta Encantada also included three palatial guest houses. The largest, Casa del Mar, is 5,350 square feet (490 square metres) and contains eight bedrooms, while the smallest, Casa del Monte, measures 2,550 square feet (235 square metres) and includes four bedrooms. Among the estate’s most iconic features are its two pools. The indoor Roman Pool was based on ancient Roman baths and features blue- and gold-coloured mosaic tiles throughout; some of the patterns were reportedly inspired by the Mausoleum of Galla Placidia in Ravenna, Italy. The Neptune Pool is located outside. It is surrounded by sculptures and colonnades, and the facade of a reconstructed Roman temple stands at one end. Completing the setting is a waterfall. The estate was also once home to reportedly the world’s largest private zoo, which featured large enclosures that allowed a number of creatures to freely roam. Among the zoo’s more notable animals were white fallow deer, camels, zebras, giraffes, and kangaroos.
La Cuesta Encantada was visited by numerous luminaries, and it was the site of lavish parties, many of which were hosted by Marion Davies, with whom the married Hearst had an affair that lasted some three decades. Visitors could arrive via the estate’s private airfield.
Hearst died in 1951, and three years later La Cuesta Encantada became a California state park. In 1958 the Hearst San Simeon State Historical Monument was established, and that year the estate was opened to public tours. It became one of the state’s more popular attractions, and some one million people visit annually.
