Benjamin F. Wade, in full Benjamin Franklin Wade,  (born Oct. 27, 1800, Springfield, Mass., U.S.—died  March 2, 1878, Jefferson, Ohio), U.S. senator during the Civil War whose radical views brought him into conflict with presidents Abraham Lincoln and Andrew Johnson.
In 1821 Wade’s family moved to Andover, Ohio. He studied law, was admitted to the bar, and formed a successful partnership in 1831 with the outspoken antislavery advocate Joshua R. Giddings. After a term as prosecuting attorney, Wade was elected in 1837 to the state Senate as a Whig. His determined antislavery stand cost him reelection in 1839, but he won another term in 1841. In 1847 he was elected by the legislature as president judge of the third judicial district. His businesslike, forceful methods won him popular attention, and the Whig-controlled legislature in 1851 elected him to the U.S. Senate. He was reelected to the Senate as a Republican in 1857 and 1863.
In the Senate during the 1850s Wade was an uncompromising foe of the extension of slavery and vigorously opposed the passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act (1854), which opened the door to the spread of slavery in the West. During the Civil War he took his stand with the Radical Republicans, a congressional group that favoured vigorous prosecution of the war, emancipation of the slaves, and severe punishment for the South. As chairman of the Joint Congressional Committee on the Conduct of the War, Wade played a prominent but controversial role in investigating all aspects of the Union military effort. In 1864, as cosponsor of the Wade-Davis Bill, which declared that reconstruction of the Southern state governments was a legislative rather than an executive concern, he came into direct conflict with President Lincoln.
When Andrew Johnson became president after Lincoln’s assassination, Wade at first cooperated with him. But when Johnson made it clear that he favoured a lenient plan of reconstruction, Wade became his caustic critic. Elected president pro tempore of the Senate on March 2, 1867, Wade would have succeeded to the presidency had Johnson been removed by the Senate in the impeachment trial of May 1868. Certain of success, Wade actually began to select his cabinet, and Johnson’s acquittal bitterly disappointed him. When the Democratic majority in the Ohio legislature denied him a fourth senatorial term, Wade retired to his Ohio law practice in 1869.
