 On April 11, 1861, having been informed by messengers from Pres. Abraham Lincoln that he planned to resupply Fort Sumter, the Federal outpost in the harbour of Charleston, South Carolina, the newly formed government of the secessionist Confederate States of America demanded the fort’s surrender. Maj. Robert Anderson, Fort Sumter’s commander, responded, “I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your communication, demanding the evacuation of this fort, and to say, in reply thereto, that it is a demand with which I regret that my sense of honor and my obligations to my Government prevent my compliance.” So read the report in Harper’s Weekly magazine of April 27, which continued: “Accordingly at 4:27 A.M. on 12th fire was opened from Fort Moultrie on Fort Sumter. To this Major Anderson replied with three of his barbette guns.” The exchange of fire continued throughout the day and into the next morning, when the Federal forces surrendered. “The last act in the drama of Fort Sumter has been concluded,” read the Harper’s report. “Major Anderson has evacuated, and, with his command, departed by the steamer Isabel from the harbor. He saluted his flag, and the company, then forming on the parade-ground, marched out upon the wharf, with drum and fife playing ‘Yankee Doodle.’ ” The curtain had come down on Fort Sumter, but the drama of the American Civil War was just beginning.
As the sesquicentennial of the Civil War began in 2011 with the commemoration of the outbreak of hostilities, the war was still seen by many as the central event of American history. The highlight of the commemoration of the war’s 50th anniversary had been the gathering of more than 50,000 Union and Confederate veterans at the end of June and early July 1913, the anniversary of the Battle of Gettysburg, in that small Pennsylvania town. They congregated in tents at the “Great Camp,” listened to speeches, and walked the battlefield together. By that time the need for national reconciliation had brought about a received interpretation of the war as a tragic struggle between noble adversaries that at least tacitly acknowledged the Confederate effort as the “Great Lost Cause.” Lost or buried in that interpretation were the consequences of the war, emancipation, and Reconstruction for African Americans. The centennial of the War Between the States, coming during the Cold War in the 1960s, at a time that seemed to demand patriotic consensus, was still remembered by many as the tragic clash of brother against brother. That, however, was also at the height of the civil rights movement, and the view of the war as a fight for emancipation was paramount for many others. They saw the modern civil rights struggle as a continuation of the war’s emancipationist quest and of the pursuit of the earlier civil rights goals of Reconstruction, which had been sabotaged by white supremacy and the Jim Crow laws. 
This special feature focuses primarily on the Civil War itself, its major battles and military leaders, as well as its prominent civilian figures and leaders and their words—particularly those of Lincoln, whose antislavery sentiments and election to the presidency were the immediate catalysts for secession. In addition to drums and guns, Drum-Taps and photo shoots are considered here. The war-related poetry of Walt Whitman and others is examined, along with the patriotic songs of the period, as well as the visual art and photography of the war. The Civil War was the first major conflict to be documented by the then new art of photography, and arresting images of the war are presented in collections of work by Mathew Brady and other famous photographers. There is also a timeline that chronicles not just the major events of the war but those of American history leading up to it, especially those relating to slavery. Further context for the war is provided most prominently in the article “American Civil War” and also by a collection of background articles on topics ranging from abolitionism to the Shenandoah Valley campaigns and from the Dred Scott decision to Plessy v. Ferguson.
