Robert Dale Owen,  (born Nov. 9, 1801, Glasgow, Scot.—died  June 24, 1877, Lake George, N.Y., U.S.), American social reformer and politician. The son of the English reformer Robert Owen, Robert Dale Owen was steeped in his father’s socialist philosophy while growing up at New Lanark in Scotland—the elder Owen’s model industrial community. In 1825 father and son immigrated to the United States to set up another self-sufficient socialist community at New Harmony, Ind.
Robert Dale Owen edited the community’s newspaper, the New Harmony Gazette, until 1827, when he became associated with the controversial reformer Fanny Wright. They traveled together to Wright’s experimental community of Nashoba, Tenn., which was dedicated to the education and gradual emancipation of slaves, and from there went on to Europe.
Upon returning to the United States, Owen and Wright revisited the Nashoba and New Harmony communities, then in a state of decay. They settled in New York, where Owen edited the Free Enquirer. The paper opposed evangelical religion and advocated more liberal divorce laws, more equal distribution of wealth, and widespread industrial education; it was at the centre of radical free thought in New York. For two years, Owen, with Wright and other radicals, sought to turn the New York Workingmen’s Party away from Thomas Skidmore’s belief in an equal division of property. They successfully ousted Skidmore, but later their own program of social reform through public education was also repudiated.
After a brief trip to England in 1832, Owen returned to New Harmony. He served three terms in the Indiana legislature (1836–1838), where he advocated the allocation of government funds for public schools, and two terms in the U.S. House of Representatives, where he introduced the bill creating the Smithsonian Institution.
Owen was defeated for a third term in Congress and went back to Indiana, where he advocated property rights for married women and liberalization of divorce laws. Appointed chargé d’affaires at Naples in 1853 and minister to Italy in 1855, Owen spent much of the 1850s abroad. Upon his return in 1858, he became an outspoken proponent of emancipation; at the outbreak of the American Civil War, he urged an end to slavery in a letter to President Lincoln, a letter that Secretary of the Treasury Salmon Chase said greatly influenced the president.
In 1863 Owen headed a committee to investigate the condition of the freedmen and wrote a book on his findings, The Wrong of Slavery (1864). In it he surprised many people by counseling a 10-year delay in granting the newly emancipated slaves the right to vote.
Owen spent his final years writing a novel (Beyond the Breakers, 1870) and his autobiography (Threading My Way, 1874).
