Samuel Cotton,  (born January 24, 1947, New York City?, New York, U.S.—died December 20, 2003, New York City?), American antislavery activist and spokesman for the eradication of contemporary slavery in Mauritania and Sudan.
Raised in the impoverished Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, NewYork, Cotton received a B.A. degree in sociology from Lehman College, a division of the City University of New York (1993). He went on to do graduate work at Columbia University’s School of Social Work (M.A., 1995; Ph.D., 2002) and lectured at Columbia beginning in 1998.
Cotton first learned of the existence of slavery in contemporary Mauritania and Sudan from writings of the American Anti-Slavery Group in the early 1990s. His conscience was profoundly disturbed, and in 1994 he became a reporter for the City Sun, an African American weekly newspaper published in Brooklyn. Cotton was assigned to investigate and write a series of articles on allegations that black Africans were being enslaved by Arabs in the two North African countries. He caused a deep stir with his exposition of the situation and his description of the mental and emotional suffering the enslaved people underwent.
In March 1995 Cotton organized a meeting at Columbia University on the topic of slavery that drew black Africans from all over the United States. They agreed to work together to draw the attention of the American public to the crisis. Cotton then founded and became executive director of the Coalition Against Slavery in Mauritania and Sudan, made up of abolitionists and human rights groups from Mauritania, Sudan, and North America. In December of that year Cotton traveled to Senegal, and from there he was taken undercover to Mauritania. For several weeks he worked among refugees in camps and gathered testimonies from slaves and ex-slaves. Those testimonies formed the basis of a documentary film and a book, Silent Terror: A Journey into Contemporary African Slavery (1998). Silent Terror was recognized as a powerful, truthful, and passionate indictment of slavery in Mauritania and soon became widely used as a college text.
Cotton’s next initiative was to create an organization similar to the Reconstruction-era Freedmen’s Bureau to educate, feed, clothe, and house runaway slaves in Mauritania. In March 1996 he testified before the U.S. Congress about his findings regarding slavery. He continued writing articles, holding meetings at universities and churches, and speaking at public forums throughout the United States. He appeared in a series of radio and television programs, including debates with members of the Nation of Islam who had made anti-Islamic allegations against him. Cotton died of a brain tumour in December 2003. The American Anti-Slavery Group established a memorial fund in his name that was dedicated to continuing his abolitionist work.
