William Styron,  (born June 11, 1925, Newport News, Virginia, U.S.—died November 1, 2006, Martha’s Vineyard, Massachusetts), American novelist noted for his treatment of tragic themes and his use of a rich, classical prose style.
Styron served in the U.S. Marine Corps before graduating from Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, in 1947. During the 1950s he was part of the community of American expatriates in Paris. In 1953 he became an advisory editor to The Paris Review.
Styron’s first novel, Lie Down in Darkness (1951), set in his native tidewater Virginia, tells of a young woman from a loveless middle-class family who fights unsuccessfully for her sanity before committing suicide. His next work, The Long March (1956), chronicles a brutal forced march undertaken by recruits in a marine training camp. The novel Set This House on Fire, complexly structured and set largely in Italy, appeared in 1960.
Styron’s fourth novel, The Confessions of Nat Turner (1967), is an account of a historical incident, a slave rebellion led by the title character in Virginia in 1831. Based on a transcript of Turner’s testimony and told from his point of view, the book sympathetically portrays a man who is denied happiness because of his degrading enslavement. Embittered and alienated, he undertakes a bloody revolt that ends in his capture and execution. The novel’s publication at the peak of the civil rights movement helped make it a best seller. It was awarded a Pulitzer Prize in 1968, but it also stirred wide controversy, with critics accusing the book of racism and of misrepresenting African American history.
Styron’s final novel, Sophie’s Choice (1979), portrays the growth of a friendship between a young Southern writer and a Roman Catholic woman from Poland who survived the Nazi death camp Auschwitz. It too became a controversial best seller, and the 1982 film adaptation was widely acclaimed. His other works included the play In the Clap Shack (1972) and This Quiet Dust (1982), a collection of essays that treat the dominant themes of Styron’s fiction. Darkness Visible (1990) is a nonfiction account of Styron’s struggle against depression. A Tidewater Morning (1993) consists of autobiographical stories. Havanas in Camelot (2008), a collection of personal essays on topics ranging from the author’s friendship with U.S. Pres. John F. Kennedy to his morning walks with his dog, was published posthumously. Compilations of his correspondence were issued as Letters to My Father (2009) and Selected Letters of William Styron (2012).
