Marty Robbins,  full name Martin David Robinson (born  Sept. 26, 1925, Glendale, Arizona, U.S.—died Dec. 8, 1982, Nashville, Tennessee), American singer, songwriter, music publisher, and NASCAR driver. He was one of the most popular country music performers in the 1950s through 1980s.
Robinson was born in a shack in the desert outside Glendale, Arizona. The sixth of nine children in a nomadic family, he learned early to fend for himself. His father’s alcoholism, temper, and thievery kept the family on the move, while his hard-working mother struggled to provide for her children. The family relied on county welfare for medicine and school clothes. Robinson, throughout his life, was torn between extreme shyness and a craving for attention and appreciation. He became the class clown in school, and he enjoyed entertaining people with his singing and harmonica playing.
Robinson enlisted in the U.S. Navy during World War II. His combat service in the South Pacific included delivering U.S. Marines ashore during the invasion of the Solomon Islands on November 1, 1943. He was the ramp operator on a landing craft (LCM) that participated in the first and third invasion waves. When the surf smashed the LCM, the crew was stranded on Bougainville Island.
After the war, Robinson returned to Phoenix and pursued a singing career. Taking the suggestion of a friend to change his name to Marty Robbins, he was hosting a show on KPHO-TV when Grand Ole Opry star Little Jimmy Dickens came to Phoenix. Dickens recommended him to Columbia Records for a contract, and Robbins moved to Nashville and the Grand Ole Opry in 1953. He and wife Marizona raised their children, Ronny and Janet, there.
Marty Robbins placed 94 songs on Billboard’s Country Singles charts in a thirty-year career, four of them after his death. Beginning with the autobiographical "I’ll Go On Alone" in 1953, sixteen songs topped the charts. They included "Singing the Blues," which held the number one spot for 13 weeks in 1956, and "A White Sport Coat (and a Pink Carnation)" in 1957. His Hawaiian songs, rockabilly hits, teen ballads, gunfighter ballads, pop standards, and dozens of songs of various tempos showcased his versatility. He starred in western, country music, and car racing movies and hosted television shows, including The Marty Robbins Spotlight.
Western songs were his favorite music, and Gene Autry his favorite singer. His most famous album, Gunfighter Ballads and Trail Songs, was released in 1959 and remains popular today. His signature song, "El Paso," entered 1960 as the number one single on both the country (7 weeks) and pop (2 weeks) charts for Billboard. When asked in 1982 how many times he had sung the song, he replied, "Tell me how many personal appearances I’ve made since 1959, and then I will know."
He received two Grammy awards, the first in 1960 for "El Paso" and another in 1970 for "My Woman, My Woman, My Wife." He was honored with the first Man of the Decade Award from the Academy of Country Music (ACM) in 1970. The award was renamed Artist of the Decade when presented to Loretta Lynn ten years later. Its most recent recipients are Garth Brooks and George Strait.
Robbins wrote most of his own music and placed the songs in his publishing companies. He was inducted into the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1975. On October 11, 1982, he was inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame, two months before his fourth heart attack took his life at age 57.
His love of racing conflicted with his commitment as a country music entertainer. His skill at driving a race car moved him from the local speedway into the NASCAR circuit. "He started out being a singer driving a race car, but he became a race car driver who could sing," NASCAR’s Bobby Allison said. Robbins was proud of his racing achievements, pointing out that other drivers "practice more than I run." His best finish was number five at Michigan’s Motor State 400 in 1974.
He ran his final NASCAR race a month before his death.
