Maybelle Carter, née Maybelle Addington,  (born May 10, 1909, near Nickelsville, Virginia, U.S.—died October 23, 1978, Nashville, Tennessee), American guitarist whose distinctive playing style and long influential career mark her as a classic figure in country music.
By the time she was 12 years old, Maybelle Addington was well versed in the traditional hill-country songs of the region and had become a skilled and original guitarist and autoharpist. When she was 17, she married E.J. Carter, and they moved to Poor Valley, Virginia. To great local acclaim, Maybelle Carter began performing with E.J.’s brother and sister-in-law at community gatherings and church events. To showcase her unique guitar-playing style—she picked out the melody on the bass strings while strumming the rhythm on the treble strings—the Carters accommodated their vocals to her bass lead. Maybelle Carter’s innovative playing style would eventually be imitated by countless country and folk guitarists.
In 1927 the group won a contract with RCA Victor Records. Recordings and radio broadcasts brought the Original Carter Family (as they are now known) fame throughout the country. The group stopped performing in 1943, but Maybelle Carter formed a new group with her daughters. From 1943 to 1948, Mother Maybelle and the Carter Sisters were featured performers on the Richmond, Virginia, radio program Old Dominion Barn Dance. In 1950 they began performing on WSM’s Grand Ole Opry in Nashville, Tennessee, and they soon became stars. Many of their recordings from the time, such as “Wabash Cannonball” and “Wildwood Flower,” are considered classics of country music. In the late 1950s the daughters stopped performing, but Carter remained with the Opry until 1967.
The folk revival of the late 1960s revitalized interest in the Original Carter Family, and Carter performed at the Newport Folk Festivals of 1963 and 1967. In 1970, in no small part owing to Carter’s innovations, the group was inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame. During the 1970s Carter continued to appear regularly on television on the Johnny Cash Show and to perform to appreciative audiences across the country and in Europe. She was one of the esteemed elder traditional country musicians who performed with the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band on the breakthrough crossover album Will the Circle Be Unbroken (1973).
