Mel Tillis, byname of Lonnie Melvin Tillis,  (born August 8, 1932, Dover, Florida, U.S.—died November 19, 2017, Ocala, Florida), American songwriter and entertainer who composed more than a thousand country music songs (music and lyrics), many of which became standards. Overcoming a pronounced stammer, he achieved stardom in the 1970s as a country singer, screen actor, and comedian.
Tillis was confronted with numerous challenges during his childhood; he was the son of a heavy drinker who often left the family to fend for themselves for years at a time, and he contracted a serious case of malaria at age three. He came away from his early years with a lifelong stutter, a speech impediment that became a source of ridicule during his youth as well as a job obstacle during his adult life. Though his early interests centred on gridiron football and fishing, he also learned to play the fiddle and guitar and, for the marching band, drums. In high school he discovered that he never stuttered when he sang, and in the summer before his senior year (while serving in the U.S. National Guard) he made his first radio appearance, performing a Hank Williams song. He continued to sing—as well as tell jokes—at parties and won several local talent contests. While in the U.S. Air Force (1951–55) during the Korean War, he was stationed in Okinawa, Japan, and there he joined a band called the Westerners, which played in clubs at night, and began writing songs during his off-hours.
Tillis relocated to Nashville in 1957, where he found the city’s music industry executives bemused by the idea that a stutterer could be a recording artist, while his songwriting capability gained quick acceptance. He soon had a contract with Tree Publishing and began to compose songs that would help define the country music of the late 1950s and early ’60s—“Tupelo County Jail” (1958), “Honky Tonk Song” (1957), and “I Ain’t Never” (1959) for Webb Pierce; “Detroit City” (1963) for Bobby Bare; and “Heart over Mind” (1961) and “Burning Memories” (1964) for Ray Price.
Tillis’s own success as a smooth, crooning baritone began only in the later 1960s, with singles such as “Stateside” (1966) and “Who’s Julie” (1968). He formed a backing band, the Statesiders, and appeared regularly on country music singer Porter Wagoner’s television show. By that point he had become inspired by the rock music of Bob Dylan and the Beatles and began to broach social and psychological issues in adventurous new country compositions such as “Mental Revenge” (1967) for Waylon Jennings and “Ruby, Don’t Take Your Love to Town” (1969) for Kenny Rogers.
During the 1970s Tillis enjoyed great success as a country singer, with a steady stream of hits, including “Commercial Affection” (1970), with the Statesiders, and “Coca Cola Cowboy” (1979), among others. He also became a principal owner of several music publishing companies and of his own plane known as Stutter One. In 1976 he was voted Entertainer of the Year by the Country Music Association. Tillis became a fixture on television talk and variety shows and commercials, his wit and self-deprecating humour adding to his broad popularity. The comedy contributed to his success as a live performer, and he went on to establish an acting career, appearing in Hollywood films such as W.W. and the Dixie Dancekings (1975) and Cannonball Run (1981)..
While still writing hit songs in the 1980s and authoring an autobiography—Stutterin’ Boy (1984), with Walter Wager—he became a frequent attraction in the country music resort town Branson, Missouri, and he opened his own 2,700-seat theatre there in the mid-1990s. Meanwhile, he saw his daughter Pam Tillis become a country star in her own right; she eventually recorded a tribute album of his songs, It’s All Relative (2002). In 1998 he renewed his recording success as a member of the Old Dogs, a group that included his friends Waylon Jennings, Bobby Bare, and Jerry Reed. When Tillis returned to Nashville in 2007, he became a regular cast member of the Grand Ole Opry. He was inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame in 2007. In 2010 he released his first comedy album, You Ain’t Gonna Believe This, which nearly topped the Billboard chart in its category.
