 Steve Earle, in full Stephen Fain Earle,  (born January 17, 1955, Fort Monroe, Virginia, U.S.), American singer, songwriter, and guitarist who bridged the genres of rock and country music.
As a child growing up in Texas, Earle acquired his first guitar at age 11 and was playing proficiently two years later. Although he showed musical promise, Earle was often in trouble with the law and was disliked by local country music fans because of his long hair and precocious anti-Vietnam War stance. He left home as a teenager to live with an uncle in Houston and dropped out of high school. Making his way to Nashville, Tennessee, Earle sought to establish himself as a songwriter. In the process he forged friendships with a pair of his musical idols, Guy Clark and Townes Van Zandt, country music “outlaws” of long standing. Earle’s debut album as a performer, Guitar Town (1986), won praise from critics and was a commercial success, with both its title track and “Goodbye’s All We Got Left” reaching the Top Ten on the country music chart.
Much influenced by Van Zandt, Earle’s music contains elements of country and rock yet fits wholly into neither genre. Of Earle’s more than 20 albums, Copperhead Road (1988) was particularly popular. His career sometimes was sidetracked by drug and alcohol addictions, as well as by several divorces, and he served nearly a year in prison and rehab following his conviction for narcotics possession. The turmoil of Earle’s personal life is particularly evident in his album The Hard Way (1990).
Earle’s political fervour (especially in his opposition to the death penalty) was often evident. His leftist leanings came through clearly on Jerusalem (2002), an agitprop-filled album that features the controversial “John Walker’s Blues,” an empathetic consideration of John Walker Lindh, the “American Taliban.” The similarly political The Revolution Starts…Now (2004) won a Grammy Award (best contemporary folk album) in 2005, and Washington Square Serenade (2007), Earle’s romantic confessional collaboration with his sixth wife, singer Allison Moorer, won a Grammy (best contemporary folk/Americana album) in 2008. His 2009 tribute to Van Zandt, titled Townes, earned him another Grammy Award for best contemporary folk album.
Earle followed with I’ll Never Get out of This World Alive (2011), which took its title from the last single released by Hank Williams before he died. The album explores notions of mortality, and T Bone Burnett’s stripped-down production evoked the bygone era that Williams inhabited. Earle’s later releases included The Low Country (2013); the Texas blues album Terraplane (2015); the country-leaning So You Wannabe an Outlaw (2017); and Guy (2019), featuring the songs of Guy Clark. In addition, he teamed up with country artist Shawn Colvin for a folk-oriented collection, Colvin & Earle (2016).
Earle authored a collection of short stories, Doghouse Roses (2001), and was the subject of a film documentary, Steve Earle: Just an American Boy (2003). He also appeared in bit roles in the television dramas The Wire and Treme (both produced by David Simon) and in the comedy-thriller film Leaves of Grass (2009). Earle’s debut novel, I’ll Never Get out of This World Alive (2011), was published shortly after the release of the album of the same name.
