The Judds,  American country music duo, consisting of Naomi Judd (originally Diana Ellen Judd; b. January 11, 1946, Ashland, Kentucky, U.S.) and her daughter Wynonna Judd (originally Christina Claire Ciminella; b. May 30, 1964, Ashland, Kentucky), whose effective vocal harmonies, melding of traditional country sounds with popular music styles, and mother-daughter chemistry produced a string of hits in the 1980s and early 1990s.
Naomi Judd—known as Diana prior to embarking on her music career—grew up in a small town in Kentucky. Although her musical activities there were largely limited to listening to pop music broadcasts on the radio, she was enamoured with the prospect of a career in performance. Her aspirations were postponed at age 17, however, when she became pregnant by a high-school classmate who rejected any further relationship. During her pregnancy she married Michael Ciminella, who was long identified publicly as the biological father of her first daughter, Christina—later known professionally as Wynonna Judd. In 1968 the Ciminellas relocated to the Los Angeles area, where Naomi’s second daughter, Ashley, was born that year. As an adult, Ashley emerged as the screen actress Ashley Judd.
The Ciminella marriage ended in practical terms in 1972, when Naomi filed for divorce, although the separation was not official until 1977. Naomi supported her young family through various jobs, including secretarial work in the Hollywood film industry and waitressing. She also attended nursing school (first at Eastern Kentucky University and then at the College of Marin, California) while living alternately in California and Kentucky. Meanwhile, Wynonna learned to play the guitar during her teen years and showed a strong inclination toward music. She shared with Naomi a growing interest in the work of the tradition-minded female bluegrass duo Hazel Dickens and Alice Gerrard and the blues-influenced pop singer Bonnie Raitt, among others. When mother and daughter began singing together in the late 1970s, they forged a sound that reflected the influence of those artists. They adopted their professional names—Naomi and Wynonna Judd, or, together, the Judds—in 1976, while in Kentucky.
While Naomi was completing nursing school, the fledgling act made appearances in the San Francisco area as the Hillbilly Women, before they moved to Nashville in 1979. Ashley, meanwhile, went to Kentucky in summer 1978, first to live with her paternal grandparents, then with her father, before she reunited with her mother and sister shortly after they settled in Tennessee. Naomi and Wynonna pursued a musical career in Nashville.
For the next few years Naomi worked as a nurse and a model, while she and Wynonna occasionally appeared on Nashville radio and television. A turning point came in 1982, however, when record producer Brent Maher listened to a Judds audition tape and was stunned by the sound—Wynonna’s powerful lead singing complemented by Naomi’s delicate harmonizing. By 1983 the Judds had been signed by RCA Victor Records. Their first single release, “Had a Dream (For the Heart)” (1983), made the Billboard Country Singles chart. The next two, “Mama He’s Crazy” and “Why Not Me” (both 1984), were number one hits and Grammy Award winners (best country performance by a duo or group with vocal) that later became country music standards. While her mother and half sister pursued musical interests, Ashley sometimes stayed with her father in Louisville, Kentucky, and sometimes traveled with the Judds. In 1986 she enrolled in the University of Kentucky (Lexington), from which she graduated in 1990.
Through the remainder of the 1980s, the Judds were among the most prominent faces in the field, winning the Country Music Association’s Vocal Group of the Year award every year from 1985 to 1991. They not only served as role models for up-and-coming female country music artists but also entertained their audiences with their look-alike, often feisty mother-daughter relationship. Indeed, in their own words, the Judds put the fun in dysfunctional.
The duo was forced to dissolve in 1991, after Naomi was diagnosed with debilitating chronic hepatitis C. Wynonna subsequently pursued a solo career with considerable success. Her 1992 singles “She Is His Only Need,” “I Saw the Light,” and “No One Else on Earth” reached number one on the Billboard country music charts, as did her 1996 release “To Be Loved by You”; her albums, moreover, were effectively marketed in both the pop and country music categories. Wynonna’s memoir, Coming Home to Myself, was published in 2005. Naomi became an author of children’s books and self-help manuals—notably The Transparent Life: 30 Proven Ways to Live Your Best (2005) and Naomi’s Guide to Aging Gratefully: Facts, Myths, and Good News for Boomers (2007)—as well as a motivational speaker and television actress. The Judds reunited briefly in 1999, before touring in 2000. In 2010–11 they staged another full-fledged reunion tour, documented on the cable television series The Judds.
