Tom T. Hall, originally Thomas Hall,  (born May 25, 1936, near Olive Hill, Kentucky, U.S.—died August 20, 2021, Franklin, Tennessee), American songwriter and entertainer, popularly known as the “Storyteller,” who expanded the stylistic and topical range of the country music idiom with plainspoken, highly literate, and often philosophical narratives. His songs were largely reflections of his own experiences, from his rural working-class beginnings to his life as a country music star and national television celebrity.
Hall was raised in rural Kentucky, one of eight children of an impoverished brick-plant worker and minister and his wife. He began to play guitar and write stories and poems at a young age. By the time he was nine, he had composed his first song, “Haven’t I Been Good to You,” inspired by the music of the Grand Ole Opry and by the conversations of neighbours. As a teenager, he was the double-bass (upright bass) player for the Kentucky Travelers, a bluegrass band that appeared regularly on local radio and made several recordings for Starday Records in the early 1950s. After the band broke up, Hall worked as a radio disc jockey until he joined the U.S. Army in 1957. While stationed in Germany, he performed original comic songs on Armed Forces Radio. Following his discharge from the military in 1961, he took journalism classes at Roanoke College in Salem, Virginia, while working as a deejay at the local radio station and continuing to compose and perform his own songs. When Nashville song publisher Jimmy Key heard his work, he signed Hall to a songwriting contract.
In the mid-1960s Hall found success as a composer of songs that were, at first, relatively conventional, made-to-order country music numbers, recorded by such established Nashville acts as Jimmy C. Newman, Dave Dudley, Johnnie Wright, and (Lester) Flatt & (Earl) Scruggs. In 1968, however, Hall exploded onto the popular music scene when Jeannie C. Riley’s recording of his pointed story song “Harper Valley P.T.A.” topped the charts in the country and pop categories. Meanwhile, Mercury Records encouraged Hall to perform his own songs, and his first recorded single with the company—“I Washed My Face in the Morning Dew” (1967)—was a minor hit.
During the 1970s Hall both solidified his standing as a songwriter and gained recognition as a singer through a series of major country hits of his own. “Ravishing Ruby” (1973) and “Country Is” (1974), with their conventional choruses and catchy hooks, were among Hall’s most successful songs, but they were not the most representative of his work. The bulk of his songs were cast in the gentle narrative mold that marked him as a leader in a generation of innovative Nashville songwriters, which also included such notables as Willie Nelson, Kris Kristofferson, and Shel Silverstein. With narrative hits such as “The Year That Clayton Delaney Died” (1971) and “Old Dogs, Children and Watermelon Wine” (1972), Hall significantly broadened the scope and sophistication of country song subjects.
Aside from his standard albums, Hall released theme projects, including the Songs of Fox Hollow (1974), which featured children’s songs, and The Magnificent Music Machine (1976), a bluegrass salute.
Hall’s smooth wit and unaffected amiable style proved broadly attractive; in the 1970s and ’80s he was a frequent guest on television series oriented toward country music audiences, such as Hee Haw, and on general-interest talk and variety shows, such as The Dean Martin Show (later called The Dean Martin Comedy Hour). His storytelling facility led to further literary pursuits, including a memoir called The Storyteller’s Nashville (1979), a handbook on songwriting, and several novels.
In the mid-1980s the sometimes lush, acoustic style of instrumental backing that was characteristic of Hall’s music became less commercially viable. Consequently, Hall cut back on recording and public appearances, although he continued to write songs. By the mid-1990s he had returned to bluegrass music and composed many new songs in that idiom, usually in collaboration with his wife “Miss Dixie” Hall (originally Iris Lawrence); the couple continued to compose and publish songs into the second decade of the 21st century. Home Grown, an all-acoustic album of new material, was released in 1998. Meanwhile, Hall built and operated a recording studio at his home near Nashville and formed the label Blue Circle Records, which was dedicated to recording and publishing bluegrass music. He also produced the comic all-star bluegrass film Who Shot Lester Monroe? (2009), featuring the Halls and their friends. Hall was inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame (2008) and the Songwriters Hall of Fame (2019).
