Calvin Klein, in full Calvin Richard Klein,  (born November 19, 1942, Bronx, New York, New York, U.S.), American fashion designer noted for his womenswear, menswear, jeans, cosmetics and perfumes, bed and bath linens, and other collections.
Klein studied at the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York City and, after graduating in 1962, went to work as an apprentice designer for a coat-and-suit manufacturer in the New York garment district. In 1968, when he opened his own company, the New York fashion industry was in a depressed period, with casual hippie-style clothing and the miniskirt defining the range of fashions. Klein undertook to provide simple, understated clothing. Though noted at first for suits and coats, he gradually placed more emphasis on sportswear, particularly interchangeable separates.
Klein was the first designer to win three consecutive Coty Awards for womenswear (1973–75) and was the youngest designer of ready-to-wear clothes ever elected to the Coty Hall of Fame (1975). He described his design philosophy as the making of “simple, comfortable but stylish clothes—but with nothing overscale or extreme.” His clothes were relatively expensive, classic, elegant, and easy to wear, and they struck a responsive chord among buyers in the United States and other countries. His achievements were said to represent not only the triumph of his particular brand of classical styling but also the maturation of the American fashion industry.
Perhaps more than for his clothes, however, Klein became famous for his advertisements, some of which verged on the scandalous. One series of advertisements featured the teenaged actress Brooke Shields modeling a pair of blue jeans and proclaiming that “nothing comes between me and my Calvins.” Klein’s underwear advertising—with photographs by Herb Ritts and Bruce Weber and models such as actor Mark Wahlberg—helped position men as sex objects. Other controversial ad campaigns included several for his fragrance Obsession.
In 2003 Klein sold his company to Phillips–Van Heusen (later called PVH) in a deal valued at some $430 million with up to $300 million in future royalties. After retiring the following year, he maintained a low public profile. In 2017, however, he published Calvin Klein, a survey of his career that included photographs and anecdotes.
