Donatella Versace, in full Donatella Francesca Versace,  (born May 2, 1955, Reggio Calabria, Italy), Italian fashion designer whose roles at Gianni Versace SpA included vice president and artistic director and whose contributions—business and artistic—furthered the company’s sophisticated high-end image.
Versace was born the youngest of four children. Her older sister, Tina, died of a tetanus infection at the age of 12, leaving Donatella, Santo, and Giovanni (later Gianni) to carry on the Versace name. Gianni, the second oldest, began his fashion career by moving to Milan in 1972. The next year, Donatella began studying foreign languages in Florence. Though she was studying to become a teacher, she made frequent visits to Milan to assist her brother, who valued her insights and critiques as he made his start in the fashion industry.
When Gianni Versace SpA was founded in Milan in 1978, Donatella assumed the role of vice president. From 1978 to 1997, Donatella acted largely as a creative hand and critic for her brother, Gianni, though she did maintain control of her own lines, specifically Young Versace and Versus, the latter of which was dropped in 2005 but revived in 2010. After its relaunch, Versus, alongside Young Versace, became a staple for the company. A Versace perfume, Blonde, was released by Gianni in honor of Donatella in 1995.
Change came on July 15, 1997, when Gianni was shot and killed outside his Miami Beach home by American serial killer Andrew Cunanan. After a lengthy leave from Gianni Versace SpA, Donatella reemerged to assume the roles of chief designer and vice president of the board. She also obtained a 20 percent stake in the company, while Allegra Versace Beck—her daughter with Paul Beck—received 50 percent. Donatella’s brother, Santo, received the remaining 30 percent, and her son, Daniel Paul Beck, was willed no portion of the company upon Gianni’s death.
As artistic director and vice president, Versace advanced the company’s image through her public relations skills and confident design direction. After her brother’s death, she significantly increased the company’s exposure in markets across the globe and enhanced its reputation. Advertising efforts grew in Europe and the U.S. as Versace attached the faces of Madonna, Jennifer Lopez, Lady Gaga, Beyoncé, and other stars to the Versace line. Versace also collaborated with celebrities to produce designs. Such connections put her in high social esteem, with people such as Sir Elton John, Kate Moss, and Prince Charles attending her parties.
Versace also led the company through a design reinvention after her brother’s death in 1997. This task required her to remove herself from Gianni’s inspirations and stylings—one of her biggest challenges as artistic director, by her own account. She sought to make the Versace look her own and, in doing so, gained the fashion house critical acclaim and a reputation for sophistication, especially in women’s fashion. Her direction turned out such creations as a green dress worn by Lopez at the Grammy Awards ceremony in 2000. The piece was deemed an instant classic in fashion history.
Versace also participated in several of the company’s high-profile business collaborations and partnerships that were intended to pursue new markets and consumers, including one with the automaker Lamborghini beginning in 2006 and another with the retail clothing chain H&M in 2011. She was at the helm when the Versace company entered real estate in 2000, opening the luxury hotel Palazzo Versace in Australia. She also made final design decisions in the construction of Versace’s second hotel, in Dubai, completed in 2015.
Over the years, changes in ownership and management of the company loosened the Versace family’s control—the multinational financial services firm Blackstone purchased 20 percent of the company in 2014, for example, and in 2016 Jonathan Akeroyd was appointed CEO—but Donatella maintained her leadership roles. In 2018 it was announced that Michael Kors Holdings Ltd. was acquiring the business for some $2 billion, though Donatella was expected to “continue to lead the company’s creative vision.”
