Giorgio Armani,  (born July 11, 1934, Piacenza, Italy), Italian fashion designer whose signature style of relaxed yet luxurious ready-to-wear and elegant, intricately beaded evening wear helped introduce ease and streamlined modernity to late 20th-century dressing.
The son of a shipping manager, Armani intended to become a doctor but left medical school to pursue a career in fashion. Beginning in 1957 he worked as a buyer for the Milan department store La Rinascente. After a seven-year stint in that position, he began to pursue a career in fashion design, training in the atelier of Nino Cerruti. In 1975, with the help of his friend and business partner Sergio Galeotti, Armani launched his own label of ready-to-wear for men and women.
Armani best described his approach to fashion as follows: “I was the first to soften the image of men, and harden the image of women. I dressed men in women’s fabrics, and stole from men what women wanted and needed—the power suit.” His androgynous approach rarely disappointed fashion critics, who dutifully appeared each season at shows staged at his 17th-century palazzo on Via Borgonuovo in central Milan. Armani’s reputation grew as a result of the popular film American Gigolo (1980), in which actor Richard Gere was featured as the dashing owner of a closetful of tailored Armani clothing. The public developed an increasingly insatiable demand for his minimalist style, and many Hollywood leading ladies became torchbearers for the Armani look at the Academy Awards ceremonies.
Over the years Armani continually added new offerings to his company, introducing perfume, accessories, a jeans line, the lower-priced diffusion line Emporio Armani, sportswear, and a limited-edition line of handmade couture dresses. In 2000–01 the Guggenheim Museum in New York City presented a major retrospective of Armani’s work. In 2002 Armani was appointed Goodwill Ambassador for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. He designed the uniforms for the Italian flag-bearers participating in the 2006 Winter Olympics Opening Ceremony as well as those of various professional athletic teams, including England’s Chelsea Football Club and Australia’s Rabbitohs. In 2007 Armani partnered with the electronics giant Samsung to create a luxury LCD (liquid crystal display) television and cellular phone as part of an expansion of his consumer lifestyle product line. That same year his Armani Privé spring/summer-collection fashion show was broadcast worldwide via Microsoft Corporation’s MSN Web portal as well as Cingular cellular phones, making him the first clothing designer to broadcast an haute couture fashion show live on the Internet.
