Krissy Taylor, in full Kristen Erin Taylor,  (born May 15, 1978, South Miami, Fla., U.S.—died July 2, 1995, Pembroke Pines, Fla., U.S.), American fashion model perhaps best known as a face of the cosmetics companies CoverGirl and L’Oréal. She was the sister of supermodel Niki Taylor. Taylor walked the runways for the top fashion houses, including Fendi and Ralph Lauren. She was featured in the leading beauty and fashion magazines, including international editions of Cosmopolitan, Elle, and Glamour.
Taylor was raised with her two older sisters in Pembroke Pines, a suburb of Fort Lauderdale, where the family relocated in 1987. Her father was employed as a state patrol officer. When Niki began modeling in the late 1980s, Taylor accompanied her on several assignments and, at age 11, was invited to join her sister on a shoot for the leading teen magazine, Seventeen (March 1990). Taylor subsequently signed for professional representation with the local modeling agency Irene Marie. However, unlike her sister, Taylor was extremely shy and uncomfortable in front of the camera. In addition, her tall stature disqualified her as a child model, and her childlike features made her unsuitable as a teen model.
After a two-year hiatus, then 13-year-old Taylor again ventured into modeling, making her runway debut at Milan Fashion Week—one of the industry’s major semiannual events—alongside some of the world’s top models, including Naomi Campbell, Claudia Schiffer, and Christy Turlington, gaining international recognition. Perhaps because of her growing resemblance to her sister, Taylor was featured with Niki on the first ever black-and-white cover of Seventeen (January 1992) to positive reviews. Thereafter the two were often booked together for various modeling assignments, including a shoot for the leading fashion magazine, Vogue (May 1992), and advertisements for CoverGirl. In 1993 Taylor signed for professional representation with IMG Models—one of the world’s top modeling agencies. The following year, at age 16, she was the youngest model chosen to walk the runways at New York Fashion Week, for which she was featured prominently in various media outlets, including the New York Daily News. Having thus become a model in her own right, Taylor quickly began landing solo assignments, perhaps most notably becoming a face of L’Oréal in 1995.
At age 17, Taylor was on the verge of achieving the status of “supermodel”—a top fashion model who appears simultaneously on the covers of the world’s leading fashion magazines and is globally recognized by first name only—and was being courted for acting roles in various films and television shows when Niki found her collapsed and unconscious inside their parents’ home. Efforts to resuscitate Taylor were unsuccessful, and she was later pronounced dead at a nearby hospital. The final autopsy report ruled her official cause of death as an acute bronchial asthma attack complicated by a sudden cardiac arrhythmia, later attributed to a rare heart condition.
