Manolo Blahnik, in full Manuel Blahnik Rodríguez,  (born November 27, 1942, Santa Cruz de la Palma, Canary Islands, Spain), Spanish fashion designer best known for his signature line of high-end women’s footwear.
Blahnik was born the eldest of two children into an affluent family. His Czech father’s family owned a pharmaceutical firm in Prague, and his Spanish mother’s family owned a banana plantation in the island city of Santa Cruz de la Palma, where both Blahnik and his sister were raised and homeschooled. Blahnik’s mother favoured designer footwear and, during the scarcity of World War II, was taught by a local cobbler to make her own shoes out of available materials, such as wood, leather, ribbon, and lace. Blahnik subsequently expressed an interest in shoe design at an early age, fashioning creations for his pets out of muslin and cotton ribbons. He attended a Swiss boarding school before studying international law at the University of Geneva, owing to his parents’ desire for him to become a diplomat. After completing his first semester, however, Blahnik shifted his focus to literature, earning a degree in 1965. He subsequently relocated to Paris to study art at the École des Beaux-Arts and stage set design at the Louvre Art School while working at a vintage clothing shop.
In 1968 Blahnik moved to London, where he began working at the Zapata fashion boutique. He then worked briefly as a photographer for The Sunday Times newspaper as well as a writer for the Italian edition of the leading fashion magazine Vogue and, in the early 1970s, became a jeans buyer for the Feathers boutique. In 1970 Blahnik was introduced to Diana Vreeland—then editor in chief of American Vogue—who, upon noting the footwear featured in his sketches, encouraged him to pursue shoe design. The following year Blahnik began designing shoes for Zapata, and in 1972 he designed for the British designer Ossie Clark his first collection, featuring innovative designs such as the “Cherry Shoe”—a stiletto heel with imitation cherries dangling from green straps that tied around the ankle. The collection was modeled to critical acclaim by some of the era’s top models, including Twiggy, and gained the attention of the fashion elite.
To perfect his technique Blahnik briefly studied shoemaking with professional craftsmen in Northampton and East London. In 1973 he bought out Zapata’s owners and thereafter launched his own boutique, counting the socialite Bianca Jagger as one of his earliest customers. The following year Blahnik gained international recognition when he became the first man to appear (with actress Anjelica Huston) on the cover of British Vogue. In 1977 Jagger wore a pair of his shoes to make her monumental entrance to the Studio 54 disco riding a white horse, giving further endorsement to the brand. Blahnik launched a collection for the luxury retailer Bloomingdale’s the following year and subsequently received a series of awards, including the Fashion Council of America Award (1988), the Council of Fashion Designers of America (CFDA) Accessory Designer of the Year (1990), the British Fashion Council Accessory Designer (1990), and the CFDA’s The Stiletto (1997). Blahnik’s designs were popularized by the British television show Absolutely Fabulous (broadcast in five seasons: 1992, 1994, 1995, 2001, and 2003) as well as the American television program Sex and the City (1998–2004), whose shoe-obsessed fictional character Carrie Bradshaw transformed the brand into a household name.
In 2003 Blahnik became the first shoe designer to be featured in an exhibition at London’s Design Museum, which showcased his work in coordination with the release of his book Manolo Blahník: Drawings (2003). He subsequently collaborated with photographer Eric Boman on the book Blahník by Boman: A Photographic Conversation (2005) and designed the footwear for the biographical film Marie Antoinette (2006). In 2007 he was named Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) by Queen Elizabeth II in honour of his contribution to the British fashion industry. The book Manolo’s New Shoes: Drawings by Manolo Blahník was released in 2010. In 2017 Manolo was the subject of the documentary film Manolo: The Boy Who Made Shoes for Lizards.
Blahnik was perhaps best known for designing delicate and lightweight stiletto heels that impart an inherent sex appeal while incorporating ethereal elements to achieve a glamorous yet sophisticated look. His luxurious and decorative creations feature such opulent additions as chains, feathers, furs, grommets, ribbons, rings, and silk brocade. In an era of mass production, Blahnik was renowned for handcrafting each shoe prototype himself and collaborated with the world’s top fashion designers—including John Galliano, Calvin Klein, and Yves Saint Laurent—to design shoes that coordinate with their seasonal clothing collections.
