Nick Cave,  (born February 4, 1959, Jefferson City, Missouri, U.S.), American artist best known for his wearable mixed-media constructions known as Soundsuits, which act simultaneously as fashion, sculpture, and noisemaking performance art.
Cave began exploring fibre arts and fashion while attending the Kansas City (Missouri) Art Institute (B.F.A.; 1982). During his time there he also studied with Alvin Ailey’s modern dance company, initiating his active interest in constructing a bridge between dance, fashion, and art. He earned a master’s in fine arts (1989) at the Cranbrook Academy of Art in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, and later became chairman of the fashion design program at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago. Throughout his career, Cave made use of found and ready-made materials to reference cultural, political, and autobiographical issues.
Cave made his first Soundsuit out of twigs in the early 1990s by wiring cut and drilled sticks to a handmade cotton undergarment, realizing its performative potential only once it had been completed. Using a myriad of techniques and materials, he continued to create the hybrid objects, which ranged from formfitting bodysuits composed of intricately sewn fabrics and beads to amorphous suits made of natural materials such as woven hair. The Soundsuits—named for the sounds made when worn by performers—conceal and transform identity, race, and gender while encouraging movement and creating noise that reflects their chosen materials and construction. 
Their meanings shift and multiply with each exhibition and performance, set in places as varied as the theatre stage, fashion runway, and city street.
Echoing his ongoing exploration of issues relating to identity and politics, Cave also used recycled materials in a series of sculptures and installations that equally cited crafts and rituals. With these objects and his Soundsuits, Cave borrowed from a wide range of disciplines and cultures in an effort to examine and challenge notions of personal and cultural identity.
