Nicolas Ghesquière,  (born May 9, 1971, Comines, France), French fashion designer who, as creative director of Balenciaga (1997–2012) and as artistic director of Louis Vuitton (2013–), earned a reputation as the most original designer of his generation.
Ghesquière was born in northern France but was raised in Loudun, in the western part of the country. His love of fashion was evident at an early age, attributed in part to his fashion-conscious mother, and he was reportedly sketching designs before he was 12 years of age. He garnered his first in a series of fashion internships at the age of 15, with a brief stint at Agnès B., which was followed by a lengthier stay with Corinne Cobson. In the early 1990s he began working as an assistant to renowned French fashion designer Jean Paul Gaultier. After a few years he left that position and began to freelance.
It was a freelance job that initially took Ghesquière to Balenciaga in 1995. When Balenciaga’s creative director, Josephus Thimister, was fired two years later, Ghesquière was tapped to replace him. It was the start of his 15-year run at Balenciaga and the beginning of his meteoric rise in the fashion world. During his tenure there Ghesquière revived the previously declining fashion house: sales reportedly doubled within his first three years, and his designs were well received, including his 1980s-inspired fashions and the iconic Lariat handbag. He later expanded the number of Balenciaga’s collections and continued to produce innovative designs to wide acclaim, such as short gladiator-style skirts and toga dresses, knee-high gladiator sandals, fitted cropped tops, high-waisted trousers, dresses with flamenco ruffles, and a collection inspired by some of Balenciaga’s original designs.
In November 2012 Ghesquière and Balenciaga abruptly parted ways amid rumours of discord. A year later Louis Vuitton announced that Ghesquière would replace the departing Marc Jacobs as artistic director of its women’s collection. In 2013 Balenciaga sued Ghesquière, alleging that he had violated the terms of his separation agreement when he gave an interview in which he opined about feeling as though he was being “sucked dry” at Balenciaga. The trial commenced in July 2014, but in August the two sides agreed to settle out of court. That year Ghesquière debuted his first collection as Louis Vuitton’s new artistic director. He drew praise for the collection, in which he used such rich fabrics as crocodile, brushed shetland wool, and printed moleskin for his short A-line skirts, boxy jackets, high-waisted pants, and cropped sweaters. His signature silhouette was a slight A-line, inspired by designs from the 1970s and early ’80s.
Ghesquière garnered several awards and honours for his design acumen, including the 2001 International Designer award from the Council of Fashion Designers of America. In 2007 he was made a Chevalier de l’Ordre des Arts et des Lettres, and in December 2014 the British Fashion Awards named him International Designer of the Year.
