Raf Simons,  (born January 12, 1968, Neerpelt, Belgium), Belgian fashion designer who worked for various labels, notably serving as creative director of  Jil Sander (2005–12), as artistic director of Christian Dior (2012–15), as chief creative officer of Calvin Klein (2016–18), and as cocreative director of Prada (2020– ).
Simons studied industrial and furniture design in Genk, Belgium, taking a degree in 1991 and beginning a career as a furniture designer. Inspired by the Belgian couturiers known as the Antwerp Six, however, he had undertaken an internship at the studio of Walter Van Beirendonck (one of the Six) while still in school. With the encouragement of Linda Loppa, head of the fashion department of the Royal Academy of Fine Arts in Antwerp, he produced his first collection of menswear in 1995, thus bringing the Raf Simons label into being. His look, which fused outsider youth apparel with traditional business attire, gained an immediate following.
In 2000 Simons closed his company for a sabbatical; later that year he accepted an appointment as head of the fashion department of Vienna’s University of Applied Arts, a position he held until 2005. Simons reopened his Antwerp-based company in 2001 and added a second line of menswear, Raf by Raf Simons, in 2005. That year proved to be significant for the designer, as the German label Jil Sander, known for understated designs for both men and women, tapped him to replace Sander as creative director in spite of the fact that he had never before designed womenswear. His first collection for Jil Sander showed respect for the label’s minimalist aesthetic combined with his own subtle elegance.
In February 2012 Simons left Jil Sander, and two months later he became artistic director at Christian Dior; he replaced John Galliano, who had been fired the previous year. Simon’s first collection for the French label was shown in July 2012. He earned praise for remaining true to the romantic aesthetic of the brand while imparting a modern sensibility. Simons announced his departure from the position in October 2015. The following year he became chief creative officer of Calvin Klein, but he left the American brand in 2018. Two years later he became cocreative designer (with Miuccia Prada) of the Italian label Prada.
Simons was the recipient of various honours. In 2017 he became the second person to win both the Menswear Designer of the Year and the Womenswear Designer of the Year awards from the Council of Fashion Designers of America. He received the latter award again in 2018.
