Steve Madden, in full Steven Madden,  (born 1958, Queens, New York, U.S.), American shoe designer who founded Steven Madden, Ltd., a manufacturer of moderately priced shoes and accessories, marketed mostly to young women and girls. In 2002–05 he was imprisoned for financial misconduct.
Madden, the son of a textile manufacturer and a housewife, was a native of New York’s Long Island. He was born in the New York City borough of Queens and grew up in the Five Towns region of adjacent Nassau county. While still in high school he got a job in a shoe store and took an immediate liking to the footwear business. After two years of study at the University of Miami, he moved to New York City, where he sold shoes for two years. In 1980 he began working for L.J. Simone, a wholesale firm, where he learned how shoes were manufactured and marketed. After leaving Simone in 1988, Madden and a partner attempted to launch Souliers, a brand of women’s shoes, for the MCM footwear company, but this venture was unsuccessful.
In 1990 Madden founded Steven Madden, Ltd. He started out by having 500 pairs of shoes made to his own design and selling them to New York City-area stores from the trunk of his car. His first major success, the Mary Lou, was a variation on the classic Mary Jane style of women’s shoe. In 1993 he opened his first retail store. In the same year, seeking more capital, he entrusted his company’s initial public offering of stock to the Long Island securities firm of Stratton Oakmont, where Danny Porush, a childhood friend, was a partner. Even as his company thrived, Madden, as an individual, continued to deal with Stratton Oakmont and its principals until about 1997. The government subsequently accused Stratton Oakmont management of many forms of financial misconduct, and several people, including Porush and Jordan Belfort, ultimately pleaded guilty and went to jail. In 2000 Madden was indicted on civil and criminal charges in connection with his transactions with the firm. The following year he pleaded guilty to securities fraud and money laundering, and in 2002 he was sentenced to 41 months in prison. He served 31 months.
Steven Madden, Ltd., continued to function during its founder’s incarceration. Madden stepped down as chairman and chief executive officer but stayed on as “creative and design chief,” a title he retained  after his release in 2005. Following his much-publicized return, the company continued to expand its line beyond the platforms and chunky-heeled shoes with which it made its name. The business was often accused of making budget-priced copies of high-fashion creations. Alexander McQueen, Stella McCartney, and Balenciaga were among the fashion houses that sued for trade dress infringement. The lawsuits were usually settled out of court.
Madden’s dealings with Stratton Oakmont were dramatized in the film The Wolf of Wall Street (2013), directed by Martin Scorsese.
