Sepsis,  systemic inflammatory condition that occurs as a complication of infection and in severe cases may be associated with acute and life-threatening organ dysfunction. Worldwide, sepsis has long been a common cause of illness and mortality in hospitals, intensive care units, and emergency departments. In 2017 alone, an estimated 11 million people worldwide died from sepsis, accounting for nearly one-fifth of all deaths globally that year. Nonetheless, this number marked a decrease in sepsis death rates from the last part of the 20th century. Improvements in health care, including better sanitation and the development of more effective treatments, were thought to have contributed to the decline.
Populations most susceptible to sepsis include the elderly and persons who are severely ill and hospitalized. In the early 21st century, other factors, including increased life expectancy for persons with immunodeficiency disorders (e.g., HIV/AIDS), increased incidence of antibiotic resistance, and increased use of anticancer chemotherapy and immunosuppressive drugs (e.g., for organ transplantation), have emerged as important risk factors of sepsis.
In addition to the elderly and to persons with weak immune systems, newborns, pregnant women, and individuals affected by chronic diseases such as diabetes mellitus are also highly susceptible to sepsis. Other risk factors include hospitalization and the introduction of medical devices (e.g., surgical instruments) into the body. Early symptoms of sepsis include increased heart rate, increased respiratory rate, suspected or confirmed infection, and increased or decreased body temperature (i.e., greater than 101.3 °F [38.5 °C] or lower than 95 °F [35 °C]). Diagnosis is based on the presence of at least two of these symptoms. In many instances, however, the condition is not diagnosed until it has progressed to severe sepsis, which is characterized by symptoms of organ dysfunction, including irregular heartbeat, laboured breathing, confusion, dizziness, decreased urinary output, and skin discoloration. The condition may then progress to septic shock, which occurs when the above symptoms are accompanied by a marked drop in blood pressure. Severe sepsis and septic shock may also involve the failure of two or more organ systems, at which point the condition may be described as multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS). The condition may progress through these stages in a matter of hours, days, or weeks, depending on treatment and other factors.
Prompt treatment is required in order to decrease the risk of progression to septic shock or MODS. Initial treatment includes the emergency intravenous administration of fluids and antibiotics. Vasoconstrictor drugs also may be given intravenously to raise blood pressure, and patients who experience breathing difficulties sometimes require mechanical ventilation. Dialysis, which helps clear the blood of infectious agents, is initiated when kidney failure is evident, and surgery may be used to drain an infection.
Many patients experience a decrease in quality of life following sepsis, particularly if the patient is older or the attack severe. Acute lung injury and neuronal injury resulting from sepsis, for example, have been associated with long-term cognitive impairment. Older persons who suffer from such complications may not be able to live independently following their recovery from sepsis and often require long-term treatment with medication.
At the cellular level, sepsis is characterized by changes in the function of endothelial tissue (the endothelium forms the inner surface of blood vessels), in the coagulation (blood clotting) process, and in blood flow. These changes appear to be initiated by the cellular release of pro-inflammatory substances in response to the presence of infectious microorganisms. The substances, which include short-lived regulatory proteins known as cytokines, in turn interact with endothelial cells and thereby cause injury to the endothelium and possibly the death (apoptosis) of endothelial cells. These interactions lead to the activation of coagulation factors. In very small blood vessels (microvessels), the coagulation response, in combination with endothelial damage, may impede blood flow and cause the vessels to become leaky. As fluid and microorganisms escape into the surrounding tissues, the tissues begin to swell (edema); in the lungs this leads to pulmonary edema, which manifests as shortness of breath. If the supply of coagulation proteins becomes exhausted, bleeding may ensue. Cytokines also cause blood vessels to dilate (widen), producing a decrease in blood pressure. The damage incited by the inflammatory response is widespread and has been described as a “pan-endothelial” effect because of the distribution of endothelial tissue in blood vessels throughout the body; this effect appears to explain the systemic nature of sepsis.
The existence of multiple conditions that are characterized by similar symptoms complicates the clinical picture of sepsis. For example, sepsis is closely related to bacteremia, which is the infection of blood with bacteria, and septicemia, which is a systemic inflammatory condition caused specifically by bacteria and typically associated with bacteremia. Sepsis differs from these conditions in that it may arise in response to infection with any of a variety of microorganisms, including bacteria, viruses, protozoans, and fungi. However, the occasional progression of septicemia to more-advanced stages of sepsis and the frequent involvement of bacterial infection in sepsis preclude clear clinical distinction between these conditions. Sepsis is also distinguished from systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), a condition that can arise independent of infection (e.g., from factors such as burns or trauma).
One of the first medical descriptions of putrefaction and a sepsislike condition was provided in the 5th and 4th centuries bce in works attributed to the ancient Greek physician Hippocrates (the Greek word sepsis means “putrefaction”). With no knowledge of infectious microorganisms, the ancient Greeks and the physicians who came after them variably associated the condition with digestive illness, miasma (infection by bad air), and spontaneous generation. These apocryphal associations persisted until the 19th century, when infection finally was discovered to be the underlying cause of sepsis, a realization that emerged from the work of British surgeon and medical scientist Sir Joseph Lister and French chemist and microbiologist Louis Pasteur.
