Villus, plural villi,  in anatomy any of the small, slender, vascular projections that increase the surface area of a membrane. Important villous membranes include the placenta and the mucous-membrane coating of the small intestine. The villi of the small intestine project into the intestinal cavity, greatly increasing the surface area for food absorption and adding digestive secretions. The villi number about 10 to 40 per square millimetre (6,000 to 25,000 per square inch) of tissue. They are most prevalent at the beginning of the small intestine and diminish in number toward the end of the tract. They range in length from about 0.5 to 1 mm (about 0.02 to 0.04 inch).
The large number of villi give the internal intestinal wall a velvety appearance. Each villus has a central core composed of one artery and one vein, a strand of muscle, a centrally located lymphatic capillary (lacteal), and connective tissue that adds support to the structures. The blood vessels are thought to transport proteins and carbohydrates absorbed by the cells of the villi, while the lymphatic capillary removes droplets of emulsified fat (chyle). The muscle strand allows the villi to contract and expand; it is believed that these contractions empty the contents of the lacteal into larger lymphatic vessels.
Covering the core of a villus is the surface mucous-membrane layer. This is mainly composed of two cell types: tall, narrow, columnar cells that absorb the substances passed into the blood and lymphatic vessels; and goblet cells, rounded at the end, that secrete mucus into the intestinal cavity. On the surface of each columnar cell there are about 600 very fine projections called microvilli that further increase the absorptive area of each villus.
Villi of the intestine move in swaying, contracting motions. These movements are believed to increase the flow of blood and lymph and to enhance absorption. The villi of the small intestine absorb about 2 gallons (7.5 litres) of fluid per day, and absorption seems to be indiscriminate.
The villi in the placenta are known as chorionic villi. Chorionic villi make up a significant portion of the placenta and serve primarily to increase the surface area by which products from the maternal blood are made available to the fetus. The outer epithelial layer of the chorionic villi is made up of multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast cells, which are produced from the fusion of supporting cytotrophoblast cells. Chorionic villus cells contain the same genetic material as that of the fetus. For that reason, cells of the chorionic villi can be collected and examined to determine whether a fetus is affected by a genetic disorder; that procedure is known as chorionic villus sampling.
