white blood cell, also called leukocyte or white corpuscle,  a cellular component of the blood that lacks hemoglobin, has a nucleus, is capable of motility, and defends the body against infection and disease by ingesting foreign materials and cellular debris, by destroying infectious agents and cancer cells, or by producing antibodies.
In adults, the bone marrow produces 60 to 70 percent of the white cells (i.e., the granulocytes). The lymphatic tissues, particularly the thymus, the spleen, and the lymph nodes, produce the lymphocytes (comprising 20 to 30 percent of the white cells). The reticuloendothelial tissues of the spleen, liver, lymph nodes, and other organs produce the monocytes (4 to 8 percent of the white cells). A healthy adult human has between 4,500 and 11,000 white blood cells per cubic millimetre of blood. Fluctuations in white cell number occur during the day; lower values are obtained during rest and higher values during exercise.
The survival of white blood cells, as living cells, depends on their continuous production of energy. The chemical pathways utilized are more complex than those of the red cells and are similar to those of other tissue cells. White cells, containing a nucleus and able to produce ribonucleic acid (RNA), can synthesize protein.
Although white cells are found in the circulation, most occur outside the circulation, within tissues, where they fight infections; the few in the bloodstream are in transit from one site to another. As living cells, their survival depends on their continuous production of energy. The chemical pathways utilized are more complex than those of red blood cells and are similar to those of other tissue cells. White cells, containing a nucleus and able to produce ribonucleic acid (RNA), can synthesize protein. White cells are highly differentiated for their specialized functions, and they do not undergo cell division (mitosis) in the bloodstream; however, some retain the capability of mitosis. On the basis of their appearance under a light microscope, white cells are grouped into three major classes—lymphocytes, granulocytes, and monocytes—each of which carries out somewhat different functions.
Lymphocytes, which are further divided into B cells and T cells, are responsible for the specific recognition of foreign agents and their subsequent removal from the host. B lymphocytes secrete antibodies, which are proteins that bind to foreign microorganisms in body tissues and mediate their destruction. Typically, T cells recognize virally infected or cancerous cells and destroy them, or they serve as helper cells to assist the production of antibody by B cells. Also included in this group are natural killer (NK) cells, so named for their inherent ability to kill a variety of target cells. In a healthy person, about 25 to 33 percent of white blood cells are lymphocytes.
Granulocytes, the most numerous of the white cells, rid the body of large pathogenic organisms such as protozoans or helminths and are also key mediators of allergy and other forms of inflammation. These cells contain many cytoplasmic granules, or secretory vesicles, that harbour potent chemicals important in immune responses. They also have multilobed nuclei, and because of this they are often called polymorphonuclear cells. On the basis of how their granules take up dye in the laboratory, granulocytes are subdivided into three categories: neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils. The most numerous of the granulocytes—making up 50 to 80 percent of all white cells—are neutrophils. They are often one of the first cell types to arrive at a site of infection, where they engulf and destroy the infectious microorganisms through a process called phagocytosis. Eosinophils and basophils, as well as the tissue cells called mast cells, typically arrive later. The granules of basophils and of the closely related mast cells contain a number of chemicals, including histamine and leukotrienes, that are important in inducing allergic inflammatory responses. Eosinophils destroy parasites and also help to modulate inflammatory responses.
Monocytes, which constitute between 4 and 8 percent of the total number of white blood cells in the blood, move from the blood to sites of infection, where they differentiate further into macrophages. These cells are scavengers that phagocytose whole or killed microorganisms and are therefore effective at direct destruction of pathogens and cleanup of cellular debris from sites of infection. Neutrophils and macrophages are the main phagocytic cells of the body, but macrophages are much larger and longer-lived than neutrophils. Some macrophages are important as antigen-presenting cells, cells that phagocytose and degrade microbes and present portions of these organisms to T lymphocytes, thereby activating the specific acquired immune response.
Specific types of cells are associated with different illnesses and reflect the special function of that cell type in body defense. In general, newborns have a high white blood cell count that gradually falls to the adult level during childhood. An exception is the lymphocyte count, which is low at birth, reaches its highest levels in the first four years of life, and thereafter falls gradually to a stable adult level. See also blood cell formation.
An abnormal increase in white cell number is known as leukocytosis.  This condition is usually caused by an increase in the number of granulocytes (especially neutrophils), some of which may be immature (myelocytes). White cell count may increase in response to intense physical exertion, convulsions, acute emotional reactions, pain, pregnancy, labour, and certain disease states, such as infections and intoxications.
A large increase in the numbers of white blood cells in the circulation or bone marrow is a sign of leukemia, a type of cancer of the blood-forming tissues. Some types of leukemia have been related to radiation exposure, as noted in the Japanese population exposed to the first atomic bomb at Hiroshima; other evidence suggests hereditary susceptibility. A number of different leukemias are classified according to the course of the disease and the predominant type of white blood cell involved. For example, myelogenous leukemia affects granulocytes and monocytes, white blood cells that destroy bacteria and some parasites.
An abnormal decrease in white blood cell numbers is known as leukopenia. The count may decrease in response to certain types of infections or drugs or in association with certain conditions, such as chronic anemia, malnutrition, or anaphylaxis.
Certain types of infections are characterized from the beginning by an increase in the number of small lymphocytes unaccompanied by increases in monocytes or granulocytes. Such lymphocytosis is usually of viral origin. Moderate degrees of lymphocytosis are encountered in certain chronic infections, such as tuberculosis and brucellosis. Infectious mononucleosis, caused by the Epstein-Barr virus, is associated with the appearance of unusually large lymphocytes (atypical lymphocytes). These cells represent part of the complex defense mechanism against the virus, and they disappear from the blood when the attack of infectious mononucleosis subsides.
