Auschwitz, Polish Oświęcim, also called Auschwitz-Birkenau,  Nazi Germany’s largest concentration camp and extermination camp. Located near the industrial town of Oświęcim in southern Poland (in a portion of the country that was annexed by Germany at the beginning of World War II), Auschwitz was actually three camps in one: a prison camp, an extermination camp, and a slave-labour camp. As the most lethal of the Nazi extermination camps, Auschwitz has become the emblematic site of the “final solution,” a virtual synonym for the Holocaust. Between 1.1 and 1.5 million people died at Auschwitz; 90 percent of them were Jews. Also among the dead were some 19,000 Roma who were held at the camp until the Nazis gassed them on July 31, 1944—the only other victim group gassed in family units alongside the Jews. The Poles constituted the second largest victim group at Auschwitz, where some 83,000 were killed or died.
Auschwitz was probably chosen to play a central role in the “final solution” because it was located at a railway junction with 44 parallel tracks—rail lines that were used to transport Jews from throughout Europe to their death. Heinrich Himmler, chief of the SS, the Nazi paramilitary corps, ordered the establishment of the first camp, the prison camp, on April 27, 1940, and the first transport of Polish political prisoners arrived on June 14. This small camp, Auschwitz I, was reserved throughout its history for political prisoners, mainly Poles and Germans.
In October 1941, work began on Auschwitz II, or Birkenau, located outside the nearby village of Brzezinka. There the SS later developed a huge concentration camp and extermination complex that included some 300 prison barracks; four large so-called Badeanstalten (German: “bathhouses”), in which prisoners were gassed to death; Leichenkeller (“corpse cellars”), in which their bodies were stored; and Einäscherungsöfen (“cremating ovens”). Another camp (Buna-Monowitz), near the village of Dwory, later called Auschwitz III, became in May 1942 a slave-labour camp supplying workers for the nearby chemical and synthetic-rubber works of IG Farben. In addition, Auschwitz became the nexus of a complex of 45 smaller subcamps in the region, most of which housed slave labourers. During most of the period from 1940 to 1945, the commandant of the central Auschwitz camps was SS-Hauptsturmführer (Capt.) and ultimately SS-Obersturmbannführer (Lieut. Col.) Rudolf Franz Höss (Hoess).
The death camp and slave-labour camp were interrelated. Newly arrived prisoners at the death camp were divided in a process known as Selektion. The young and the able-bodied were sent to work. Young children and their mothers and the old and infirm were sent directly to the gas chambers. Thousands of prisoners were also selected by the camp doctor, Josef Mengele, for medical experiments. Auschwitz doctors tested methods of sterilization on the prisoners, using massive doses of radiation, uterine injections, and other barbaric procedures. Experiments involving the killing of twins, upon whom autopsies were performed, were meant to provide information that would supposedly lead to the rapid expansion of the “Aryan race.”
Subject to harsh conditions—including inadequate shelter and sanitation—given minimal food, and worked to exhaustion, those who could no longer work faced transport back to Birkenau for gassing. German corporations invested heavily in the slave-labour industries adjacent to Auschwitz. In 1942 IG Farben alone invested more than 700 million Reichsmarks in its facilities at Auschwitz III.
Throughout the camp’s history, there were numerous escape attempts, and on April 10, 1944, two Slovak Jews—Rudolph Vrba and Alfred Wetzler—successfully broke out of Auschwitz-Birkenau. After a harrowing two-week journey through Nazi-occupied Poland, they made it back to their home country. There they made contact with Slovak resistance forces and gave them a complete report on the extermination camp. Vrba and Wetzler documented the killing process and provided detailed maps of the camp’s layout. This information was passed on to Western intelligence organizations along with an urgent request to bomb Auschwitz. Part of the report was forwarded to the U.S. government’s War Refugee Board and arrived in Washington in July 1944. In August U.S. Assistant Secretary of War John J. McCloy rejected the notion of bombing Auschwitz, stating that “such an operation could be executed only by the diversion of considerable air support essential to the success of our forces now engaged in decisive operations elsewhere and would in any case be of such doubtful efficacy that it would not warrant the use of our resources.” Although the IG Farben industrial complex adjacent to Auschwitz was bombed four times in the final year of the war, the death camp and its crematoria were left untouched, a subject of controversy more than 70 years later. (See Why Wasn’t Auschwitz Bombed?)
On March 19, 1944, Germany occupied Hungary, and, while the Allies considered the ramifications of the Vrba-Wetzler report, the Nazis undertook the systematic destruction of Hungarian Jewry. Between May 15 and July 9, 1944, some 438,000 Hungarian Jews were shipped on 147 trains to Birkenau, stretching the camp’s resources for killing beyond all limits. Because the crematoria were overcrowded, bodies were burned in open pyres fueled partly by the victims’ own fat. More than two-thirds of Hungary’s Jewish population would perish in the Holocaust, and the overwhelming majority of those murders would take place at Birkenau.
As Soviet armies advanced in 1944 and early 1945, Auschwitz was gradually abandoned. On January 18, 1945, some 60,000 prisoners were marched to Wodzisław Śląski, where they were put on freight trains (many in open cars) and sent westward to concentration camps away from the front. One in four died en route from starvation, cold, exhaustion, and despair. Many were shot along the way in what became known as the “death marches.” The 7,650 sick or starving prisoners who remained were found by arriving Soviet troops on January 27, 1945.
After the war, hundreds of Nazi officials and SS soldiers would be tried for war crimes in connection with the atrocities committed at Auschwitz. Höss was arrested by Allied military police in 1946, and the following year a Polish tribunal sentenced him to death by hanging. On April 16, 1947, he was executed on the grounds of Auschwitz. Another tribunal was convened at Kraków in 1947, and 23 SS officers, including Arthur Liebehenschel (who had served as commandant of Auschwitz I) and Maria Mandel (director of the women’s camp at Birkenau) were sentenced to death. Mengele went into hiding after the war and fled to South America in 1949. With the exception of Adolf Eichmann, Mengele was arguably the highest-profile Nazi to escape justice in the years immediately following World War II. Eichmann was arrested by Mossad agents in Buenos Aires in May 1960 and returned to Israel for trial, but Mengele would remain at large. In 1985 a team of forensic investigators concluded that Mengele had died of a stroke in 1979 while living in Brazil under the assumed identity of Wolfgang Gerhard.
Although the Germans destroyed parts of the camps before abandoning them in 1945, much of Auschwitz I and Auschwitz II (Birkenau) remained intact and were later converted into a museum and memorial. The site has been threatened by increased industrial activity in Oświęcim. In 1996, however, the Polish government joined with other organizations in a large-scale effort to ensure its preservation. Originally named Auschwitz Concentration Camp, the memorial was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1979. It was renamed “Auschwitz-Birkenau. The Nazi German Concentration and Extermination Camp (1940–1945)” in 2007.
