Austrian Netherlands,  (1713–95), provinces located in the southern part of the Low Countries (roughly comprising present Belgium and Luxembourg), which made up what had been the major portion of the Spanish Netherlands.
Following the death of the Habsburg Charles II of Spain (1700), Spain and the Spanish territories had passed to the Bourbon grandson of Louis XIV, Philippe d’Anjou (Philip V). None of the other major powers in Europe—the Habsburgs, the Dutch Republic, and the English—would accept French succession: the War of the Spanish Succession ensued. When the Spanish possessions were divided in the Treaties of Utrecht in 1713, the Spanish Netherlands fell to the Holy Roman emperor Charles VI. It was known as the Austrian Netherlands until 1795.
The Treaty of Antwerp (also known as the Treaty of the Barriers, 1715) further provided that the Austrian administration of the southern Low Countries would remain essentially unchanged from the Spanish rule; the official organ of the region was simply transferred from Madrid to Vienna. As the natural prince of the Austrian Netherlands, Charles VI was subject to the same agreements as his predecessors. The autonomy of the cities and states and the ascendancy of the Roman Catholic Church were to remain intact. The one exception to this continuance of conditions was the quartering of Dutch troops against French invasion.
Charles’s initial attempt to improve the economy of the region—the establishment of a trading company—was blocked by the Dutch and the English. He eventually dissolved the company and turned his attentions to the problem of Habsburg succession. Despite his efforts on his daughter’s behalf, Maria Theresa was challenged as soon as she took up the sceptre in 1740. During the subsequent War of the Austrian Succession, the French took advantage of the Prussian challenge to Maria Theresa and invaded Flanders in 1744. Soon all the Austrian Netherlands except Limburg and Luxembourg fell to the French. They were restored to Austria in 1748.
During the rule of Maria Theresa, the Austrian Netherlands again began to prosper as it had during the first half of the Spanish regime. Still, the Austrians were unused to the republican spirit of the southern provinces. When Joseph II succeeded his mother to the throne in 1780, he attempted to force his Enlightenment ideas on the people. In 1783 he abolished contemplative orders, declaring them useless. In 1786 individual religious fraternities were regrouped into a single entity. Seminaries were disbanded and replaced with state schools. In 1787 Joseph negated the centuries-old privileges he had sworn to uphold and eliminated the ruling councils and judiciary bodies on which the people had come to depend. The people were outraged at his interference. Their objection caused some of his edicts to be suspended, but the spirit of the acts remained. When certain rebellious leaders were castigated, a revolution centred in the province of Brabant erupted (1789–90).
The Brabant Revolution was for a time successful. A republic was proclaimed by the rebels, but it was unable to withstand internal conflicts and external pressures. Regardless of revolutions, the peasants continued to support the emperor. The republic fell within a year. In 1790 Joseph died and the new emperor, Leopold II, offered a restoration of all rights. When for various reasons his offer was refused, the Austrian resorted to military action. Into this confusion rode the French Revolutionaries in 1792, and they were welcomed as liberators. Austrian rule held sway in 1792–93, but the French were determined to stay. On Oct. 1, 1795, after a period of arbitrary rule, the Austrian Netherlands was annexed to France. After the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars, it was merged with the Dutch provinces to become the Kingdom of the Netherlands (1815). An independent Belgium was established in 1831.
