Baghelkhand,  historical region, eastern Madhya Pradesh state, central India.  Known as Dahala before the Muslims, Baghelkhand was held by the warlike Kalacuri dynasty (6th–12th century), whose stronghold was at Kalinjar. With the advent of the Baghela Rajputs (warrior caste) in the 14th century, after whom the tract is named, it was absorbed into Rewa state. Baghelkhand Agency, a subdivision of the British Central India Agency, was created in 1871 and included Rewa and several other states, with headquarters at Satna. It merged with Bundelkhand Agency in 1931 and formed the eastern half of Vindhya Pradesh, created at Indian independence in 1947.
The area is divided into two natural regions by the Kaimur Range. To the west lie elevated plains, and to the east is a rough, hilly tract intersected by a succession of parallel forested ridges of the Vindhya Range. Within the region, the more prominent relief features are the Vindhyan scarplands (consisting of the Bhanrer Range, Rewa Plateau, Sonapur hill ranges, and Son trough). The rest of Baghelkhand is a plateau terrain underlain by granite in the south and the east. Sections of the historical Gondwana region and the ancient Deccan Traps (lava outpouring) lie in the central part, and the Vindhyas are in the northeast. The Tons and Son rivers and their tributaries drain the area. An alluvial cover is found in the narrow Son trough.
Baghelkhand has traditionally been neglected because of its isolated location. The population of the region consists chiefly of tribal Gonds and Kols. Agriculture is underdeveloped; rice is the principal crop, and some wheat, corn (maize), and gram (chickpeas) are also grown. Deposits of coal, limestone, bauxite, clay, and quartzite are in the region, but only the first two have been mined extensively.
Rewa, Rajgarh, Satna, and Shahdol are the major administrative and commercial centres. Other locales include Umaria, Burhar, and Gaurela, in the Sohagpur basin; Ambikapur, Manendragarh, and Baikunthpur, which are rice-growing regions; Singrauli, Renukut, Pipri, and Dudhi, known for coal mining; and Obra, Dala, Sidhi, and Agori, which are transportation centres.
