Bophuthatswana,  former republic (though never internationally recognized as such) and Bantustan that was the legally designated homeland for the Republic of South Africa’s Tswana people. It consisted of seven distinct territorial units located north or west of the Witwatersrand, in north-central South Africa, and lying near or on the border with Botswana. Its capital, Mmabatho, was situated northwest of the city of Mafikeng (formerly Mafeking), which became part of Bophuthatswana in 1980. The name of the republic meant “that which binds” (bophutha) to the Tswana-speaking people.
The Tswana settled in the area about 1600. The region suffered from wars started by Shaka, the founder of the Zulu empire, and from famine between 1822 and 1837. The resulting migrations led to the formation of subgroups of Tswana and new settlements. In 1837 the Boers gained control of the region. The constituent areas of Bophuthatswana were designated a Tswana “homeland” by the South African government in the 1960s. The territorial assembly created in 1961 was replaced a decade later with a partly elected, partly appointed legislative assembly. Bophuthatswana became officially self-governing (1972) as one of South Africa’s nonindependent Bantustans, with Lucas M. Mangope as chief minister, and was declared an independent republic in December 1977.
Most of Bophuthatswana’s semiarid terrain was used for grazing beef and dairy cattle, while the scarce arable land supported corn (maize), sorghum, wheat, and peanuts (groundnuts). The republic’s small-scale industries produced beverages, processed tobacco, textiles, wood products, and leather goods. Mafikeng and the Witwatersrand were places of employment for many of Bophuthatswana’s commuters and contract migrant workers. Gambling casinos also became a source of income during the 1980s.
Under the South African constitution that abolished the apartheid system, Bophuthatswana was dissolved and reincorporated into South Africa in 1994. Its various enclaves became parts of Orange Free State (now Free State) province and the newly created North-West and Eastern Transvaal (now Mpumalanga) provinces.
