British West Africa,  assortment of widely separated territories in western Africa that were administered by Great Britain during the colonial period. These included Sierra Leone, the Gambia, Nigeria (with the British Cameroons), and the Gold Coast (including Gold Coast crown colony, the Asante empire, the Northern Territories, and British Togoland).
Sierra Leone was colonized in 1787 by freed slaves arriving from England; other groups followed from Nova Scotia (1792) and Jamaica (1800). They were sponsored and governed by the private Sierra Leone Company until 1808, when Britain made Sierra Leone a crown colony. In 1816 the British founded the colony of Bathurst at the mouth of the Gambia River. Both colonies served as bases for the British effort to block the slave trade along the coast. Later in the century British rule spread to the interior of Sierra Leone and the Gambia. Both interiors became protectorates governed through indigenous rulers.
The British policy of indirect rule was most clearly formulated by Frederick J.D. Lugard in Nigeria. In the early 1900s, long after Britain annexed Lagos as a crown colony (1861), Lugard conquered the north. Northern Nigeria and Southern Nigeria, established as separate units in 1906, were merged in 1914 under Lugard’s direction. His central government comprised an appointed governor, an executive, and a legislative council. Local administration and jurisdiction, however, depended on traditional rulers and traditional institutions. In some cases this meant removing authority from the new class of Western-educated Africans and suppressing social change that was already under way. A British resident or district officer served as the liaison between the traditional ruler and the colonial regime. Lugard’s system became the model for all of British West Africa.
Parts of the Gold Coast (present Ghana) were acquired by Britain at different times. The Gold Coast crown colony, on the Gulf of Guinea coast, was established in 1874 in Fante and Ga lands near the British coastal trading forts. The mighty Asante empire to the north was conquered and made a protectorate in 1900–01. The far north, too, became a protectorate. Sir Gordon Guggisberg, who served as governor from 1919 to 1929, introduced indirect rule by restoring the Asante king to his title.
After World War I the former German colonies of Togoland and Kamerun were each divided between Britain and France as League of Nations mandates. British Togoland was administered from the Gold Coast, the British Cameroons from Nigeria. In 1946 they were redefined as United Nations trusteeships (see Trusteeship Council).
British West Africa came to an end when Western-educated Africans, who were excluded from power under indirect rule, led nationalist movements for independence. Ghana (including British Togoland) became independent in 1957. Nigeria followed in 1960, Sierra Leone in 1961, and The Gambia in 1965. The British Cameroons were divided between Nigeria and the Republic of Cameroon.
