Grand Canyon National Park,  vast scenic area of northwestern Arizona in the southwestern United States. The park was created in 1919, and its area was greatly enlarged in 1975 by the addition of the former Grand Canyon and Marble Canyon national monuments and by portions of Glen Canyon National Recreation Area, as well as other adjoining lands. It has an area of 1,902 square miles (4,927 square km). In 1979 the park was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site.
The park encompasses the Grand Canyon, one of the world’s most renowned scenic wonders, which winds for 277 miles (446 km) from the mouth of the Paria River, near Lees Ferry and the northern boundary of Arizona with Utah, to Grand Wash Cliffs, near the Nevada state line. The canyon consists of a broad, intricately sculptured chasm of imposing peaks, buttes, gorges, and ravines formed over the past six million years by the cutting action of the Colorado River. It is at its widest and deepest in the 56-mile (90-km) stretch where the river bends from flowing south to flowing west and northwest, attaining widths of up to 18 miles (29 km) and depths of some 6,000 feet (1,800 metres) below the canyon rims.
Tourism in earnest to the canyon began at the turn of the 20th century, after the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway Company completed (1901) a rail line to the South Rim; a hotel (the El Tovar) opened in 1905 and was followed by other guest accommodations. Both the North and the South Rim are accessible by paved roads, and the two sides are connected by a 215-mile- (346-km-) long highway via a bridge near Lees Ferry. In addition, a 21-mile- (34-km-) long transcanyon trail runs between the two rims, and scenic drives and trails lead to all important features. Mule pack trips down into the canyon and rides down the river in rafts are intensively sought-after ways of viewing and experiencing the vast beauty of the canyon. Visitors also can take helicopter and small-plane flights over the canyon or ride a 65-mile (100-km) scenic railway from Williams northward to the South Rim. Some four to five million people visit the park each year.
Three Indian reservations border long stretches of the national park—Navajo to the east and Havasupai and Hualapai to the south. In addition, the main section of the park is surrounded to the north and south by Kaibab National Forest, and Grand Canyon–Parashant National Monument (established 2000) occupies much of the area north of the western portion of the park to the Nevada state line. Adjacent to the park on its northeastern and western borders, respectively, are Glen Canyon National Recreation Area and Lake Mead National Recreation Area.
