Koguryŏ,  the largest of the three kingdoms into which ancient Korea was divided until 668. Koguryŏ is traditionally said to have been founded in 37 bce in the Tongge River basin of northern Korea by Chu-mong, leader of one of the Puyŏ tribes native to the area, but modern historians believe it is more likely that the tribal state was formed in the 2nd century bce.
By the reign of King T’aejo (53–146 ce), a royal hereditary system had been established. With the promulgation by King Sosurim (reigned 371–384) of various laws and decrees aimed at centralizing royal authority, Koguryŏ emerged as a full-fledged aristocratic state. Its territory was extended greatly during the reign of King Kwanggaet’o (391–412) and further by Changsu (reigned 413–491). The entire northern half of the Korean peninsula and, in what is now China, the Liaodong Peninsula and a considerable portion of Manchuria (Northeast China) were under Koguryŏ rule during the kingdom’s peak period.
The central bureaucracy had 12 grades, with a tae-daero (prime minister) at the top who was elected by his fellow officials every three years. The officials ruled through a series of military garrisons erected at strategic points throughout the state.
As a result of Chinese influence, Buddhism was introduced in 372 ce as an ideological backing for the newly developed centralized bureaucracy, and, at about the same time, Confucian education began to be emphasized as a means of maintaining the social order. Daoism was also widespread in the later years. The numerous surviving tomb paintings give a good picture of the life, ideology, and character of the Koguryŏ people.
With the establishment of the unifying Sui (581–618) and Tang (618–907) dynasties in China, Koguryŏ began to suffer incursions from China. The kingdom was defeated in 668 by the allied forces of the southern Korean kingdom of Silla and the Tang dynasty, and the entire peninsula came under the Unified Silla dynasty (668–935). Several locations in far southern Jilin province, China, containing early Koguryŏ ruins and tombs were collectively designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 2004.
