Madjedbebe, formerly Malakunanja II,  rock shelter archaeological site in Northern Territory, Australia, that archaeological evidence suggests is among the oldest Aboriginal sites on the continent, with an estimated age of more than 50,000 years. Madjedbebe is located on the western edge of the Arnhem Land plateau about 25 miles (40 km) west of the East Alligator River and roughly 45 miles (70 km) north of Nauwalabila I, another archaeological site that is thought to be of a comparable age.
A sandstone overhang located at the base of the Arnhem Land plateau escarpment forms a narrow rock shelter at Madjedbebe. The shelter’s floor is predominantly flat, generally sandy, and largely vegetation-free. Rock art lines the shelter’s walls. Among the artifacts found there are stone axes with sharpened polished edges, stone spear tips, seed-grinding tools (mortars and pestles), animal bones, seashells, and a large amount of ground ochre. Since its discovery in 1972, the site has been investigated a number of times. The application of optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) dating—which measures the last time the sand in question was exposed to sunlight—to an excavation in 1989 led scientists to conclude that the site had been occupied by humans as early as 50,000 and 60,000 years ago. In 2017 another evaluation based on OSL shifted the date for first occupation even earlier, to between 65,000 and 80,000 years ago.
The conclulsion that Madjedbebe and the nearby site at Nauwalabila I were both inhabited more than 50,000 years ago is consistent with the theory that the original human colonization of Australia occurred during the Pleistocene ice age at a time when the Sahul Shelf was exposed by low sea levels that permitted early humans to travel almost entirely by land from Papua New Guinea to Australia. Some scholars have found in the notion that this migration might have occurred more than 60,000 years ago support for the theory that anatomically modern Homo sapiens from beyond Africa and adjacent parts of Southwest Asia migrated to South and Southeast Asia along the so-called Southern Route before human migration to Europe had occurred. The date of the first human arrival in Australia via Sahul remains contested, however. Some paleontologists and archaeologists are skeptical of the conclusions drawn from OSL dating at Madjedbebe and Nauwalabila I, largely becasuse both sites are areas of termite activity. They note that termite tunneling can cause large rock fragments, including stone tools, to be displaced downward into older layers. This movement, the skeptics argue, would invalidate the associated dating with the sand surrounding the fragments. In any case, the remains at Madjedbebe offer important clues about early Aboriginal culture and provide a vital record of human interaction with the environment over tens of thousands of years.
