Mitla,  Mesoamerican archaeological site, Oaxaca state, southern Mexico. One of Mexico’s best known ruins, Mitla lies at an elevation of 4,855 ft (1,480 m) on the eastern edge of one of several cold, high valleys surrounded by the mountains of the Sierra Madre del Sur, 24 mi (38 km) southeast of Oaxaca city. It is generally believed that Mitla (Nahuatl: Place of the Dead) was established as a sacred burial site long before the Christian Era, probably by the Zapotecs, whose influence was predominant until about ad 900. Between 900 and 1500 the Mixtecs moved down from northern Oaxaca and took possession of Mitla; it is the Mixtec influence that is most pronounced on the existing ruins. The Spaniards arrived at Mitla in 1521, and the first European account of the area was given by Diego García de Palacio in 1576.
The archaeological zone of Mitla includes five main groups of structures—Grupo de las Columnas (Columns Group), Grupo de las Iglesias (Churches Group), Grupo del Arroyo (Arroyo Group), Grupo de los Adobes (Adobe Group), and Grupo del Sur (Southern Group)—of which only the first two had been fully excavated and restored by the early 1980s. Each group has several rectangular patios (some connected by long, winding passages and others separate) bordered by long, narrow rooms. The patios in the Grupo de los Adobes and those in the Grupo del Sur are also bordered by rooms, as well as by stepped pyramids.
The method of above-ground wall construction appears to have been the same for all groups: a core of mud and stone covered with plaster or well-cut trachyte. The door frames are decorated with mosaics of intricately worked small stones perfectly fitted into stepped fret (geometric) patterns. Cruciform lithic tombs have been discovered beneath both the Grupo de las Columnas and the Grupo del Sur.
The modern village of Mitla, composed mainly of thatched huts and adobe houses situated on the hillside below the ruins, is the operation base for the Regional Studies Centre of the Universidad de las Americas. The Museo Frissell de Arte Zapoteca (Frissell Museum), located in the village, contains a collection of artifacts from the state of Oaxaca.
