Tukulor empire,  Tukulor also spelled Tukolor, or Toucouleur,  Muslim theocracy that flourished in the 19th century in western Africa from Senegal eastward to Timbuktu (Tombouctou).
The founder of the empire, al-Ḥajj ʿUmar (c. 1795–1864), was a Tukulor cleric of the austere Tijānīyah brotherhood who about 1848 moved with his followers to Dinguiraye (now in Guinea), on the borders of the Fouta Djallon region, to prepare to found a new state that would conform to the stringent moral requirements of his order. He thus set about training an elite corps in which religious, military, and commercial considerations were combined. Equipped with European firearms, this force was ready by about 1850 to embark on a jihad, or holy war, against his neighbours. It first came into conflict with the Bambara chiefdoms to the north, then two years later moved northward again across the upper Sénégal River to conquer the Bambara kingdom of Kaarta. Checked by the French in their westward return down the Sénégal River, the Tukulor quickly overran the Bambara kingdom of Segu (1861) and thereafter conquered Macina. They then extended their dominion as far north as Timbuktu (now in Mali).
This empire, though almost as large as that of the Sokoto Fulani to the east, was by no means so soundly based. Whatever ʿUmar’s original motives may have been, his followers seem to have been as much concerned with amassing riches and power as with converting their subjects to Islām. Numerous risings against Tukulor authority by the conquered Bambara and Fulani continually shook the empire, and in 1864 ʿUmar himself was killed. His son and successor, Aḥmadu Seku, inherited a patrimony disturbed by inner conflicts and rival claims to power. For the sake of internal order, in the 1880s he began to disband his army and put increasing reliance on the loyalty of subject peoples. The policy failed; not only did Aḥmadu fail to win new loyalties, but he lost the adherence of the Tukulor themselves as they saw their privileged position erode. The French exploited the situation by constructing forts within Tukulor territory and signing treaties of friendship with Tukulor’s neighbours. After 1890, French troops swept the empire, conquering Segu, Macina, and Timbuktu in turn. Aḥmadu succumbed to the French in 1893, and his former empire was soon firmly incorporated into French overseas territory.
