Valencia,   medieval kingdom of Spain, alternately Muslim and independent from 1010 to 1238 and thereafter held by the kings of Aragon. Though its territory varied, it generally comprised the modern provinces of Alicante, Castellón, and Valencia.
When Umayyad power in Moorish Spain disintegrated in the reign of Hisham II (1010), Valencia eventually came to be ruled by ʿAbd al-Aziz al-Mansūr (reigned 1021–61), grandson of the famous Cordoban caliph of that name. Stabilized by the protection of the caliphs of Córdoba and by friendship with Christian princes, his reign marked a period of peace and prosperity. However, his successor, a minor, ʿAbd al-Malik (reigned 1061–65), was attacked by Ferdinand I of Castile and Leon, who missed capturing Valencia but inflicted such a defeat on its defenders that they sought protection from al-Maʾmun, the ruler of Toledo. Al-Maʾmun deposed the minor, and for the next 10 years (1065–75) Valencia formed part of his domains.
The weakness of al-Qādir, al-Maʾmun’s successor, permitted the Valencians to reassert their independence under the leadership of the Toledan governor, Abū Bakr, who allied himself with Alfonso VI of Leon and Castile. But when the latter took Toledo in 1085, he installed al-Qādir as puppet ruler in Valencia with mercenary support. The following year, when the mercenaries were recalled to stem the Almoravids, al-Qādir was left defenseless before his hostile subjects. Several potentates maneuvered to depose him. The count of Barcelona, allied with the Muslim ruler of Zaragoza (Saragossa), besieged Valencia (1089). To forestall them, Alfonso offered the spoils of the city to the freebooter Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar, called El Cid. On his approach the siege was lifted, but the Cid found it more politic to exact protection money from al-Qādir than to occupy the city. This latter course was forced on the Cid when the Valencians assassinated al-Qādir in 1092 and constituted themselves as a republic under Almoravid protection. The Cid ruled Valencia from 1094 until his death in 1099. When his widow was forced to relinquish the kingdom to the Almoravids in 1102, the Christians burned the city before evacuating it.
For the next 30 years Valencia was ruled by Almoravid governors; but, in the confused period that preceded the arrival of the Almohads, the city again recovered a measure of independence. The Valencians admitted as their overlords several ephemeral Murcian princelings, until the Valencian Ibn Mardanish seized control of both kingdoms in 1147. This prince, of Spanish origins, aroused popular opposition in Valencia by his alliances with the Christians, and in 1151 the Valencians, with Almohad support, revolted against him. The kingdom remained in the hands of local rulers, vassals of the Almohads, until it fell to James I of Aragon on Sept. 28, 1238. Henceforth, its history fused with that of Aragon.
