Vinland,  the land of wild grapes in North America that was visited and named by Leif Eriksson about the year 1000 ce. Its exact location is not known, but it was probably the area surrounding the Gulf of Saint Lawrence in what is now eastern Canada.
The most detailed information about Viking visits to Vinland is contained in two Norse sagas, Grænlendinga saga (“Saga of the Greenlanders”)  and Eiríks saga rauða (“Erik the Red’s Saga”). These two accounts differ somewhat. According to the Grænlendinga saga, Bjarni Herjólfsson became the first European to sight mainland North America when his Greenland-bound ship was blown westward off course about 985. He apparently sailed along the Atlantic coastline of eastern Canada and from there returned to Greenland. About 1000 a crew of 35 men led by Leif Eriksson, son of Erik the Red, set out to try to find the land sighted by Bjarni. Leif’s expedition came first to an icy barren land that he called Helluland (“Land of Flat Rocks”); sailing southward,  they encountered a flat wooded land, which Leif named Markland (“Land of Forests”). Again they set sail southward and came to the warmer, more-hospitable area where they decided to stay and build a base, Leifsbúðir (“Leif’s Camp”). Exploring from there, they found fine lumber and wild grapes, which led them to name the land Vinland (“Land of Wine”). A couple of years later Leif’s brother Thorvald led an expedition to Vinland and spent two years there before he died in a skirmish with native inhabitants. The following year a third brother, Thorstein, tried to reach Vinland to take Thorvald’s body back to Greenland, but storms kept him away. Encouraged by the reports of the riches of Vinland, Thorfinn Karlsefni, an Icelandic trader visiting Greenland a couple of years later, led another expedition to Vinland. By the time that party had stayed there three years, trade with the local indigenous people had turned to warfare, so the colonists gave up and returned to Greenland. The last Vinland expedition was led by Erik the Red’s daughter Freydis in partnership with two Icelandic traders and their crews. According to the Grænlendinga saga, Freydis had her people kill the Icelandic crew before she returned to Greenland. So ended the Norse visits to the Americas as far as the historical record is concerned.
In Eiríks saga rauða, Leif is the accidental discoverer of Vinland, and Thorfinn Karlsefni and his wife, Gudrid, are credited with all subsequent exploration.  It describes two settlements, Straumfjord  (“Fjord of Currents”) in the north and Hóp (“Tidal Estuary Lagoon”) in the south.  Straumfjord is a base for exploration to which all of the colonists retire in the winter.  Hóp is a summer camp where the explorers find wild grapes and fine lumber.  Both at Hóp and somewhere north of Straumfjord, the Norse meet large groups of indigenous people. After a short-lived period of trading, skirmishes ensue, with deaths on both sides.  Feeling outnumbered, the Norse return to Greenland
The Norse name for the land they discovered, Vinland, reflected reality. Archaeological discoveries at L’Anse aux Meadows proved that the Norse did travel south to areas where grapes grew wild. Wine was a luxury drink, cherished by the elite in Norse society as part of an ostentatious lifestyle, and it was a means to power and influence. The area with grapes closest to  L’Anse aux Meadows is eastern New Brunswick, so it was probably there that the Norse made their discovery. It was also an area with impressive hardwood forests where excellent timber could be harvested, a treasure for Greenlanders who lacked forests. The tales of the North American “Land of Wine” entered the literature of continental Europe, almost certainly first in 1075 through the History of the Archbishops of Hamburg-Bremen written by Adam, head of the cathedral school of Bremen (see Adam of Bremen). Adam mentioned Vinland on the authority of King Sweyn II Estridsen of Denmark, who told of Iceland, Greenland, and other lands of the northern Atlantic known to Scandinavians. Adam says of King Sweyn: “He spoke also of yet another island of the many found in that ocean. It is called Vinland because vines producing excellent wine grow wild there.”
Why then, did the Norse so soon abandon Vinland? The distance from Greenland was great, more than 3,500 km (2,200 miles) to the area of good hardwoods and grapes, farther than back to Norway where they could obtain the same kinds of goods. Furthermore, they were not alone in the new land; it was already occupied by people who outnumbered them by the thousands. However, the biggest hindrance was Greenland’s small population. A colony of only 500 or so people simply did not have the manpower to settle and maintain a splinter colony so far from home.
