Zululand,  traditional region in the northeastern section of present-day KwaZulu-Natal (formerly Natal) province, South Africa. It is the home of the Zulu people and site of their 19th-century kingdom.
The Zulu, a Nguni people, initially were a small chieftaincy situated near the White Mfolozi River, but they provided the nucleus for the amalgamations of regional chieftaincies into a Zulu kingdom during the 1810s and early 1820s. The nearby Mthethwa confederacy, under its leader, Dingiswayo (reigned 1809–17), had established close links with the Zulu. On Dingiswayo’s death, the Zulu leader Shaka (reigned 1816–28) established his people’s dominance over their neighbours and, using a well-disciplined and efficient fighting force, expanded the kingdom’s area of control from roughly the Mzimkhulu River in the north to the Tugela River in the south and from the Drakensberg mountains eastward to the coast. Under Shaka, a system of fortified settlements known as amakhanda were established, and young men were drafted into amabutho (age sets or regiments; an organizational tactic Shaka learned while serving in the Mthethwa military under Dingiswayo) to defend against raiders and provide protection for refugees.
Shaka was assassinated in 1828 and was succeeded by his half brother, Dingane (reigned 1828–40). During Dingane’s reign, the Zulu kingdom was penetrated by the British as well as the Boers (see Great Trek), who had formed an alliance with his brother, Mpande. Dingane was deposed by Mpande in 1840 and later killed. Under Mpande (reigned 1840–72) portions of the Zulu territory were taken over by the Boers and by the British, who had moved into the neighbouring Natal region in 1838. The Boers seized the bulk of the Zulu kingdom south of the Black Mfolozi, but they were compelled to return the main region between the Black Mfolozi and the Tugela to the Zulu after the British annexed Natal in 1843.
Mpande was succeeded by his son, Cetshwayo (reigned 1872–79). Cetshwayo refused to submit to growing British hegemony in Southern Africa, and in 1879 the British invaded the Zulu kingdom, launching the Anglo-Zulu War. After an initial defeat at Isandlwana in January, British armies seized Cetshwayo’s capital, Ulundi, in July, captured him in August, and divided the kingdom into 13 chieftaincies. In 1882 the southern part of the kingdom between the Mhlatuze and Tugela rivers was designated by the British as the Zulu Native Reserve. Cetshwayo was permitted to return to Ulundi in January 1883, and, although he was welcomed by his supporters, other Zulu prepared for civil war. Their raids into the northern parts of the dwindling area under Cetshwayo’s control culminated in an attack on Ulundi and the final defeat of Cetshwayo and his supporters on July 21, 1883. It is to this, known as the second Battle of Ulundi, that modern historians date the demise of the Zulu kingdom. During the fighting, large areas of the kingdom were bartered to the Boers in return for military support. These areas became part of the southeastern Transvaal and were known as the New Republic.
In 1887 the British annexed what remained of Zululand outside the Native Reserve and the New Republic to form the British Colony of Zululand. Attempts by Cetshwayo’s son, Dinuzulu, to prevent this were deemed by British authorities to be rebellion, and after being tried for treason, he was exiled to St. Helena in 1888. In 1893 Natal was given internal self-government, and in 1897 British Zululand was incorporated into Natal. After the defeat of the Boers in the South African War (1899–1902), the New Republic (the old western Zululand) was also incorporated into Natal. In 1902–04 a Land Commission partitioning resulted in some two-thirds of Zulu land, including the most fertile areas, being taken away from the Zulus. The last traces of Zulu resistance to these developments and other issues (which included heavy taxation) were defeated in the Bambatha Rebellion of 1906. The remainder of the old Zulu areas were set aside as Native Reserves. The scattered reserve areas were governed by chiefs under the close supervision of white administrators. The growing population (including some non-Zulu) in the reserves and intense competition for land saw the accentuation of ethnic concepts, and “Zuluness” was claimed by many people whose ancestors had never been part of the independent kingdom.
Natal became a province in the Union of South Africa in 1910. After the South African government adopted the policy of making the Native Reserves separate, nominally independent states (the Promotion of Bantu Self-Government Act of 1959), the scattered Zulu reserves, together with other African areas in southern Natal and the northern Transkei that had never been part of the pre-1879 Zulu kingdom, were earmarked for consolidation into a Zulu “Homeland,” or Bantustan. Part of the country’s apartheid policy of separate development, Bantustans were intended to exclude black Africans from the South African political system. The KwaZulu Territorial Authority and the KwaZulu Legislative Assembly were established in 1970 and 1972, respectively. However, the South African government’s controversial offers of complete independence for KwaZulu were refused by Mangosuthu Buthelezi, the head of KwaZulu and the Inkatha movement (see Inkatha Freedom Party), who opted to instead work within the Bantustan administrative structure to bring an end to apartheid. With the abolition of the apartheid system in the early 1990s, the scattered blocks of KwaZulu were fused with Natal to form the new province of KwaZulu-Natal in 1994.
