Rock festival,  a series of musical performances by a variety of artists, which generally take place over a number of days. Some festivals are singular events, while others recur annually in the same location. Occasionally, a festival will focus on a particular genre (e.g., folk, heavy metal, world music), but many attempt to bring together a diverse lineup to showcase a broad array of popular music trends.
Rock festivals had their origin in the jazz festivals held in Newport, Rhode Island, and in Monterey, California, in the 1950s. As the folk music revival spread in the early 1960s, the Newport Festival added a folk component, which gave birth to other folk festivals across the country. When the 1965 Newport Folk Festival allowed the Paul Butterfield Blues Band to play and to back up Bob Dylan, controversy over the appearance of electric instruments followed, but the shrewd commercial decision meant that, increasingly, electric performers appeared at these events. The roots of the all-rock festival can be found in the early days of the San Francisco scene, particularly in a 1965 benefit show held at the Ark, a club in Sausalito, California, and in several subsequent benefits for the San Francisco Mime Troupe organized by Bill Graham. Because by the mid-1960s most rock performers were self-contained acts, these festivals differed from earlier phenomena such as Dick Clark’s Cavalcade of Stars, which generally presented a series of solo singers or vocal groups who worked with a single backing band.
The 1967 Monterey Pop Festival, held at the fairgrounds where the Monterey Jazz Festival was produced, was the first major rock festival, but its logistics, expense, and commercial failure deterred other American promoters from mounting similar events until the Woodstock Music and Art Fair, held in Bethel, New York, in 1969, became the prototype. Like Woodstock, many of the subsequent festivals were commercial disasters, which kept any single rock festival from becoming an annual event like the jazz festivals had become, and the Rolling Stones’ unfortunate show at Altamont Speedway in Livermore, California, in 1969 (at which several people were beaten and one man stabbed to death) did nothing to improve their reputation. Another inhibiting factor was expense: because so many bands went unpaid by promoters, most who would be major attractions at a festival priced themselves out of the market. Only a trusted promoter like Graham, who presented the Watkins Glen (New York) Festival in 1973, could attract big names. In fact, it was Graham who hit on the most workable formula for a rock festival in the mid-1970s with his “Day on the Green” series at the Oakland (California) Coliseum; it was held in an enclosed area, which made it possible for the promoter to minimize gate crashing and the unauthorized sale of alcohol and drugs.
Of the post-Woodstock festivals, the Atlanta (Georgia) Pop Festival in 1969–70 was perhaps the most important to rock history; it packed the lower end of the bill with local groups and thereby invigorated the Southern rock movement of the 1970s. Rock festivals in the United States tapered off after about 1975, only to be revived in 1991 by Perry Farrell, the leader of the alternative rock group Jane’s Addiction, who came up with a very successful formula based on the “Day on the Green” concept. Farrell’s touring Lollapalooza event endeavoured to bring underground music to middle America by mixing large- and small-stage performances with political and cultural information booths. Genres represented in the Lollapalooza lineup typically included hip-hop, punk, ska, and shoegazer, although the headlining spot was generally reserved for an alternative or hard rock band that had achieved some degree of mainstream success. Canadian singer-songwriter Sarah McLachlan launched Lilith Fair, an all-women festival that followed the Lollapalooza model, and Ozzy Osbourne collected heavy metal artists under the Ozzfest banner.
Woodstock inspired a pair of anniversary concerts in 1994 and 1999, but neither would have been mistaken for the generation-defining event of 1969. While the 1994 festival offered a lineup of classic and contemporary rock acts at a location near the original Woodstock site, the 1999 event was tied to the original by little more than name. Relocated to a decommissioned air force base in Rome, New York, Woodstock ’99 featured none of the bands who had performed in 1969, and its musical achievements were overshadowed by the wave of arson and lawlessness that consumed the event’s final night. In spite of this, Woodstock ’99, which was attended by more than 200,000 people, demonstrated that fans were willing to travel great distances to experience music in a festival setting. Promoters seized upon this knowledge, and the “destination festival” became a fixture of the North American concert scene.
The fires of Woodstock ’99 were still fresh in the minds of observers when the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival debuted in Indio, California, in October 1999. Coachella gathered dozens of artists, boasted multiple main stages, and proved that destination festivals could be safe and financially successful. Other destination festivals were soon created: the Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival in Manchester, Tennessee, in 2001; a reimagined Lollapalooza in Chicago in 2005; and the Pitchfork Music Festival (originally the Intonation Festival) in Chicago in 2006. South by Southwest (SXSW), an independent music conference launched in Austin, Texas, in 1987, had for all practical purposes become a destination festival by the early 21st century. Originally envisioned as a way to connect emerging artists with industry insiders, SXSW grew into a weeklong event that drew tens of thousands of musicians, journalists, label representatives, and fans.
In Europe, destination festivals had been an essential part of the summer scene for decades, and good organization and payment of bands had always been part of the agenda. Every country has its important festivals, and rock bands tour the festival circuit each summer, just as jazz performers have done for years. Most European rock festivals are just star-studded, crowd-pleasing events, but Denmark’s Roskilde Festival and France’s Trans Musicales in Rennes, with their balance of big names and developing acts, became important career stepping-stones for international performers, and England’s Glastonbury Festival became a cornerstone of the British rock scene for established acts and newcomers alike. England’s Reading and Leeds festivals achieved new prominence in the 21st century, and the legendary Isle of Wight Pop Festival was resurrected in 2002. Elsewhere in the world, the Fuji Rock Festival, held in the shadow of Japan’s Mount Fuji since 1997, showcased a selection of domestic and international acts.
