Continental rise,  a major depositional regime in oceans made up of thick sequences of continental material that accumulate between the continental slope and the abyssal plain. Continental rises form as a result of three sedimentary processes: mass wasting, the deposition from contour currents, and the vertical settling of clastic and biogenic particles.
The first such process is a downslope movement of sediments by mass wasting, a set of gravity-deposition events, including submarine landslides, slumps, debris flows, and high-velocity sediment-laden density flows known as turbidity currents. Several phenomena may initiate gravity events. In tectonically active areas, earthquakes are important triggering mechanisms. Even in the Atlantic they play a significant role. One of the few documented major gravity events took place on the Grand Banks of Newfoundland in 1929, when an earthquake triggered a gravity flow that possibly attained velocities of more than 90 km (56 miles) per hour and was traced for hundreds of kilometres as it successively broke transatlantic cables. Other triggering events may be oversteepening of deposits on the sharply inclined portions of the continental slope, breaking internal waves that have been shown to affect the upper slope, and storm waves and storm-induced currents.
A second process that may be equally important, although its overall significance is subject to considerable scientific debate, is deposition from bottom currents that flow parallel to the slope of the continental rise—namely, contour currents. Resulting sediment accumulations are called contourites. The major points of contention concerning the efficacy of contour currents are (1) whether or not they are strong enough—they flow at a speed of about 20 cm (8 inches) per second—to build the huge thicknesses of sediment that make up the rises and (2) how the sediments get into the contour currents in the first place. It is probable that most of the mass of rise material is originally brought downslope by gravity events and then redistributed by contour currents.
Vertical settling through the water column of both clastic and biogenic particles is the third contributor of slope and rise sediments. These pelagic sediments are composed of clay minerals and fine-grained particles (chiefly quartz, mica, and carbonate) swept off the continental shelf, wind-blown dust, organic detritus, and the tests of plankton. Chief among the last group are the tests of foraminiferans, pteropods, and coccolithophores that are composed of calcium carbonate and those of diatoms and radiolarians that are made of silicon dioxide.
