Great Dismal Swamp, also called Dismal Swamp,  marshy region on the Coastal Plain of southeastern Virginia and northeastern North Carolina, U.S., between Norfolk, Virginia, and Elizabeth City, North Carolina. It is densely forested and contains scattered natural elevations of 10 to 20 feet (3 to 6 metres) above sea level. Along the western margin the Pamlico Formation (known as the Great Dismal Swamp Terrace) rises to 25 feet (7.5 metres) and more, forming a natural boundary.
The name Great Dismal was given by Colonel William Byrd of Virginia, who surveyed the region in 1728. In 1763 George Washington, as a member of a surveying and engineering company, surveyed the area with a view to canalizing, draining, and reclaiming it. At that time the swamp was about 40 miles (65 km) long and covered about 2,000 square miles (5,200 square km). In the late 18th century some 62 square miles (160 square km) were drained. The swamp is now about 37 miles (60 km) long north to south and covers an area of approximately 750 square miles (1,940 square km). About 167 square miles (433 square km) of this is protected within Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge, established in 1974. Despite much lumbering and widespread destruction of timber by fire, the area is still heavily wooded with cypress, black gum, juniper, and water ash, and a tangle of honeysuckle and woodbine. The swamp was once the habitat of many rare birds, including the ivory-billed woodpecker. The cottonmouth and other poisonous snakes are numerous. The area is noted for fishing and hunting; deer, bears, raccoons, and opossums are plentiful, especially in the nearly inaccessible Coldwater Ditch area.
The Dismal Swamp Canal (built 1790–1828) is an intracoastal waterway 22 miles (35 km) long connecting Chesapeake Bay, by way of Deep Creek and the southern branch of the Elizabeth River, with Albemarle Sound in North Carolina through the Pasquotank River. The canal forms a link in the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway. In the midst of the swamp is the freshwater Lake Drummond (about 3 miles [5 km] in diameter), which is connected with the canal by the 3-mile-long Feeder Ditch; this lake is the basis of the poem The Lake of the Dismal Swamp by the Irish poet Thomas Moore.
