Lake Moeris, Arabic Birkat Qārūn,  ancient lake that once occupied a large area of the al-Fayyūm depression in Egypt and is now represented by the much smaller Lake Qārūn. Researches on the desert margin of the depression indicate that in early Paleolithic times the lake’s waters stood about 120 feet (37 m) above sea level and probably filled the depression; the lake’s level gradually fell until about 10,000 bc, when it was about 15 feet (4 1/2 m) below sea level, perhaps because its connection with the Nile River was temporarily cut off. Early in the Neolithic Period (nearly 4,000–11,000 years ago), the lake rose again and then gradually subsided. Neolithic and Early Dynastic people made their homes on the slowly shrinking shores.
Not until the Egyptian Middle Kingdom (c. 2040–1786 bc) were attempts made to stop the gradual silting of the channel connecting the lake with the Nile. Probably either Sesostris II or Amenemhet III widened and deepened the channel, thus setting the lake once more in hydraulic equilibrium with the river. The lake, which was then 55 feet (17 m) above sea level, served both as a flood control that was able to take excess water from overly high Nile floods and as a reservoir whose waters could be used for irrigation after the Nile flood had subsided. In about 450 bc when Herodotus visited the lake, he assumed it to be artificial and was told that it had been dug by King Moeris at least 900 years before.
Large land-reclamation projects in the Fayyum region were carried out by the Ptolemaic kings of Egypt. Under Ptolemy II Philadelphus in the 3rd century bc, Lake Moeris was partially drained by means of a dam that restricted the entry of Nile water into it. The rich alluvial soil that was thus laid bare (approximately 450 square miles [1,200 square km] of it) was irrigated by canals and subjected to intensive cultivation. The population around the lake thus increased at a rapid rate, and a number of new towns sprang up. The modern-day excavation of several of these sites has yielded a rich harvest of Hellenistic and Roman papyri. The Fayyum region continued to flourish during the first two centuries of Roman rule, but thereafter it declined. The water levels of Lake Moeris subsequently continued to decrease, leading to the shallow and relatively small Lake Qārūn of modern times.
