Whillans Ice Stream, formerly Ice Stream B,  moving belt of ice in the West Antarctic Ice Sheet that deposits ice onto the massive Ross Ice Shelf. Whillans Ice Stream is approximately 2,600–3,000 feet (792–914 metres) thick and about 50–60 miles (80.5–96.5 km) wide. It is named for American glaciologist Ian Whillans, who was known for his studies of West Antarctic ice streams.
Whillans Ice Stream has been studied since the late 1950s, with its exploration’s having provided basic insight into ice-stream mechanics, such as the role of ice-stream margins in determining the speed of ice flow. In the early 21st century, it was of particular interest to researchers, because of its subglacial lakes and dynamic properties as well as rising concerns about the effects of climate change on ice in the Antarctic.
One of the most marked dynamic features of Whillans Ice Stream is its tide-driven stick-slip cycle, in which the ice stream slides forward briefly twice per day, once at high tide and once midway into falling tide. Each movement covers a distance of roughly half a yard. The stagnation of ice flow between tides is thought to be due to the occurrence of relatively high-friction ice in certain portions of the ice stream as well as to certain characteristics of the ice-till interface at the stream’s grounding line (the point where the ice stream loses contact with the ground and begins to float on the water beneath it). The start-stop motion is most pronounced at the ice plain that lies at the mouth of Whillans Ice Stream, where the ice meets the Ross Ice Shelf. The movement of the ice stream has been likened to the stick-slip movements of earthquakes and is associated with seismic emissions.
Multiple subglacial lakes exist beneath Whillans Ice Stream, where they form part of an interconnected system of channels and lakes that underlies Whillans and neighbouring ice streams. Beneath Whillans Ice Stream, fluctuations in water movement through the system cause repeated filling and draining of the lakes, which in turn causes rapid short-term changes in their elevation. The rise and fall of the subglacial lakes may influence the movement of Whillans Ice Stream.
Among the bodies of water lying beneath Whillans Ice Stream is subglacial Lake Whillans, one of the first Antarctic subglacial lakes to yield evidence of microbial life. The lake was discovered in 2007 and sits 2,600 feet (792 metres) below the ice surface. It is about 23 square miles (60 square km) in area and roughly 5 feet (1.5 metres) deep (former depth estimates ranged from 10 to 25 feet [3 to 7.6 metres]). Microbial life was detected in samples of the lake’s sediment that were collected after researchers successfully drilled through the thick ice layer, using hot water.
Unlike many other ice streams, the flow of Whillans Ice Stream has slowed significantly, on the basis of observations that began in 1973 and continued into the 21st century. Researchers have concluded that the combined deceleration and stick-slip motion of Whillans Ice Stream could cause it to eventually stagnate, similar to nearby Kamb Ice Stream (formerly Ice Stream C). Its stagnation could take place sometime in the latter half of the 21st century. The slowing of Whillans Ice Stream also has been linked to its thickening and its decreased contribution of ice to the Ross Ice Shelf.
The continued thickening of ice streams in the Antarctic is associated with ice-shelf thinning, raising the likelihood of increased calving at the shelf front and eventual flotation of the Antarctic ice plains. Those changes could have consequences for the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, which could destabilize as the Ross Ice Shelf thins. If the West Antarctic Ice Sheet were to melt significantly, it could lead to a substantial rise in sea level.
