Sir Anthony Caro, in full Sir Anthony Alfred Caro,  (born March 8, 1924, London, England—died October 23, 2013), English sculptor of abstract, loosely geometrical metal constructions.
Caro was apprenticed to the sculptor Charles Wheeler at age 13 during summer vacations, and later he studied engineering at Christ’s College, Cambridge. He served in the Royal Navy during World War II and then returned to studying sculpture, first at Regent Street Polytechnic, London, and later with Wheeler at the Royal Academy Schools (1947–52). He then assisted the sculptor Henry Moore in his studio.
Caro’s student sculpture had been primarily figurative, but on a visit to the United States in 1959 he met the sculptor David Smith, and the two formed a mutually influential relationship. Following Smith’s example, Caro in 1960 began experimenting with the abstract metal sculptures made of steel beams, rods, plates, and aluminum tubing that became his hallmark. He welded or bolted these prefabricated elements together into suggestive shapes which he then painted a uniform colour.
Caro’s sculptures tend to be large in dimension, linear in form, and open or sprawling in character. Though some of his work adheres to a rigid, rational geometry (e.g., Sailing Tonight, 1971–74), his characteristic sculptures suggest lyrical movement, apparent weightlessness, improvisation, and chance. His Ledge Piece (1978), for example, commissioned for the East Building of the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., seems to spill over its high perch from the pull of gravity. Caro came to be regarded as the most important sculptor since Smith and exercised great influence over a younger generation of British sculptors. He took the lead among modern sculptors in resting his sculptures directly on the ground rather than on the traditional pedestal. His sculptures of the 1970s were composed of massive, irregular sheets of rough steel, but in the 1980s he returned to a more traditional style, making semi-figurative sculptures in bronze. Caro taught at St. Martin’s School of Art in London from 1952 to 1979. He was knighted in 1987, and in 1992 he received the Japan Art Association’s Praemium Imperiale prize for sculpture.
