Antoine Bourdelle, in full Émile-Antoine Bourdelle,  (born October 30, 1861, Montauban, France—died October 1, 1929, Paris), French sculptor whose works—exhibiting exaggerated, rippling surfaces mingled with the flat, decorative simplifications of Archaic Greek and Romanesque art—introduced a new vigour and strength into the sculpture of the early 20th century.
Bourdelle studied at the École des Beaux-Arts in Toulouse, France, before moving to Paris in 1885. Reacting against the conservatism of the École, Bourdelle left to study with the artists Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux and Jules Dalou. In 1893 he entered the studio of sculptor Auguste Rodin, who was to remain one of the chief influences of his artistic life. At that stage of his career, Bourdelle emulated the rugged realism of his mentor, Rodin. Bourdelle’s first major commission, a war memorial at Montauban, France (1902), exhibited a similarly brutal quality, as did the series of works inspired by the music of Beethoven that he also created during that period.
Bourdelle gradually moved toward a more refined, Classical form of sculpture. In 1900 he created an important work, the Head of Apollo, the majestic dignity and broad planes of which recall early Classical Greek sculpture. In 1910 he achieved his first triumph in the Salon with Herakles (also called Hercules Archer), which again owes much to Archaic art, although the pose is far more sinuous and the musculature more exaggerated; he made several sculptures of this subject. Also in 1910 he created the full-length portrait Rodin at Work, the head of which is a pastiche of Michelangelo’s Moses in the Church of San Pietro in Vincoli, Rome.
In 1912 Bourdelle executed reliefs for the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées; these works are remarkable for their unusually compact, planar style. Two years later he created another masterpiece, the Dying Centaur, in which he represented the defeat of paganism. In his later career, Bourdelle became known for his majestic public monuments. Never able to escape completely the shadow of Rodin, Bourdelle became a famous teacher, turning his studio into the Académie de la Grande-Chaumière.
