Bartolommeo Ammannati,  (born June 18, 1511, Settignano, near Florence [Italy]—died April 22, 1592, Florence), Italian sculptor and architect whose buildings mark the transition from the classicizing Renaissance to the more exuberant Baroque style.
Ammannati began his career as a sculptor, carving statues in various Italian cities in the 1530s and ’40s. He trained first under Baccio Bandinelli and then under Jacopo Sansovino in Venice, working with the latter on the Library of St. Mark.
He was called to Rome in 1550 by Pope Julius III on the advice of the architect and art historian, Giorgio Vasari. Ammannati’s most important work there was in collaboration with Vasari and Giacomo da Vignola on the villa of Pope Julius, the Villa Giulia (begun 1551). Cosimo de’ Medici (Cosimo I) brought Ammannati back to Florence in 1555; he was to spend almost all of his remaining career in service to the Medicis. His first commission was to finish the Laurentian Library, begun by Michelangelo. Ammannati interpreted a clay model sent him by Michelangelo in 1558 to produce the especially impressive staircase, leading from the vestibule into the library proper.
Ammannati’s masterpiece in Florence is the Pitti Palace, where, beginning in 1560, he enlarged the basic structure by Filippo Brunelleschi, designing a courtyard and facade opening onto the Boboli Gardens, which Ammannati had a part in designing. The facade overlooking the courtyard is very unusual in its rusticated (rough-hewn) treatment of successive levels of Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian attached columns. At the Pitti Palace it provides an appropriately rural yet impressive backdrop for the gardens.
Two other major works by Ammannati in Florence are the Bridge of Santa Trinità (1567–69; destroyed 1944, rebuilt 1958), which contains elliptical arches, and the Fountain of Neptune (1567–70); the latter, in the Piazza della Signoria, features a colossal marble statue of that deity. In his old age Ammannati was strongly influenced by the Counter-Reformation philosophy of the Jesuits. He repudiated his earlier nude sculptures as lustful, and he designed several austere buildings for the Jesuits.
