Chris Burden, in full Christopher Lee Burden,  (born April 11, 1946, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.—died May 10, 2015, Topanga Canyon, California), American performance and installation artist and sculptor based in Los Angeles who in the 1970s became recognized for shockingly masochistic works such as Shoot (1971) and Trans-fixed (1974), in which he played the central role. His later works were intricate, often-mechanical, large-scale sculptures and installation pieces.
Burden studied physics and architecture at Pomona College in Claremont, California, where he earned a bachelor of fine arts in 1969. He then earned an M.F.A. in 1971 from the University of California, Irvine, where one of his teachers was artist Robert Irwin. He began to make a name for himself with his master’s thesis project, Five Day Locker Piece (1971), for which he enclosed himself within a small locker with just five gallons of water above him to drink and an empty bottle below him for urine. From then on, his performance, or body, art grew more violent, dangerous, and often repellent. His works pushed the outer limit of even the most-avant-garde definitions of art. In Shoot, for example, the artist was shot with a rifle by a friend, and the event was photographed. For Trans-fixed, perhaps his best-known work, he had his hands nailed to the back of a Volkswagen Beetle, as if he were reenacting the crucifixion of Jesus. From 1978 through 2004, Burden taught art at the University of California, Los Angeles.
At the end of the 1970s and after some 50 performances, Burden shifted his focus from performance to sculptural works, many of which showed his interest in engineering and technology. His first sculpture of that period, The Big Wheel (1979), demonstrates his aptitude for engineering while it also makes reference to Dada artist Marcel Duchamp and the tradition of the ready-made. The work is composed of a motorcycle and a very large cast-iron flywheel, which spins when the motorcycle engine is revved.  In 1985 he installed a turnstile, a winch, a worm gear, a leather strap, a jack, timbers, steel, and steel plates in the Gagosian Gallery in New York City for his piece Samson. Visitors entering the gallery through the turnstile triggered a mechanism that pushed the steel plates against the load-bearing walls of the space, leading observers to experience a sense of danger when they entered the exhibition.
Burden created installations throughout the 1990s—some with broader sociopolitical messages, including The Other Vietnam Memorial (1991), which displays three million Vietnamese names engraved on steel and copper plates (compared with the roughly 58,000 names on Maya Lin’s Vietnam Veterans Memorial), and L.A.P.D. Uniforms (1993), which responded to the Rodney King beating (1991) and the Los Angeles riots of 1992. In other works—such as The Flying Steamroller (1996), a 12-ton steamroller attached to a pivoting arm with a counterbalance weight that, when driven, lifts off the ground and spins in a circular motion—Burden set aside the political in favour of the merely spectacular. 
In the 21st century Burden’s noteworthy public installations included What My Dad Gave Me (2008; displayed at Rockefeller Center, New York City, for about a year), a 65-foot (20-metre) skyscraper he built from Erector set parts, and Urban Light (2008), a permanent—and now iconic—installation of some 200 restored antique lampposts outside the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. In 2013 he was the subject of a large-scale retrospective, “Chris Burden: Extreme Measures,” organized by the New Museum, in New York. He received the Skowhegan Medal for Sculpture in 1997 and the Distinguished Artist Award from the College Art Association in 2009, and in 2014 he was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
