Elie Nadelman,  (born February 20, 1882, Warsaw, Russian Empire [now in Poland]—died December 28, 1946, Bronx, New York, U.S.), Polish-born sculptor whose mannered curvilinear human figures greatly influenced early 20th-century American sculpture.
Nadelman left home at age 19 and, after briefly attending the Warsaw Art Academy, spent six months in Munich studying the city’s art collection. In 1904 he moved to Paris, where he worked independently but was influenced by the work of Auguste Rodin. Nadelman began an analysis of the relationship between sculptural volume and geometry in 1905, and his research culminated in the series of drawings published as Toward a Sculptural Unity (1914). His first one-man show in Paris in 1909 was a sensational success, as was his 1915 exhibition at Alfred Stieglitz’s 291 gallery. A number of his drawings and one sculpture were featured in the Armory Show in 1913. Nadelman’s abilities and early success attracted many important patrons, including art critic Leo Stein (one of writer Gertrude Stein’s older brothers) and businesswoman Helena Rubinstein.
As World War I began, Nadelman in 1914 left Paris for New York City, where he was immediately attracted to the lively cultural life, particularly the theatre and music scenes. At this time he began making his humorous mannequins—e.g., Man in the Open Air (c. 1915)—which may have been influenced by the doll collection he had once studied in Munich’s Bavarian National Museum.
In 1919 Nadelman married Viola Spiess Flannery, a wealthy socialite, and the couple, folk-art enthusiasts, opened the Museum of Folk and Peasant Art (later called the Museum of Folk Arts) in Riverdale, New York, in 1926. During the Great Depression, however, the Nadelmans lost their wealth and were forced to close the museum. He grew increasingly isolated, refusing to exhibit his work, and in 1946 committed suicide. After his death it was found that he had created hundreds of small plaster figurines of young girls. Their discovery generated great excitement in the art world, and many were later exhibited.
