Elisabet Ney, in full Franzisca Bernadina Wilhelmina Elisabeth Ney,  (born January 26, 1833, Münster, Westphalia, Prussia [now in Germany]—died June 29, 1907, Austin, Texas, U.S.), sculptor remembered for her statues and busts of European and Texas personages of the mid- to late 19th century.
Ney was the daughter of a stonecutter, and from him she inherited artistic ambitions. She studied drawing privately in her home city of Münster and at the Royal Bavarian Academy of Fine Arts in Munich, Germany. In 1855 she went to Berlin to study with the noted sculptor Christian Daniel Rauch, through whom she was introduced to the literati and cultural leaders of that city. Ney exhibited her work successfully at the Berlin Exposition of 1856, and on the death of Rauch the following year she took over some of his unfinished commissions. She established her fame with busts of the philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer, a personal friend, and of King George V of Hanover. In 1863, after three years in Münster working on a number of busts and statues, she married Edmund Duncan Montgomery, whom she had met as a student in Munich; a staunch feminist, she retained her own name.
Ney and her husband lived for a time in Madeira and then in Rome, where she prevailed upon the Italian patriot Giuseppe Garibaldi to sit for a bust in 1865–66. In Rome she also made a bust of Prussian prime minister Otto von Bismarck (1867) on commission from William I of Prussia, and she executed a colossal Prometheus Bound (1867). In late 1867 she returned to Munich as court sculptor to Ludwig II of Bavaria. She and her husband immigrated to the United States in 1870, settling first in Thomasville, Georgia, where they hoped to establish a colony of like-minded “enlightened” émigrés. When this idea failed, they moved in 1873 to Liendo Plantation near Hempstead, some 40 miles (64 km) from Houston, Texas. Ney virtually abandoned sculpture for nearly 20 years to devote herself to the task of rearing their son.
She again turned to her art in 1890 when she received commissions for statues of Texas patriots Sam Houston (1892) and Stephen F. Austin (1893), which were to be exhibited in the Texas State Building at the World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago three years later. In 1892 she opened a studio in Austin, Texas, where she was able to bring her forceful personality, attractive unconventionality, and talent to bear on prominent Texans. (On her death the studio and its contents became the Elisabet Ney Museum.) She received further commissions, primarily of state political figures. Her last major private work, completed in 1905, was a statue of Lady Macbeth.
