George Grey Barnard,  (born May 24, 1863, Bellefonte, Pennsylvania, U.S.—died April 24, 1938, New York, New York), sculptor and art collector whose private medieval and Gothic art collection was integral to the formation of the  Cloisters of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City. He is well known for his sculptures Love and Labor: The Unbroken Law and The Burden of Life: The Broken Law that flank the steps of the Pennsylvania State Capitol in Harrisburg.
Barnard grew up in the rural Midwest, the son of a Presbyterian minister. It is thought that he learned taxidermy in his youth and made early sculptures from clay. In his late teens he moved to Chicago and studied sculpture briefly there before moving to Paris in 1883 to study further at the École des Beaux-Arts. Three years later he found a patron in Singer Company heir Alfred Corning Clark, who began commissioning works such as Brotherly Love (1886–87).
Barnard exhibited six sculptures at the 1894 Paris Salon du Champs de Mars, including the well-known marble group (commissioned by Clark) The Struggle of the Two Natures in Man (1888–94), a depiction of two male nudes, which created a sensation. He returned to the United States soon after and settled in New York City. Beginning in 1900, he taught briefly at the Art Students League. About that time he received the commission for the Pennsylvania State Capitol works, a project he chose to carry out in France. The sculptures were installed in 1911. He was then commissioned to create a standing bronze portrait of Abraham Lincoln, which resides in Cincinnati, Ohio. When it was installed in that city’s Lytle Park in 1917, Barnard’s realistic and human depiction was criticized as being disrespectful to the much-revered 16th president.
While Barnard had been in France working on the Pennsylvania commission, he supported his family by dealing medieval and Gothic antiquities that he found by roaming the French countryside. He sold or procured to museums many of the relics and artifacts that he unearthed and amassed a private collection as well. He envisioned establishing a museum that displayed his collection in a medieval setting. To that end, he transported fragments of cloisters back from Europe, incorporating them into a single new structure, and in 1914 opened a private museum near his studio in the Washington Heights neighbourhood of Upper Manhattan. In 1925 John D. Rockefeller, Jr., purchased Barnard’s Cloisters and later orchestrated their transfer to the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
