Giambologna, also called Giovanni da Bologna, or Jean Boulogne,  (born 1529, Douai, Spanish Netherlands [now in France]—died  Aug. 13, 1608, Florence [Italy]), preeminent Mannerist sculptor in Italy during the last quarter of the 16th century.
First trained under Jacques Dubroeucq, a Flemish sculptor who worked in an Italianate style, Giambologna went to Rome about 1550, where his style was influenced by Hellenistic sculpture and the works of Michelangelo. Settling in Florence (1552), where he spent the rest of his life, he attracted the notice of Francesco de’ Medici, for whom many of his most important works were made. Among his earliest Florentine works were a bronze Bacchus, later placed on a fountain in the Borgo San Jacopo, and a bronze Venus, made for the Villa di Castello and now at the Villa Medicea della Petraia, near Florence.
The Fountain of Neptune at Bologna (1563–66), which emulated Michelangelo’s Victory, established his reputation. The full-scale plaster model of this work (Accademia, Florence), initially set up with the Victory in the Palazzo Vecchio, was replaced in 1570 by the marble version, now in the Museo Nazionale. His Samson and a Philistine (1567; Victoria and Albert Museum, London) displays violence and anguish in a masterfully contrived composition that recalls such complex Hellenistic pieces as the Laocoön. Rape of a Sabine (1579–83; Loggia dei Lanzi, Florence), while uncluttered and monumental, is even more complex. The composition is subtly designed so that it can be viewed from any side with equal effect. In his fountain Mercury (c. 1580; Bargello, Florence) Giambologna uses the shimmering play of light on the figure’s smooth surface to enhance the effect of fleetness. His bronze equestrian portrait of Cosimo I de’ Medici (1587–94; Piazza della Signoria, Florence) is also notable.
Giambologna enjoyed great popularity as a maker of garden sculpture for the Boboli Gardens, Florence (Fountain of Oceanus, 1571–76; Venus of the Grotticella, 1573), and for the Medici villas at Pratolino (the colossal Apennine, 1581), Petraia, and Castello. He was also a prolific manufacturer of bronze statuettes. In addition to his secular commissions, Giambologna was responsible for a large number of religious sculptures, which include (in marble) the fine Altar of Liberty in Lucca cathedral (1577–79) and several bronze reliefs.
An Italian sculptor in all but birth, Giambologna transformed the Florentine Mannerism of the mid-16th century into a style of European significance. His ability to capture fleeting expression and the vivacity and sensual delight of his mature style anticipate the Baroque sculpture of Gian Lorenzo Bernini. For three centuries his work was more generally admired than that of any sculptor except Michelangelo.
