Horatio Greenough,  (born September 6, 1805, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.—died December 18, 1852, Somerville), Neoclassical sculptor and writer on art. He was the first known American artist to pursue sculpture as an exclusive career and one of the first to receive a national commission.
From an early age, Greenough was drawn to the plastic arts, and while still an adolescent he received instruction from carvers, architects, and sculptors in Boston. Greenough was urged to study art by his wealthy family and by the painter Washington Allston. After graduating from Harvard University, he went to Italy for two years, starting in 1825. There he continued his art studies with a regimen that included visits to museums and galleries and life-drawing lessons at the French Academy at the Villa Medici. When he became ill he returned to the United States and, after recuperating, traveled to the nation’s capital to seek portrait commissions. There he met Robert Gilmor, Jr., a wealthy Baltimore merchant, who would become an important patron for Greenough. Buoyed by his successes in Washington, D.C., the artist made a second trip to Italy in 1828, and this time he remained there until a year before his death.
Greenough is best known for his toga- and sandal-clad statue of George Washington, based on the statue of Zeus at Olympia by the ancient Greek sculptor Phidias. Commissioned by Congress in 1832, it was designed to stand in the rotunda of the U.S. Capitol. Depicting a national hero in seminudity aroused such controversy, however, that the statue was removed to the Smithsonian Institution (it is now housed at the National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.).
Greenough’s most enduring achievement is his writing. He wrote a body of original essays on art in which he outlined the functional relationship between architecture and decoration. These theories influenced the development of Functionalism in modern architecture. Originally entitled The Travels, Observations, and Experience of a Yankee Stonecutter (1852), these essays were reissued in 1947 under the title Form and Function.
Horatio’s younger brother, Richard Saltonstall Greenough (1819–1904), was also a sculptor. His most famous work is a statue of Benjamin Franklin, which stands in front of Boston City Hall.
