Jacopo della Quercia,   (born c. 1374, Siena [Italy]—died  Oct. 20, 1438, Bologna, Papal States), one of the most original Italian sculptors of the early 15th century. His innovative work influenced Italian artists such as Francesco di Giorgio, Niccolò dell’Arca, and Michelangelo.
Jacopo della Quercia came from a family of craftsman; his father, Piero d’Angelo, was also a sculptor, and his brother Priamo was a painter. In 1401 he participated in the competition for the bronze doors of the baptistery in Florence, which was won by Lorenzo Ghiberti. About 1406 Jacopo carved the tomb of Ilaria del Carretto in the Cathedral of Lucca. The effigy and sarcophagus alone survive. In 1408, at Ferrara, he made the statue of the Virgin and Child, which still exists in the Museo dell’Opera del Duomo, and a year later he received the commission for the Fonte Gaia in the Piazza del Campo at Siena, now replaced by a copy; the original is in the loggia of the town hall. The scheme of this celebrated and highly original fountain seems to have been repeatedly modified, the most effective work being done between 1414 and 1419. At the same time, Jacopo was working on the statue of an apostle for the exterior of the cathedral at Lucca, the Trenta altar for the Church of San Frediano in Lucca, and tomb slabs for Lorenzo Trenta and his wife.
In 1417 he undertook the creation of two gilt bronze reliefs for the baptismal font in San Giovanni in Siena. Being a dilatory artist, he completed only the Zacharias in the Temple, the second being assigned to Donatello. Jacopo’s main work is the sculpture around the portal of San Petronio at Bologna. The 10 scenes from Genesis, including The Creation of Eve, 5 scenes from the early life of Christ, the reliefs of prophets, and the statues of the Virgin and Child with Saints Petronius and Ambrose give a sense of depth often seen in the paintings of Masaccio.
In 1435 Jacopo was appointed superintending architect of Siena Cathedral, for which he was employed on the decoration (unfinished) of the Cappella Casini. His innovative sculptural style found no immediate followers in Siena, Bologna, or Lucca, but it later became a profound influence on Michelangelo.
