Jay DeFeo, original name Mary Joan DeFeo,  (born March 31, 1929, Hanover, New Hampshire, U.S.—died November 11, 1989, Oakland, California), American painter, sculptor, and jewelry maker associated with Surrealism and Abstract Expressionism. She is best known for her masterpiece titled The Rose, a work that took her eight years to complete.
DeFeo grew up in the San Francisco Bay area and in Colorado, shuttled between her mother and both sets of grandparents. Her parents divorced in 1939 when she was in grade school, and she was raised thereafter by her mother in San Jose, California. Her interest in art was nurtured by an art teacher in high school. She went on to earn a bachelor’s degree (1950) and master’s degree (1951) in art from the University of California, Berkeley. She spent 1951–52 in Europe on a fellowship, traveling and studying prehistoric painting throughout France and Spain and art and architecture of the Renaissance in Florence. While in Florence she painted prolifically. She returned to the Bay Area and soon after focused on making wire jewelry as a way to earn a living but shifted her attention back to painting a few years later and had her first solo exhibition in 1954.  She began showing her works at galleries in and around San Francisco, and in 1959–60 she was included (as “J. de Feo”) among the most promising up-and-coming artists in New York City’s Museum of Modern Art exhibition Sixteen Americans. In the late 1950s she began showing her work at both the Ferus (Los Angeles) and the Dilexie (San Francisco) galleries; both were major hubs for California avant-garde artists.
In 1958 DeFeo began working on her masterpiece, The Rose. She worked for eight years on what resulted in a nearly 11-foot- (3.3-metre-) high and 1,850-pound (839-kilogram) work of art which she created by applying and scraping off paint until she had built up a floral sculptural relief. The Rose was exhibited at the Pasadena Art Museum in 1969, at which point she began painting again after a three-year hiatus. The Rose hung in a conference room at the San Francisco Art Institute for many years and then remained out of view until it was acquired by the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York City, in 1995.
In the 1970s DeFeo expanded her art practice to include photography. She also taught art and in 1981 joined the faculty at Mills College in Oakland, California, where she taught until she died of lung cancer at age 60. Though she had an expansive and varied body of work and had a successful career over the course of four decades, DeFeo seemingly disappeared from art history. In 2013 a major retrospective organized by the Whitney Museum (and also shown at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art) aimed to reintroduce her to the public and present her significant contributions to Abstract Expressionism and 20th-century art.
