Joseph Cornell,  (born December 24, 1903, Nyack, New York, U.S.—died December 29, 1972, Flushing, Queens, New York), American self-taught artist and filmmaker and one of the originators of the form of sculpture called assemblage, in which unlikely objects are joined in an unorthodox unity. He is known for his shadow boxes, collages, and films.
Cornell attended secondary school at Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts, for four years, beginning in 1917, the year in which his father died of leukemia. Cornell’s formal education ended when he graduated from Andover in 1921, at which time he returned to live with his mother, who had moved from Nyack, New York, with Cornell’s younger brother, Robert, to Queens. In 1929 the Cornell family moved into a home at 3708 Utopia Parkway in Flushing, Queens, where Cornell would remain, rather reclusively, for the rest of his life.
From 1921 to 1931 Cornell worked in Manhattan as a salesman for a textile company in order to help support his family. After hearing about Christian Science from a coworker, Cornell began to read the works of its founder, Mary Baker Eddy, ultimately converted to the religion in 1925, and regularly attended services at a local church. His job in the city also exposed him to a new range of possibilities in the arts. Working in Manhattan gave him the opportunity to explore the visual arts, dance, literature, film, and opera. Visiting the Julien Levy Gallery in 1931, Cornell encountered the work of Surrealist artists Max Ernst, René Magritte, Alberto Giacometti, Salvador Dalí, and others. Heavily influenced by them and by Metaphysical painter Giorgio de Chirico, Cornell began creating collages by using illustrations cut out of old books. His earliest extant collage, known as The Schooner (1931), is a small image of a ship at sea with a rose containing a spider on a spiderweb as one part of the ship’s sails. Those early works were inspired by Ernst’s collage-novel La Femme 100 têtes (1929; The Hundred Headless Woman), a narrative assembled from Victorian engravings. 
Cornell exhibited at the landmark 1932 “Surréalisme” exhibition (for which he also designed the exhibition catalog cover) held at the Levy Gallery and had his first solo exhibition (“Objects by Joseph Cornell: Minutiae, Glass Bells, Coups d’Oeil, Jouet Surréalistes”) there in November of the same year.  Though he exhibited alongside the self-identified Surrealists, Cornell was unwilling to assume that label himself; his work, while it incorporated dream imagery and was often rooted in childhood experiences, was not dark and did not bear the overtly sexual and violent iconography found in much work by the leading Surrealist artists.
His experience in the 1920s in the textile industry helped Cornell find a position in 1934 as a textile designer at the Traphagen Commercial Textile Studio, a job he held until 1940 that allowed him to continue to create art in his free time. In 1936 he participated in “Fantastic Art, Dada, Surrealism” at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA), New York. For that exhibition he created Untitled (Soap Bubble Set), his first shadow box of the type for which he became best known. Cornell’s shadow boxes—or “memory boxes” or “poetic theatres,” as he called them—took the form of glass-fronted boxes containing found objects and collaged elements arranged in enigmatic, often poetic, juxtaposition. Recurrent themes and motifs included astronomy, music, commedia dell’arte, birds, seashells, broken crystal, and souvenirs of travel. Untitled (Soap Bubble Set) encased a doll’s head, a clay soap-bubble pipe, a pale blue egg in a wineglass, four cylindrical weights, and a map of the Moon. It was featured in the MoMA exhibition as the centrepiece of a larger installation of his work titled The Elements of Natural Philosophy. 
In 1940, after he had left his job as a textile designer to make more time for his art, Cornell took on freelance design work with magazines such as Harper’s Bazaar and Vogue. He also contributed writing and designs to Dance Index and View magazines. Cornell continued to make shadow boxes but also began making short films, which for him—in the “ready-made” tradition of Marcel Duchamp (who was a friend)—involved splicing together footage from existing silent films to create a wholly new, altered visual experience. His best-known early film is Rose Hobart (1936), a short reedited version of the B-movie East of Borneo (1931). As Cornell’s title suggests, his film focused entirely on the original film’s star, Rose Hobart, whom he expertly extracted from the plot into 19 minutes of dramatic shots in which she is featured. A selection of Cornell’s shadow boxes also featured his favourite Hollywood stars, including Lauren Bacall, Marilyn Monroe, Hedy Lamarr, and Greta Garbo. An almost obsessive lover of ballet, during the 1940s Cornell created many works (collages and boxes) devoted to the art form, some of which were appreciations of ballerinas such as Renee (“Zizi”) Jeanmaire and, especially, Tamara Toumanova. Homage to the Romantic Ballet (1942), A Swan Lake for Tamara Toumanova (Homage to the Romantic Ballet) (1946), and Untitled (Lighted Dancer) (c. 1949) are among his ballet-themed works.
Cornell often created his boxes in series. Among these were the Soap Bubble Set series; the Pharmacy series, which looked like miniature apothecaries or cabinets of curiosities; the Medici series, which featured reproductions of Italian Renaissance portraits; and the Aviary series, boxes that focused on birds and showed a stylistic shift toward abstraction..
During the 1950s Cornell’s boxes became more spare, with less texture and more open space. Throughout the decade he created shadow boxes that focused on astronomy (the Celestial Navigation series, including Untitled [Solar Set], 1956–58, and Cassiopeia #1, 1960) as well as boxes related to (and sometimes expressly dedicated to) Cubist artist Juan Gris, many of which included collaged newspaper and some representation of a cockatoo. He returned to filmmaking during the 1950s, this time recording his own footage but also collaborating with well-known filmmakers such as Stan Brakhage on two films, Gnir Rednow (1955–60; Wonder Ring spelled backward) and Centuries of June (1955), and Rudy Burckhardt on nine more, including The Aviary (1954–55), Angel (1957), Nymphlight (1957), and A Legend for Fountains (1957–65). 
In 1965 his brother died, and the following year his mother died too, sending Cornell into a deep depression. His production of boxes fell off dramatically in that decade, and he worked increasingly in collage as he neared the end of his career. He made a series of collages dedicated to his brother in 1965 that he called Memorial Collection. In those works he incorporated drawings made by Robert.
In 1967 the Guggenheim Museum and the Pasadena Art Museum in California both held major exhibitions on Cornell, and both were critical successes. As Cornell’s reputation skyrocketed, he became ever more reclusive. In 1968 he was selected for the award of merit from the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters, a medal and $1,000. He won two other awards that year, though it is said that he did not accept any of them in person. At the end of 1970, New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art had an exhibition of his collages, but it was not nearly as well received as those that featured his boxes.  Throughout his last years Cornell enjoyed mentoring young artists, and in his last year he helped organize two exhibitions of his work that were geared toward children, one at the gallery at Cooper Union and the other (the last exhibition of his work while he was alive) at the Albright-Knox Gallery in Buffalo, New York. Cornell’s work continued to capture the imagination of the public and scholars alike and to engender many exhibitions and publications into the 21st century.
