Kiki Smith,  (born January 18, 1954, Nürnberg, Germany), German-born American sculptor, installation artist, and printmaker whose intense and expressionistic work investigated the body and bodily processes.
The daughter of the American actress and opera singer Jane Lawrence and the American architect and sculptor Tony Smith, she was born in Germany, where her mother had launched a career in opera. The family returned to the United States in 1955, and Smith was raised in South Orange, New Jersey. After briefly attending the Hartford Art School, she moved to New York in 1976. Her work as a sculptor bore little resemblance to that of her father. Where he was abstract and nonfigurative, she was engaged in the study of human anatomy and the natural world.
Her work in the 1980s often examined particular parts of the body—hands, the digestive system, the pelvis, the liver—using materials such as cloth, paper, and ceramics to depict the mystery and vulnerability of the body. In 1985 she briefly studied to be an emergency medical technician. By 1990 she had begun to create fully realized human figures, and she often employed beeswax to heighten the suggestion of flesh, as in Untitled (1990). Smith used the body as a metaphor for the passions and tribulations of existence, and her work reinvigorated the tradition of expressionist and emotive figural sculpture.
Toward the turn of the 21st century Smith began to explore animal imagery in print and sculpture. She also continued to represent human figures—often females from fairy tales, folklore, mythology, and other stories—as in the print Wolf Girl (From the Blue Prints Series) (1999) and the multimedia sculpture Singing Siren (2003). From the 2000s her work combined these interests to depict the intersection between women and nature. Notable examples included the porcelain sculpture Woman with Wolf (2003), the collage Sitting with a Snake (2007), and the tapestry Sky (2011). Smith also became interested in creation stories and cosmology, making bronze wall-mounted starbursts (Net [2012]) and aluminum sculptures on iron stands (Cloudburst and Spiral Nebula (Large) [both 2017]).
Smith was the subject of many solo exhibitions, including a retrospective in 2006 organized by the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis. Among the many awards she received were the Skowhegan Medal for Sculpture (2000), awarded annually by the Skowhegan (Maine) School of Painting and Sculpture; the Athena Award from the Rhode Island School of Design (2005) in recognition of her printmaking; the Edward MacDowell Medal (2009) from the MacDowell Colony artists’ residency in Peterborough, New Hampshire, for her outstanding contribution to the field of sculpture; and the U.S. State Department Medal of Arts (2012).
