Louis XIV style,   visual arts produced in France during the reign of Louis XIV (1638–1715). The man most influential in French painting of the period was Nicolas Poussin. Although Poussin himself lived in Italy for most of his adult life, his Parisian friends commissioned works through which his classicism was made known to French painters. In 1648 the painter Charles Le Brun, assisted by the king, founded the Royal Academy of Painting and Sculpture, an organization that dictated style to such a degree that it virtually controlled the fortunes of all French artists for the remainder of the reign. French sculpture reached a new zenith at this time, after the mediocrity of the first half of the century. François Girardon was a favourite of the King and did several portrait sculptures of him, as well as the tomb of the cardinal de Richelieu. Antoine Coysevox also received royal commissions, including the tomb of Cardinal Mazarin, while Pierre Puget, whose work showed strong Italian Baroque influences, was not so well favoured at court.
At the Gobelins factory, founded by Louis for the production of meubles de luxe and furnishings for the royal palaces and the public buildings, a national decorative arts style evolved that soon spread its influence into neighbouring countries. Furniture, for example, was veneered with tortoise shell or foreign woods, inlaid with brass, pewter, and ivory, or heavily gilded all over; heavy gilt bronze mounts protected the corners and other parts from friction and rough handling and provided further ornament. The name of André-Charles Boulle is particularly associated with this style of furniture design. Common decorative motifs of the period include shells, satyrs, cherubs, festoons and garlands, mythological themes, cartouches (ornamental frames), foliated scrolls, and dolphins.
The ability of the King to form a strong “national” style was exhibited particularly in the field of architecture. The year 1665 was crucial for the history of French art, for it was in that year that Gian Lorenzo Bernini arrived in Paris to design a new facade for the Louvre. It was decided, however, that the Italian Baroque style was incompatible with the French temperament, and the Louvre was completed according to the new tenets of French classicism.
The Louvre was the project of Louis’s minister Colbert; the King’s interest lay at Ver- sailles, where in the 1660s he began to renovate an ancient hunting lodge, and the resultant palace dazzled the world. Never before had a single man attempted any architectural plan on such a large scale. The result is a masterpiece of formal grandeur, and, because the arts were all under the rigid control of the state, each element at Versailles was overseen and designed to be in keeping with the whole. Versailles, though usually thought of by the French as Classical, can be considered the ultimate Baroque composition, in which motion is always present but always contained.
Not the least important element at Versailles was the landscaping. André Le Nôtre, the greatest artist in the history of European landscape architecture, worked with the King, designing vistas, fountains, and many other outdoor arrangements. Versailles had an enormous impact on the rest of Europe, both artistic and psychological, but the whole complex was so large that even the extremely long life of Louis XIV did not hold enough years to see it completed.
