Manuel Tolsá,  (born 1757, Enguera, Spain—died December 1816, Mexico City, Viceroyalty of New Spain [now in Mexico]), Spanish-born sculptor and architect who introduced Neoclassicism to New Spain (Mexico).
Tolsá studied Neoclassical sculpture at the Academia de San Carlos in Valencia, Spain. He gained acclaim early in his career and in 1790 was named director of sculpture at the Academia de San Carlos in New Spain. He arrived there in July 1791 with an enormous library and a collection of plaster casts of ancient sculptures for his students to study. As director, he led students away from late Baroque aesthetics toward the Neoclassical style that was prevalent in Europe at the time.
While living in New Spain, Tolsá also worked as an architect despite his lack of formal training. His first project involved the completion of the cathedral in Mexico City, on which he began work in 1793. Notably, he finished the cupola (enlarging it from the original plan), raised the centre of the facade, and decorated the cathedral’s towers. He also made three allegorical sculptures—of Faith, Hope, and Charity—for the top of the facade.
Tolsá’s second major architectural project and the one for which he is best known was the College of Mines. His plans for the building were approved in 1797, and construction was complete in 1813. The building epitomizes the Neoclassical with its fully symmetrical and balanced design, which makes use of the most sedate of the Greek columnar orders, the Doric. Ionic columns line the interior patio, and enormous elegant staircases link the floors.
Little of Tolsá’s sculptural work remains. His equestrian statue of Charles IV, made in 1803, is considered his most important sculpture. Apparently based on French sculptor Girardon’s statue of Louis XIV, it portrays Charles IV in the apparel of a Roman emperor seated on his horse.
Tolsá integrated architecture and sculpture in his design for the high altar of the cathedral of Puebla, begun in 1797 and completed in 1818. Tolsá oversaw the project, which was a collaboration with a number of other artists, and made an allegorical sculpture of Purity for the altar. He also received the commission for the baldachin for the cathedral in 1797, which replaced an earlier Baroque structure. Tolsá’s baldachin relied on complex religious iconography within a Neoclassical framework of Corinthian columns topped by a cupola on which St. Peter sits. Although the baldachin is noteworthy for its general Neoclassical symmetry and orderly design, Tolsá also included Baroque elements, such as a burst of gilded rays.
