Martin Puryear,  (born May 23, 1941, Washington, D.C., U.S.), American sculptor whose streamlined and evocative sculptures made from materials such as wood and wire are associated with Postminimalism.
Puryear grew up in Washington, D.C., and there attended Catholic University of America (B.A., 1963). After graduating, he joined the Peace Corps for two years, teaching in a remote village in Sierra Leone. Puryear, who is African American, was intrigued by the native crafts he saw there, and he subsequently studied woodworking and design in Stockholm before returning to the United States to attend Yale University (M.F.A., 1971). He taught at Fisk University in Nashville and at the University of Maryland before moving to Chicago in 1978. He taught at the University of Illinois at Chicago from 1978 to 1990 and then moved to upstate New York, where he continued to work. He received a MacArthur Foundation fellowship in 1989.
Puryear’s experiences in Africa and Scandinavia led him to concentrate for much of his career on the sculpting of wood, a medium not commonly employed in modern sculpture. His elegant and powerful work shows a consummate understanding of a wide range of woodworking techniques, including processes such as the lamination and painting of forms (Self, 1978) and strategies evolved from basketry (Charm of Subsistence, 1989). His forms, reduced to essences, are derived from nature or culture and still suggest the actual objects to which they refer. Puryear’s efforts as a public sculptor have led him to such materials as steel and granite (North Cove Pylons, New York City, 1995).
In the 1990s several of Puryear’s works contended with the boundaries of fine art and everyday objects. In the piece Ladder for Booker T. Washington (1996), Puryear transformed a useful tool into sculpture. The ladder quickly narrows as it rises, impeding function while suggesting an infinite climb. Puryear also designed a series of circular benches (1998) whose elegant abstract forms confuse the distinction between furniture and sculpture.
Puryear continued to create work into the 21st century, including a series of sculptures considering the idea of freedom, the centerpiece of which was Big Phrygian (2010–14), a massive rendition of the cap associated with liberty. He collaborated with New York’s Madison Square Park Conservancy on a monumental sculpture, Big Bling (2016), to temporarily reside in that park. Puryear was selected to represent the United States at the 58th Venice Biennale (2019), in which he returned to themes of freedom in an exhibition titled “Liberty/Libertà.”
Puryear has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions, including major traveling retrospectives at the Art Institute of Chicago in 1991–92 and at the Museum of Modern Art in New York in 2007. He received many honours, among them the Skowhegan Medal for Sculpture (1990), the National Medal of Arts (2011), and the Yaddo Artist Medal (2016), awarded annually by the Yaddo artist colony, where he was an artist in residence in 1979. He was elected to the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters (1992).
