Ossip Zadkine,  (born July 14, 1890, Smolensk, Russia—died November 25, 1967, Paris, France), Russian-born French sculptor known for his dramatic Cubist-inspired sculptures of the human figure.
As a boy, Zadkine, the son of a professor of Greek and Latin, preferred clay modeling to his studies. In 1905 his father sent him to stay with relatives in England in order to learn “English and good manners.” He attended art school and eventually worked for a wooden-ornament maker in London. After living alternately in London and Smolensk, in 1909 Zadkine moved to Paris, where he briefly studied at the École des Beaux-Arts; he gave up academic training after a few months to work independently.
Soon after settling in Paris, Zadkine became friends with a number of avant-garde artists, including Pablo Picasso, who had invented the Cubist style of painting a few years earlier. Zadkine developed a lyrical and expressive style, typically sculpting elongated figures with simplified features. About 1917, however, he adopted a new approach in his drawings and sculptures, substituting his previously graceful and sensitive lines with a more angular approach influenced by Cubism. Zadkine was also drawn to the expressiveness of the 19th-century Romantic sculptor Auguste Rodin, so he combined a Cubist geometric analysis of form with a dramatic emotionalism, as seen in his sculpture Musicians (1924).
During World War II, because of his Jewish ancestry, Zadkine fled to unoccupied France and then to the United States, where he taught at the Art Students League in New York City. In Zadkine’s mature work, such as the complex sculpture Birth of Forms (1947), he used convexities, concavities, lines, and parallel planes to achieve a sense of rhythm and a multidimensional unity. After the war he returned to France, and in 1946 he visited the bombed Dutch city of Rotterdam. The ruinous state of the city made a deep impression on him and inspired his best-known sculpture, The Destroyed City (c. 1947–51), a monument in which the arms of a large figure, a hole torn in the centre of its body, are outstretched in horror.
Zadkine was awarded the grand prize for sculpture at the Venice Biennale (1950) and the grand prize of the city of Paris (1960). Following the success of The Destroyed City, he created monuments in Jerusalem, Amsterdam, and other cities.
