Rachel Whiteread, in full Dame Rachel Whiteread,  (born April 20, 1963, London, England), British artist known for her monumental sculptures that represent what is usually considered to be negative space. She won the Turner Prize in 1993, becoming the honour’s first woman recipient, and represented Great Britain at the Venice Biennale in 1997.
Whiteread, whose mother was also an artist, grew up in Ilford and Essex. She knew from an early age that she wanted to make art, and she attended Brighton Polytechnic (1982–85), where she studied painting, and the Slade School of Fine Art (1985–87), where she studied sculpture. For her first solo exhibition (1988), at the now-defunct Carlisle Gallery in Islington, she showed four sculptures: Closet, Mantle, Shallow Breath, and  Torso. Each was a plaster cast of some interior space, an effect roughly comparable to the casts made of those who died at Pompeii. Torso embodies the interior of a hot-water bottle; Mantle casts the space directly below and outlined by a dressing table; Shallow Breath presents a space below a bed; and Closet makes physical the interior space of a wardrobe. Like other up-and-coming artists known as YBAs (Young British Artists; also known as the BritArtists)—including Damien Hirst and Tracey Emin—Whiteread was scorned by many reviewers.
Whiteread’s next major project was Ghost (1990), which bumped the scale of her sculpture up to room size. For this work she chose a Victorian sitting room, complete with a window, a fireplace, and a door. In removing the plaster mold, she managed not only to transform the “roomness” of the room (it was no longer something one could be inside) but also to reveal the personal—the scratches, scars, and dings of human use, the bits of wallpaper—and give abstract geometries an emotional resonance.
Perhaps her most iconic work is House (1993; now destroyed), a lengthy project for which she applied her techniques on a three-story house that was about to be torn down. She applied the same principles in much of her later work, notably in her memorial to the victims of the Holocaust (2000) in Vienna’s Judenplatz. In addition to examining the qualities of materials other than plaster—for example, resin (Water Tower [1998] and Monument [2001])—Whiteread ventured in many directions after winning the Turner Prize. She worked with the spaces inside small containers (Embankment [2005]), created a village of some 200 dollhouses (Place [Village] [2006–08]), and in the process also produced a number of exquisite works on paper. In celebration of the 2012 London Olympic Games, she was commissioned to fill a space that had stood vacant on the Whitechapel Gallery for more than a century. Other commissions included US Embassy (Flat pack house) (2013–15), wall-mounted casts of a mid-century prefabricated house for the U.S. Embassy in London, and Cabin, a concrete cast of the interior of a wood shed, which was unveiled on Governors Island, New York, in 2016.
Whiteread was named Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 2006 and made Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in 2019. A major survey of her work was organized in 2017 by Tate Modern, London, and the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C. The exhibition debuted such pieces as Chicken Shed (2017).
