Scopas,  (flourished 4th century bc), Greek sculptor and architect of the late classical period who was ranked by ancient writers with Praxiteles and Lysippus as one of the three major sculptors of the second half of the 4th century bc. Scopas was influential in establishing the expression of powerful emotions as artistic themes. He was a native of Paros and probably belonged to a family of artists on that Greek island.
According to ancient writings, Scopas worked on three major monuments of the 4th century: the temple of Athena Alea at Tegea (in Arcadia), the temple of Artemis at Ephesus, and the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus. The temple of Athena Alea was a new temple, begun some time after 394 bc. The 2nd-century-ad Greek traveler Pausanias says that Scopas worked as architect as well as sculptor at the temple. He mentions him as the artist responsible for the statues of Asclepius and Hygieia that stood inside the temple on each side of the image of Athena Alea. It is also possible that Scopas worked on the pedimental sculptures of this temple, including extant fragments depicting the hunt of the Calydonian boar, which are preserved in the National Archaeological Museum at Athens. These extant heads show a highly forceful and individual style and may give an idea of Scopas’ work; the heads have squarish forms, deep-set eyes, and tense features that convey a strong emotional intensity.
According to the 1st-century-ad Roman writer Pliny, Scopas carved the reliefs adorning one of the columns of the temple of Artemis, but, of the three decorated columns remaining, it is not likely that any are Scopas’ work. He also worked on the sculptures of the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus with Bryaxis, Timotheus, and Leochares.
Scopas is now believed to be the sculptor of a group representing the destruction of the daughters of Niobe, formerly attributed to either Scopas or Praxiteles. Copies of the Niobe statues are in the Uffizi, Florence. Of the many freestanding sculptures attributed to Scopas, the “Maenad” (State Art Collection, Dresden) and the “Pothos” (“Longing”) in the collection of the Palazzo dei Conservatori at Rome are the most noteworthy.
