Treasury Section of Painting and Sculpture,   most important of the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s three visual arts programs conceived during the Great Depression of the 1930s by the Franklin D. Roosevelt administration and designed to embellish new federal buildings with murals and sculpture. It was established within the Procurement Division of the Department of the Treasury’s Public Works Branch in October 1934 and was funded by one percent of each construction appropriation. Under the direction of the financier and painter Edward Bruce, who was assisted by Edward Rowan and the critic Forbes Watson, the section commissioned works of art by contract after selecting the artists by means of local and national competitions. At a cost of $2,571,267, it sponsored more than 1,100 murals and 300 sculptures, which were executed in the Justice, Post Office, Interior, and Social Security buildings in Washington, D.C., and in post offices and courthouses throughout the country.
The section’s chief objective was to procure art and not, like the other cultural projects, to provide work relief for needy artists; it tended, however, to frown on any image that was politically controversial or particularly abstract. The results included many conservative views of landscape and industry and reconstructions of local historical events. Among the major artists to receive commissions were John Steuart Curry, William Gropper, Chaim Gross, and Reginald Marsh. Initially conceived to promote a mural movement in the United States comparable to that in Mexico during the 1920s, the section refused to sponsor the work of the avant-garde.
Among its other programs the section circulated exhibitions of mural studies and sculpture models, sponsored murals at the New York World’s Fair of 1939–40, and supervised the art program of the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC). In 1938 its name was changed to Section of Fine Arts, and in 1939 it was removed from the Department of the Treasury and placed under the Public Buildings Administration of the Federal Works Agency. Although Edward Bruce fought to make the section a permanent government program, it ended in 1943 along with the other remaining cultural projects.
