Vinnie Ream,  (born September 25, 1847, Madison, Wisconsin, U.S.—died November 20, 1914, Washington, D.C.), American sculptor, who is best remembered for her sculpture of Abraham Lincoln in the rotunda of the Capitol in Washington, D.C.
Ream had a peripatetic childhood, but in 1861 her family settled in Washington, D.C. She took up sculpture in 1863 under the tutelage of Clark Mills, who was then finishing the bronze Liberty sculpture for the Capitol dome. Ream received recognition for her busts of several congressmen and other prominent persons, which led in 1864 to an offer from Congress for her to sculpt a bust of President Abraham Lincoln from life. The success of this work prompted Congress in 1866 to commission from Ream a full-size marble statue of Lincoln for the Capitol rotunda. Then a virtually untrained 18-year-old, Ream was the first woman to win such a commission from the federal government. She completed a plaster model for the statue in her studio and then, accompanied by her parents, took it to Rome in 1869 to translate it into marble.
During a brief stay in Paris she studied with Léon Bonnat and created busts of Gustave Doré and Père Hyacinthe. In Rome she studied with Luigi Majoli. She was popular among expatriate artists there, becoming especially close to Georg Brandes. She also made busts of Franz Liszt and Cardinal Antonelli.
In January 1871 Ream’s statue of Lincoln, done in white Carrara marble, was unveiled at the Capitol. Although later criticized for its lack of vigour and its manifest amateurishness, it possessed a naive expressiveness and was warmly received at the time. In January 1875, in competition with such prominent artists as William Wetmore Story and John Quincy Adams Ward, Ream won a $20,000 commission from the government to create a bronze statue of Admiral David G. Farragut. Her sculpture, cast from the propeller of the naval hero’s flagship, was unveiled in April 1881 in Farragut Square, Washington, D.C. In May 1878, while at work on the statue, Ream married Lieutenant (later Brigadier General) Richard L. Hoxie, with whom she established a home in Farragut Square that was a popular site for parties.
From about 1863 to 1867 Ream executed portraits of figures such as General Ulysses S. Grant, General George A. Custer, Senator John Sherman, and congressman Thaddeus Stevens. Her idealized figures include America (1870) and Sappho (1865–70). Ream abandoned sculpture for many years in deference to her husband’s wishes, but in her later years she executed a statue of Iowa governor Samuel Kirkwood (1906), as well as the model for a statue of Sequoyah (1912–14), both for Statuary Hall in the Capitol.
