Adam Zagajewski,  (born June 21, 1945, Lwów, Poland [now Lviv, Ukraine]—died March 21, 2021, Kraków), Polish poet, novelist, and essayist whose works were grounded in the turbulent history of his homeland and concerned with the quandary of the modern intellectual.
Zagajewski’s family had resided in Lwów for many centuries. Shortly after Adam’s birth, Lwów was incorporated into the Soviet Union, and his family was forcibly repatriated to Poland. They moved to Silesia and then later to Kraków, where Zagajewski graduated from the Jagiellonian University.
His first collections of poetry, Komunikat (1972; “Communiqué”) and Sklepy mięsne (1975; “Meat Shops”), came out of the Polish New Wave movement, which rejected the falseness of official communist propaganda. Zagajewski was a major figure in the Solidarity movement of the 1980s, and his volume List: oda do wielości (1982; “Letter: An Ode to Multiplicity”) contained poems reacting to the imposition of martial law in Poland.
Zagajewski’s writings interwove the historical and political with the more spiritual aspects of life. His first novel, Ciepło, zimno (1975; “Warm and Cold”), was about a young intellectual who, tormented by self-doubts and unable to accept unambiguous principles, became a servant of the police state. Zagajewski left Poland for Paris in 1982, and there his work grew more lyrical and more personal. A romantic in whose worldview memory and nostalgia were key elements, Zagajewski never let go of his sense of loss of historical roots. In his memoir W cudzym pięknie (1998; Another Beauty), he wrote of his growing conviction that “a poem, essay, or story must grow from an emotion, an observation, a joy, a sorrow that is my own, and not my nation’s.” His second novel, Cienka kreska (1983; “The Thin Line”), explored the spiritual dilemma of the contemporary artist who is caught between the splendour and the triviality of everyday experience.
Zagajewski served as coeditor of the Paris-based Polish-language Zeszyty literackie (“Literary Review”). He published several more volumes of poetry, including Jechać du Lwowa (1985; “Traveling to Lwów”), Ziemia ognista (1994; “The Fiery Land”), and Anteny (2005; “Antenna”). And he received acclaim as an essayist with such collections as Drugi oddech (1978; “Second Wind”), Solidarność i samtoność (1986; Solidarity and Solitude), Dwa miasta (1991; Two Cities: On Exile, History, and the Imagination), and Obrona żarliwości (2002; A Defense of Ardor). Zagajewski gained notoriety in the United States when a translation of his poem “Try to Praise the Mutilated World” was published in The New Yorker shortly after the September 11 attacks of 2001. He received several notable literary awards, including the Swedish PEN’s Kurt Tucholsky Prize, the Tomas Tranströmer Prize, and the Neustadt International Prize for Literature. In the first decade of the 21st century, he taught at the University of Chicago.
