Alfred Ely Beach,  (born September 1, 1826, Springfield, Massachusetts, U.S.—died January 1, 1896, New York, New York), American publisher and inventor whose Scientific American helped stimulate 19th-century technological innovations and became one of the world’s most prestigious science magazines. Beach himself invented a tunneling shield and the pneumatic tube, among other devices.
While Beach was attending Monson Academy in Massachusetts, his father, Moses Yale Beach, bought the New York Sun newspaper. Alfred learned journalism by working for his father on the Sun, and in 1845 he became a partner in the Sun’s parent company. The next year he joined with Orson D. Munn and Salem H. Wales in organizing Munn & Company, which bought the six-month-old Scientific American magazine from Rufus Porter and built it over the years into a great and unique periodical. Like his father, Beach was most interested in inventions, and although he was the magazine’s editor for a while, he devoted most of his effort to helping and advising inventors and to working on his own inventions. In 1847 he applied for his own first patent, on a typewriter, and a few years later, at the 1853 Crystal Palace Exhibition in New York City, he displayed a version of his machine that produced embossed letters for the blind.
Beach originally envisioned the pneumatic tube as a means of delivering mail in downtown areas of cities, a use to which it was widely put, but in the 1860s, after experimenting with a cable railway, he conceived the idea of a pneumatic subway. At the 1867 Fair of the American Institute in New York City, he exhibited a tube in which a 10-passenger car was driven back and forth by a powerful fan. Because of the opposition of William Magear Tweed, the political boss of New York City, Beach found it necessary to construct an experimental subway in secret. Obtaining a charter in 1868 for a 4-foot (1.2-metre) pneumatic tube to demonstrate mail delivery, he actually dug an 8-foot (2.4-metre) bore tunnel 300 feet (100 metres) under Broadway, between Warren and Murray streets. Because he could not disturb street traffic with a trench, he was forced to drive the tunnel by underground methods and invented a cylindrical tunneling shield, powered by hydraulic rams; this shield actually antedated that built by James Henry Greathead for the Tower Subway in London. A 100-horsepower blower, operating alternately as an exhauster, pushed and pulled the single car back and forth in the tunnel. The demonstration was a success, but adoption was blocked partly by Tweed’s opposition, partly by the financial panic of 1873, and finally by the arrival of electric traction. In the 1960s the idea was revived in the form of a proposed gravity-vacuum train for long-distance high-speed transportation.
