almanac,  book or table containing a calendar of the days, weeks, and months of the year; a record of various astronomical phenomena, often with climate information and seasonal suggestions for farmers; and miscellaneous other data. An almanac provides data on the rising and setting times of the Sun and Moon, the phases of the Moon, the positions of the planets, schedules of high and low tides, and a register of ecclesiastical festivals and saints’ days. The term almanac is of uncertain medieval Arabic origin; in modern Arabic, al-manākh is the word for climate.
The first printed almanac appeared in Europe in 1457, but almanacs have existed in some form since the beginnings of astronomy. Ancient Egyptian and Greek calendars showed festival dates and days thought to be lucky or unlucky, while the Roman fasti, which named days upon which business could or could not be conducted, were later elaborated into lists resembling modern almanacs. Medieval psalters and missals usually contained calendars listing the various holy days, and 12th-century manuscripts containing tables on the movements of the heavenly bodies are still extant.
Almanacs began to gain real prominence only after the development of printing. The German astronomer Regiomontanus (Johann Müller) published one of the most important early almanacs in 1473 under the title Ephemerides ab anno. Most early printed almanacs in England were published by the Stationer’s Company; the most famous of them is the Vox Stellarum of Francis Moore, which was first published in 1700. These early printed almanacs devoted as much space to astrology and prophecies and predictions of the future as they did to basic calendrical and astronomical data. With the development of Western science in the 17th and 18th centuries, the more sensational elements gradually disappeared from their pages, and scientific almanacs developed into the modern ephemeris, containing rigorously exact tables of astronomical data.
Meanwhile, in both Europe and the New World, the popular almanac was developing into a genuine form of folk literature containing, in addition to calendars and weather predictions, interesting statistics and facts, moral precepts and proverbs, medical advice and remedies, jokes, and even verse and fiction. Guided by the almanac, the farmer was able to tell the time of day and to estimate the proper time to begin seasonal farm work. The almanac also furnished much incidental information that was instructive and entertaining and greatly appreciated where reading matter was scarce. The first almanac printed in colonial North America was An Almanac for New England for the Year 1639, compiled by William Pierce and printed in Cambridge, Mass., under the supervision of Harvard College. This was followed by many other American almanacs, one of the best of which, the Astronomical Diary and Almanack, was begun by Nathaniel Ames of Dedham, Mass., in 1725 and published until 1775. Benjamin Franklin’s brother James printed The Rhode Island Almanac in 1728, and Benjamin Franklin (under the nom de plume of Richard Saunders) began his Poor Richard’s almanacs, the most famous of American almanacs, in Philadelphia in 1732. Poor Richard’s, enlivened by Franklin’s shrewd wit and straightforward prose style, remained a best-seller in the American colonies until sold by him in 1758.
Modern-day almanacs are of several types. The traditional type survives in the Old Farmer’s Almanac, which has been continuously published in the United States since 1792. But the best-known type of almanac is now a handy and dependable collection of a vast array of statistical, historical, and other information. Notable English-language examples of this type include The World Almanac and Book of Facts, which was first published in 1868, the Information Please Almanac (from 1947), and the Reader’s Digest Almanac (from 1965).
