BITNET, in full Because It’s Time Network, originally Because It’s There Network,  computer network of universities, colleges, and other academic institutions that was a predecessor to the Internet. BITNET members were required to serve as an entry point for at least one other institution wishing to join, which ensured that no redundant paths existed in the network. As a “point-by-point” network, BITNET distributed information from one BITNET location (called a node) to another until it reached its final destination. At each point, the file was forwarded and held until it could be passed along to the next location. BITNET supported research and education as a tool for sending e-mail, exchanging files, and sharing text-based information between institutions.
BITNET was the product of joint efforts by researchers at the City University of New York (CUNY) in New York City and Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut, to create an academic network by linking existing campus mainframe computers. Ira H. Fuchs of CUNY and Greydon Freeman of Yale are widely credited with the idea of using existing communications protocols to connect scholars and researchers through computer-mediated communication. In the spring of 1981 the two universities used leased telephone circuits to allow accounts on their respective mainframe computers to communicate, thus initiating what would eventually become known as BITNET. Within two years the number of linked BITNET institutions had grown to about 20, and BITNET connected with similar networks internationally, such as AsiaNet in Japan, the European Academic and Research Network (EARN), and NetNorth in Canada.
In 1984, representatives from participating institutions and organizations formed the BITNET Executive Committee to establish network policies and procedures as well as to begin long-term planning. That same year the network received funding from IBM to help develop the BITNET Network Information Center (BITNIC), which provided centralized support services. That funding continued until 1987, when participating institutions and organizations began paying dues to help support the network. Members also provided a large amount of volunteer support in the form of software development and services to keep BITNET operating and at low cost. Indeed, the cost of joining the network was minimal, as the only true expense facing a prospective member was acquiring a leased line to connect to the existing network.
One of the most unique features of BITNET was the origination of LISTSERV mailing lists. LISTSERV software automated the administration of discussion groups on BITNET, allowing the maintenance and management of mailing lists to occur without the aid of a human moderator. LISTSERVs could send automated mass mailings and maintained a searchable index of past messages and discussions. They also allowed individuals to initiate (or cancel) memberships simply by sending an e-mail to the host computer indicating their wish to subscribe (or unsubscribe) to the list.
In 1987 a new set of protocols, BITNET II, was introduced to solve the problems associated with a network lacking homogeneous hardware and software among its hosts. BITNET II helped foster efficient use of increased bandwidth capacities.
In 1990 BITNET merged with CSNET, a computer science and engineering academic network, to form CREN (Corporation for Research and Educational Networking). The BITNET network reached its peak of popularity in 1991–92, connecting approximately 1,400 members in 49 countries. Shortly thereafter the migration of academic institutions to the Internet began, reducing the number of BITNET members substantially in less than two years. By 1996 CREN had suggested to its members that they abandon the use of BITNET in favour of other tools, though CREN continued to develop list-management software similar to LISTSERV.
