Blog, in full Web log or Weblog,  online journal where an individual, group, or corporation presents a record of activities, thoughts, or beliefs. Some blogs operate mainly as news filters, collecting various online sources and adding short comments and Internet links. Other blogs concentrate on presenting original material. In addition, many blogs provide a forum to allow visitors to leave comments and interact with the publisher. “To blog” is the act of composing material for a blog. Materials are largely written, but pictures, audio, and videos are important elements of many blogs. The “blogosphere” is the online universe of blogs.
The World Wide Web and the idea of a blog appeared at the same time. Tim Berners-Lee, often described as the Web’s inventor, created the first “blog” in 1992 to outline and render visible the ongoing development of the Web and the software necessary to navigate this new space. Web history, especially the early growth of Web servers and sites, is chronicled on the various “What’s New” pages in the archives of the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Another example of a blog that existed before the word was coined is Slashdot. Following its debut in September 1997, Slashdot operated as a clearinghouse for information in its “News for Nerds,” with a small set of editors who decided what to publish of numerous articles and news items submitted by the “geek” community. Indeed, Web sites mentioned on Slashdot were often overwhelmed, leading to a condition now known as being “slashdotted.”
In December 1997, Jorn Barger, an early online presence, coined the term web log to describe his Web site RobotWisdom.com. In early 1999 another individual with considerable online experience, Peter Merholz, began to employ the term blog on his site Peterme.com. While the history of the term is pretty well settled, the same cannot be said of the identity of the first blogger. Depending on the definition of a blog, Berners-Lee may not qualify as the first blogger. Claimants to this title include Justin Hall, a college student who started an online list at links.net in 1994; Carolyn Burke, who began publishing Carolyn’s Diary online in 1995; and Dave Winer, who has published Scripting News online since April 1, 1997.
The growth of the blogosphere has been nothing short of remarkable. Technorati, Inc., a Web site and organization dedicated to mapping and searching the blogosphere, found that by October 2005 there were 19.6 million blogs, a number that has been doubling roughly every five months. Approximately 70,000 new blogs are created each day—or, more vividly, nearly one every second. Also of importance is the growth of blogs in languages other than English, especially Chinese.
Despite the overwhelming number of blogs, very few individuals make a living as a blogger. A few individuals earn money from their Web sites by carrying ads and appeals for funds, and some blogs are financed by corporate or organizational owners; nevertheless, most bloggers derive nonmonetary rewards from their activity. In particular, blogs offer ordinary individuals the ultimate soapbox and an opportunity to create their own digital identity or personal brand.
One reason for the proliferation of blogs is the ease with which they can be established and maintained. Many services and software systems are available that allow an individual to set up a blog in less than an hour. Of course, updating a blog is essential for maintaining its presence and importance. Statistics on blogs that are started but not updated remain elusive, but the proportion is undoubtedly substantial.
Like the fad for personal Web pages in the 1990s, the proliferation of blogs has led to the creation of Web sites that group blogs, often with a similar political emphasis or subject orientation, to form “superblogs.” An example of this phenomenon is The Huffington Post, founded in 2005 by American author and syndicated newspaper columnist Arianna Huffington, which hosts dozens of other bloggers who post mostly on politics and current affairs.
In addition to the frequency of updates, the thing that distinguishes most blogs from ordinary Web pages is the inclusion of forums for readers to post comments to which the blogger might respond. The degree to which dissenting views are tolerated depends on the publisher, but most Web sites must regularly prune “spam”—insertions of commercial and pornographic ads into the text of an apparent comment or the use of insulting and defamatory language. Trackback, an Internet function, facilitates communication by allowing bloggers to monitor who is reading and discussing their site. In turn, bloggers often post a “blogroll,” or a list of other blogs that they read and respect. Blogging is a conversational activity that seeks to create a community or reflect an existing community.
For a corporation, blogs can be used to advertise corporate products and practices and for two-way communication with consumers. For nonprofit entities such as charities, blogs allow officials to discuss their goals and actions in pursuit of a common end.
A growing phenomenon involves people who start blogs, often anonymously, to disparage someone or something that they dare not attack openly—such as their company, boss, school, or teacher—or to tilt at some organization that “done ’em wrong.” In several instances, individuals have lost their jobs when employers discovered their blogs.
The U.S. presidential election of 2004 brought blogs to a newfound prominence as bloggers for both parties used the Internet as another arena of debate and conversation—as well as fund-raising. Democratic presidential primary candidate Howard Dean was the most prominent user of the Internet and the blogosphere. Dean used bloggers as unpaid advisers and cheerleaders to help build his base; in turn, bloggers rallied to Dean’s campaign against the Second Persian Gulf War.
Even before the election, bloggers played a central role in demoting Mississippi Senator Trent Lott from his leadership position in the U.S. Senate. The mainstream media initially paid little attention to Lott’s comments praising Strom Thurmond’s 1948 Dixiecrat presidential campaign when the latter ran as an ardent segregationist. Only after left-wing bloggers made it clear that Lott had a history of such comments did the mainstream media begin a series of stories that eventually forced Lott to step down as Senate majority leader. In Britain, bloggers forced Prime Minister Tony Blair to address the substance of the so-called Downing Street memo, which purportedly showed that the Bush administration had deliberately “juiced up” military intelligence to support war against Iraq. Criticism of the mainstream media has come not only from the left. Dan Rather, a news anchor for CBS TV, was no doubt ushered into retirement in part because of right-wing bloggers’ criticism of his journalistic practices during the 2004 election—a view summed up in the name of a central site: RatherBiased.com.
Despite the overheated phrase “every person a blogger,” blogs are not likely to replace the mainstream media. Instead, blogs will continue to complement existing news media by allowing anyone to set up a Web site dedicated to his or her particular interest or perspective. Blogs now exist on a vast array of topics, from the latest electronic gadgets to books and movies to sex and politics, and over time the most successful blogs may be those that cater to a wide audience while not offending an even wider group. Or success may be redefined. If the purported convergence of electronic technologies—cable television, movies, and the Internet—actually takes place, blogs may become gatekeepers to the new digital frontier, making criticism and discussion an essential element of search, the most basic Internet function. Hence, search engines such as Google and Yahoo are working to make blogs part of their respective digital empires. Similarly, America Online, Inc., has bought certain blogs to acquire both technological cachet and access to the blogs’ readership. Blogs may become the new “portals” to the Web.
Nor is blogging the final frontier of individual expression online. Podcasting, the use of a personal computer to create a “radio show” that users can download and play on their computer or portable music player, became the “bleeding edge” of personal performance in 2005. Podcasting derives its name from the nearly ubiquitous iPod, Apple Inc.’s portable music player. Apple’s iTunes software has also played a crucial role in the spread of podcasting, as users can access thousands of podcasts for free with a simple click of their computer’s mouse. Anyone with a computer and a microphone can create an audio podcast, and the release of Apple’s video iPod in 2005 set the stage for video podcasting.
