Blu-ray,  optical disc data-storage format that is most often used for playback of high-definition (HD) video.
Blu-ray represents the third generation of compact disc (CD) technology, after audio CDs and digital video discs (DVDs). In all three technologies, data is stored on a plastic disc 120 millimetres (4.75 inches) in diameter. The data is encoded in pits that form a spiral track on the disc. A blue-violet laser, emitting at a wavelength of 405 nanometres, reads the pits. Because the laser used in a Blu-ray is of a shorter wavelength than that used in DVDs (635 or 650 nanometres), the spiral track can be more tightly wound. Thus, the Blu-ray disc can hold more information than the DVD. A single-layer Blu-ray holds 25 gigabytes (GB), and a dual-layer Blu-ray (one with two layers of information, one on top of the other) holds 50 GB. By contrast, a single-layer DVD holds only 4.7 GB.
As television systems switched over to digital signaling, high-definition television (HDTV) became available, featuring much greater picture resolution (1,920 by 1,080 pixels) than traditional television (usually 720 by 480 pixels). Motion pictures were especially suited for display on wide flat-panel HDTV screens, and in 2002 two competing but incompatible technologies were presented for storing HD video on a CD-sized disc: HD DVD, proposed by Toshiba and the NEC Corporation, and Blu-ray, proposed by a group led by Sony. Both technologies employed a laser emitting light in the blue-violet end of the visible spectrum.
With two incompatible technologies on the market, consumers were reluctant to purchase next-generation players for fear that one standard would lose out to the other and render their purchase worthless. In addition, movie studios faced a potentially expensive situation if they produced movies for the losing format, and computer and software firms were concerned about the type of disc drive that would be needed for their products. Those uncertainties created pressure to settle on a format, and in 2008 the entertainment industry accepted Blu-ray as its preferred standard. Toshiba’s group stopped development of HD DVD. By that time, doubts were being raised about how long even the new Blu-ray discs would be viable, as a growing number of movies were available for HD streaming online, and cloud computing services offered consumers huge data banks for storing all sorts of digitized data.
The doubters were correct. Blu-ray disc sales in the United States peaked in 2013, and sales of Blu-ray discs and DVDs combined fell by almost half from 2014 to 2018, with the decline attributed to competition from streaming services like Netflix and Amazon Prime Video. Even the introduction of Ultra HD 4K Blu-rays in 2016, for displays with a resolution of 3,840 by 2,160 pixels, failed to slow the decline. In 2019 Samsung announced that it would not introduce any more new Blu-ray player models in the U.S.
