Broadcasting,  electronic transmission of radio and television signals that are intended for general public reception, as distinguished from private signals that are directed to specific receivers. In its most common form, broadcasting may be described as the systematic dissemination of entertainment, information, educational programming, and other features for simultaneous reception by a scattered audience with appropriate receiving apparatus. Broadcasts may be audible only, as in radio, or visual or a combination of both, as in television. Sound broadcasting in this sense may be said to have started about 1920, while television broadcasting began in the 1930s. With the advent of cable television in the early 1950s and the use of satellites for broadcasting beginning in the early 1960s, television reception improved and the number of programs receivable increased dramatically.
The scope of this article encompasses the nontechnical aspects of broadcasting. It traces the development of radio and television broadcasting, surveys the state of broadcasting in various countries throughout the world, and discusses the relationship of the broadcaster to government and the public. Discussion of broadcasting as a medium of art includes a description of borrowings from other media. For more detailed information about electronic components and techniques used in radio and television communications, see electronics; telecommunication system; radio; and television.
The first known radio program in the United States was broadcast by Reginald Aubrey Fessenden from his experimental station at Brant Rock, Mass., on Christmas Eve, 1906. Two musical selections, the reading of a poem, and a short talk apparently constituted the program, which was heard by ship wireless operators within a radius of several hundred miles. Following the relaxation of military restrictions on radio at the conclusion of World War I, many experimental radio stations—often equipped with homemade apparatus—were operated by amateurs. The range of such broadcasts was only a few miles, and the receiving apparatus necessary to hear them was mostly in the hands of other experimenters, who, like the broadcasters, pursued radio as a hobby. Among the leading personalities of this early period was David Sarnoff, later of the Radio Corporation of America and the National Broadcasting Company, who first, in 1916, envisaged the possibility of a radio receiver in every home.
From this beginning the evolution of broadcasting was rapid; many persons who wanted to hear music from the air soon created a demand for receivers that were suitable for operation by the layman. The increase in the number of listeners in turn justified the establishment of stations especially for the purpose of broadcasting entertainment and information programs. The first commercial radio station was KDKA in Pittsburgh, which went on the air in the evening of Nov. 2, 1920, with a broadcast of the returns of the Harding-Cox presidential election. The success of the KDKA broadcast and of the musical programs that were initiated thereafter motivated others to install similar stations; a total of eight were operating in the United States by the end of 1921.
The popularity of these early stations created two possible sources of financial support to offset the operating costs of broadcasting. First, there were possibilities for profit in the manufacture and sale of radio receiving equipment, and, second, the fame attained by the organizations operating the first broadcasting stations called attention to the value of broadcasting as an advertising medium. Advertising eventually became the principal means of support for broadcasting in the United States.
Between 1921 and 1922 the sale of radio receiving sets and of component parts for use in home construction of such sets began a boom that was followed immediately by a large increase in the number of transmitting stations. By Nov. 1, 1922, 564 broadcasting stations had been licensed.
The use of long-distance wire telephone lines in 1922 to connect a radio station in New York City with one in Chicago to broadcast a description of a gridiron football game introduced a new idea into radiobroadcasting. In 1926 the National Broadcasting Company purchased WEAF in New York and, using it as the originating station, established a permanent network of radio stations to which it distributed daily programs. Some of these programs were sponsored by advertisers and furnished revenue to both the network and its associated stations, while others were supported by the network, with a portion of the time being set aside for public-service features.
Although the growth of radiobroadcasting in the United States was spectacularly swift, in the early years it also proved to be chaotic, unplanned, and unregulated. Furthermore, business arrangements that were being made between the leading manufacturers of radio equipment and the leading broadcasters seemed to threaten monopoly. Congress responded by passing the Radio Act of 1927, which, although directed primarily against monopoly, also set up the agency that is now called the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to allocate wavelengths to broadcasters. The government’s attack on monopoly resulted eventually in four radio networks—the National Broadcasting Company, the Columbia Broadcasting System, the Mutual Broadcasting System, and the American Broadcasting Company—while the FCC permitted orderly growth and ensured the survival of educational radio stations.
Radiobroadcasting in Great Britain eventually developed in quite a different way from that in the United States. The first initiatives after World War I were taken by commercial firms that regarded broadcasting primarily as a means of point-to-point communication. The first successful broadcasting of the human voice, from a transmitter in Ireland across the Atlantic in 1919, led to the erection of a six-kilowatt transmitter at Chelmsford, Essex. From this spot two daily half-hour programs of speech and music, including a well-received broadcast by the opera singer Dame Nellie Melba, were broadcast for about a year between 1919 and 1920. Opposition from the armed services, fear of interference with essential communications, and a desire to avoid the “commercialization” of radio led, however, to a ban on the Chelmsford broadcasts, which the Post Office claimed the right to impose. Experimental broadcasts, the Post Office ruled, had to be individually authorized. Nevertheless, about 4,000 receiving-set licenses and 150 amateur transmitting licenses issued by the Post Office by March 1921 were evidence of growing interest. When these amateurs, grouped into 63 societies with a total of about 3,000 members, petitioned for regular broadcasts, their request was granted in a limited form: the Marconi Company was authorized to broadcast about 15 minutes weekly.
The first of these authorized broadcasts, from a hut at Writtle, close to Chelmsford, took place on Feb. 14, 1922; the station call signal was 2MT. Shortly thereafter an experimental station was authorized at Marconi House in London, and its first program went on the air May 11, 1922. Other stations were soon to follow.
