Cable television,  generally, any system that distributes television signals by means of coaxial or fibre-optic cables. The term also includes systems that distribute signals solely via satellite. Cable-television systems originated in the United States in the late 1940s and were designed to improve reception of commercial network broadcasts in remote and hilly areas. During the 1960s they were introduced in many large metropolitan areas where local television reception is degraded by the reflection of signals from tall buildings. Commonly known as community antenna television (CATV), these cable systems use a “community antenna” to receive broadcast signals (often from communications satellites), which they then retransmit via cables to homes and establishments in the local area subscribing to the service. Subscribers pay a specified monthly service charge in addition to an initial installation fee.
Since the mid-1970s there has been a proliferation of cable-television systems offering special services. Besides bringing high-quality signals to subscribers, the systems provide additional television channels. Some of these systems can deliver 50 or more channels because they distribute signals occurring within the normal television broadcast band as well as nonbroadcast frequencies. A frequency-conversion device is connected to the television set of the subscriber to accommodate these signals of nonbroadcast frequencies. The increased number of channels allows expanded programming, including broadcasts from distant cities, continuous weather and stock-market reports, programs produced by community groups and educational institutions, and access to pay-TV program materials such as recent motion pictures and sports events not telecast by other broadcasters.
Another feature offered by more and more cable operators is two-way channel capability, which enables subscribers to communicate with programming facilities or information centres within the system. Using the cable connection, home viewers can, for example, participate in public-opinion polls or call up various kinds of written and graphic materials (e.g., citations from reference books, concert schedules, and recipes). The latter feature is offered by systems called videotex, which were first introduced in Great Britain and West Germany. Two-way cable-television systems increasingly allow subscribers with home computers to link up with computer networks, giving the subscribers access to data banks and permitting them to interact with other online users. Cable operators have also experimented with video compression, digital transmission, and high-definition television (HDTV).
In the United States, government deregulation of the cable-television industry in the 1990s allowed cable companies to experiment with telephony and allowed telephone companies to distribute cable-television programming.
