Charlotta Spears Bass, née Charlotta Spears,  (born October 1880, Sumter, S.C., U.S.—died April 12, 1969, Los Angeles, Calif.), American editor and civil rights activist whose long career was devoted to aggressively publicizing and combating racial inequality.
Charlotta Spears moved to Providence, Rhode Island, in 1900 and worked at the Providence Watchman, a local newspaper. In 1910 she went to Los Angeles, where she began working part-time at the Eagle, a newspaper published for a predominantly black readership. By May 1912 she had been given control of the newspaper, which she renamed the California Eagle, and she began to take it in a new direction by focusing on social and political issues that concerned all “patriotically inclined” Americans, both blacks and whites.
In 1912 Joseph Bass, cofounder of the Topeka Plaindealer, arrived from Kansas to work as editor of the California Eagle. He and Spears soon married. With Charlotta working as managing editor, the couple used the newspaper to vehemently attack racial discrimination and segregation. The paper passionately denounced D.W. Griffith’s film The Birth of a Nation and opposed the harsh punishment of black soldiers involved in a 1917 race riot in Houston, Texas. In 1925 the Ku Klux Klan unsuccessfully sued the newspaper for libel. In 1931 the Basses denounced the results of the Scottsboro case (the swift trial and death sentences given to nine black teenagers convicted of rape in Scottsboro, Alabama). Several years later they lent their support to A. Philip Randolph as he fought against discrimination in hiring for railroad jobs.
Charlotta Bass’s efforts to end racism were not limited to her work on the California Eagle. In 1919 she traveled to Paris for the Pan-African Congress organized by W.E.B. Du Bois, and in the 1920s she served as copresident of the Los Angeles chapter of Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Association. In 1930 she was a founder of the Industrial Business Council, which encouraged the development of black-owned businesses and sought nondiscriminatory employment practices. She also sought an end to housing covenants that denied blacks the opportunity to live in all-white neighbourhoods through her organization, the Home Protective Association.
Bass managed the California Eagle on her own following her husband’s death in 1934. Her political activity increased, and her longtime association with the Republican Party led to her selection as the western regional director for Wendell Willkie’s presidential bid in 1940. In 1943 Bass served as the first black member of a grand jury for the county court in Los Angeles, and in 1945 she was chosen by city representatives as the people’s candidate in an unsuccessful bid for a seat on the Los Angeles city council. She left the Republican Party in the late 1940s to help found the Progressive Party, which she viewed as “the only party in which there is any hope for civil rights,” and campaigned heavily for Henry Wallace in his 1948 bid for the presidency.
After an unsuccessful 1950 campaign for Congress, in 1952 Bass became the first black woman candidate for the office of U.S. vice president, representing the Progressive Party. Her campaign called for peace with the Soviet Union, an end to the Korean War, and greater emphasis on civil rights and women’s rights. Despite losing the election by a wide margin—Bass and her running mate received only 0.2 percent of the vote—she made an impact with her campaign, running under the slogan “Win or lose, we win by raising the issues.”
In 1960 Bass published Forty Years: Memoirs from the Pages of a Newspaper, which provides both a history of the California Eagle and personal reflections on her own career.
