Compact disc (CD),  a molded plastic disc containing digital data that is scanned by a laser beam for the reproduction of recorded sound and other information. Since its commercial introduction in 1982, the audio CD has almost completely replaced the phonograph disc (or record) for high-fidelity recorded music. Coinvented by Philips Electronics NV and Sony Corporation in 1980, the compact disc has expanded beyond audio recordings into other storage-and-distribution uses, notably for computers (CD-ROM) and entertainment systems (DVD).
A standard CD is 120 mm (4.75 inch) in diameter and 1.2 mm (0.05 inch) thick. It is composed of a clear polycarbonate plastic substrate, a reflective metallic layer, and a clear protective coating of acrylic plastic. The reflective metallic layer is where audio data is read in the form of minuscule (as short as 0.83 micrometre) depressions (pits) and contrasting flat regions (lands) that are arranged in a spiral track (groove) winding from the disc’s inner hole to its outer edge. The centres of adjacent grooves are spaced 1.6 micrometres (0.0016 mm) apart. A smaller CD single (80 mm [3.1 inches] in diameter) is also used for audio distribution.
The production of a CD begins with a digital tape master supplied by the recording studio (see also digital sound recording). The information on this tape is used to modulate a beam of light from a blue laser as it traces a spiral path on the surface of a spinning glass disc. The glass is coated with a photosensitive material that dissolves where it is exposed to laser pulses, forming the pits. This “glass master” is coated with a thin layer of nickel to form a “metal master,” and the metal master in turn is used to produce a number of “mothers.” Each mother serves as the master for several metal “stampers,” onto which molten polycarbonate is injected for molding into clear plastic discs. Each disc is exposed to a stream of vaporized or atomized aluminum, which forms the reflective layer, and is then coated with the protective acrylic layer. The entire production process is carried out under conditions of laboratory-like cleanliness and control.
By the mid-1990s, however, developments in computer technology advanced such that CD recording and replication could avoid the need for a digital tape master. High-quality sound recordings could be sent from the microphone or other device directly to computer programs whose digital files could be stored on the computer’s hard disk (or magnetic storage media) before being transferred to a CD.
When a disc is inserted into a CD player, the disc’s track is scanned by a low-intensity infrared laser with a 1-micrometre-diameter focal point. In order for the laser to maintain a constant scanning rate, the disc’s rotation rate decreases from 500 to 200 revolutions per minute as the light beam spirals out from the disc’s centre. (Some CD players use two additional lasers to help control the disc’s rotation and the scanning laser’s focus.) When the light beam strikes a land, it is reflected back to a photodiode, and an electrical pulse is generated. When the light beam strikes a pit, however, no electrical pulse is generated. This is because light reflected from the pit, which has a depth of approximately one-quarter the wavelength of the scanning infrared beam (0.78 micrometre), is out of phase with light reflected from the adjacent separation track, and thus the reflected light is reduced below the level necessary to activate the photodiode. Each “dark” pit on the track is interpreted (based on its length) as a sequence of 0s in binary logic, and each “bright” land is interpreted (again based on its length) as a sequence of 1s. A device known as a digital-to-analog convertor is necessary to translate—and correct for data misread because of minor surface blemishes on the disc or imperfect laser alignment—this binary information into audio signals for playback (see also digital-to-analog conversion). The standard CD will hold more than one hour of music.
