Curzio Malaparte, pseudonym of Kurt Erich Suckert,  (born June 9, 1898, Prato, Italy—died  July 19, 1957, Rome), journalist, dramatist, short-story writer, and novelist, one of the most powerful, brilliant, and controversial of the Italian writers of the fascist and post-World War II periods.
Malaparte was a volunteer in World War I and then became active in journalism. In 1924 he founded the Roman periodical La Conquista dello stato, and in 1926 he joined Massimo Bontempelli in founding 900, an influential, cosmopolitan literary quarterly whose foreign editorial board included James Joyce and Ilya Ehrenburg; he later became coeditor of Fiera Letteraria, then editor of La Stampa in Turin.
An early convert to fascism, he became, next to Gabriele D’Annunzio, the most powerful writer associated with the party. His political views were voiced in his own literary magazine, Prospettive (1937), and in many articles written for fascist periodicals. He also wrote a particularly controversial and influential discussion of violence and means of revolution published in French, Technique du coup d’état (1931; Coup d’État, the Technique of Revolution; Italian trans., Tecnica del colpo di stato). His early fiction—Avventure di un capitano di Sventura (1927); Sodoma e Gomorra (1931); and Sangue (1937)—also showed a fascist slant.
During the 1940s Malaparte repudiated fascism and was expelled from the party. During World War II he was involved with the Allied armies, both as a correspondent and, later, as a liaison officer during the Allied occupation of Naples. His reports from the Russian front were published as Il Volga nasce in Europa (1943; The Volga Rises in Europe). He then acquired an international reputation with two passionately written, brilliantly realistic war novels: Kaputt (1944); and La pelle (1949; The Skin), a terrifying, surrealistically presented series of episodes showing the suffering and degradation that the war had brought to the people of Naples.
While continuing to write articles and fiction, Malaparte wrote three realistic dramas, based on the lives of Marcel Proust (Du côté de chez Proust, performed 1948) and Karl Marx (Das Kapital, performed 1949) and on life in Vienna during the Soviet occupation (Anche le donne hanno perso la guerra, performed 1954; “The Women Lost the War Too”). He also wrote the screenplay for a film, Il Cristo proibito (1951) and, in addition to other works, published a volume titled Racconti italiani (1957; “Italian Tales”). His complete works were published 1957–71.
