Dom Moraes, in full Dominic Francis Moraes,  (born July 19, 1938, Bombay, British India [now Mumbai, Maharashtra, India]—died June 2, 2004, Mumbai), editor, essayist, biographer, and inveterate traveler who was one of the best-known English-language poets of India. His first book of poetry, A Beginning (1957), was published when he was only 19 years old. He produced nearly 30 books in his lifetime.
Moraes’s father was noted Goan journalist and writer Frank Moraes, who became the first Indian editor of The Times of India after independence. Moraes grew up in a minority Christian culture. In his youth he witnessed his mother’s increasingly erratic and violent behaviour, and she was ultimately institutionalized. Moraes traveled with his father throughout Southeast Asia, Ceylon (now Sri Lanka), Australia, and New Zealand. His first poems were written at age 12; his first book, Green Is the Grass, written about the sport of cricket, was published when he was 13 years old. At 16 he attended the University of Oxford (as his father had), and in London he fell in with a group of poets and painters that included W.H. Auden, Stephen Spender, and Francis Bacon.
When A Beginning won him the Hawthornden Prize for the “best work of the imagination” in 1958, Moraes was on his way. He was established as a serious poet with his third volume, John Nobody (1965), and followed that with Beldam Etcetera (1966).
After producing those volumes, Moraes took a long hiatus from the writing of poetry. At 20 he had conducted one of the first interviews of the 14th Dalai Lama, the Tibetan spiritual leader who had fled to India in 1959, and his peripatetic life had continued. In the following years he edited magazines in London, Hong Kong, and New York, including, in 1971, Asia Magazine. In addition, he wrote and codirected more than 20 television documentaries for the BBC and ITV and served as a war correspondent in Algeria, Israel, and Vietnam. He also worked for some time with the United Nations. Moraes returned to poetry with the publication of Collected Poems (1987). His autobiographies include My Son’s Father (1968) and Never at Home (1992).
