Electrocardiography,  method of graphic tracing (electrocardiogram; ECG or EKG) of the electric current generated by the heart muscle during a heartbeat. The tracing is recorded with an electrocardiograph (actually a relatively simple string galvanometer), and it provides information on the condition and performance of the heart. Dutch physiologist Willem Einthoven developed the first electrocardiogram in 1903, and for many years the tracing was called an EKG after the German Elektrokardiogramm. During the late 1960s, computerized electrocardiography came into use in many of the larger hospitals.
Electrocardiograms are made by applying electrodes to various parts of the body. Electrodes that record the electrical activity of the heart are placed at 10 different locations: one on each of the four limbs and six at different locations on the anterior surface of the chest. After the electrodes are in place, a millivolt from a source outside the body is introduced so that the instrument can be calibrated. Standardizing electrocardiograms makes it possible to compare them as taken from person to person and from time to time from the same person.
The normal electrocardiogram shows typical upward and downward deflections that reflect the alternate contraction of the atria (the two upper chambers) and of the ventricles (the two lower chambers) of the heart. The first upward deflection, P, is due to atrial contraction and is known as the atrial complex. The other deflections—Q, R, S, and T—are all due to the action of the ventricles and are known as the ventricular complexes. Any deviation from the norm in a particular electrocardiogram is indicative of a possible heart disorder.
The electrocardiogram is of greatest use in diagnosing cardiac arrhythmias, acute and prior myocardial infarctions (heart attacks), pericardial disease, and cardiac enlargement (atrial and ventricular). The presence of hypertension (high blood pressure), thyroid disease, and certain types of malnutrition also may be revealed by an electrocardiogram. In addition, electrocardiography can be used to determine whether a slow heart rate is physiological or is caused by heart block.
The exercise electrocardiogram, or ECG stress test, is used to assess the ability of the coronary arteries to deliver oxygen while the heart is undergoing strain imposed by a standardized exercise protocol. If the blood supply to the heart is jeopardized during exercise, the inadequate oxygenation of the heart muscle is recorded by typical changes in the electrocardiogram that indicate coronary heart disease (narrowing of the coronary arteries). However, a normal electrocardiogram does not exclude significant coronary heart disease and is not predictive of disease course.
