Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF),  nonprofit organization established to raise funds for lobbying, litigation, and education about civil liberties on the Internet. The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) was founded in 1990 by American author and activist John Perry Barlow and American entrepreneur Mitch Kapor, with additional support from activist John Gilmore and Steve Wozniak, a co-founder of Apple Computer.
The formation of the EFF was prompted primarily by the reaction of Barlow and Kapor to efforts by the U.S. Secret Service and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) to crack down on hackers in early 1990. Both Kapor and Barlow were questioned by law-enforcement authorities about suspected connections to hackers. Both reached the conclusion that law-enforcement agencies were dangerously uninformed about the new forms of communication occurring through computers and the Internet. They felt that there was a need to increase civil-liberties protections for online communication.
Barlow, previously a Wyoming cattle rancher and lyricist for the American rock band Grateful Dead, and Kapor, the founder of Lotus Development Corporation, were participants on The Whole Earth ’Lectronic Link (The WELL) bulletin board service (BBS). Barlow and Kapor had met through their participation on The WELL, and, when Barlow posted an account of his encounter with the FBI, the two got together, exchanged information about their experiences, and decided to form the EFF.
The EFF’s first important battle related directly to the investigations that had sparked its formation. In its attempt to track down various hackers thought to be in possession of an illegally obtained telephone-company document, the Secret Service raided a small role-playing-game company called Steve Jackson Games, confiscating computer equipment and other materials, without which the business was unable to function. Unable to find any copies of the document in question, the Secret Service eventually returned the equipment and did not press charges. However, they had deleted unrelated personal e-mail contained on BBS files. The EFF brought suit against the government on behalf of Steve Jackson Games, charging that the search warrant used during the raid had been insufficient and that the privacy rights of the BBS users had been violated by the erasure of their personal e-mail. The suit was successful on most points and received a significant amount of press coverage. The EFF’s involvement with this and other hacker-related cases provided the organization with considerable early publicity. It quickly gained respect among many computer-related and Internet subcultures and became a force to contend with in legal and political battles relating to computer-mediated communication and commerce.
Since that initial case, the EFF has been involved in litigation relating to a wide range of online and computer-related civil-liberty issues. In general, it has sought to extend free speech and privacy rights to online communications, including such forms of “speech” as encryption and other computer programs. It was particularly active in opposing the Communications Decency Act (CDA) of 1996, instigating the Blue Ribbon Campaign, in which hundreds of Web sites displayed a blue ribbon graphic in protest of the passing of the CDA.
In 1991, the EFF moved its offices from Cambridge, Massachusetts, to Washington, D.C., in order to engage more directly in attempts to influence governmental policy and legislation regarding computers and the Internet. The somewhat controversial move was seen by some of the EFF’s online supporters as selling out to political interests in the government. While in Washington, in affiliation with the Digital Privacy and Security Working Group, a coalition of more than 50 communications and computer companies and civil-liberty groups, the EFF successfully lobbied in 1992–93 to stop FBI digital telephony proposals that would have greatly increased the scope of the FBI’s powers to perform wiretaps on digital communications. When a similar act was proposed in 1994, the EFF became involved in drafting a weaker alternative that eventually passed. However, as it considered even the weakened version to be an unnecessary intrusion on privacy, the EFF did not fully support the legislation it had helped draft.
The EFF’s experiment in Washington-insider politics highlighted some of the tensions within the organization. Some of those tensions stemmed from the strong personalities of many members of both the board of directors and the staff. The organization also had to clarify the relationship between its mission and its funding structure. Most of the EFF’s ideological support came from a wide-ranging and strongly libertarian online grassroots community, whereas much of its funding during its Washington sojourn came from corporate sources (including, somewhat ironically, telephone companies). Those two sources of support did not always share common objectives and viewpoints, and the EFF found it difficult to satisfy both constituencies.
Because of internal tensions, the EFF underwent a variety of reorganizations. Disagreements over the experiences in Washington caused a major shake-up in 1994–95, during which then-executive-director Jerry Berman was fired and co-founder Mitch Kapor left the organization. The EFF then moved its offices to San Francisco, greatly in debt and with a significantly reduced staff. Another reorganization occurred in early 2000, sparked by internal disagreements over whether to take on a case relating to corporate copyright protection.
In 2000, Shari Steele, who had served as the EFF’s legal director, took the post of executive director. She oversaw the organization’s move to larger offices in San Francisco. During her tenure, the EFF again opened an office in Washington, D.C. In 2015 Steele stepped down from her post and was replaced by American civil-liberties attorney Cindy Cohn. Under Steele’s and subsequently Cohn’s leadership, the EFF continued to fight against legislation with negative implications for online civil liberties. It also became increasingly focused on court cases and educational campaigns.
