Flexography,   form of rotary printing in which ink is applied to various surfaces by means of flexible rubber (or other elastomeric) printing plates. The inks used in flexography dry quickly by evaporation and are safe for use on wrappers that come directly in contact with foods.
In flexography, the desired imagery or lettering is engraved in the form of tiny indentations, or cells, onto a flexible rubber plate by means of plastic-molding techniques. Liquid ink is flooded onto a rotating ink-metering roller while a blade inclined at a reverse angle to the direction of rotation shaves any surplus ink from the ink-metering roller. The remaining ink is rolled onto the rubber printing plate, which is affixed to a rotary letterpress cylinder, and the plate’s tiny indentations receive and hold the ink. The inked plate then transfers the image or type to paper (or some other material) that is held on an impression cylinder.
Flexography has been widely used as a quick and economical way of applying simple designs and areas of colour to a wide variety of packaging materials, such as paper and plastic containers (including waxed-paper ones), corrugated-cardboard boxes, tape, envelopes, and metal foil. The inks used can be overlaid to achieve brilliant colours and special effects. Among the fluid inks used in flexography are aniline inks (aniline dyes dissolved in alcohol or some other volatile solvent), polyamide inks, acrylic inks, and water-based inks. These are superior to oil-based printing inks because they adhere to the surface of the material, while oil-based inks must be absorbed into the material.
In the late 20th century flexography began to find new and significant applications as an alternative process used in newspaper printing presses. This was because of the simplicity and ease of the flexographic ink-distribution system, which only requires a single roller to determine the thickness of the ink applied, in contrast to the 10 or so rollers needed in conventional newspaper presses using oil-based inks. New water-based flexographic inks promised further advantages in newspaper printing, since such inks do not transfer to the hands of newspaper readers (a familiar problem with newspapers) and do not present the toxic-waste disposal problems associated with oil-based inks.
