Gmail,  free e-mail service offered by the American search engine company Google Inc. Google began offering Web-based e-mail accounts to select beta testers in 2004.
Gmail was opened to the general public in 2007 and, when first launched, offered an unprecedented one gigabyte (one billion bytes) of free e-mail storage space, though users were also presented with advertisements based on keywords Google found in their messages. Google has regularly expanded the amount of free storage space given to users, which was in excess of seven gigabytes by 2008, and allows users to rent additional space. In 2007 Google acquired Postini, an e-mail security firm, for $625 million in order to improve Gmail’s security, especially in Google’s efforts to sign up businesses.
Since its founding, one of Gmail’s most appealing features has been that it is Web-based, so users can access their e-mail from a computer, a smartphone, or any other Internet-enabled device. Also, Gmail gives users an e-mail address that is independent of any particular Internet service provider (ISP), which makes it easier to maintain a permanent address. Other features include conversation view, in which replies to the same message are displayed in a single group, and integrated text and video chat. In February 2010 Google incorporated a social networking application, called Buzz, into Gmail. Buzz allowed users to share updates and photos with contacts in their Gmail networks in a manner similar to Facebook or Twitter, but it was not restricted by the 140-character limit that defined Twitter. The service proved relatively unpopular, however, and was discontinued in late 2011.
In January 2010 Google announced that it had detected a series of sophisticated hacking attacks, originating in China, that were directed at the Gmail accounts of Chinese human rights activists and foreign journalists working in China. In some cases the accounts had been reconfigured to forward all incoming and outgoing e-mail to unfamiliar addresses. Google’s immediate response was to change Gmail’s protocol from the Web standard HTTP to the encrypted HTTPS, a move that increased security at the expense of speed.
