Harriet Farley,  (born Feb. 18, 1813/1817, Claremont, N.H., U.S.—died Nov. 12, 1907, New York, N.Y.), American writer and editor, remembered largely for her stewardship of the Lowell Offering, a literary magazine published by women at the textile mills in Lowell, Massachusetts.
Farley grew up from 1819 in Atkinson, New Hampshire, where she was educated in the local academy headed by her father. In 1837 she made her way to Lowell and obtained a position in a textile mill. She eagerly threw herself into the lectures and other activities that promoted culture among the female workers of the Lowell mills, and in December 1840 she attracted some attention when her reply to Orestes Brownson’s criticisms of the working conditions in the mills was published by the Lowell Offering. The Lowell Offering, a magazine written by and for the “mill girls,” changed ownership in October 1842, and Farley was invited to become editor. Harriot Curtis, another mill worker, became her coeditor in 1843.
Under Farley’s direction the Offering was a literary magazine of the most conventional sort, publishing moral and inspirational pieces that were meant to demonstrate the intelligence and refinement of the working girls and women of Lowell. The magazine attracted attention as far away as Great Britain, where an anthology of Offering pieces was published in 1844. However, the respectability of the magazine foundered in the rising tide of labour unrest of the mid-1840s, and by explicitly refusing to discuss the issues of hours, wages, and working conditions, the Offering lost its appeal to its own audience. Criticism of the magazine, spearheaded by Sarah Bagley, led to its demise in December 1845.
In 1847 Farley published Shells from the Strand of the Sea of Genius, a collection of homilies, many of which had been published originally in the Offering. In September of that year she revived the magazine as the New England Offering, but after less than three years it went under again. Farley then moved to New York City, where she contributed to Godey’s Lady’s Book. She edited a collection of her father’s essays in 1851 and a children’s book two years later. After her marriage in 1854 to John I. Donlevy, she wrote no more, but after his death she published a Christmas book, Fancy’s Frolics (1880).
