Iva Toguri D’Aquino, née Ikuko Toguri, byname Tokyo Rose,  (born July 4, 1916, Los Angeles, Calif., U.S.—died Sept. 26, 2006, Chicago, Ill.), Japanese-American broadcaster from Japan to U.S. troops during World War II, who, after the war, was convicted of treason and served six years in a U.S. prison. She was later pardoned by President Gerald R. Ford.
Iva Toguri grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), in 1941. Her aunt’s illness in July 1941 sent Toguri, a U.S. citizen, to Japan, where she was stranded when Pearl Harbor was bombed by the Japanese and the United States entered World War II. She was considered an enemy alien in Japan. In November 1943 she began radio announcing for “Zero Hour,” an English-language propaganda program beamed at U.S. troops. Toguri, now married to Felipe d’Aquino, was one of 13 women announcers, all native speakers of American English, who were collectively known as Tokyo Rose. When the war ended, Iva Toguri d’Aquino was interviewed by American journalists and was subsequently indicted, charged with treason for giving aid and comfort to the enemy in time of war. When she returned to the United States in 1947, an outcry arose, demanding her trial, which began on July 5, 1949. On September 29 she was found guilty and was sentenced to 10 years in a federal penitentiary and a fine of $10,000. She served six years and was released in 1956, her sentence having been reduced for good behaviour.
Later, mitigating information came to light. In Tokyo, she had refused to become a Japanese citizen. Eventually, she found a job at Radio Tokyo. There she met an Australian and an American who were prisoners of war. These men had been ordered to write English-language broadcast material to demoralize Allied servicemen. Secretly, they were attempting to subvert the entire operation. D’Aquino was recruited to announce for them and made her first broadcast in November 1943. Much later, President Ford became convinced that she had been wrongly accused and convicted, and in January 1977 he pardoned her.
