Jeannette Leonard Gilder,  (born Oct. 3, 1849, Flushing, N.Y., U.S.—died Jan. 17, 1916, New York, N.Y.),  American editor and writer, a prolific and influential figure in popular journalism, particularly in the arts, in the latter half of the 19th century.
Gilder grew up in Flushing, New York, and Bordentown, New Jersey. In 1864 she went to work to help support her large family, left fatherless that year by the American Civil War, with a job in the office of the New Jersey adjutant general. In 1865–66 she attended the Bridgeton Female Seminary in southern New Jersey. In 1868 she joined the staff of the Newark Morning Register, which had recently been established by Richard Watson Gilder, destined to be the most famous of her five talented brothers. She later became an editor of the paper, and for a time she was Newark correspondent for the New York Tribune. In 1875 she moved to New York City and secured a job as literary editor of James Gordon Bennett’s New York Herald. Before long her reviews and criticism of music, drama, and literature made her a central figure in the cultural life of the city, and she numbered many of the leading writers, artists, and actors of the day among her friends. In January 1881 she and another brother, Joseph B. Gilder, established the Critic, a biweekly (later weekly) journal of criticism and review that enjoyed a long life and earned for itself an important place in American cultural affairs. She contributed a regular column, “The Lounger,” and helped edit the Critic, becoming the sole editor in 1901.
For several years up to 1906 Gilder also edited the monthly Reader. During this period she contributed columns to Harper’s Bazaar, the New York Commercial Advertiser, and the London Academy, and under the pen name Brunswick she was a New York correspondent for the Boston Saturday Evening Gazette and later the Boston Evening Transcript; she also corresponded at various times with newspapers in Philadelphia, Chicago, and London. In 1906 the Critic was absorbed by Putnam’s Monthly, of which she was associate editor until it in turn was absorbed by the Atlantic Monthly in 1910. Her gift for editorial work also produced several books, including Essays from “The Critic,” with Joseph Gilder (1882), Representative Poems of Living Poets (1886), Pen Portraits of Literary Women, with Helen Gray Cone (1887), Authors at Home, with Joseph Gilder (1888), Masterpieces of the World’s Best Literature, in eight volumes (1905), and Heart of Youth, young people’s poetry (1911). Her attempts at literary creation met with indifferent success.
Gilder wrote several plays, including Quits, produced in Philadelphia in 1877; Sevenoaks (1878), based on Josiah G. Holland’s novel of that name; and A Wonderful Woman (1878). In 1887 she published a novel, Taken by Siege, about literary life in New York. Her Autobiography of a Tomboy (1900) and The Tomboy at Work (1904) were more successful. For many years she also served as New York agent for a number of authors and publishers. In later years she supplied book columns to McClure’s magazine, Woman’s Home Companion, and the Chicago Tribune.
