Johann Philipp Reis,  (born Jan. 7, 1834, Gelnhausen, Hesse-Kassel [Germany]—died  Jan. 14, 1874, Friedrichsdorf, Ger.), German physicist who constructed a precursor of the electric telephone.
Reis was educated at Frankfurt am Main, became a merchant for a few years, and in 1858 began teaching in Friedrichsdorf. While there he experimented with electricity and worked on the development of hearing aids. This research led to his interest in the electrical transmission of sound, and by 1861 he had designed several transmitters and receivers.
In Reis’s instruments, a contact in an electrical circuit was established between a metal point and a metal strip resting on a membrane in the transmitter. It was Reis’s theory that, as the membrane vibrated, the metal point would bounce up and down, producing intermittent contact and intermittent current synchronous with the vibrations, and that, furthermore, the height of the bounce, the force of its return, and the amplitude of the current pulse would vary with the intensity of the sound. Thus, he expected that something of the quality as well as the intensity of the sound would be conveyed. Reis’s receiver consisted of an iron needle surrounded by a coil and resting on a sounding box. It was designed to operate on the principle of magnetostriction, a phenomenon in which the length of a metal rod varies as the magnetic field through it varies. It had been known since 1837 that an interrupted current would produce corresponding “ticks” in such a device. Reis believed that simple musical tones could be transmitted by the apparatus—which he called a telephone—and in fact such demonstrations with his instruments were common.
In addition, though, there were several reports of successful speech transmission. These reports were subsequently discounted in court cases upholding the patents of Alexander Graham Bell, largely because it was recognized that speech transmission would have been impossible if the instruments had operated as Reis believed they did. Nevertheless, it is a fact that, if the sound entering a Reis transmitter is not too strong, contact between the metal point and the metal strip will not be broken. Instead, the pressure of the former on the latter will fluctuate with the sound, causing fluctuations in the electrical resistance and therefore in the current. Similarly, the receiver will respond to continuously fluctuating as well as to intermittent currents (but not by magnetostriction). The sensitivity, however, is extremely low—so low that it is not unreasonable to question the validity of the limited testimony regarding successful voice transmission in the 1860s.
There is no evidence that Reis himself thought of his devices as more than “philosophical toys,” good for lecture demonstrations to illustrate the nature of sound. He authorized their reproduction, and numerous copies were sold for this purpose.
