Johan Ludvig Heiberg,  (born December 14, 1791, Copenhagen, Denmark—died August 25, 1860, Bonderup), playwright, poet, literary historian, and critic whose romantic idealism in a sense epitomized the Danish Romantic school, which he helped bring to an end when he established a new era of topical, sophisticated, and satirical literature. Heiberg also introduced both Hegelian philosophy and vaudeville, or ballad opera, to Denmark.
Originally Heiberg planned an academic career and taught Danish at the University of Kiel (1822–25), but he turned to writing in earnest about 1825. The son of the political writer Peter Andreas Heiberg and his wife, the novelist Thomasine, Baroness Gyllembourg-Ehrensvärd, Heiberg was a central figure in Danish literature and criticism for many years. During this time he originated Danish vaudeville, a form of popular folk musical, in which critical and satirical verses were set to well-known melodies. Theoretically, he argued in Om Vaudevillen (1826; “About Vaudeville”), vaudeville as a genre was a synthesis of words and music that subsumed in its poetic realism both the lyrical and the epic and thus marked the highest form of comedy-drama. Besides his vaudeville pieces, Heiberg’s most frequently performed plays are Elverhøj (1828; “Elfinhill”) and En sjæl efter døden (1841; A Soul After Death), which was his greatest literary success. He had a lifelong association with the Danish Royal Theatre, where his wife was the leading actress, and from 1849 to 1856 he was the theatre’s controversial general manager.
Over the years Heiberg edited several influential periodicals, most notably Kjøbenhavns flyvende post (“Copenhagen’s Flying Mail”) from 1827 to 1828, again in 1830, and, under the name Interimsblade, from 1834 to 1837. In this journal he carried on many literary feuds but also featured many new talents, including Søren Kierkegaard and Hans Christian Andersen. Even such exponents of modern realism as Georg Brandes and Henrik Ibsen acknowledged debts of inspiration owed to Heiberg.
