John T. Chambers, in full John Thomas Chambers,  (born  August 23, 1949, Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.), American business executive who, as CEO (1995–2015) of Cisco Systems, Inc., elevated the technology company into one of the largest corporations in the world in the early 21st century.
Chambers grew up in Charleston, West Virginia, and attended West Virginia University, from which he received a bachelor’s degree in business (1971) and a law degree (1974). He subsequently earned an M.B.A. in finance and management (1975) from Indiana University at Bloomington. Chambers began his business career at IBM Corp. in 1976, and after six years there he moved to Wang Computers. During his eight-year tenure at Wang, he had to lay off 5,000 employees, and he later said, “I’ll do anything to avoid that again.” In 1991 Chambers took a position at Cisco as senior vice president of worldwide operations.
From the moment he joined Cisco, Chambers made it clear that he did not intend to let the company rest on its laurels as the world’s chief provider of routers, the powerful network computers that sort the information packets that speed data through the Internet. Although the firm continued to improve the speed and capacity of the routers so that they could process one billion bits of information per second, Chambers had loftier goals. He presciently viewed the future as a time when “data, voice, and video will be delivered over a single connection in our homes.” With that in mind, he engineered the acquisition of more than 60 companies, aiming to broaden Cisco’s expertise and range of products. In his first five years as CEO, Cisco experienced a more than 10-fold increase in annual revenues. By 2000 the company was the third largest in the world. Although growth slowed considerably over the next several years, under Chambers’s leadership Cisco remained among the largest companies worldwide. Chambers stepped down as CEO in 2015, but he continued with the company as executive chairman until 2017.
