Larry Ellison, in full Lawrence Joseph Ellison,  (born August 17, 1944, New York City, New York, U.S.), American businessman and entrepreneur who was cofounder and chief executive officer (1977–2014) of the software company Oracle Corporation.
His mother, Florence Spellman, was a 19-year-old single parent. After he had a bout of pneumonia at the age of nine months, she sent him to Chicago to live with her aunt and uncle, Lillian and Louis Ellison, who adopted the child. He attended the University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign from 1962 but dropped out in 1964 shortly after Lillian’s death; he had been very close to his adoptive mother but had a much more difficult relationship with Louis, who often told him that he would never amount to anything. Larry then briefly attended the University of Chicago in 1966.
He went to California and spent the next several years as a computer programmer for various companies. Beginning in 1973, he worked at the electronics company Ampex, where he met fellow programmer Ed Oates and was supervised by Bob Miner. Ellison left Ampex in 1976 and later joined Precision Instruments (later Omex), where he was vice president of research and development.
In 1977 Ellison joined with Miner and Oates to form Software Development Laboratories (SDL), which was created to do contract programming for other companies. Ellison wanted SDL to do more. Inspired by a research paper written by British-born computer scientist Edgar F. Codd that outlined a relational database model, Ellison and his colleagues saw commercial potential in the approach, which organized large amounts of data in a way that allowed for efficient storage and quick retrieval. Ellison, Miner, and Oates set to work developing and marketing a program based on Codd’s data-management theory. They received a contract from the Central Intelligence Agency to develop a database, and they began working on a commercial relational database program. In 1979 the company (now called Relational Software, Inc.) released Oracle, the earliest commercial relational database program to use Structured Query Language (SQL), and the versatile database program quickly became popular.
Known for innovation and aggressive marketing, the company, renamed Oracle Systems Corporation (later Oracle Corporation) in 1982 after its flagship product, grew rapidly throughout the 1980s, going public in 1986. In 1987 Oracle became the largest database-management company in the world. However, in 1990 an internal audit conducted in the wake of a shareholder’s lawsuit revealed that Oracle had overstated its earnings, and the company’s stock plunged dramatically. Ellison restructured Oracle’s management, and by the end of 1992 the company had returned to financial health.
In the mid-1990s Ellison saw an opportunity to compete with Microsoft Corporation by developing a cheap alternative to the desktop personal computer (PC) called the Network Computer (NC). The NC was not as fully equipped as a standard PC and relied on computer servers for its data and software in an early version of what later became known as cloud computing. However, both the continued fall in PC prices and delays in the NC’s development meant that PCs running the Microsoft Windows operating system continued to dominate business users’ desktops. Ellison later admitted that the NC was technologically premature.
Ellison had more success with his early embrace of the Internet. Oracle developed products that were compatible with World Wide Web technologies, which helped the company to grow. In the early 2000s Ellison started Oracle on an aggressive strategy of buying rival software companies. Dozens of acquisitions were made, including multibillion-dollar purchases of PeopleSoft (2005), Siebel (2006), BEA (2008), and Sun Microsystems (2010).
Ellison was one of Silicon Valley’s most divisive figures, being both admired for his great success and deplored for his sometimes ruthless business methods and his conspicuous consumption. He was an avid yachtsman who founded a team that won the prestigious America’s Cup in 2010. In 2012 Ellison bought 98 percent of the Hawaiian island of Lanai. That year it was estimated that his personal fortune was worth about $40 billion, making him the sixth richest person in the world and the third richest American (after Microsoft founder Bill Gates and investor Warren Buffett). In September 2014 Ellison stepped down as CEO of Oracle, though he remained involved with the company, serving as executive chairman and chief technology officer.
