Letterpress printing, also called Relief Printing, or Typographic Printing,  in commercial printing, process by which many copies of an image are produced by repeated direct impression of an inked, raised surface against sheets or a continuous roll of paper. Letterpress is the oldest of the traditional printing techniques and remained the only important one from the time of Gutenberg, about 1450, until the development of lithography late in the 18th century and, especially, offset lithography early in the 20th.
Originally the ink-bearing surface for printing a page of text was assembled from individual types by a typesetter or compositor, letter by letter and line by line. The first keyboard-actuated typesetting machines, the Linotype and the Monotype (qq.v.), were introduced in the 1890s. If only a small number of copies is to be made, printing can be done directly from the hand- or machine-set blocks of type assembled in forms, but for long press runs, duplicates—stereotypes or electrotyping (qq.v.)—are made to prevent wear and damage of the expensive types.
Letterpress was originally carried out on platen presses, in which the paper is pressed against the flat, inked form by a flat platen; later, the platen was replaced by a roller in the flat-bed cylinder press; still later, the printing form was wrapped around one cylinder and the paper was passed between this cylinder and a second, creating a rotary press (see printing).
Several procedures have been developed for the production of line drawings or reproduction of photographs in the form of halftone pictures by letterpress. The most widely used method of preparing a printing plate for such matter is photoengraving (q.v.).
Letterpress can produce work of high quality at high speed, but it requires much time to adjust the press for varying thicknesses of type, engravings, and plates. Because of the time needed to make letterpress plates and to prepare the press, many newspapers have changed to offset printing. To combat this trend, letterpress printers have developed printing plates made from a photosensitive plastic sheet that can be mounted on metal. See also flexography.
