Local area network (LAN),  any communication network for connecting computers within a building or small group of buildings. A LAN may be configured as (1) a bus, a main channel to which nodes or secondary channels are connected in a branching structure, (2) a ring, in which each computer is connected to two neighbouring computers to form a closed circuit, or (3) a star, in which each computer is linked directly to a central computer and only indirectly to one another. Each of these has advantages, though the bus configuration has become the most common.
Even if only two computers are connected, they must follow rules, or protocols, to communicate. For example, one might signal “ready to send” and wait for the other to signal “ready to receive.” When many computers share a network, the protocol might include a rule “talk only when it is your turn” or “do not talk when anyone else is talking.” Protocols must also be designed to handle network errors.
The most common LAN design since the mid-1970s has been the bus-connected Ethernet, originally developed at Xerox PARC. Every computer or other device on an Ethernet has a unique 48-bit address. Any computer that wants to transmit listens for a carrier signal that indicates that a transmission is under way. If it detects none, it starts transmitting, sending the address of the recipient at the start of its transmission. Every system on the network receives each message but ignores those not addressed to it. While a system is transmitting, it also listens, and if it detects a simultaneous transmission, it stops, waits for a random time, and retries. The random time delay before retrying reduces the probability that they will collide again. This scheme is known as carrier sense multiple access with collision detection (CSMA/CD). It works very well until a network is moderately heavily loaded, and then it degrades as collisions become more frequent.
The first Ethernet had a capacity of about 2 megabits (millions of bits) per second (mbps), and today 10- and 100-mbps Ethernet is common, with gigabit-per-second (billions of bits per second; gbps) Ethernet also in use. Ethernet transceivers (transmitter-receivers) for personal computers are inexpensive and easily installed.
A standard for wireless Ethernet, known as Wi-Fi, has become common for small office and home networks. Using frequencies from 2.4 to 5 gigahertz (GHz), such networks can transfer data at rates up to 600 mbps. Early in 2002 another Ethernet-like standard was released. Known as HomePlug, the first version could transmit data at about 8 mbps through a building’s existing electrical power infrastructure. A later version could achieve rates of 1 gbps. Another standard, WiMax, bridges the gap between LANs and wide area networks (WANs).
