Mary Louise Booth,  (born April 19, 1831, Millville [now Yaphank], N.Y., U.S.—died March 5, 1889, New York, N.Y.), American journalist, prolific translator from the French, and the first editor of Harper’s Bazar (later Bazaar).
Booth supplemented her regular schooling with voracious reading and study of languages. At age 14 she taught for a year in a school of which her father was principal, in what is now a section of Brooklyn. Booth then moved to Manhattan, where she worked as a vest maker by day and wrote and studied by night. She contributed to various journals and was a space-rate reporter for the New York Times. Gradually translation became her chief labour, beginning with The Marble-Workers’ Manual from the French in 1856. In all she translated some 40 volumes from the French, including works of Blaise Pascal and Victor Cousin. At the same time, she worked assiduously on the large and comprehensive History of the City of New York, the first work of its kind, which was published in 1859 and went through four editions.
In a week of almost ceaseless labour in 1861, Booth produced a translation of Count Agénor de Gasparin’s The Uprising of a Great People: The United States in 1861. It was received with great enthusiasm and proved a vital morale builder for Union sympathizers in the early phase of the Civil War. As the war progressed, she translated Gasparin’s America Before Europe (1862), Edouard Laboulaye’s Paris in America (1863), and Augustin Cochin’s The Results of Slavery and The Results of Emancipation (both 1863), earning high praise from President Abraham Lincoln and others. In 1864–66 she translated three volumes of Henri Martin’s History of France.
Booth was invited in 1867 to become the first editor of Harper & Brothers’ new weekly Harper’s Bazar. Under her direction the magazine was a great success, growing to a circulation of 80,000 in its first decade. Harper’s Bazar printed information on fashion, interior decoration, and domestic arts and crafts, as well as fiction and essays by leading popular authors of the day. Booth remained editor until her death.
