Matt Drudge,  (born Oct. 27, 1966, Takoma Park, Md., U.S.), American journalist who was best known for the Drudge Report, a conservative news and commentary Web site.
Drudge grew up in the Washington, D.C., suburb of Takoma Park, Md. In 1989, a few years after he graduated from high school, he moved to Los Angeles, where he worked in the CBS Television studio gift shop. After his father bought him a computer in 1994, he began publishing an e-mail newsletter featuring hearsay about the entertainment industry that he picked up on the studio lot. In early 1995 he launched the online Drudge Report from his home, and a year later he quit his day job and began covering politics.
Drudge soon made waves in media and political circles. During the 1996 presidential campaign, he was the first to report Sen. Bob Dole’s choice of a vice presidential running mate. In 1997, on the basis of an unpublished article from Newsweek magazine, he ran the story of Kathleen Willey’s sexual harassment accusations against Pres. Bill Clinton. Drudge ran into trouble later that year when he was slapped with a $30 million lawsuit after he ran—and then retracted—a story claiming that White House aide Sidney Blumenthal had a history of spousal abuse.
In early 1998 Drudge’s name became a household word. By January Newsweek had prepared an article on Bill Clinton’s affair with former White House intern Monica Lewinsky, but it was Drudge who first publicized the story, on January 17, after having learned that the magazine was holding its piece back. In an address before the National Press Club, he defended his tactics, characterizing himself as a “citizen journalist” who exposed stories that mainstream reporters were hesitant or refusing to print. Some observers praised Drudge for using the Internet to help change the way news was disseminated. Hits on the Drudge Report Web site, which had numbered around one million per day before the Lewinsky scandal, increased more than 10-fold.
Drudge’s notoriety landed him a weekly program on television’s Fox News Channel as well as his own radio show for ABC. His contract with Fox was terminated in November 1999 after Drudge accused Fox of censorship and refused to go on the air. The network had deemed Drudge’s plan to display a photo of a 21-week-old fetus (actually one that was undergoing surgery) to illustrate his objections to partial-birth abortion as “misrepresentation.” Though ABC originally intended to expand the broadcast of his New York City radio show to major cities nationwide, they also fired him, in late 2000.
Despite these setbacks, his 2001 book, The Drudge Manifesto, became a best seller. That year also marked the debut of The Matt Drudge Show on talk radio station WABC; it ran until 2007. In addition, he continued to update the Drudge Report, which remained a politically powerful, albeit sometimes fallible, news source.
