Michael Moorcock, in full Michael John Moorcock,  (born Dec. 18, 1939, Mitcham, Surrey, Eng.), British science fiction and fantasy author who as editor of the magazine New Worlds led the New Wave movement in science fiction that expanded the boundaries of the genre.
Moorcock’s career started in 1956 when, as a teenager, he began selling fiction to various British pulp magazines. A year later he became editor of Tarzan Adventures, a weekly comic book.
In 1964 Moorcock became editor of New Worlds. As the epicentre of what became known as New Wave science fiction, New Worlds published work that used techniques of the literary avant-garde (American author William S. Burroughs was an oft-cited inspiration) and explored subjects, particularly sexuality, that had previously been taboo in the genre. Among the notable works that appeared under Moorcock’s editorship were the “condensed novels” of J.G. Ballard that later appeared in The Atrocity Exhibition (1970); Thomas Disch’s Camp Concentration (1968), about an American military camp where political prisoners are subjected to experiments to increase their intelligence; and Brian Aldiss’s Barefoot in the Head (1969), about the aftermath of a war in which Europe had been bombarded with psychedelic drugs.
In 1967 Moorcock won the Nebula Award for his novella “Behold the Man,” in which a time traveler from the 20th century takes the place in history of an intellectually disabled Jesus. New Worlds ended publication in 1970 but was revived as a quarterly, also edited by Moorcock, until its final issue in 1976.
Much of Moorcock’s fantasy and science fiction takes place in the “Multiverse,” an infinity of parallel universes in which the Eternal Champion, a lone hero who takes many forms, battles against forces that wish to upset the balance between Law and Chaos. Many of the Multiverse stories appear in interlocking series of novels and short stories that span Moorcock’s career. The Elric of Melniboné stories, which began with “The Dreaming City” (1961) and ended with The White Wolf’s Son (2005), are about the albino emperor of a decadent civilization in Earth’s distant past and were first conceived as a critical commentary on Robert E. Howard’s Conan series. In the Jerry Cornelius novels, beginning with The Final Programme (1968) and concluding with The Condition of Muzak (1977), the main character wanders through the 20th century in guises ranging from secret agent to messiah and is revealed as a London teenager.
Moorcock also wrote mainstream novels such as Mother London (1988), an impressionistic evocation of London from the Blitz to the 1980s, and the Pyat Quartet, a fictional history of the 20th century consisting of Byzantium Endures (1981), The Laughter of Carthage (1984), Jerusalem Commands (1992), and The Vengeance of Rome (2006).
