Mohamed al-Fayed, original name Mohamed Fayed,  (born January 27, 1929, Alexandria, Egypt), Egyptian businessman who acquired a number of prestigious holdings throughout his career, including the Ritz Hotel in Paris and Harrods department store in London. He also was known for his clashes with the British establishment, which escalated after his son Dodi and Diana, princess of Wales, were killed in a car crash in 1997.
Fayed was raised in Alexandria, Egypt. Although he later claimed to have been born in 1933, official documents give his birth year as 1929. In 1954 he wed (later divorced) Samira Khashoggi, the sister of Saudi Arabian businessman and international arms dealer Adnan Khashoggi, who subsequently employed him at his import-export business. Fayed moved to Genoa, Italy, in 1958 and then to London in 1964. Two years later he became an adviser to the sultan of Brunei and founded his own shipping company, Genevaco. In 1972 he launched the marine repair yard International Marine Services in Dubayy.
In 1974 Fayed moved to Britain, where he added the al- to his name and acquired vast holdings, including the Ritz Hotel in Paris (1979). Fayed’s contentious relationship with the British establishment was well documented. In a rancorous takeover in 1985, he beat out mining giant Lonrho to purchase the House of Fraser, the holding company that controlled Harrods department store. Spurred on by Lonrho owner Roland (“Tiny”) Rowland, the government accused Fayed of having misrepresented his ability to finance the takeover. Though Fayed proved his solvency, his wealth continued to be suspect in some quarters. In 1986 he signed a 50-year lease on the Parisian villa of the duke and duchess of Windsor, which he promptly restored. Following the formal reopening of the villa in 1989, he received the Plaque de Paris, the city’s highest honour.
However, Fayed’s relationship with the establishment was further strained by his involvement in the “cash-for-questions” scandal that arose in 1994 after Fayed named ministers who had accepted money from him in return for tabling parliamentary questions on his behalf. After the disclosures were made, two junior ministers resigned and a new committee was established to monitor standards at Westminster. Fayed’s 1995 attempt to buy London News Radio and his 1996 bid to buy The Observer also attracted considerable publicity, as did his relaunch of the venerable humour magazine Punch (1996–2002).
Although frustrated in his efforts to be accepted as a British citizen—his application was first denied in 1995, and subsequent attempts were also unsuccessful—Fayed continued to play an influential and highly controversial role in Great Britain. Fayed had numerous feuds with the British establishment and helped wreck the careers of several Conservative politicians. British royalty also became entangled with Fayed, when on August 31, 1997, Diana, princess of Wales, died in a car crash alongside Fayed’s son Emad (“Dodi”) Mohamed al-Fayed, with whom she was romantically linked; that evening the couple had dined at the Fayed-owned Ritz Hotel in Paris. Two months later Fayed launched a private investigation into the crash and hired a former French police chief to head it. Although a French court later faulted the driver of Diana’s car, Fayed continued to assert that the British royal family had ordered her execution. A 2008 British inquest later cleared the royals and the secret service of any wrongdoing.
In 1997 Fayed acquired a controlling interest in the Fulham Football Club, of which he became chairman, and his name first appeared on The Sunday Times’s annual list of Britain’s wealthiest individuals. In 2006 Fayed launched the luxury convenience store Harrods 102. Four years later it was announced that Harrods had been sold to Qatar Holding. In 2013 Fayed also sold Fulham.
