Myra Bradwell, née Myra Colby,  (born February 12, 1831, Manchester, Vermont, U.S.—died February 14, 1894, Chicago, Illinois), American lawyer and editor who was involved in several landmark cases concerning the legal rights of women.
Myra Colby grew up in Portage, New York, and from 1843 in Schaumburg township, near Elgin, Illinois. She was educated in schools in Kenosha, Wisconsin, and Elgin. After a few years as a schoolteacher she married James B. Bradwell, a law student, in May 1852 and moved with him to Memphis, Tennessee, where they taught and then operated their own private school. In 1854 they returned to Illinois and settled in Chicago, where in 1855 James Bradwell was admitted to the bar. He enjoyed considerable success, rising to the Cook county bench in 1861 and to the state legislature in 1873.
In October 1868 Myra Bradwell launched her own distinguished career by founding the weekly Chicago Legal News, of which she was both editorial and business manager. It soon became the most important legal publication in the western United States. In 1869 she helped organize Chicago’s first women’s suffrage convention, and she and her husband were active in the founding of the American Woman Suffrage Association in Cleveland.
In that same year Bradwell passed the qualifying examination and applied to the Illinois Supreme Court for admission to the state bar; the court’s refusal, on the grounds that she was a woman, was upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court in April 1873. (See Bradwell v. State of Illinois.) Meanwhile, the Illinois legislature opened all professions to women in 1872, and, although she did not renew her application for the bar, she was made an honorary member of the state bar association.
The physical plant of the Chicago Legal News was destroyed in the Chicago fire of 1871, but the paper continued regular publication. As editor, Bradwell supported women’s suffrage, railroad regulation, improved court systems, zoning laws, and other reforms. She drafted and—with the aid of Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Mary Livermore, and others—secured passage of a bill in 1869 that gave married women the right to retain their own wages and protected the rights of widows. Later she supported her husband’s successful efforts to secure legislation making women eligible to serve in school offices and as notaries public and to be equal guardians of their children.
Bradwell was a representative of Illinois at the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia in 1876 and played a major role in winning the World’s Columbian Exposition of 1893 for Chicago. In 1890 the Illinois Supreme Court, on its own initiative, took up her 1869 application again and admitted her to the bar, and in March 1892 she was admitted to practice before the U.S. Supreme Court. Bradwell was followed into the law and the Chicago Legal News by her daughter, Bessie Bradwell Helmer.
