Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,  international organization founded in 1961 to stimulate economic progress and world trade. Current members are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Member countries produce two-thirds of the world’s goods and services.
The convention establishing the OECD was signed on Dec. 14, 1960, by 18 European countries, the United States, and Canada and went into effect on Sept. 30, 1961. It represented an extension of the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation (OEEC), set up in 1948 to coordinate efforts in restoring Europe’s economy under the Marshall Plan.
One of the fundamental purposes of the OECD is to achieve the highest possible economic growth and employment and a rising standard of living in member countries; at the same time it emphasizes maintaining financial stability. The organization has attempted to reach this goal by liberalizing international trade and the movement of capital between countries. A further major goal is the coordination of economic aid to developing countries.
Lacking the power to enforce its decisions, the OECD is essentially a consultative assembly that pursues its program through moral suasion, conferences, seminars, and numerous publications. Although the rule of unanimity inhibits its impact on member countries, the OECD is considered to have a significant influence as an advisory body. By maintaining contact with many governmental and international agencies, such as the International Monetary Fund, the organization has become a clearinghouse for a vast amount of economic data. It publishes hundreds of titles annually on a variety of subjects that include agriculture, scientific research, capital markets, tax structures, energy resources, lumber, air pollution, educational development, and development assistance. Its bimonthly magazine, The OECD Observer, constitutes a useful source of information on economic and related social matters. Annual evaluations of individual member countries’ economies are also issued.
