Paul Baran,  (born April 29, 1926, Grodno, Pol. [now Hrodna, Bela.]—died March 26, 2011, Palo Alto, Calif., U.S.), American electrical engineer, inventor of the distributed network and, contemporaneously with British computer scientist Donald Davies, of data packet switching across distributed networks. These inventions were the foundation for the Internet.
In 1928 Baran’s family moved to Philadelphia. Baran studied electrical engineering at Drexel University in Philadelphia (B.S., 1949) and at the University of California, Los Angeles (M.S., 1959). In 1959 he became a researcher at the RAND Corporation, a think tank that provided analyses of various issues affecting public policy and national defense. At RAND, Baran worked on developing a method for U.S. authorities to communicate in the event that their centralized switching facilities were destroyed by a nuclear attack. Influenced by the principle that the human brain can recover lost functions by bypassing a dysfunctional area, Baran conceived a “distributed” network employing digital technology that would have no centralized switches or dedicated transmission lines and that would continue to operate even if several of its switching nodes had been disabled.
For transporting messages across this system, Baran conceived of the idea of breaking large messages or units of computer data into “message blocks”—separate pieces of data that would be sent independently to the target destination, where they would be rejoined into the original message. By foregoing dedicated communication lines in favour of using any number of available circuits, Baran’s system increased transmission capacity (bandwidth) and created a flexible, reliable, and robust communications network. Baran’s work on message blocks appeared in a series of RAND studies published between 1960 and 1962. At about the same time, Davies in the United Kingdom invented a similar system employing what Davies called “packets,” and packet switching, as this process came to be called, formed the basis for communication across modern networks. With digital computers as network nodes, Baran used a “rapid store and forward” design for packet switching, allowing for essentially real-time data transmission.
In the 1970s Baran became an informal consultant to ARPANET, a high-speed computer network created by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) to connect research institutes and laboratories supported by the Department of Defense across the United States. Baran’s inventions provided the technical foundation for the eventual development at ARPANET of the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP), a communications protocol that allowed a number of different networks designed by different vendors to form a “network of networks.” ARPANET, based on Baran’s packet switching, thus became the predecessor of the Internet.
Baran left RAND in 1968 and afterward was involved with developing discrete multitone technology (a crucial component of digital subscriber lines) and with contributing to developments in spread spectrum transmission (an essential component of wireless communication). Baran also founded Metricom, a wireless Internet service company, in 1986; Com21, a supplier of cable modem systems, in 1992; and GoBackTV, a company specializing in infrastructure equipment for television operators, in 2003.
