Paul Chan,  (born April 12, 1973, Hong Kong), Hong Kong-born American artist and activist whose informed interrogative approach to material, imagery, and concept was central to all his endeavours, which included documentary videos, animations, book publishing, and font design.
Chan moved with his family from Hong Kong in 1981 to Omaha, Nebraska, U.S. After he studied video and film at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago (B.F.A.,1996) and Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York (M.F.A., 2002), Chan gained critical notice with Happiness (Finally) After 35,000 Years of Civilization (After Henry Darger and Charles Fourier) (1999–2003), a 17-minute animated video shown on a continuous loop and projected on a floating scroll-shaped screen. A deep commitment to social justice anchored Chan’s work, motivating him to film in Iraq, despite the U.S. sanctions imposed in 2002, and to help stage performances in 2007 of Samuel Beckett’s Waiting for Godot in New Orleans’s Lower Ninth Ward and Gentilly section, areas that Hurricane Katrina had particularly ravaged in 2005. Also in 2007, Chan debuted The 7 Lights; the spectral silhouettes projected in the installation were conceived as a visual representation of the ambiguous yet pervasive threat plaguing Americans in the post-September 11, 2001, world.
For the 53rd Venice Biennale (2009), Chan created Sade for Sade’s Sake, a 5-hour 45-minute animated projection featuring pulsating abstract imagery inspired by the erotic writings of the French nobleman Marquis de Sade. Seeking to explore varied dimensions of arousal rather than to retell a narrative, Chan pushed viewers to experience their own individual responses. In addition, he created 21 functional font sets—inspired by the “erotic mutterings” of Sade’s characters—that he initially made available for free download over the Internet. Shortly thereafter Chan announced his retirement from making art and opened his own publishing house in Brooklyn. Informed by Chan’s synthetic and experimental perspective, Badlands Unlimited produced font designs, GIFs, and books in print and electronic formats. With more than 40 titles by varied authors, the Badlands catalog ranged from philosophy to pulp fiction and erotica, and the designs reflected Chan’s fluid mobility across media and genre.
In 2015, after a six-year hiatus from mainstream exhibition, Chan mounted a spare but provocative show at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York City. “Paul Chan, Nonprojections for New Lovers,” which was organized in conjunction with the Hugo Boss Prize awarded to Chan in 2014, featured the type of animated video that launched his career, but those “nonprojections” confounded viewers who could see no more than light flickering behind the projectors’ lenses. The exhibition also included prototypes of three books in a series titled New Lovers and Tetra Gummi Phone—a fluttering nylon sculpture inspired by the Greek notion of pneuma (“breath” or “spirit”) and conceived as a three-dimensional moving image.
In addition to his art, Chan continued to produce work with Badlands Unlimited. He released a series of posters (New Proverbs) for the Women’s March in 2017, the March for Our Lives protests for gun reform in 2018, and other demonstrations. The signs were inspired by those used by the Westboro Baptist Church, Topeka, Kansas, which was known for its strident opposition to the gay rights movement, and they included such provocative slogans as “Trump hates women” and “NRA takes lives.”
Chan was one of six artists who curated the Guggenheim Museum’s exhibition “Artistic License: Six Takes on the Guggenheim Collection” (2019–20). His work is in the collections of such institutions as the Museum of Modern Art, New York City; the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; and the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam.
