Piers Morgan, in full Piers Stefan Pughe-Morgan, original name Piers Stefan O’Meara,  (born March 30, 1965, Guildford, Surrey, England), British journalist and media figure who attracted controversy as a tabloid editor for his aggressive tactics in breaking stories and who later achieved international fame as a television personality. He hosted the talk show Piers Morgan Tonight (later Piers Morgan Live) on CNN (2011–14).
Morgan grew up in southern England. He displayed an affinity for journalism at age 15, when he wrote an article for a local newspaper about his village’s cricket team, and he went on to study the subject at Harlow College in Essex. After working as a reporter for papers in south London, he was hired in 1989 as the show-business editor at the tabloid The Sun, at the time the most widely read daily newspaper in the United Kingdom. The position allowed Morgan to socialize with celebrities, and he managed to boost his own public profile by frequently posing for photographs with them.
Morgan’s ambition and savvy were rewarded in 1994 when he was appointed by publishing magnate Rupert Murdoch to be editor in chief of News of the World, the Sunday sister paper of The Sun; aged 28, he was the youngest national newspaper editor in the United Kingdom since 1937. He quickly won attention for his enthusiastic pursuit of scoops and his penchant for pushing against journalistic standards in the process. A year later Morgan took over the editorship of the rival tabloid The Daily Mirror, which he ran in the same provocative vein. A number of exclusive stories, such as an exposé of security at Buckingham Palace and a first look at the memoirs of royal butler Paul Burrell, positioned the newspaper at the forefront of national conversation. At the same time, Morgan was often criticized for his brash style and his seeming disregard for privacy. In 2000 a scandal erupted when it was discovered that Morgan had bought shares in a company shortly before the The Daily Mirror’s financial column suggested that the firm was a good investment. Though he emerged from the situation unscathed, another controversy arose four years later when the paper published photographs purporting to depict British soldiers mistreating prisoners in the Iraq War. After the images were revealed to be a hoax, Morgan was fired.
In 2006 Morgan was chosen by his friend Simon Cowell to appear as a judge on the American reality-TV competition America’s Got Talent. His biting wit and self-confidence in that role, which he filled for six seasons, led to further television opportunities, including a seat (2007–10) on the judging panel of Britain’s Got Talent and his own interview program, Piers Morgan’s Life Stories (2009– ), in which he grilled such public figures as singer Cliff Richard and Prime Minister Gordon Brown. The latter show, along with a monthly interview column for the British version of GQ magazine, attested to Morgan’s skill at drawing out celebrities’ personal lives. In 2011 he replaced Larry King as host of the flagship nightly talk show on American news channel CNN. The show struggled to maintain an audience, however, and was canceled in 2014. The following year Morgan began cohosting ITV’s Good Morning Britain. However, he abruptly left the program in 2021 amid an uproar over his comments about Prince Harry and his wife, Meghan, after the couple gave a candid interview regarding the royal family. He drew particular criticism for questioning Meghan’s claim that she had contemplated suicide. Amid an onslaught of complaints, the Office of Communication, which regulates British media, investigated but determined that he had not violated any broadcasting rules.
Morgan was also the author of several best-selling memoirs.
