Robert Maxwell, in full Ian Robert Maxwell, original name Jan Ludvik Hoch,  (born June 10, 1923, Slatina-Selo, Czechoslovakia—died November 5, 1991, at sea off the Canary Islands), Czechoslovak-born British publisher who built an international communications empire. His financial risks led him into grand fraud and an apparent suicide.
Virtually all of the young Hoch’s Jewish family living in Czechoslovakia and Budapest died in the Nazi Holocaust, but he was able to make his way first to France and then to Britain, where he became a British army officer and participated in the Normandy invasion. (At this time he changed his name to Ian Robert Maxwell.) At war’s end in Germany he got into the business of publishing academic and scientific papers—cheaply bought and profitably sold—and, back in Britain, he managed to acquire control of a publishing company, which he renamed Pergamon Press Ltd. in 1951. By the 1960s the company was a major publisher of trade journals and scientific and technical books and was making several minor acquisitions in the publishing industry. Maxwell also dabbled in politics, becoming a Labourite member of Parliament (1964–70).
After some corporate infighting that focused on his shady dealings, Maxwell temporarily lost control of Pergamon (1969–74) but won control again and rejuvenated the company. In 1981 he gained control of the country’s leading printing concern, the British Printing Corp., revived its sagging fortunes, and resold it to its managers in 1987. In 1984 he purchased the Mirror Group Newspapers, publishers of six newspapers, including the sensationalist tabloid Daily Mirror; and in 1989 he tilted the balance of Maxwell Communications toward the United States, buying Berlitz International language instruction, Macmillan book publishers, and Official Airline Guides. In 1990 he launched the European, a London-based English-language weekly newspaper circulated throughout Europe. In 1991 he acquired the financially troubled New York Daily News and was a willing front-page hero.
The financial empire had become shaky, however. Debts exceeded profits. He sold part of Pergamon and floated shares of the Mirror Group Newspapers. He secretly siphoned some $1.2 billion from two of his flagship public companies and from employee pension funds in an effort to keep his empire from collapsing. On November 5, 1991, while at sea, he mysteriously disappeared from his luxury yacht, and his nude body was later recovered from the Atlantic Ocean. An autopsy was inconclusive, but the unofficial probability was suicide.
Following Maxwell’s death, the European ceased publication, and the Maxwell Communication Corp. filed for bankruptcy in the United States and petitioned for court protection in Britain. His two sons were charged with, among other things, allying themselves with their father in fraudulent financial dealings.
