Tina Brown, byname of Christina Hambley Brown,  (born November 21, 1953, Maidenhead, England), English American magazine editor and writer whose exacting sensibilities and prescient understanding of popular culture were credited with revitalizing the sales of such publications as Vanity Fair and The New Yorker. She applied her media acumen to the online realm as editor of The Daily Beast, a newsmagazine.
Brown was raised in Little Marlow, Buckinghamshire, England. Her father was a film producer and her mother a publicist. Obstreperous behaviour earned her ejection from several boarding schools. She ultimately enrolled at the University of Oxford at age 16. Majoring in English and writing for a student magazine at Oxford, Brown was drawn into the orbit of literary figures, among them Auberon Waugh, who secured publication of her writing in the weekly New Statesman. Brown graduated with a bachelor’s degree in 1974 and began contributing to Punch magazine and the Sunday Times. She left the Times for the Sunday Telegraph after becoming involved with Times editor Harold Evans (they married in 1981).
In 1979 Brown was named editor of Tatler, a periodical that focused on celebrities and royalty. She was credited with reversing flagging sales at the nearly 300-year-old tabloid by abandoning the reverence with which it had previously treated the rich, famous, and titled and instead documenting their foibles in salacious detail.
In 1984 she joined Evans in the United States, where he had accepted a teaching position. That year Brown became editor of Vanity Fair magazine, which had been relaunched in 1983 by media conglomerate Condé Nast. Increased circulation under her leadership was attributed in part to her use of such notable contributors as photographer Annie Leibovitz, whose newsworthy images included a nude pregnant Demi Moore for the August 1991 cover, and writer Dominick Dunne, who covered the sensational murder trial of former football star O.J. Simpson in 1995. Advertising Age named Brown editor of the year in 1988.
In 1992 Brown stepped down as editor of Vanity Fair to helm another Condé Nast publication, The New Yorker. Though some devotees disparaged her hiring as counter to the magazine’s literary tone, her trademark formula did prove effective in boosting circulation. Brown filled the void left by her purge of the writing staff with her own selections, which included Malcolm Gladwell and Henry Louis Gates, Jr.
She left in 1998 to form a partnership with Miramax Films, headed by Harvey Weinstein and Bob Weinstein. The venture, which included Talk magazine and Talk Miramax Books, folded in 2002. In 2008 Brown partnered with American media executive Barry Diller of IAC/InterActiveCorp to form The Daily Beast, an online newsmagazine named for the newspaper in Evelyn Waugh’s novel Scoop (1938). In early 2011 The Daily Beast formally merged with print magazine Newsweek to form The Newsweek/Daily Beast Company, with Brown as editor in chief. Newsweek was sold to IBT Media, the company that published the International Business Times, in August 2013. Brown announced in September 2013 that she would leave The Daily Beast at the end of the year.
Brown published The Diana Chronicles (2007), which charted the rise of Diana, princess of Wales. Loose Talk: Adventures on the Street of Shame (1979) and Life as a Party (1984) collected her early writing. The Vanity Fair Diaries: 1983–1992 appeared in 2017. She also hosted Topic A with Tina Brown, a discussion-style television talk show (2003–05).
Brown was named a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 2000. She became a U.S. citizen in 2005.
