Typography,  the design, or selection, of letter forms to be organized into words and sentences to be disposed in blocks of type as printing upon a page. Typography and the typographer who practices it may also be concerned with other, related matters—the selection of paper, the choice of ink, the method of printing, the design of the binding if the product at hand is a book—but the word typography without modifier most usually denotes the activities and concerns of those most involved in and concerned with the determination of the appearance of the printed page.
Thus understood, there was by definition almost—but not quite—no typography before the invention of printing from movable type in the mid-15th century, and, thus understood, it is only by analogical extension that the term can be applied, if ever it can be, to “reading” in which the material at hand is something other than words that remain stationary on flat firm surfaces. The electronically created letter that lives out its brief life while moving across the face of a signboard or a cathode-ray tube is not a typographic item. Typography, then, exists somewhere between the extreme of manuscript writing, on the one hand, and the transient image on the electronic device, on the other hand. Whether the letter be made by metal type or photographic image is no longer important in defining the subject, and whether the finished item is a book or a page influences its inclusion as typographic not one bit.
An overview of typography suggests that a number of generalized observations may be reasonable:
First and most important, typography and printing, the mechanical processes by which the plans of the typographer are realized, are useful arts. Though there is indeed fine typography, typography is not a fine art. Books, the primary source of typographic examples, are written in the main by people with something to say; they are selected for printing in the main by publishers who see merit and hope for profit in disseminating the statements of the writers to an audience; properly they are edited and designed and printed in the main by craftsmen whose boundaries are fixed for them by considerations germane to the needs of the writers to communicate and the needs of the readers to understand and appreciate. The typographer exists not to express his own design preferences, his own aesthetic needs, but to provide a useful (because usable) connection between someone with something to say and someone to say it to.
But to say—as did the late Beatrice Warde, one of England’s great typographic authorities—that printing ought to be invisible is not to say that the typographer has no contribution to make; to say that typography is a functional art and as such ought not to get between the writer and the reader is not to say that there is only one solution to every typographical problem, that aesthetics, taste, personal judgments, and imagination cannot find room for expression in the typographic studio.
Nonetheless, there are limitations to what the typographer may and may not do; for, in addition to being a useful art with the generally accepted first use of transmitting information, typography for at least three reasons is a secondary art.
First, it is secondary in that its basic materials, the alphabets or other similar notational systems with which it works, are not of its own invention. The influence of this fact on the art form is obvious. Generally speaking, Western writing, or printing, is accomplished by the use of a relatively small number of individual letters capable of being grouped in almost infinite numbers of meaningful permutations. Even in the face of language differences, there is a wide carry-over of letter shapes and typefaces from one language to another. Because the number of images (letters) to be designed is limited and entirely manageable, the type designer’s job is made less difficult. The language carry-over makes possible the establishment of meaningful typologies, the evolution of international styles and conventions, and the development of criteria and traditions of taste by which typographers improve their work. As the result, it is fairly certain that in a little more than 500 years of printing history since Gutenberg, at least 8,000 and very probably 10,000 or 11,000 typefaces have been designed. The practicing typographer has, then, a vast number of types to choose from, and, because the best of those types have evolved within cosmopolitan traditions and have stood the test of judgment by many people in many places over many years, there are, within the several thousands of types available, many that are of unquestioned excellence.
By way of contrast, the Japanese method of writing and printing involves a combination of systems—some 3,000 kanji (symbols based on Chinese characters), seicho (based on the brush-written Kana), and two groups of phonetic symbols (hiragana and katakana), each of which consists of 46 separate symbols. The problem of individually designing some 3,000 symbols, some of them of incredible complexity, is not one that many designers are able to surmount in a lifetime. As a result, to all intents and purposes, Japanese typographers have had only two typefaces to choose from—mincho, roughly equivalent to the West’s roman, and Gothic, functionally a Japanese sans serif. In the 1960s a group of Japanese designers produced a third typeface called Typos.
Second, the typographer is limited by reading conventions over which he has little or no effective control. The appearance of a book page, whether well or badly designed, is governed more by the fact that Western readers begin at the top left of a page and read right, a line at a time until they get to the bottom, than it is by the aesthetic desiderata of the designer. Many typographers have long been attracted to the clean and uncluttered look of so-called sans serif type (the two little bases on which the vertical elements of the lowercase “n” rest are serifs, as is the backward pointing slab atop the lowercase “i” or “l,” and sans serif types are those in which such embellishments are lacking [T I]). But the difficulty is that almost every study ever completed has indicated that sans serif type is less easy to read in text than is type with the serif. It may well be that if Western texts were printed vertically, from the bottom of a page to the top and read upward so that each letter occupied a separate line with no horizontal connection to those before and after it, the apparent advantage of serif types in this regard might disappear.
To consider another example of the restrictions put on the typographer by the necessity of working with the reading conventions, it is arguable that the appearance of the printed page would be changed and one of the petty annoyances of reading—“doubling,” in which the eyes finish a line and then return to the left margin and begin the same line all over again—could be eliminated if people could be persuaded to accept the following reading pattern:
or
But the fact, of course, is that the problems involved in winning acceptance of any change as fundamental as this one would appear to be so numerous and so substantial as to preclude its further consideration by any but writers of typographical journal articles or textbooks. Basic changes in the format of written text attributable to the typographer or, his earlier form, the printer-typographer, have been few, though occasionally dramatic, as in, for example, the practice of separating succeeding sentences with periods or of separating paragraphs (which in handwritten manuscripts were separated only by the insertion of the scribe’s paragraph mark without the initiation of a new line or indentation).
Third, it would appear to be reasonable to call typography a secondary art because, just as the typographer uses letter forms and reading conventions over which he has had little control, so too what he contributes comes into being only through the intervention of a mechanical process that, as often as not, in the 20th century at least, has become the province of the printer, so that the typographer practices his art at least once removed from its final production. The extreme example of the consequence of such a situation may have been seen in the early years of computer-generated typefaces in which, many felt, most faces revealed quite clearly that they had been developed by specialists whose first capabilities were not in the field of typography. And when typographers were later introduced into the process, they found that they had to work through the electronics expert, even as, for many years, those unable to cut their own type had been forced to work through typefoundries.
It will already have become apparent that there is, at the worst, some confusion and, at the least, some lack of uniformity involved in talking about typographers and typography. The words themselves are of relatively recent origin and have been used self-consciously in their contemporary sense only from about the mid-20th century. The difficulty is, of course, the matter of the process involved. Gutenberg was his own typographer. It may well be, in fact, that his major personal contribution to the invention of printing was the development of a way to cut and cast type so that after the shape of the letter had been fixed and the molds prepared each letter form might be replicated over and over again in one relatively simple process. He was also the publisher, who undertook to risk capital in the selection and preparation of material to be printed for sale; he was presumably the man who designed the layout of each page; he may have done whatever editing was required, and he certainly either printed or supervised an assistant in the printing of the finished product. In the course of years many of the functions at first performed by one man came to be divided among several. Quite early, some printers employed men to cut type to their design; others employed men to design and cut the type; some held their services out for hire to others who became publishers; editors were separated from the process, though not always from decision-making roles in the appearance of the final product. After the introduction of bound volumes, trends were initiated that led eventually to the creation of binding designers as separate artists; it became not uncommon to find persons performing services as book designers and, as such, responsible for coordinating and leading the work of type designers, layout artists, binding designers—all who were in any way responsible for the appearance of the book as a whole. The situation became further clouded by the great variety of practice as to the status of each of the persons who perform one or more or, in some cases, all of these functions. They may be professionals retained by printing concerns for a single project; they may be full-time members of a corporate printing staff; in some very few cases they may be a single artist-craftsman-patron carrying out all of the functions in operations (usually necessarily small) devoted self-consciously to the production of “fine books.”
Parenthetically, it is significant to note that, in general, the major examples of really fine typography—the significant developments that have raised the possibilities for the improvement of the typographic arts and, in fact, a preponderance of the typographic examples held up as outstanding—have been produced by publisher, printer, and typographer all working within the normal day-to-day requirements of their regular operations. Such a statement must not, however, be taken as dismissing the outstanding services rendered by the best work of the so-called private presses and by the valued demonstration volumes produced in limited numbers by major presses such as the Cambridge University Press in England, in holding up to view the best that the craft is capable of and thus serving as models for the craft itself.
