Videotex,  an electronic data-retrieval system in which usually textual information was transmitted via telephone or cable television lines and displayed on a television set or video display terminal. Videotex was originally designed in the early 1970s. It was an information-delivery system for the home, and one of the earliest incarnations of an end-user information system. Typically, videotex systems were menu-driven systems designed for display on television sets. Videotex information included news, weather, local information, and services such as bus schedules and entertainment event listings. Many large media firms implemented videotex systems in the United States, and several countries (notably England, Canada, and France) invested large amounts of money in the technology. However, with the exception of the Minitel system in France, videotex systems were largely defunct by the late 1990s.
In the mid-1980s, several media firms in the United States invested large amounts of money into developing videotex systems, though all were unsuccessful. Other countries used government money to fund and develop videotex systems. In 1979 the British Post Office (now British Telecom) developed Prestel, which foundered for years with low numbers of users.
Minitel, developed by France Télécom in the early 1980s, was one of the few successful videotex systems. Although it was originally created to provide an online telephone directory, Minitel became popular in large part owing to its messageries, or chat services, especially the sexually explicit adult chat lines. In 1998 Minitel was more popular in France than the Internet, with over 14 million users. The service persisted until its retirement in 2012.
With the exception of Minitel, the failure of videotex systems can be attributed to their technical limitations and to their lack of varied social uses. Many customers were deterred by awkward interfaces and poor interactivity. The decoder boxes were notoriously difficult to use, and the touted interactivity was negligible. Delivery by telephone line meant that customers’ lines were tied up for the duration of each use. Videotex operators found it difficult to attract customers, and advertisers were reluctant to sign up. Despite the prognostications of information-society theorists, the commercial content provided on videotex was just not compelling enough, nor was it sustainable for advertisers and content providers.
