Viewfinder,  camera component that shows the photographer the area of the subject that will be included in a photograph. In modern cameras it usually is part of a direct visual- or range-finder focusing system and may also be used to display exposure settings or meter information.
Modern viewfinders are variations on two types: reflex and direct optical. In the single-lens reflex camera, the camera lens itself serves as the finder in conjunction with a ground-glass focusing screen to which the image is reflected by a mirror. The image is viewed on the screen through a pentaprism that corrects the lateral reversal of the image as it appears on the screen. At the moment of exposure, the mirror moves out of the way, leaving a clear path to the film.
In a twin-lens reflex camera, the finder has a lens of its own, essentially a duplicate of the aperture lens, placed above it and reflecting the image by a mirror to a ground-glass screen. The image is not inverted but is laterally reversed. The focusing mechanism of the viewfinder regulates the main lens as well.
The direct-optical viewfinder most commonly used, the bright-line viewfinder, is essentially an inverted Galilean telescope system with an optically projected rectangle outlining the frame area. The viewed image is neither inverted nor reversed.
With direct-optical and twin-lens reflex viewfinder systems, a slight error known as parallax is introduced by the slightly different viewpoints of finder and camera lenses. The error can be reduced by positioning the finder as close to the camera lens as possible or by making the finder field smaller so that the camera field includes it.
Most digital cameras are built with optical viewfinders, though most also have prominent liquid-crystal display (LCD) preview screens that are frequently used as convenient viewfinders in casual photography. Some digital cameras feature an electronic viewfinder, which is a separate LCD that accurately reproduces the image gathered through the lens and also displays essential camera settings.
