Virtual museum,   a collection of digitally recorded images, sound files, text documents, and other data of historical, scientific, or cultural interest that are accessed through electronic media. A virtual museum does not house actual objects and therefore lacks the permanence and unique qualities of a museum in the institutional definition of the term. In fact, most virtual museums are sponsored by institutional museums and are directly dependent upon their existing collections. Nevertheless, through the hyperlinking and multimedia capabilities of electronic information media—particularly the World Wide Web (a hypermedia system carried on the Internet)—digitized representations can be brought together from multiple sources for enjoyment and study in a manner largely determined by the individual user. Virtual museums of this type can be a powerful tool for comparative study and for research into a particular subject, material, or locality.
Many virtual museums have their roots in “Web sites” or “home pages” maintained on the Internet by museums in order to disseminate information about themselves. Museums’ home pages usually contain administrative information such as opening hours, policies, and services. Some include a floor plan of the museum—as does, for instance, the Web site of the British Museum. Virtual museums in this limited sense join the exhibition, the guidebook, the photograph, and the videotape as a medium for promoting and interpreting a museum and its collection.
Extensive sites offering “virtual exhibitions”—that is, online tours of certain key exhibits—are maintained by some institutions, such as the Science Museum in London and the University of California Museum of Paleontology in Berkeley. Still other museums or administrative organs provide access to databases on collections—for instance, the Joconde database, maintained by the French Ministry of Culture, from which information can be obtained on important works of art held by more than 60 French museums.
Several institutions collect representations of widely dispersed objects that may or may not be found in museums. One of the pioneers in this field is ArtServe, a collection of thousands of images, particularly of classical art and architecture, made available by the Australian National University for teachers and students of art history. Virtual museums in this sense offer the student many benefits—not least in the selection of material for detailed study—even though final recourse may be necessary to the original material.
Virtual museums in the fullest sense of the term consist of collections that take full advantage of the easy access, loose structure, hyperlinking capacity, interactivity, and multimedia capabilities of the World Wide Web. Indeed, some early electronic collections were used to promote Mosaic, the first graphical Web browser, when it was introduced in 1993. One of the first was EXPO, which originated in 1993 with an online guide to artifacts from the Vatican Library that were on display at the U.S. Library of Congress in Washington, D.C. EXPO has been maintained since then on servers outside of the Library of Congress network and has been expanded into several “pavilions”—including archaeological, architectural, historical, and paleontological exhibits—which have been donated by several organizations. Another pioneer is the WebMuseum, an exhibition of artworks by Western painters from medieval times to the present day that was begun in 1994 by a computer scientist at the École Polytechnique in Paris. The WebMuseum grew to incorporate reproductions of paintings, background text, and musical selections submitted by a large number of contributors.
A directory to virtual museums and museum home pages on the Internet can be found in the World Wide Web Virtual Library: Museums, a service of the International Council of Museums (ICOM) that provides lists of museums by country as well as other categories. Worldwide museum sites can also be found in the Museum Online Resource Review, which provides keyword searching as well as lists of various kinds, and by the Guide to Museums and Cultural Resources.
Many schools use the Internet to form collections of material on a wide variety of subjects. Advice on building school virtual museums is provided by the Bellingham Public Schools in Bellingham, Wash.
