Western Union Corporation,   former telecommunications company that was the largest provider of telegraphic services in the United States.
The company was founded in 1851, when the New York and Mississippi Valley Printing Telegraph Company was formed to build a telegraph line from Buffalo, N.Y., to St. Louis, Mo. Five years later, with the acquisition of several other independent lines, the company reorganized to become the Western Union Telegraph Company. By the end of 1861, Western Union had built the first transcontinental telegraph line. The company made a brief foray into the telephone field but lost a legal battle with Bell Telephone in 1879 and thereafter concentrated solely on telegraphy. It grew rapidly and absorbed more than 500 other companies, including its chief competitor, Postal Telegraph Inc., in 1943.
As telegraphy was increasingly replaced by other methods of telecommunication, Western Union diversified its operations to include automatic teletypewriter services, leased private-line circuitry, and a money order service, as well as telegrams and mailgrams. Western Union’s Telex and TWX systems made it the chief operator of teleprinter networks in the United States in the 1960s and ’70s, and its Westar communications satellite (1974) made it a major participant in the American satellite communications industry. Later in the century, the advent of high-speed digital data transmission and modern fax machines supplanted some of the company’s most important services, notably telegrams, TWX, and Telex. In the face of rapidly changing technology, the Western Union Telegraph Co. was reorganized in 1988 as the Western Union Corp. to handle money transfers and related services. Parts of the company were sold to AT&T and GM Hughes Electronics Corp., among other buyers, and the company’s name was changed to New Valley Corp. in 1991. The company entered bankruptcy proceedings in 1993 and shortly thereafter sold the last of its major holdings, Western Union Financial Services Inc., to First Financial Management Corp.
