William Ernest Henley,  (born Aug. 23, 1849, Gloucester, Gloucestershire, Eng.—died  July 11, 1903, Woking, near London), British poet, critic, and editor who in his journals introduced the early work of many of the great English writers of the 1890s.
Son of a Gloucester bookseller and a pupil of the poet T.E. Brown, Henley contracted a tubercular disease that later necessitated the amputation of one foot. His other leg was saved only through the skill and radical new methods of the surgeon Joseph Lister, whom he sought out in Edinburgh. Forced to stay in an infirmary in Edinburgh for 20 months (1873–75), he began writing impressionistic poems (some in free verse) about hospital life that established his poetic reputation. Some of these were published in The Cornhill Magazine in 1875; the whole sequence appeared in A Book of Verses (1888). Dating from the same period is his most popular poem, “Invictus” (1875), which concludes with the lines “I am the master of my fate; / I am the captain of my soul.” Subsequent volumes of verse include London Voluntaries (1893), Poems (1898), Hawthorn and Lavender (1899), and For England’s Sake (1900).
Henley’s long, close friendship with Robert Louis Stevenson began in 1874 when he was still a patient, and Stevenson based part of the character of Long John Silver in Treasure Island on his crippled, hearty friend.
Restored to active life, Henley edited The Magazine of Art (1882–86), in which he championed the artists James McNeill Whistler and Auguste Rodin, and worked on the Encyclopædia Britannica. He became editor of the Scots Observer of Edinburgh in 1889. The journal was transferred to London in 1891 and became the National Observer. Though conservative in its political outlook, it was liberal in its literary taste and published the work of Thomas Hardy, George Bernard Shaw, H.G. Wells, James Barrie, William Butler Yeats, and Rudyard Kipling. As an editor and critic, Henley was remembered by young writers as a benevolent bully, generous in his promotion and encouragement of unknown talents and fierce in his attacks on unmerited reputations. The “hearty,” realist, and imperialist writers particularly associated with Henley in the 1890s—sometimes known as the “Henley regatta”—were seen as an alternative to the Decadent writers of the period.
