WiMax, in full worldwide interoperability for microwave access,  communication technology for wirelessly delivering high-speed Internet service to large geographical areas.
Part of fourth generation (4G) wireless-communication technology, WiMax far surpassed the 30-metre (100-foot) wireless range of a conventional Wi-Fi local area network (LAN), offering a metropolitan area network with a signal radius of about 50 km (30 miles). In the early 2000s, WiMax proponents hoped to establish a global area network in which signals could reach, for instance, the entire continental United States, including the many rural and suburban areas to which land-based broadband providers did not run cable.
WiMax operates over radio waves on a tower-receiver model. A single WiMax tower can provide coverage over about 8,000 square km (3,000 square miles) and also connect to other towers via a line-of-sight microwave link to broaden coverage further. A roof-mounted antenna dish can receive information at the fastest data-transfer rates, or an internal receiver chip in a personal computer, mobile telephone, or other device can communicate without a line of sight at lower speeds. Under optimal conditions, WiMax offers data-transfer rates of up to 75 megabits per second (Mbps), which is superior to conventional cable-modem and DSL connections. However, the bandwidth must be split among multiple users and thus yields lower speeds in practice.
The development of WiMax began in the early 21st century. The American integrated circuit manufacturer Intel Corporation invested substantially in creating receiver chipsets and was a vocal proponent of the technology. Technical hurdles to achieving optimal speed and coverage, combined with competition from rival schemes, hampered the development of early networks. In 2008 American wireless service providers Sprint Nextel Corporation and Clearwire Corporation—both early WiMax adopters—completed an agreement to merge their WiMax efforts, with a goal of spreading their 4G coverage throughout the United States in the following few years. However, WiMax was largely supplanted by Long Term Evolution (LTE) in 4G communications, because LTE merely required extending and enhancing existing third-generation (3G) technology rather than building new WiMax networks. 
