Xbox,  video game console system created by the American company Microsoft. The Xbox, Microsoft’s first entry into the world of console electronic gaming, was released in 2001, which placed it in direct competition with Sony’s PlayStation 2 and Nintendo’s GameCube.
Concerned about Sony’s successful PlayStation console damaging the personal computer market, Microsoft initiated plans in 1999 to create its own console gaming system to both diversify its product line and capitalize on the thriving gaming industry. The system—originally termed the DirectX-box for its use of the eponymous video software—underwent multiple launch delays and several pricing adjustments after it made its debut. Despite popular titles such as Halo: Combat Evolved and Halo 2, Microsoft reported in 2005 that it had thus far lost $4 billion from the Xbox enterprise.
Xbox offered superior technological features (as compared with its competitors), but it initially lacked some of the software licensing benefits available to rivals Nintendo and Sony. Xbox Live, the Xbox’s online gaming network, debuted in 2002 and allowed players to compete against one another over the Internet. More than two million players subscribed to Xbox Live, establishing it as one of the Xbox’s greatest successes. Many people exploited security flaws in the Xbox to modify the system so that pirated copies of games could be played on the console, a process that was popular despite the fact that such alterations voided the warranty.
In 2005 the Xbox was replaced by Microsoft’s Xbox 360, but, even with a superior console available, many players continued to use the original Xbox and take advantage of the Xbox Live network. Hardware modification and software piracy remained an issue with the Xbox 360, but Microsoft took the dramatic step of banning one million accounts from the Xbox Live network in 2009 when it detected that those users had circumvented the company’s digital-rights management protections. In an intensely competitive market, where the Xbox 360 faced strong pressure from the Nintendo Wii and the Sony PlayStation, Microsoft struggled to make consistent profits from its console. For example, in 2009 Microsoft cut the price of the Xbox 360 Elite by as much as 25 percent in order to pick up market share. The move was successful; by 2010 the Xbox 360 was the most-used game console in the American home, and the Xbox Live network boasted more than 20 million subscribers. In November 2013 Microsoft released the Xbox One, a more powerful system that addressed one of the most persistent flaws of the Xbox 360. A larger, better-ventilated housing, combined with more responsive cooling mechanisms, meant that the Xbox One would not be subject to the overheating issues that had plagued the earlier console. 
