Zombie computer,  computer or personal computer (PC) connected to the Internet and taken over by a computer worm, virus, or other “malware.” Groups of such machines, called botnets (from a combination of robot and network), often carry out criminal actions without their owners’ detecting any unusual activity. Over time, however, most zombie computers accumulate so much malware that they become unusable by their owners. Often, the only cure for heavily infected machines is to completely erase the hard drive and reinstall the operating system. There are millions of zombie computers in the world, about one-fourth of them located in the United States.
The most typical use of botnets is for widely disseminating spam (unwanted commercial e-mail), which makes it difficult to determine the original spammer. Cybercrime experts believe that 50–80 percent of all spam is generated by botnets. Similarly, botnets are used to transmit phishing scams, which seek to extract personal data from unwary individuals. Occasionally, botnets are used to launch denial of service attacks on World Wide Web sites, effectively shutting them down. Although criminals have sometimes tried to extort money from Web site administrators with threats of continual denial of service attacks, such attacks more often are based on some political, environmental, or religious motivation.
Individual zombie computers have been used to store and transmit child pornography and other illegal materials, which has sometimes resulted in the prosecution of individuals, including minors, who are later shown to be innocent. In an effort to combat botnets, some computer security scientists, such as those associated with the German Honeynet Project, have begun creating fake zombies, which can enter into and interact with members of a botnet in order to intercept commands relayed by their operators. This information can then be used to help find and arrest the “masterminds.”
The largest known botnet was uncovered in April 2009. A six-person gang operating out of Ukraine had compromised 1.9 million computers around the world; approximately half were in the United States. The cybercriminals infected others’ computers using JavaScript code executed within a Web browser to install a trojan that they could activate on command. The criminals were discovered after they posted an advertisement on a criminal “black-hat” site offering to rent out portions of their botnet.
