Adolf Wölfli,  (born February 29, 1864, Bowil, Switzerland—died November 6, 1930, Bern), Swiss artist, writer, and musician associated with the art-brut and outsider-art movements.
The youngest of seven children, Wölfli had a tumultuous childhood. His father, a stonecutter, was an alcoholic and eventually abandoned his family about 1870. When in 1872 his mother became ill and could no longer support the family on the money she made as a laundress, authorities resettled her and Wölfli in Schangnau. Though supported by the community, mother and son were sent to work at different farms. His mother died the next year, and the nine-year-old boy was sent to various foster homes, where he was often mistreated and sometimes abused. Despite what must have been a lonely and both mentally and physically painful existence, Wölfli seems to have completed a secondary-school education about 1879. From 1881 to 1882 he worked for a wealthy farmer in Zäziwil, and he fell in love with a girl whose father forbade him to see her. Dejected, Wölfli moved to Bern. He took a variety of mostly agriculture-related jobs and in 1883–84 served in the military in Lucerne.
In the spring of 1890, he attempted to sexually assault a 14-year-old girl but was stopped by passersby. In August of the same year, he unsuccessfully attempted an assault on a five-year-old girl, was arrested, and spent two years in prison. When he was released, he worked at various jobs, including as a gravedigger and a cement layer. He became more isolated and aggressive over time. In May 1895 he once again tried to assault a girl—this time a three-year-old. After his arrest he was admitted to Waldau Mental Asylum in Bern, where he was diagnosed with schizophrenia. He remained a patient at Waldau until his death.
During his first few years at the institution, he exhibited paranoia, hallucinations, and violent behaviour, and he was often sent to solitary confinement. In 1899 he began drawing, an activity that noticeably calmed him; despite that early start, his oldest extant drawings date from 1904. He began to work on a massive autobiography in 1908; it is a compilation of prose, poetry, drawings, collages, and musical compositions (which he sometimes performed on a cardboard horn). He divided the narrative into five parts: From the Cradle to the Grave (nine books; 1908–12), Geographic and Algebraic Books (seven books; 1912–16), Books with Songs and Dances (six books; 1917–22), Album Books with Dances and Marches (eight books; 1924–28), and Funeral March (16 books; 1928–30, unfinished). Even though the work ended abruptly at the time of Wölfli’s death, the volumes stacked on top of each other stood about six feet (nearly two metres) high. From 1916 Wölfli also produced what he called Brotkunst (“bread art”), single-sheet drawings he would sell for income.
Wölfli’s autobiography depicted an outlandish version of his life. Writing as Doufi, which was a childhood nickname, he explored the universe. Later he began to refer to himself as St. Adolf II, in which persona he participated in a grand cosmic battle. He also signed many of his later art works “St. Adolf II.” His art was characterized by its obsessive, surrealistic quality, strong emphasis on symmetry and geometric shapes, and use of colour.
The psychiatrist Walter Morgenthaler, who arrived at Waldau in 1907, supported Wölfli’s pursuits and published a monograph on him in 1921 called Madness and Art: The Life and Works of Adolf Wölfli. Its publication resulted in exhibitions of Wölfli’s work in bookshops across Zürich. In 1949 Jean Dubuffet, the founder of the art-brut movement, displayed five of Wölfli’s works in the exhibition “L’Art brut préféré aux arts culturels” in Paris. Wölfli’s work is now housed in the Adolf Wölfli Foundation at the Museum of Fine Arts, Bern.
