Albert Gleizes, in full Albert Léon Gleizes,  (born December 8, 1881, Paris, France—died June 23, 1953, Avignon), French painter and writer known for his Cubist paintings and his lifelong commitment to promoting the Cubist movement.
As a young adult, Gleizes was most passionate about theatre. His father, concerned about the profitablity of his son’s interest (though willing to support it to an extent), required him to work in his fabric-design studio on a daily basis. Gleizes credited that experience with fostering his interest in colour, line, and design. He first started painting in his late teens, working in the style of the Impressionists. He exhibited his work, a landscape titled The Seine in Asnières (1901), for the first time in 1902 at the Société Nationale des Beaux-Arts in Paris.
Gleizes continued to paint while serving in the French military from 1903 to 1905. In 1904 he exhibited two paintings at the Salon d’Automne, an annual exhibition of independent artists. After his military service Gleizes’s politics skewed left, toward socialism. In that spirit he cofounded Abbaye de Créteil, a community outside Paris composed of writers, artists, musicians, and intellectuals, among them poets Georges Duhamel, René Arcos, Charles Vildrac, and Jules Romains. The community supported itself by publishing writings by its members and affiliates, but when in 1907 that income proved insufficient to cover the rent, Abbaye de Créteil folded after just one year.
In 1909 Gleizes met painter Henri Le Fauconnier, whose Cubist portrait of the poet Pierre Jean Jouve had a profound effect on the direction Gleizes would take with his own painting. Gleizes’s full-length portrait of Arcos painted the next year shows Le Fauconnier’s influence and Gleizes’s first experimentation with Cubism in its simplified forms, flatness, strong lines, and restrained use of colour. Over the next year Gleizes became involved with a group of artists who, with Le Fauconnier, became leading Cubists: Robert Delaunay, Fernand Léger, and Jean Metzinger. Together the five artists made history at the 1911 Salon des Indépendants when they exhibited their works in the same room, the notorious “Salle 41” (“Room 41”). Though Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque had been painting in such a fashion since about 1907, that new group of young artists introduced Cubism to the general public for the first time. Gleizes exhibited four paintings—two landscapes, a male nude, and Woman with Phlox (1910), an angular monochromatic rendering of a woman whose form merges with her surroundings. The exhibition drew large crowds and elicited strong, mostly negative, reactions.
The Cubist group, energized by the impact of Salle 41 at the Salon des Indépendants, truly became a movement in 1912. That year Gleizes joined the Puteaux group, established for artists working in a more broadly defined mode of Cubism than that of Braque and Picasso. The group, established by artists Jacques Villon and Raymond Duchamp-Villon, met outside Paris at Villon’s house in Puteaux and sometimes at Gleizes’s house in Paris. Together, the Puteaux artists established Section d’Or (“Golden Section”), a group exhibition of Cubist artists that included, in addition to the original five, Marcel Duchamp, Juan Gris, and Francis Picabia, among others. Gleizes exhibited a large painting (8.2 × 11.5 feet [2.5 × 3.5 metres]), The Harvesters (1912), and Women in a Kitchen (1911) at the impressively large Section d’Or exhibition held October 1912 at the Galerie la Boétie in Paris. In culmination of a groundbreaking year, Gleizes and Metzinger cowrote Du Cubisme, a treatise on the style and the first printed definition of the term.
In August 1914 Gleizes was conscripted into military service but was able to continue painting. While stationed in Toul, France, he painted Portrait of an Army Doctor (1914–15), a work that had been commissioned by a doctor by the name of Lambert, who was instrumental in making it possible for Gleizes to paint while in the army. According to the artist, however, Lambert was disappointed in the highly abstracted composition and accepted only one small gouache study Gleizes had made but not the final canvas. Once discharged from the army in 1915, Gleizes married Juliette Roche (daughter of a government official and his ticket to an early discharge from service), and the couple left promptly for New York City. Gleizes’s New York City compositions, such as Broadway (1915) and On the Brooklyn Bridge (1917), showed a shift farther toward abstraction and the introduction of textual elements in his compositions. In 1916 Gleizes and his wife traveled to Barcelona, where he had his first solo exhibition. After more travel, the couple returned to New York in 1918. It was at that time that Gleizes began to explore religion and the conflicts between a life of faith and a life of art. He and his wife returned to France in 1919.
Over the next few years, Gleizes struggled with the lost momentum of Cubism (and the rise of Dada) and became more entrenched in capturing and disseminating its theory. He also attempted to revive Section d’Or in 1920 with a traveling exhibition, though it was not successful. He gradually retreated from the Paris art scene and continued to paint but also wrote prolifically on art, including Du Cubisme et des moyens de le comprendre (1920; “Cubism and the Means to Understand It”) and La Peinture et ses lois (1924; “The Laws of Painting”). In the latter Gleizes suggested that the pinnacle of Western painting occurred in the 11th and 12th centuries and that the illusionism that was introduced in the Renaissance with one-point perspective was the downfall of true artistic expression. In that text he also broke down the rules of painting into what became his theory of translation and rotation, the role and habits of the eye when looking at a painting.
In 1927 Gleizes and his wife founded Moly-Sabata, an agrarian-based artists’ utopian commune in Sablons, a village not far from the French city of Lyon. Artists who lived there had to earn their keep by producing and selling their crafts and working the land for sustenance. In 1930 Gleizes published Vie et mort de l’occident Chrétien (Life and Death of the Christian West), in which he denounced the Industrial Revolution as incompatible with Christian faith. Gleizes also traveled during that time, lecturing on his theories of art in Poland and Germany. He continued to delve into the art of the past, exploring pre-Renaissance art. From his studies emerged Vers une conscience plastique: la forme et l’histoire (1932; “Toward a Plastic Consciousness: Form and History”), an examination of Celtic, Asian, and Romanesque art. 
In the early 1930s he joined the abstract artists’ group Abstraction-Creation, which was dedicated to a rational art of pure abstraction like that of the De Stijl and Constructivist artists. Gleizes reunited with his peers Delaunay and Léger to collaborate on Cubist murals for the 1937 World’s Fair in Paris (Exposition Internationale des Arts et Techniques dans la Vie Moderne). The following year, in order to buy Moly-Sabata (which, until then, he had been renting), Gleizes sold several paintings, including The Harvesters, to American art collector Solomon R. Guggenheim.  In 1939, at the beginning of World War II, Gleizes started another commune for artists and students called Les Méjades (near St. Rémy-de-Provence, France).
Though he had considered himself a Roman Catholic since the 1920s, Gleizes was confirmed and officially joined the Roman Catholic Church in 1941. Soon after, he began writing his memoirs (published in part as Souvenirs: Le Cubisme, 1908–14 in 1957) and working on an on-going series of paintings on meditation (“Supports de Contemplation”) as well as the large triptych that included the paintings The Crucifixion, Christ in Glory, and The Transfiguration (all 1943).  Gleizes’s career, soon coming to a close, was celebrated with a retrospective of his work in 1947 at the Chapelle du Lycée Ampère in Lyon. His final works include a series of 57 illustrations (1948–50) for the 17th-century philosopher Blaise Pascal’s Pensées and a fresco, The Eucharist (1952), in a chapel at a new Jesuit seminary of the Fontaines community in Chantilly.
A little more than a decade after Gleizes died, the Guggenheim Museum in New York City organized the first retrospective of his work to be shown in America. However, since then, though his paintings are in collections throughout the United States and Europe, most solo exhibitions on the artist have taken place in Europe, and almost none of his writings have been translated into English, which accounts for his relative obscurity compared with his Cubist peers. In the 21st century, Moly-Sabata came under the auspices of the Fondation Gleizes and continues to be an artists’ residence.
