Anselm Kiefer,  (born March 8, 1945, Donaueschingen, Germany), German painter who became one of the most prominent figures in the Neo-Expressionist art movement of the late 20th century.
Kiefer abandoned his law studies at the University of Freiburg in 1966 to pursue art. He subsequently studied at art academies in Freiburg, Karlsruhe, and Dusseldorf. As a student, Kiefer created a series of staged photographs (Occupations, 1969) of himself giving the Nazi salute in a number of countries that Germany occupied during World War II. The photographs caused a scandal when they were published in 1975. By then, however, Kiefer had became a student of the conceptual artist Joseph Beuys, who encouraged Kiefer’s use of symbolic images to deal ironically with 20th-century German history. Beuys also encouraged Kiefer to paint, and in such huge paintings as Germany’s Spiritual Heroes (1973) and Operation Sea Lion (1975) Kiefer was able to develop an array of visual symbols by which he could continue to comment with irony and sarcasm on certain tragic aspects of German history and culture, in particular the Nazi period. These paintings used garish, sombre colours and coarse, naive drawing, but they did achieve powerful effects owing to their imaginative allusions to Nazism. In the 1970s he also painted a series of landscape vistas that capture the rutted and sombre look of the German countryside and that use linear perspective with great dramatic effect.
Kiefer’s landscapes and interiors done in the 1980s acquired an intense physical presence by means of perspectival devices and the incorporation of such materials as sand, wood, straw, and lead to create unusual textures on the surface of the painted canvas. Though Kiefer continued to treat Germany’s Nazi past in such paintings as Interiors (1981), the range of his themes broadened to include references to ancient Hebrew and Egyptian history, as in the large painting Osiris and Isis (1985–87). In the late 1990s, while continuing to paint, Kiefer began to create mixed-media sculptures. These include stacks of charred or lead books, as in Paete non dolet (2006) and The Language of the Birds (2013), as well as vitrines of plaster gowns laced with glass shards (Die Schechina, 2010) or of cast resin plants (Morgenthau, 2015). His later paintings, including Superstrings, Runes, The Norns, Gordian Knot (2019), consider myths, poems, and string theory as a means of understanding the world. Among his many awards was the Japan Art Association’s Praemium Imperiale prize for painting in 1999.
