Camille Corot, in full Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot,  (born July 16, 1796, Paris, France—died February 22, 1875, Paris), French painter, noted primarily for his landscapes, who inspired and to some extent anticipated the landscape painting of the Impressionists. His oil sketches, remarkable for their technical freedom and clear colour, have come to be as highly regarded as the finished pictures that were based upon them.
Corot was born of prosperous bourgeois parents. His mother, who was Swiss-born, had a fashionable milliner’s shop, which Corot’s father—a draper by trade—helped manage. Camille was a poor scholar and even less adept when he tried to follow his father’s trade. Finally, at age 25, he was given a small allowance by his father and allowed to become what he had always dreamed of being: a painter.
Like every young French artist, Corot spent much time studying the paintings in the Louvre, and he had some private instruction from Achille-Etna Michallon and Jean-Victor Bertin, both followers of the Neoclassical landscape painter Pierre-Henri de Valenciennes. From the beginning, however, Corot preferred to sit outdoors, rather than in studios, sketching what he saw and learning by firsthand experience.
In the autumn of 1825 Corot went to Rome, and the three years that he spent there were the most influential of his life. He painted the city and the Campagna, the countryside around Rome; he made a trip to Naples and Ischia; and he returned to Paris by way of Venice. He was very happy. He told a friend in August 1826: “All I really want to do in life…is to paint landscapes. This firm resolve will stop me forming any serious attachments. That is to say, I shall not get married.” He was as good as his word and never married. Romantic companionship played no part in his life, which was entirely devoted to painting.
Back in France, Corot settled into a routine to which he kept for the whole of his life. He always spent the spring and summer months painting outside, making small oil sketches and drawings from nature. He acquired a mastery of tonal relationships that formed the basis of his art, for the balance and gradation of light and dark tones was always more important to him than the choice of colour. In the winter Corot would retire to his Paris studio to work on some much larger pictures, which he liked to have ready for exhibition at the annual Salon when it opened in May.
His first important work, The Bridge at Narni, was shown at the Paris Salon in 1827, when he was still in Italy. In 1833 he exhibited a large landscape of the forest of Fontainebleau, which was awarded a second-class medal: this gave Corot the right to show his pictures without submission to the jury for their approval.
From May to October of 1834 Corot made his second visit to Italy. He painted views of Volterra, Florence, Pisa, Genoa, Venice, and the Italian lake district. He collected enough material in small sketches to last him the rest of his life, although he returned to Italy briefly in the summer of 1843, for the last time.
When he grew older, Corot moved around less. In 1836, however, he made important trips to Avignon and the south of France; he went to Switzerland in 1842 and on several other occasions, to the Netherlands in 1854, and to London in 1862. His favourite regions of France were the forest of Fontainebleau, Brittany, the Normandy coast, his family property at Ville-d’Avray near Paris, and, later in life, Arras and Douai—in the north of France—where close friends lived.
Throughout his life Corot liked occasionally to paint straightforward topographical landscapes, depicting buildings such as the cathedral at Chartres (1830) or the belfry at Douai (1871) exactly as they appeared to him. But the basic division in his work was between the sketch made from nature—small, direct, spontaneous—and the large, finished picture done for the Salon. In the early 19th century the sketch was thought to be unsuitable for public exhibition, and there were only a few connoisseur collectors who would buy such pictures. The finished landscapes were preferred. These were considered even more dignified if they included a few small figures who could be identified with the heroic characters of legend, literature, or the Bible. Thus, Corot exhibited pictures with such titles as Hagar in the Wilderness (Salon of 1835), Diana Surprised by Actaeon (Salon of 1836), Homer and the Shepherds (Salon of 1845), and Christ in the Garden of Olives (Salon of 1849).
As landscape was his major interest, Corot used figures in his work in an incidental manner, much as they were used in the work of the 17th-century painter Claude Lorrain. In the 1860s Corot invented a new kind of landscape, the Souvenirs, in which he made compositions out of standardized elements—usually a lake with diaphanous trees painted in an overall silvery tonality—to evoke a mood of gentle melancholy. At the end of his life, he also painted a number of portraits and figure studies, especially of young women posed in his studio holding a flower or a musical instrument or looking at a landscape on the easel. These more private pictures Corot almost never exhibited.
During the 1830s Corot showed regularly at the Paris Salon and had some critical success. Yet he sold very few pictures and was glad of his father’s allowance. Then, in 1840, the state purchased one of his works, The Little Shepherd, and, five years later, the poet and art critic Charles Baudelaire could write in his review of the 1845 Salon that “Corot stands at the head of the modern school of landscape.” In 1846 he was made a member of the Legion of Honour, and, when his father died, in 1847, Corot was able to feel that he had justified the family’s support of his ambition to be a painter.
