Chuck Close, in full Chuck Thomas Close,  (born July 5, 1940, Monroe, Washington, U.S.—died August 19, 2021, Oceanside, New York), American artist noted for his highly inventive techniques used to paint the human face. He is best known for his large-scale Photo-realist portraits.
Close began taking art lessons as a child and at age 14 saw an exhibition of Jackson Pollock’s abstract paintings, which helped inspire him to become a painter. He studied at the University of Washington School of Art (B.A., 1962) and at the Yale University School of Art and Architecture (B.F.A., 1963; M.F.A., 1964), and in 1964 he won a Fulbright scholarship to study in Vienna. While teaching at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst (1965–67), he gradually rejected the elements of Abstract Expressionism that had initially characterized his work.
Close’s first solo exhibition included a series of enormous black-and-white portraits that he had painstakingly transformed from small photographs to colossal paintings. He reproduced and magnified both the mechanical shortcomings of the photograph—blurriness and distortion—and the flaws of the human face: bloodshot eyes, broken capillaries, and enlarged pores. To make his paintings, Close superimposed a grid on the photograph and then transferred a proportional grid to his gigantic canvases. He then applied acrylic paint with an airbrush and scraped off the excess with a razor blade to duplicate the exact shadings of each grid in the photo. By imposing such restraints, Close hoped to discover new ways of seeing and creating.
Throughout his career, Close continued to concentrate on portraits—from the neck up—based on photographs he had taken. In addition to self-portraits, the portraits were usually of friends, many of whom were prominent in the art world. These images represent a very human, flawed view of the subjects, given the scale of attention given to imperfections, while also presenting a rather grand, iconic view of the sitters, given the monumental and confrontational quality of the works. During the 1970s and ’80s, Close began to use colour and to experiment with a variety of media and techniques. One technique involved simulating the printing process: he used only cyan, magenta, and yellow and applied one layer of colour at a time to the canvas. He developed one of his most innovative techniques for his “fingerprint series,” in which he inked his thumb and forefinger and pressed them to the canvas to achieve a subtle range of grays. Viewed up close, the whorled patterns of his fingerprints can easily be seen; from a distance the method is unidentifiable, and the fingerprints combine to create an illusionistic whole.
In 1988 a spinal blood clot left Close almost completely paralyzed and confined to a wheelchair. A brush-holding device strapped to his wrist and forearm, however, allowed him to continue working. In the 1990s he replaced the minute detail of his earlier paintings with a grid of tiles daubed with colourful elliptical and ovoid shapes. Viewed up close, each tile was in itself an abstract painting; when seen from a distance, the tiles came together to form a dynamic deconstruction of the human face. In 1998 the Museum of Modern Art in New York City mounted a major retrospective of Close’s portraits. Close has been called a Photo-realist, a Minimalist, and an Abstract Expressionist but, as the 1998 retrospective proved, his commitment to his unique vision and his evolving techniques defy any easy categorization.
Close continued to experiment with portraits at the start of the 21st century, creating a series of large daguerreotypes, an early form of photography. His work continued to appear in exhibitions and group shows, and many major museums acquired his pieces for their collections. In 2018, however, the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., announced that it was canceling a forthcoming exhibition of his amid allegations of sexual misconduct from several of his potential models. Although he apologized for inappropriate comments, Close denied any wrongful actions.
