Daniele da Volterra, original name Daniele Ricciarelli,  (born 1509, Volterra [Italy]—died  April 4, 1566, Rome), Italian Mannerist painter and sculptor, noted for his finely drawn, highly idealized figures done in the style of Michelangelo.
It is believed that Daniele first studied in Siena under the painter Il Sodoma. His fresco Justice, completed for the Palazzo dei Priori after 1530, reflects Sodoma’s influence. Sometime after 1535 he moved to Rome, where he worked outside the city to decorate a villa for Agostino Cardinal Trivulzio. He might have become a student of Baldassare Peruzzi, the architect who designed the villa; his work mimics Peruzzi’s style.
While in Rome he became a pupil and close friend of Michelangelo. The latter’s influence is apparent in the exaggerated musculature and strong linear rhythms of the figures in Volterra’s fresco frieze (1541) in the Massimi Palace depicting the story of Fabius Maximus. That same year he painted his most famous work, the Descent from the Cross, in the Orsini Chapel of the church of Trinità dei Monti in Rome. The dynamically posed, monumental figures in this powerful and agitated composition make it one of the most important works done by the younger generation of Mannerist painters in Rome. Daniele’s other major paintings include Massacre of the Innocents and David Killing Goliath. In the 1540s he also assisted the Italian artist Perino del Vaga on various projects in Rome, including decorating the Sala Regia in the Vatican.
About 1555 Daniele began work on the Ricci Chapel in Rome. With the help of assistants, he created paintings for altarpieces and frescoes and also designed two statues, St. Peter and St. Paul. The chapel was not completed until 1568, two years after his death. In 1559 Pope Paul IV assigned him the task of painting in draperies to cover the nudity of many of the figures in Michelangelo’s Last Judgment in the Sistine Chapel. For his performance of this task Daniele earned the nickname Il Braghettone (or Brachettone; “The Breeches Maker”), as well as an undeserved posthumous reputation as a prude. Using Michelangelo’s death mask for his model, Daniele made a bronze portrait bust of Michelangelo; it was his last work. The bust is considered to be the finest surviving representation of that great artist.
