Duane Michals, in full Duane Stephen Michals,  (born February 18, 1932, McKeesport, Pennsylvania, U.S.), American photographer noted for his sequential images, which often deal with myths and mysteries and for his creative extension of the possibilities of the photographic medium.
Interested in art from a young age, Michals took classes at the Carnegie Museum of Art in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, before attending the University of Denver, Colorado, from which he received a Bachelor of Arts degree. In 1956, after service in the army, he continued to pursue his interest in the arts at the Parsons School of Design in New York City, where he trained as a graphic designer. His photographic career commenced in 1958, when he traveled to the Soviet Union and made portraits of people on the streets with a borrowed camera. On his return, he worked as a freelance photographer for Vogue, Esquire, Mademoiselle, and Life magazines, doing fashion photography and portraits.
Over the years, Michals’s approach to expressive photography changed considerably. His early interest in street happenings led him to make single documentary images of events that were considered part of what then was called the “social landscape.” In the mid-1960s he lost interest in straight documentation. Inspired by the work of such painters as René Magritte and Balthus, Michals began to address literary and philosophical ideas about death, gender, and sexuality. He usually staged scenes to be photographed and worked with multiple exposures, sequences, and series. He also experimented with combining text and drawings with his images.
Michals published a number of books of his work, including Sequences (1970), Homage to Cavafy: Ten Poems by Constantine Cavafy/Ten Photographs by Duane Michals (1978), and Eros & Thanatos (1992). His work as a freelance commercial photographer ran parallel to the expression of his highly personal vision. His noncommercial photographs were widely exhibited in museums and galleries throughout the United States and Europe.
