Engraving,  technique of making prints from metal plates into which a design has been incised with a cutting tool called a burin. Modern examples are almost invariably made from copperplates, and, hence, the process is also called copperplate engraving. Another term for the process, line engraving, derives from the fact that this technique reproduces only linear marks. Tone and shading, however, can be suggested by making parallel lines or crosshatching.
Engraving originated independently in the Rhine valley in Germany and in northern Italy about the middle of the 15th century. It seems to have been first developed by German goldsmiths now known only by their initials or pseudonyms, the most prominent being the Master E.S. and the Master of the Playing Cards. Martin Schongauer is the first engraver known to have been not only a goldsmith but also a painter. His “Temptation of St. Anthony” (c. 1470) is unprecedented in its sophisticated use of the medium to achieve a sense of form and surface texture.
In Italy, engraving grew out of both the goldsmith’s art and niello work, a type of decorative metalwork. One of its earliest practitioners was the Florentine goldsmith and niellist Maso Finiguerra (1426–64). Major Italian painters adopted engraving much more enthusiastically than did their German counterparts. Before the 15th century had passed, important engravings had been made by two great Italian painters: Andrea Mantegna and Antonio Pollaiuolo. Although its quick association with painting in Italy resulted in such prodigious prints as Pollaiuolo’s “Battle of the Nudes” (c. 1465), this also prevented the independent development of engraving, which soon was used primarily to reproduce paintings. By the 16th century, the reproductive role of engraving had become so firmly established that Italy’s greatest master of engraving technique, Marcantonio Raimondi, is mainly known for his copies of Raphael’s paintings.
In northern Europe, however, engraving followed its own course, and two of its greatest 16th-century masters, Albrecht Dürer and Lucas van Leyden, produced some of their finest original work in this technique.
During the rest of the 16th century, engravers such as Hendrik Goltzius (1558–1617) continued to develop increasingly brilliant techniques. Simultaneously, however, engraving became more and more restricted to reproducing paintings. This trend, which continued throughout the 17th century, was facilitated by the popularization of techniques capable of producing gradations of tone. The dotting of the plate with short jabs of the burin, common from the late 15th century, evolved in the late 17th and 18th centuries into the techniques of stipple engraving and crayon manner (also called chalk-manner, or pastel-manner, engraving). These techniques scored the plate with numberless dots and nicks made with a burin or special tools called rockers and roulettes. With mezzotint, a related technique invented in the 17th century by Ludwig von Siegen, they almost completely replaced line engraving in the 18th century. It was revived to an extent in the 20th century by the French artist Jacques Villon and the English artists Eric Gill and Stanley William Hayter. The latter demonstrated that line engraving is a suitable medium for much modern art, including abstraction. The American printmakers Mauricio Lasansky and Gabor Peterdi also produced engravings.
