Felipe Guáman Poma de Ayala,  (born c. 1535, Huamanga? [Peru]—died c. 1615, Huamanga?, Viceroyalty of Peru), native Peruvian author and illustrator of El primer nueva corónica y buen gobierno (1612–15; “The First New Chronicle and Good Government”).
Guáman Poma was born into a noble Inca family shortly after the Spanish conquest of Peru. He did not have formal training as an artist. His half brother, a mestizo priest, taught him how to read and write, and through contact with a Mercedarian friar and historian, Martín de Murúa, he apparently gained further education.
Guáman Poma worked as an administrator within the government of the viceroyalty. From 1594 to 1600 he represented his family in a land dispute, claiming land outside of the town of Huamanga. The case was decided in his favour several times, but he was eventually accused of misrepresenting his nobility and his claim. His punishment included 200 lashes and two years of exile from Huamanga.
This experience inspired him to work on behalf of other indigenous people involved in judicial suits and to create El primer nueva corónica y buen gobierno (translated in abridgement as Letter to a King). The work was begun about 1600 and finished between 1612 and 1615. It comprised 1,189 pages and included 398 drawings. The Nueva corónica was intended for the eyes of King Philip III of Spain, with whom Guáman Poma hoped to share the history of Andean civilization and his view of the damage that had been done by colonial Spanish rule. The work encapsulates the multiple issues at stake in the clash and convergence of Inca and Spanish cultures following the conquest. It blends multiple literary genres, including the historical chronicle, the epistle, and the sermon, with artistic genres that include portraiture, genre scenes, and historical representations. Both text and image are used as rhetorical tools throughout the Nueva corónica. The first two-thirds of the book is an attempt to convince the king of the nobility and sophistication of Andean civilization. The last third, the Buen gobierno, described Peru’s society as turned upside down by the Spanish.
While Guáman Poma drew on Western literary genres in his text, he wrote in multiple languages, including Spanish, Quechua (the language of the Inca), Aymara (another Andean language), and Latin. Like the use of language, the images that fill the Nueva corónica reflect the melding of Spanish and indigenous styles that resulted from the conquest. The artist utilized European notions of space, composition, and figural representation throughout the book but drew with a simple line, flattening and abstracting his forms in a way that is strongly tied to the geometric abstraction that decorates Inca textiles and ceramics. His illustrations also incorporated complex Inca metaphysical and social concepts. His Map of the Kingdom of the Indies, for example, utilizes European mapping techniques but imposes on these the Inca model of the universe in which the world is divided into four parts through the use of intersecting diagonal lines. He also locates Cuzco, the capital of the Inca empire but not of colonial Peru, at the centre of the map.
In other images Guáman Poma utilizes spatial composition in highly symbolic ways. In Inca society every town and every city was divided physically and socially into two halves or moieties, hanan (upper) and hurin (lower). These moieties were also associated with right and left, and the hanan was in some ways the privileged moiety. Throughout his text Guáman Poma uses these positions to represent power structures. The title page of the book, for example, shows the pope on the right-hand side of the page (the reader’s left), while the king kneels below on his left. Guáman Poma places himself only slightly below the king. The image suggests that religious authority supercedes royal power, and it asserts Guáman Poma’s authority as a historian to the king.
Guáman Poma claimed to be a devout Christian and included numerous religious images in the Nueva corónica. Some of the images confirm his piety but undermine Spanish authority. Spanish conquistadors often credited apparitions of saints with ensuring military victory during the conquest. Guáman Poma illustrates several of these miraculous appearances, but he depicts the saints themselves as the victors, with the Spanish completely absent. In The Miracle of Saint Mary, for example, the Virgin floats above a group of defeated Inca warriors. He suggests that God, rather than the Spanish, reigns supreme.
It is unclear whether the Nueva corónica ever reached its intended audience. It is now housed in the Royal Library in Copenhagen, so at some point it did reach Europe, and there is evidence that it circulated at the viceregal court in Lima.
