George Caleb Bingham,  (born March 20, 1811, Augusta county, Virginia, U.S.—died July 7, 1879, Kansas City, Missouri), American frontier painter noted for his landscapes, his portraits, and especially his representations of Midwestern river life.
In 1819 Bingham’s family moved to Franklin, Missouri, on the Lewis and Clark trail. After the death of his father, the family relocated to Arrow Rock, Missouri. Between 1827 and 1828, Bingham apprenticed to a cabinetmaker in Booneville, Missouri, during which time his interest in a career as a painter developed. By 1833 he had established himself as an accomplished itinerant portrait painter. Except for three months of study at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, Bingham was self-taught.
During a brief stay in Philadelphia he studied paintings by Benjamin West, Thomas Lawrence, and Thomas Sully and drew from antique casts. He returned to Missouri in 1838 with renewed interest in his artistic career. He continued to paint, and his most mature works date from this period. In works such as The County Election (1852) and The Verdict of the People (1854–55) Bingham gives a vivid account of the rough and lively political life of the frontier. These works display his facility for incisive characterization as well as his talent for organizing large, dense compositions.
Among Bingham’s most memorable works are scenes of river life. Works such as The Jolly Flatboatmen (1846) show Bingham’s continued preference for compositions crowded with lively figures. But in his Raftsmen Playing Cards (1847) Bingham greatly reduced the number of figures and made the composition more static. The sweeping view of the mist-covered river shows his growing ability to manipulate space and light in order to heighten the mood of the picture, a quality further exemplified in the well-known Fur Traders Descending the Missouri (1845).
In 1856 Bingham visited Germany to study the masters of the Düsseldorf school, a group of painters whose work is characterized by sentimentality and careful attention to detail. Influenced by the paintings he saw there, he altered his style and lost the directness he had achieved in earlier works. Late in life, Bingham became active in politics, serving as a Missouri state treasurer in 1862, and in 1875 he was appointed adjutant general of Missouri. During the last two years of his life he taught at the University of Missouri, Columbia.
