Germain Pilon,  (born 1535, Paris, France—died  Feb. 3, 1590, Paris), French sculptor whose work, principally monumental tombs, is a transitional link between the Gothic tradition and the sculpture of the Baroque period.
A sculptor’s son, Pilon was employed at age 20 on the decoration of the tomb of King Francis I at Saint-Denis. His earlier work clearly shows an Italian influence, but eventually he developed a more distinctively French expression by fusing elements from classical art, Gothic sculpture, and Michelangelo with the Fontainebleau adaptation of Mannerism, a style characterized by subjective conceptions, studied elegance, and virtuoso artifice.
 Pilon’s best-known works are funerary sculptures for Henry II. It was a custom of the period for men of high estate to assign their remains to more than one burial site—often one for the body, one for the heart, and one for the entrails. Pilon’s monument for the heart of Henry II (c. 1561) consists of three marble Graces of great elegance supporting an urn. It was perhaps based on a design by Primaticcio. For the principal tomb of Henry II and Catherine de Médicis at Saint-Denis (1563–70), also designed by Primaticcio, Pilon created four bronze corner figures and, above, the kneeling figures of the king and queen in bronze. Most important, however, are the seminude, marble gisants, or figures of the royal pair recumbent in death. Considered by some to be his most sublime achievement, the gisants are a Renaissance idealization of a Gothic convention and possess a depth of emotion that Pilon perhaps never again attained.
Sculptor royal from 1568, Pilon had a successful career as a portraitist, his finest work in the genre being the kneeling figure of René de Birague (1583–85). Pilon also created an effigy, Valentine Balbiani, of Birague’s wife. It is also believed that his bronze relief Deposition was created for Birague’s private chapel. Appointed controller of the mint in 1572, he contributed to French medal casting a distinguished series of bronze medallions in 1575. Pilon was commissioned to decorate the Valois Chapel (1559, destroyed 1719) in Saint-Denis Abbey, and he worked on several marble statues, among them Risen Christ (begun 1572), that were probably intended for the chapel but were unfinished at the time of his death in 1590.
