Hans Holbein, the Elder,  (born c. 1465, Imperial Free City of Augsburg [Germany]—died  1524, Isenheim, Alsace [now in France]), German painter associated with the Augsburg school. He was the senior member of a family of painters that included his brother Sigmund and his sons Ambrosius (c. 1494–1519/20) and the famous Hans Holbein the Younger.
Nothing is known of Holbein’s early life and training, but he was married and established as a painter in Augsburg by about 1493. Holbein’s early works, which include the Weingarten Altar (1493; Augsburg Cathedral), the St. Afra Altar (c. 1495; parts in the bishop’s palace at Eichstätt), the picture called the Basilica of St. Mary (1499; Augsburg), and a Passion series in 12 scenes (Donaueschingen), are characterized by deep, rich colouring and by balanced compositions of figures moving slowly and deliberately on a narrow stage. They show a knowledge of the art of Rogier van der Weyden, which has led some authorities to suppose that Holbein had visited the Netherlands, but ignorance of his Augsburg predecessors precludes any real evaluation of the immediate sources of his style.
A visit in 1501 to Frankfurt am Main, where, with the assistance of Sigmund Holbein and Leonhard Beck, he painted the high altar of the Dominican monastery (Städelsches Kunstinstitut, Frankfurt am Main), initiated a new stylistic phase that includes also the Kaisheim Altar (1502; Munich) and the Basilica of St. Paul (c. 1503–04; Augsburg). These paintings have much greater depth than before, with a freer grouping of highly individualized figures—often portraits—in rather lively movement. It has been suggested that this new manner was perhaps inspired by a contact with the early work of Matthias Grünewald in Frankfurt.
In a third and last phase, after 1510, including the St. Catherine Altar (1512; Augsburg), the St. Sebastian Altar (1516; Munich), and the Fountain of Life (1519; Lisbon), Holbein began to use Italianate ornament and evolved a compromise between the late Gothic and Renaissance styles similar to that of Gerard David in Bruges. However, he then found himself overshadowed by artists whose grasp of the Italian idiom was sounder than his own. In 1517, having fallen into financial difficulties, Holbein left Augsburg and went to Isenheim.
Holbein’s honesty and insight as a portraitist are best seen in his many silverpoint drawings. It is clear that the portraiture of his more famous son must have owed much to his teaching. He also made designs for glass painting, and windows were designed by him in Eichstätt Cathedral (1502) and in the churches of St. Ulrich at Augsburg and St. James at Straubing.
