Hasegawa Tōhaku,   (born 1539, Nanao, Japan—died  March 20, 1610, Edo? [now Tokyo]), Japanese painter of the Azuchi-Momoyama period (1574–1600) and the founder of the Hasegawa school of painting or painters.
Early in his career in Noto province (now in Fukui prefecture), Hasegawa painted Buddhist pictures including “Picture of Twelve Devas” (Ishikawa Shōkaku Temple), “Portrait of Takeda Shingen” (Seikei Temple of Mount Kōya), and “Portrait of Nawa Nagatoshi.” About 1571 he moved to Kyōto and studied the painting of the Kanō school of painters. He was strongly influenced by Sesshū, a 15th-century master of suiboku-ga (“water-ink painting”), and even named himself Sesshū V. He also studied the painting of the Sung and Yüan dynasties of 10th–14th-century China, becoming a master of these styles. About 1589 he painted a suiboku sansui (“landscape painting in water ink”) on sliding doors in the Daikoku Temple, and in 1591 he and his disciples painted the “Dai-kimbeki shōheki-ga” (a great wall painting with the emphasis on the colours of gold and blue) of the Shōun Temple, commissioned by chief imperial minister Toyotomi Hideyoshi for his son, who had been born prematurely and had died.
Tōhaku’s remaining works may be divided into two styles: one is that of a free-hearted spirit, expressing the masculine and candid atmosphere of the age, represented by “Picture of Flowers and Trees” (Chishaku Temple) and “Picture of Willow Tree and Bridge”; the other style is that of kotan (“elegant simplicity”), expressed in black-ink paintings such as “Picture of Pine Forest” (Tokyo National Museum) and “Picture of Monkey in Dead Trees” (Ryōsen Temple, part of Myōshin Temple). Having been a Nichiren-sect Buddhist, he was associated with Nittsū, the holy priest of the Honpō Temple, who recorded Tōhaku’s theory of painting in “Tōhaku ga-in” (“Studio of Tōhaku”) in the 1590s. In 1603 Tōhaku was raised to the hōkyō (“divine bridge,” one of the honourable ranks given to artists and doctors by the imperial house). Toward the end of his life, he painted figure-paintings in the black-ink style, patterned after the genpitsu-tai (literally, “the style of fewest strokes”) of Liang Chieh, though these works are coarse and rough. 
