Jean Clouet, byname Janet, or Jehannet,  (born c. 1485—died c. 1540, Paris, Fr.), Renaissance painter of portraits celebrated for the depth and delicacy of his characterization.
Although he lived in France most of his life, records show that he was not French by origin and was never naturalized. He was one of the chief painters to Francis I as early as 1516 and was appointed groom of the chamber from 1523, thus enjoying the salary and social position granted to the most prominent poets and scholars of the time. In the early 1520s he lived in Tours and from 1529 in Paris. He painted chiefly portraits, but, at least in the earlier part of his career, he also produced religious subjects (a “St. Jerome” in 1522; designs for the “Four Evangelists,” 1523).
Until recently, the works attributed to Clouet consisted of a group of about 130 preparatory drawings representing members of the French court between 1514 and 1540 and a small group of miniatures and oil paintings, the drawings for which can be found among those of the first group. None of these, however, is signed or documented as the work of Jean Clouet. Consequently, their attribution to Clouet was merely tentative. But the discovery and cleaning of the well-documented “Portrait of Guillaume Budé” enabled the characteristics of Clouet’s art to be established. Budé himself stated about 1536 that Jean Clouet had painted a portrait of him. Since the preparatory drawing for this picture exists in Chantilly and is obviously by the same hand as the other drawings, the attribution to Jean Clouet of all the aforementioned works ceased to be merely hypothetical.
In all these portraits the sitters’ hands differ considerably and were probably executed by apprentices in Clouet’s workshop. This body of works shows Clouet as one of the best 16th-century portrait painters, both incisive and delicate in the psychological characterization of sitters. His drawings are simple, broad, and subtle; his paintings are fresh in colour, subdued in modeling, and minute in execution. His technique seems fundamentally Flemish (he came probably either from Brussels or from the old Franco-Flemish region of Valenciennes), but the supple drawing, the calm plasticity, and the acute analysis of the individual in his portraits are typically French. In his youth he could have been influenced by the already ancient French tradition of portrait drawing. On the other hand, his monumental composition is influenced by the Italian Renaissance portraiture introduced into France by Andrea Solari. Some of Clouet’s portraits also show similarities to those by Holbein, who in his turn borrowed the technique of portrait drawing in coloured chalks, or pastels, from Clouet.
