Lu Yanshao, Wade-Giles romanization Lu Yen-shao, alias Wanruo,  (born June 26, 1909, Jiading, Shanghai, China—died 1993, Jiading), Chinese landscape painter whose vigorous style received critical acclaim in the late 20th century.
As a child, Lu showed an interest in Chinese painting, calligraphy, and seal carving. In 1927 he began to study under Wang Tongyu, a former scholar-official of the imperial court in the Qing period who had settled at Nanxiang, and the renowned Shanghai painter Feng Chaoran, on the recommendation of Wang. Lu had an opportunity to gain a grounding in traditional Chinese painting by making copies directly from the Ming and Qing paintings that these teachers collected, particularly works of the Four Wangs of the early Qing period.
After the Japanese invasion in the 1930s, Lu was forced to live for a time in remote mountainous areas. He had his first one-man show in 1938. Lu accurately described his works produced during this period as “meticulous and elegant,” reflecting his steadfast attention to studying ancient models and refining his painting and calligraphic skills. Over subsequent decades Lu was a painting instructor at a variety of art schools, including the Chinese Painting Academy in Shanghai in 1955.
Like many of his contemporaries, Lu was deprived of his freedom to paint during the Cultural Revolution. From the 1970s onward, however, he again became active and started to make painting expeditions to different parts of China to study landscapes directly from nature. Believing a knowledge of Chinese literature to be essential to Chinese painting, Lu also assiduously studied Chinese classics and poetry, with a special preference for the works of the Tang poet Du Fu. He created many poetic renderings of landscapes based on the ideas of Du’s poems, as may be seen in the set of 100 folios from his Album of Poetic Settings from Du Fu’s Lines that he produced from about 1959 to 1962.
Lu gained his reputation relatively late in life. By the 1980s his brushwork had already turned into the bold and vigorous style for which he received the most attention. While some critics have theorized that this restless and trembling style is derived from Qing masters such as Shitao, Lu claimed that he followed the style of the Four Wangs in his early stage, and that through these painters he acquired the skill of the Four Masters of the Yuan dynasty. Yet, unlike many painters inspired by traditional Chinese art, he boldly applied dark ink directly on the paper without creating any outlines. He then spontaneously built subsequent brushstrokes upon the previous brushstrokes, without the aid of a clear composition guiding him. In this way, his traditional approach to painting transformed into a completely new and innovative style by the end of his career.
In the 1980s and ’90s a number of major exhibitions of Lu’s work were held, including an important retrospective staged by the Chinese Art Gallery in Shenzhen in 1991. Lu’s most significant publications include Drafts for Teaching Landscape Painting (1985) and Lu Yanshao’s Autobiography (1986).
