Max Liebermann,  (born July 20, 1847, Berlin, Ger.—died February 8, 1935, Berlin), painter and printmaker who is known for his naturalistic studies of the life and labour of the poor. He was also the foremost proponent of Impressionism in Germany.
After studying under the painter Carl Steffeck from 1866 to 1868, Liebermann attended the Weimar Art School from 1868 to 1872. The straightforward realism and direct simplicity of his first exhibited picture, Women Plucking Geese (1872), presented a striking contrast to the romantically idealized art then in vogue. This picture earned him the epithet “disciple of the ugly.” Liebermann spent the summer of 1873 at the village of Barbizon, near Paris, where a group of landscape painters known as the Barbizon school had been working since the 1830s. There he became acquainted with one of the leaders of the Barbizon school, Jean-François Millet, and studied the works of Camille Corot, Constant Troyon, and Charles-François Daubigny.
In 1878 Liebermann returned to Germany, living at first in Munich and finally settling in Berlin in 1884. From 1875 to 1913 he spent summers painting in the Netherlands. During this period he found his painting subjects in the orphanages and asylums for the elderly in Amsterdam and among the peasants and urban labourers of Germany and the Netherlands. In works such as The Flax Spinners (1887), Liebermann did for German painting what Millet had done for French art, portraying scenes of rural labour in a melancholy, yet unsentimental, manner.
After 1890 Liebermann’s style was influenced by the French Impressionist painters Édouard Manet and Edgar Degas. As Liebermann focused on Impressionist concerns of light and colour, subject matter became less important for him. However, he maintained a connection to the narrative tradition of German art, and thus, unlike the French Impressionists, he never became completely detached from subject matter. In 1899 Liebermann founded the Berliner Sezession, a group of artists who supported the academically unpopular styles of Impressionism and Art Nouveau. Despite his association with the antiestablishment Sezession, he became a member of the Berlin Academy, and in 1920 he was elected its president. In 1932 the Nazis forced him to resign from his position.
