Milton Glaser,  (born June 26, 1929, Bronx, New York, U.S.—died June 26, 2020, New York, New York), American graphic designer, illustrator, and cofounder of the revolutionary Pushpin Studio.
Glaser graduated from Cooper Union in New York City in 1951 and studied printmaking with Giorgio Morandi in Italy in 1952–53. Glaser founded the graphic design firm Pushpin Studio in New York with Seymour Chwast, Reynold Ruffins, and Edward Sorel in 1954. At this time photography and television were radically altering the visual-communications industry, and naturalistic illustration was declining from its position as the dominant mass-media imaging technique. Glaser and the Pushpin artists drew upon their childhood love of comic books, an understanding of modern art gleaned from their student days, and the art of non-Western cultures to forge an innovative conceptual approach to graphic design. Eschewing traditional narrative techniques, these artists’ work expressed ideas about the subject through simplified images that functioned as signs and symbols.
By 1960 Glaser and Chwast had become increasingly involved in typography and the total design of visual communications. Their approach—in which one designer creates the concept, overall page design, type or lettering, and image for a project—recalled the working method of Art Nouveau-era poster artists such as Jules Chéret and Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec. An example of such an overall design was Glaser’s insert poster (1967) for a record album by Bob Dylan. In this work, which became a cultural icon, he used contoured lines and flat colour to create an emblematic image. One of Glaser’s own typeface designs, Babyteeth, spells out Dylan’s name in the image.
Glaser served as art director of New York Magazine (1968–76), which he cofounded with Clay Felker. From 1975 to 1977 Glaser was vice president and design director of the Village Voice. As his career progressed over the last half of the 20th century, his range of design activities came to encompass magazine art direction, packaging, corporate visual identity, fine art, and store and restaurant design. His willingness to experiment and explore new directions enabled him to produce an astounding variety of visual designs.
Glaser’s honours include a National Medal of Arts (2009). He was profiled in the documentary To Inform and Delight (2008).
