Neil Gaiman, in full Neil Richard Gaiman,  (born November 10, 1960, Portchester, Hampshire, England), British writer who earned critical praise and popular success with richly imagined fantasy tales that frequently featured a darkly humorous tone.
Gaiman grew up in Sussex and attended Whitgift School in Croydon. Upon graduating, he worked as a freelance journalist before earning his first author credit for a paperback biography of the pop music group Duran Duran in 1984. While the subject matter was certainly not indicative of his later work, its success was, and the first printing sold out in a matter of days. It was about that time that he met artist Dave McKean, and the two collaborated on the graphic novel Violent Cases (1987). The work established them as rising stars in the comic world, and soon the two were noticed by publishers on both sides of the Atlantic. They submitted story and art treatments to DC Comics, and the result was Black Orchid (1988), a miniseries that helped establish the atmosphere for the DC renaissance of the late 1980s. Along with Alan Moore’s work on Watchmen (1986–87) and Swamp Thing (1983–87) and Frank Miller’s gritty interpretation of Batman in The Dark Knight Returns (1986), the success of Black Orchid showed that a market existed for dark mature stories written for an adult audience. That became even clearer with the launch of The Sandman in 1989.
The Sandman was a completely new kind of comic, and it became one of the flagship titles for Vertigo, a line of adult-themed horror and fantasy series launched by DC in 1993. While McKean stayed on as cover artist for the book’s entire run, a rotating series of interior artists helped flavour each individual story arc. In addition, the stories were unlike any previously seen in mainstream comics. The protagonist was Morpheus, the manifestation of the ability of sentient beings to dream. Like many other pantheons, the Endless—Morpheus’s siblings—were godlike beings with human foibles and drives. A typical story was so littered with literary allusions and historical references that Internet fan sites soon began offering detailed annotations of individual issues. By the time the series ended in 1996, The Sandman had captured an enviable list of awards and was DC Comics’ top-selling title. Gaiman also topped best-seller lists with his novels Good Omens (with Terry Pratchett, 1990), Neverwhere (1996), Stardust (1999; film 2007), and American Gods (2001) and with his children’s book Coraline (2002; film 2009). He revisited the Sandman characters in 2003 with Endless Nights, an anthology that had the distinction of being the first graphic novel to earn a place on The New York Times best-seller list for hardcover fiction.
In 2004 Gaiman penned 1602 for Marvel Comics. The story reinterpreted classic Marvel superheroes and marked Gaiman’s first foray into the superhero genre since his run on the critically acclaimed but legally troubled Marvelman (known in the United States as Miracleman) in the early 1990s. Fittingly, the proceeds from 1602, one of that year’s best-selling comics, were used to finance Gaiman’s ultimately successful effort to free Marvelman from the copyright issues that had entangled it since 1998. The following year he reunited with McKean for the visually stunning film MirrorMask, and they collaborated on The Wolves in the Walls, an illustrated horror story for children. Anansi Boys (2006) revisited some of the characters introduced in American Gods, and it debuted at the top of The New York Times best-seller list. InterWorld (2007; with Michael Reaves) was a young-adult novel centred on a teenager who can travel between different versions of Earth and must deal with magical forces seeking to control them. The story had initially been conceived as a television show but was never picked up. Two sequels, The Silver Dream (2013) and Eternity’s Wheel (2015), were conceptualized by Gaiman and Reaves and written by Reaves and his daughter Mallory.
In 2009 Gaiman received the Newbery Medal for his distinguished contribution to literature for children for The Graveyard Book (2008), the macabre yet sweet tale of an orphan raised by a cemetery full of ghosts. In the ostensibly adult novel The Ocean at the End of the Lane (2013), a man reflects on a series of supernatural traumas sustained during his childhood. One of Gaiman’s most personal works, it was voted Specsavers Book of the Year by readers in the United Kingdom. Gaiman returned to the Sandman mythos for the first time in a decade with The Sandman: Overture (2013–15), a lushly illustrated limited series that featured art by J.H. Williams III and a story that explored the events that took place prior to the first Sandman tale. Trigger Warning: Short Fictions and Disturbances (2015) was a collection of brief tales, many of which referenced or sprung from the work of other authors and artists. In 2017 Gaiman offered a novel interpretation of Norse myths in Norse Mythology, while Bryan Fuller and Michael Green brought a lush, critically acclaimed adaptation of American Gods to the Starz cable network. Gaiman later adapted Good Omens as a miniseries that premiered on Amazon in 2019.
