Paul Rand,  (born August 15, 1914, Brooklyn, New York, U.S.—died November 26, 1996, Norwalk, Connecticut), American graphic designer who pioneered a distinctive American Modernist style.
After studying in New York City, Rand worked as an art director for Esquire and Apparel Arts magazines from 1937 to 1941. As his work developed, Rand assimilated the philosophy and visual vocabulary of European art and design, in particular that of the Bauhaus, Constructivism, Cubism, De Stijl, and Futurism. Rand believed that lines, shapes, and colours could become message-conveying signs and symbols in visual communications while simultaneously functioning as elements in an artistic composition. For example, in a 1947 poster promoting the New York Subways Advertising Company, Rand’s arrangement of dots and concentric circles in vibrant colours becomes both an illustrative image and a dynamic composition.
From 1941 to 1954 Rand worked as art director of the William H. Weintraub advertising agency, where he collaborated with copywriter Bill Bernbach. Rand advocated advertisements in which text and images were integrated into a codependent whole, with words and pictures working together to create an effective and engaging message. His advertisements, especially for Orbach’s department store, pointed toward a new stripped-down approach to advertising copy and design. During the 1950s and ’60s, as American corporations were turning to graphic designers to create contemporary trademarks and consistent graphic standards, Rand became a prominent proponent of such visual-identity systems. Now ubiquitous trademarks designed by Rand include the logos of Westinghouse (1960), ABC (1962), and IBM (1972). His designs for corporate annual reports were also broadly influential.
Rand’s career spanned seven decades, and in that time his graphic designs, teaching (he joined the faculty of Yale University in 1956), and ideas broadly influenced several generations of American designers. His major writings include Thoughts on Design (1947), A Designer’s Art (1985), Design, Form, and Chaos (1993), and From Lascaux to Brooklyn (1996).
