R. Crumb, in full Robert Crumb,  (born August 30, 1943, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, U.S.), American counterculture comic book artist and social satirist, known for his distinctive artwork and excellent marriage of drawing and narrative and for creating such well-known characters as Fritz the Cat and Mr. Natural. Crumb’s drawing style was influenced by many earlier cartoonists—notably the Disney cartoonist Carl Banks—and his satire likewise was inspired by the irreverence of Harvey Kurtzman, a mentor of sorts whose periodicals included Mad (1954–56) and Help! (1960–65).
The product of a highly unusual family, Crumb insulated himself early by becoming a voracious reader of comic books. With his elder brother Charles, he produced several comics. He graduated from high school in 1961 and the following year moved to Cleveland, where his drawing skills enabled him to find work as an illustrator for the American Greeting Card company. Three years later he joined the staff of Kurtzman’s short-lived satirical magazine Help! While at Help! Crumb introduced his best-known character, the iconoclastic and sex-obsessed Fritz the Cat. In 1972 the animation producer Ralph Bakshi released an X-rated feature-length cartoon adaptation of Crumb’s Fritz the Cat, a film that Crumb hated (he responded to it by killing the character in the pages of The People’s Comics).
Crumb began to contribute artwork to several “alternative” publications, and in 1967 he moved to San Francisco, settling in the Haight-Ashbury neighbourhood. There in 1968 he published his first underground comic book, the widely distributed and highly influential Zap Comix. Drawn in a broad, deliberately slapdash style reminiscent of the Fleischer brothers’ Popeye cartoons and George Herriman’s Krazy Kat newspaper strip, Zap and its successors (Despair, Uneeda, Head Comix, and many others) were perfectly attuned to the counterculture movement of the late 1960s. Through such grotesque caricatures as Angelfood McSpade, Shuman the Human, Whiteman, and Flakey Foont, Crumb skewered the values of contemporary American society in stories that dealt explicitly with such taboo subjects as sex and drug use. Also during this period, Crumb was  tapped to draw the Cheap Thrills album cover for a band named Big Brother & the Holding Company, which featured the up-and-coming blues vocalist Janis Joplin.
Merciless in his attacks on the establishment, the misanthropic Crumb also expressed contempt for the foibles and pretensions of the hippie generation, especially in his comic stories featuring Mr. Natural, a cynical and mercenary guru. As the counterculture movement subsided, Crumb curtailed his output, stopping altogether in 1976. Plagued by troubles with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), he lived in seclusion for several years and then resurfaced in 1981, when he published the black-and-white illustrated anthology Weirdo (1981), which featured himself as the main character in a collection of self-flagellating “confessional” tales. In 1991 Crumb moved to the south of France, from which vantage point he contributed illustrated articles to such mainstream publications as The New Yorker and devoted his spare time to collecting and performing obscure musical compositions of the 1920s and ’30s. The graphic novel Kafka for Beginners (1993), with drawings by Crumb and a script by David Zane Mairowitz, has been republished several times under a variety of titles. Crumb continued to produce original comics, either as stand-alone stories or as revisits to titles he had started decades earlier (in 2004, issue 15 of Zap was published). In October 2009 Crumb released The Book of Genesis Illustrated by R. Crumb. The work, begun in 2004, was originally intended as a parody of the first book of the Bible. However, as Crumb delved deeper into the source material, he decided to adhere to the literal text to create a unique graphic interpretation of the stories of Genesis.
Director Terry Zwigoff’s award-winning documentary Crumb (1994) is an uninhibited cinematic portrait of the artist’s life, work, and eccentricities.
