Rembrandt Peale,  (born Feb. 22, 1778, Bucks county, Pa., U.S.—died Oct. 3, 1860, Philadelphia, Pa.), American painter, writer, and portraitist of prominent figures in Europe and the post-Revolutionary United States.
One of the sons of Charles Willson Peale, Rembrandt, along with his brother Raphaelle, inherited the mantle of Philadelphia’s premier portrait painter after his father’s retirement from the profession in 1794. While Raphaelle became better known for his elegant still-life compositions, Rembrandt carried on the family’s reputation in portraiture. He studied in London with the American expatriate painter Benjamin West and emulated his father’s sculptural Neoclassical style in works such as his portrait of Thomas Jefferson (1805), Peale’s acknowledged masterpiece and the best existing portrait of Jefferson. Peale continued his training at the Royal Academy in London. Between 1808 and 1810 he lived in Paris, where his work was admired by Jacques-Louis David, the leading Neoclassical artist of the day. Peale was offered the post of court painter to Napoleon.
Apparently because of some unfavourable criticism, Peale ceased to paint for several years, and, following his father’s example, in 1814 he opened a museum and portrait gallery in Baltimore, Md. Known as the Baltimore Museum, it was where Peale exhibited the first works to be illuminated by gaslight. He sold his museum in 1822; it is now known as the Peale Museum and is devoted to local history.
When Peale resumed his painting he wanted to move beyond portraiture, so he turned to formal subject pieces. Peale culminated this phase of his painting with The Court of Death (1820), which he exhibited throughout the country. He promoted his portrait of George Washington (1823) with equal vigour, seeking to replace the popularly accepted likeness of Washington by Gilbert Stuart with his own work. He had painted Washington from life in 1795, and he later painted 76 replicas of this likeness. Peale’s painting and writing—including Notes on Italy (1831) and Portfolio of an Artist (1839)—occupied him for the remainder of his life.
