Sherrie Levine,  (born April 17, 1947, Hazelton, Pennsylvania, U.S.), American conceptual artist known for remaking famous 20th-century works of art either through photographic reproductions (termed re-photography), drawing, watercolour, or sculpture. Her appropriations are conceptual gestures that question the Modernist myths of originality and authenticity. She held that the loss of authenticity in art was a result of the ubiquitous mediated signs that defined contemporary reality and that it was impossible to create anything new.
Levine grew up in the Midwest and attended the University of Wisconsin at Madison (B.A., 1969; M.F.A., 1973). She moved to New York City in 1975, and her earliest work—in collage—demonstrated a strong feminist leaning. In the early 1980s she began to be associated with a group of artists, including Jeff Koons and David Salle, who were interested in ready-made images and objects, and her work was included in some of the important early shows for this group. She began making photographic reproductions of images by such important American photographers as Edward Weston (After Edward Weston, 1979) and Walker Evans (After Walker Evans, 1981), among others. She made drawings after such artists as Willem de Kooning, Egon Schiele, and Kazimir Malevich and watercolours after Piet Mondrian, Henri Matisse, and Fernand Léger. She deliberately chose artists with radically different styles, rendering them in a uniform format and thereby reducing the images to equivalent signs. In the mid-1980s she made two series of paintings based on the wood knot and the grid, provoking questions about the supposed unique style of modern abstraction. Her work from the 1990s included reproductions of pieces by two major 20th-century artists: Marcel Duchamp’s famous ready-made Fountain and Constantin Brancusi’s Newborn. Keeping faith with her earliest feminist concerns, Levine appropriated only the work of male artists as a means of “de-heroicizing” their patriarchal claim to the art historical canon.
Levine continued to consider art history through a variety of media in the 21st century. She made an assortment of bronze-cast animal skulls, many of which evoke the work of Georgia O’Keeffe, marking the first time Levine referenced a female artist. In 2010 Levine began a series of human skulls in cast glass, which not only recall 17th-century vanitas paintings but also Damien Hirst’s contemporary platinum and diamond skulls. She also made a number of monochrome paintings, which pare down the paintings of such artists as Alfred Stieglitz, Ad Reinhardt and Pierre-August Renoir into a sample of colours. The series were a reconceptualization of her 1989 series Meltdown, in which she made a cycle of woodblock prints, reducing the paintings of Duchamp, Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, Mondrian, and Claude Monet into 12 blocks of colour.
The Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, organized a major survey of Levine’s work (“Sherrie Levine: Mayhem”) in 2011. Her art is in the collections of such institutions as the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York; the Philadelphia Museum of Art; the Art Institute of Chicago; and the Pompidou Centre, Paris.
