Shiba Kōkan, also called Kōkan, or Shiba Shun, original name Andō Kichijirō, or Katsusaburō, pseudonym Kungaku,  (born 1738/47, Edo [now Tokyo], Japan—died  1818, Edo), Japanese artist and scholar of the Tokugawa period who introduced many aspects of Western culture to Japan. He was a pioneer in Western-style oil painting and was the first Japanese to produce a copperplate etching.
Kōkan studied painting first with a teacher of the Kanō school, in which Chinese themes and techniques were stressed, and then took up woodblock printing with Suzuki Harunobu. Kōkan became adept at imitating Harunobu’s style, but he soon moved away from what he considered the spiritless ukiyo-e tradition and came under the influence of Western realistic painting, with its techniques of shading and perspective. He learned copperplate engraving and oil painting by studying Dutch books, the only foreign books available at the time. After much trial and error, he succeeded in making his first copperplate prints; the model product of this effort was an etching entitled “Mimeguri Keizu” (1783; “The View from Mimeguri”).
In 1788 he left Edo and traveled westward to Nagasaki, which was the only Japanese port open to external trade. While there he visited the Dutch trading enclave on the island of Dejima, trying to absorb as much Western knowledge as he could. His account of the journey appeared in Saiyū ryodan (1794; “Account of a Western Visit”). He later published a set of volumes on Dutch astronomy and also endeavoured, through etchings, to illustrate Nicolaus Copernicus’ heliocentric theory of the solar system.
Kōkan is also known for his oil paintings, which display his acquired Western techniques. In 1799 he wrote Seiyō-gadan (“Dissertation on Western Painting”), in which he explained fundamental principles of the realism of Western painting.
In his later years, he turned to studying the Chinese sages, notably Lao-tzu and Confucius. He also became a disciple of Zen Buddhism, secluding himself at the Engaku Temple in Kamakura and spending much time in meditation.
