Grammy Award,  any of a series of awards presented annually in the United States by the National Academy of Recording Arts & Sciences (NARAS; commonly called the Recording Academy) or the Latin Academy of Recording Arts & Sciences (LARAS; commonly called the Latin Recording Academy) to recognize achievement in the music industry. Winners are selected from more than 25 fields, which cover such genres as pop, rock, rap, R&B, country, reggae, classical, gospel, and jazz, as well as production and postproduction work, including packaging and album notes. Four general awards are also given for record, album, song of the year, and best new artist; in total more than 75 awards are presented. The honorees receive a golden statuette of a gramophone.
To be eligible for a Grammy from NARAS, the recording or music video must be released in the United States between October 1 of the previous year and midnight September 30 of the given Grammy year. Entries are submitted by record companies as well as members of the academy and are reviewed to determine eligibility and category placement. The voting members of NARAS, through a series of ballots, select five nominees for each award and ultimately the winner; the voters cast ballots only in their areas of expertise. The winners are announced during a televised ceremony.
The Grammy Awards were first presented by NARAS in Los Angeles in 1959, when 28 prizes were given. Winners included Ella Fitzgerald, Frank Sinatra, and the Kingston Trio. The number of awards has increased as musical genres have emerged. Rock was first recognized as a genre by the academy at the 1980 ceremony and rap at the 1989 presentation. An award for best music video was first handed out in 1982 to acknowledge the growing influence of the medium. In 2011 NARAS radically restructured the Grammy category system and reduced the total number of awards from 109 to 78. Gender-based categories were eliminated, as were those that distinguished between solo and group efforts. Awards recognizing genres such as Hawaiian music, Native American music, and zydeco were folded into a single category, dubbed “regional roots music,” and instrumental categories were drastically scaled back. Further adjustments were made in subsequent years, and by 2017 the number of awards stabilized at 84.
With the rise of Latin music, NARAS created LARAS in 1997. To be eligible for a Latin Grammy, a recording may be released anywhere in the world, but it must be recorded in the Spanish or Portuguese language between July 1 of the previous year and June 30 of the award year. The first Latin Grammy Awards ceremony was staged in Los Angeles in 2000, with Carlos Santana and Shakira among the winners.
Receipt of a Grammy of any sort usually results in greater record sales, as well as increased recognition to the artists. Among those who have received the most Grammys are Sir Georg Solti (32 awards), Quincy Jones, Alison Krauss, Stevie Wonder, and Chet Atkins.
Select Grammy Award winners are provided in the table.

          "Love Theme from 'A Star Is Born' (Evergreen)," Barbra Streisand;
        

          "You Light Up My Life," Debby Boone (tied)
        
Select Latin Grammy Award winners are provided in the table.
