Music festival,  usually a series of performances at a particular place and inspired by a unifying theme, such as national music, modern music, or the promotion of a prominent composer’s works. It may also take the form of a competition for performers or composers.
Series of religious services associated with a given feast early established the idea of the music festival in the church. The term festival in its modern sense, however, was first used in England. The Festival of the Sons of the Clergy, originally an annual charity sermon, was first given at St. Paul’s Cathedral, London, in 1655; it took on a musical character in 1698. The famed Three Choirs Festival was established in 1724 (an earlier form existed in 1715) and continues to take place annually and in rotation at the cathedral cities of Gloucester, Worcester, and Hereford. Harp festivals were held in Ireland toward the end of the 18th century.
Festivals of secular music in England came into being in the 18th century; the first devoted to George Frideric Handel was held in 1784 in Westminster Abbey, London. Handel festivals continued almost without interruption well into the 20th century, including the triennial Handel Festivals held at the Crystal Palace, near London, from 1857 until the building burned in 1936. The Birmingham Festival (1768, triennial from 1769 until 1912) was originally devoted to Handel’s music but was extended to include that of other composers in the 1800s. During the 18th and 19th centuries, festivals, mostly choral, were developed in various cities in England; they include the Leeds Festival (triennial). The Glyndebourne Festival (for opera) was established in 1934 in Sussex, and the Edinburgh International Festival of Music and Drama was inaugurated in 1947; the Cheltenham Festival, initiated in 1945, is devoted to modern music.
In the United States, several large-scale choral festivals on the English model were held in the 19th century. In 1869 and 1872 the celebrated bandmaster Patrick Gilmore organized two Peace Jubilee festivals, featuring choirs of 20,000 and orchestras of 1,000, plus artillery firing and bells. Annual chamber-music festivals, performing specially commissioned works, were established by Elizabeth Sprague Coolidge (Pittsfield, Mass., 1918), and more specialized ones followed in the 20th century. In 1937 the conductor Serge Koussevitzky inaugurated the Berkshire Festival at Tanglewood, near Lenox, Mass. The annual Newport, R.I., jazz festival (1954) also became prominent. Many rock-music festivals were held in the 1960s and ’70s. In Puerto Rico the Spanish cellist Pablo Casals established a noted festival in 1957. Other Latin-American festivals have been held in Caracas, Venez.; Santiago, Chile; and Buenos Aires, Arg.
Numerous festivals were held annually in German cities during the 19th century. The Bayreuth Festival was inaugurated by the German composer Richard Wagner in 1876 to present his operas and music dramas in a specially built opera house. In Salzburg, Austria, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart’s birthplace, the first Mozart festival was held in 1877. Later including works by many composers, it became an annual summer event from 1920. Especially important among European opera festivals is that held in Munich (established 1901), devoted mainly to the work of Mozart, Richard Strauss, and Wagner. Other prominent European festivals include the Maggio Musicale Fiorentino (Florence Musical May), held annually from 1933; the Spoleto, Italy, festival, inaugurated by the composer Gian Carlo Menotti (1958); and the festivals held at Besançon and Aix-en-Provence, Fr., from 1948. Adventurous modern works, including electronic music, are heard each summer at the Darmstadt, Ger., festivals (1946).
The International Society for Contemporary Music promotes modern works of novel nature; formed in 1922, it has held summer festivals in various European and U.S. cities. The first festival of music and drama at Ōsaka, Japan, was held in 1958.
Contests of artistic skill, including music, are ancient; musical competitions were part of the 6th-century-bc Pythian Games at Delphi. The eisteddfod in Wales—originally a festival for bards (poet-singers), but now including other arts—had its beginnings in the 12th century or earlier, and in the 12th century the troubadours held musical competitions, the puys, at Puy Notre Dame, near Saumur, in France. The song contest organized by the Meistersingers at Wartburg, Ger., dates from the 13th century.
In 18th-century England local singing competitions were held by groups of singers at taverns. In the 19th century, singing and brass-band competitions between amateur musicians became popular and were adjudicated by prominent figures.
In the United States in 1790, singers from Dorchester and Stoughton, Mass., competed at Dorchester. Similar amateur activity among students was later encouraged; and in the 20th century, band, choral, and orchestral competitions among schools and colleges were organized on a large scale.
In the 20th century a new form of international competition was organized to promote the careers of professional performers. Such competition festivals include the Chopin International Competition for Pianists (begun 1927, Warsaw); the Queen Elisabeth of Belgium prize for violinists, pianists, and composers (begun 1937, Brussels); and the Tchaikovsky competition for pianists, violinists, and cellists (begun 1958, Moscow).
