Barbershop quartet singing, barbershop also spelled barber shop,  typically all-male or all-female popular choral form characterized by a capella singing, with three voices harmonizing to the melody of a fourth voice. The emphasis is on close, carefully arranged harmony, synchronization of word sounds, and the use of such devices as variation of tempo, volume level, diction, colour, and phrasing. Phrases are often repeated for echo effect, and musical arrangements usually employ syncopated ragtime and other nostalgic song styles. In all-male groups the voice parts are tenor (here equivalent to a countertenor), lead (second) tenor, baritone, and bass, with the lead normally singing the melody and the tenor harmonizing above. In all-female groups the voice parts are called by the same names, with tenor being roughly equivalent to a lyric soprano, lead being second soprano, baritone alto, and bass contralto. In the late 20th century, mixed groups of men and women were also formed.
Although barbershop quartet singing is associated with the United States, its origins (in the 19th century) are obscure: it may date from an era when American barbershops formed social and musical centres for men, or it may refer back to the British expression “barber’s music,” denoting an extemporized performance by patrons waiting to be shaved and referring to a barber’s traditional role as a musician. In any event, the modern Society for the Preservation and Encouragement of Barber Shop Quartet Singing in America (SPEBSQSA, Inc.), also called (since 2004) the Barbershop Harmony Society, was founded by Owen Clifton Cash, Rupert I. Hall, and 24 other men who attended a first meeting and songfest at the Tulsa Club in Tulsa, Okla., U.S., on April 11, 1938. The society flourished, and by the early 21st century it had more than 800 chapters with more than 38,000 members. It holds an annual convention and contests, and it publishes the bimonthly magazine The Harmonizer. Headquarters are in Nashville.
A similar organization for women, Sweet Adelines (now Sweet Adelines International), was founded on July 13, 1945, also in Tulsa. In the early 21st century the group had members on five continents, including more than 1,200 quartets and 600 choruses. It also holds an annual convention and contests. It publishes a quarterly magazine, The Pitch Pipe, and supports the Young Singers Foundation, which offers scholarships for vocal music students and a variety of grants. The headquarters of the organization are still in Tulsa. Another women’s organization, Harmony, Inc., split from the Sweet Adelines in 1959 over racial discrimination and other political matters. Its headquarters were in Fredericton, N.B., Can., and it published The Key-Note annually.
