Calle 13, English 13th Street,  Puerto Rican popular music duo known for intelligent, poetic, and sharply pointed social and political commentary—all delivered through a distinctive blend of hip-hop with a broad range of Latin American music styles. René Pérez Joglar (“Residente”; b. February 23, 1978, San Juan, Puerto Rico) was the master of language, while his stepbrother, Eduardo José Cabra Martínez (“Visitante”; b. September 10, 1978, San Juan, Puerto Rico), masterminded the music. The duo was one of the most popular and influential groups on the Latin popular music scene in the early 21st century.
Pérez and Cabra met in a middle-class neighbourhood in San Juan, Puerto Rico, and became brothers when Pérez’s mother married Cabra’s father. Although the stepparents eventually divorced, the boys’ bond remained strong, and they continued to visit each other throughout their youth. Whenever Cabra went to the gated community on 13th Street (“Calle 13”) in the San Juan suburb of Trujillo Alto where his brother lived, he’d announce himself to the guard as a “Visitor” (“Visitante”) coming to see a “Resident” (“Residente”). That recurring experience ultimately formed the foundation of the duo’s professional personae.
Both boys were involved in the arts from a young age. Cabra began formal music lessons when he was six years old and eventually studied piano, saxophone, and flute, before teaching himself guitar and experimenting with computer-generated sounds. He maintained his interest in music—particularly in production and composition—while studying accounting and information systems at the University of Puerto Rico. Pérez, meanwhile, was absorbed in literature as a youth, pursued undergraduate study at the School of Visual Arts (Escuela de Artes Plásticas) of Puerto Rico, and later received a master’s degree in animation from Georgia’s Savannah College of Art and Design.
Calle 13 started recording music in 2004, with Residente writing and rapping and Visitante supporting the vocals with a mixture of hip-hop and other types of electronic music. In 2005 the brothers signed a contract with the White Lion label in Puerto Rico and subsequently created a stir with “Querido FBI” (“Dear FBI”), a poignant criticism of the U.S. government aired in the wake of the FBI’s killing that September of Puerto Rican pro-independence leader Filiberto Ojeda Ríos. Toward the end of 2005 the brothers released their first album, Calle 13, which included “Atrévete-te-te” (“I Dare You-You-You”), the group’s first major hit. With engaging lyrics and imagery that spoke to the middle-class fear of the urban poor, the song effectively elevated the album to best-seller status and propelled the brothers to celebrity.
During the next several years Calle 13’s popularity skyrocketed, as the brothers gained audiences elsewhere in Latin America as well as in Spain and on the U.S. mainland. The brothers traveled widely, absorbing influences from an array of artists. Residente was inspired most notably by Panamanian salsa musician, actor, and political activist Rubén Blades. The duo eventually collaborated with Blades, as well as with Mexican rock band Café Tacuba, Nigerian Afro-beat musician Seun Kuti (son of Afro-beat founder Fela Anikulapo-Kuti), Puerto Rican experimental-rock musician Omar Rodriguez Lopez, and Peruvian singer-songwriter Susana Baca, among others. Although Calle 13’s music has often been classified as reggaeton (a type of Spanish-language rap), the brothers rejected the label, citing the genre as only one of many influences in their music. While reggaeton lyrics were typically vulgar, sexist, and replete with clichés, Residente’s poetry—although often raunchy—was notably cerebral; it was colourful, provocative, witty, and somewhat surreal.
In the first five years of their professional career, Calle 13 was showered with Latin Grammy Awards. In 2006 the duo won best new artist, and Calle 13 won best urban music album. The brothers’ next three albums—Residente o Visitante (2007), Los de atrás vienen conmigo (2008; “Those from Behind Are Coming with Me”), and Entren los que quieran (2010; “Everybody Is Welcome”)—also received awards in various categories. In 2011 Calle 13 made Latin Grammy history by receiving a record-breaking nine awards in a single night.
The duo returned in 2014 with the kaleidoscopic MultiViral. Guests on the album include Rage Against the Machine guitarist Tom Morello and WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, both of whom contributed to the raucous title track. MultiViral won the Latin Grammy for best urban music album and the Grammy Award for best Latin rock, urban, or alternative album. Calle 13 subsequently went on hiatus, and Residente released a self-titled album in 2017 that was also awarded the Latin Grammy for urban music.
