Chris Brown, in full Christopher Maurice Brown,  (born May 5, 1989, Tappahannock, Virginia, U.S.), American rhythm-and-blues (R&B) singer, songwriter, and actor whose melodic voice and skilled dancing propelled him to fame, though his success was sometimes overshadowed by his tumultuous personal life.
Brown grew up in small-town Virginia. As a child, he discovered a love for dancing and singing, and, when he was 15 years old, he was signed to Jive Records. His first album, a self-titled release, debuted in 2005. Sales climbed steadily on the strength of the chart-topping single “Run It!” and the quality Brown displayed both in vocals and in dancing earned him early comparisons to stars such as Usher and Michael Jackson. In 2006 Brown was nominated for two Grammy Awards, including best new artist, and in 2007 he expanded his entertainment career with roles in the dance drama film Stomp the Yard, the popular TV melodrama The O.C., and the holiday comedy-drama film This Christmas. In late 2007 he also released his second album, Exclusive, which was lauded for showcasing Brown’s growing maturity while still appealing to his target teen demographic. Exclusive featured collaborations with such big names as Lil Wayne and Kanye West, and its single “Kiss Kiss,” featuring singer-rapper T-Pain, reached the top of the Billboard Hot 100.
In 2009 Brown’s professional image was tarnished in the wake of his felony assault of fellow R&B star Rihanna, who was then his girlfriend, for which he was later sentenced to 180 days of community labour and five years of supervised probation. The highly publicized incident sparked controversy and remained in the media for months. Brown’s third album, Graffiti, debuted in December that year. Reviews seemed somewhat polarized over his musical expression of his turbulent relationship with Rihanna and its aftermath, and the album did not sell as well as his first two releases. However, two years later Brown rebounded with the album F.A.M.E., which became his first number one album on the Billboard 200 chart and won him a Grammy Award for best R&B album.
In 2012 Brown released the chart-topping Fortune. That same year he and Rihanna released remixes of each other’s songs via the social networking site Twitter, and he was featured on a song on her album Unapologetic. The collaborations sparked rumours of romantic reconciliation; in early 2013 Rihanna confirmed that the two had begun dating again, but they broke up later that year. In October 2013 Brown was charged with assaulting a man outside a hotel, a violation of his 2009 probation that ultimately resulted in him serving more than 100 days in jail in 2014. The incident—to which he later pled guilty—followed a series of altercations, several of which involved other musicians. Despite his legal troubles, Brown continued to record. His subsequent albums included X (2014), which features guest appearances by Lil Wayne and R. Kelly; Royalty (2015), named for his daughter; and the double albums Heartbreak on a Full Moon (2017) and Indigo (2019). The mixtape Slime & B (2020) is a collaboration with rapper Young Thug.
