Daft Punk,  French musical duo, active in the 1990s and early 21st century, whose sonic adventurousness and flair for presentation propelled them from the vanguard of electronic dance music to the pop mainstream. The two members were Thomas Bangalter (b. January 3, 1975, Suresnes, France) and Guy-Manuel de Homem-Christo (b. February 8, 1974, Neuilly-sur-Seine).
Bangalter and Homem-Christo met while attending secondary school in Paris. The two briefly played in a rock band called Darlin’, but by 1993 their encounters with electronic dance music (such as house and techno) at nightclubs and underground raves had inspired them to shift genres. Calling themselves Daft Punk—after a British music critic’s dismissal of a Darlin’ song as “daft punky thrash”—the pair experienced their first worldwide hit with “Da Funk” (1995), a groove-based instrumental that integrated elements of funk and a subgenre of house music known as acid house. Their debut album, Homework (1997), won them further acclaim within the dance music scene, and the buoyant single “Around the World”—which featured a looped, electronically processed vocal—helped introduce the act to a wider audience.
For Daft Punk’s next album, Discovery (2001), Bangalter and Homem-Christo took a more expansive and song-oriented approach. A colourful mélange of disco, rhythm-and-blues, and glam rock sounds of the 1970s and ’80s filtered through lustrous electronic production, Discovery was a success both on and off the dance floor. Its highlights included the kitschy “Digital Love,” which was built around a sample of a George Duke song, and the euphoric “One More Time,” which became a top-10 hit in multiple countries. While promoting the album, Bangalter and Homem-Christo presented themselves, in deadpan fashion, as robots; as part of the act, they sported sleek costumes that hid their faces beneath metallic helmets. Thereafter the two rarely appeared in public undisguised, and their robotic personas became integral to Daft Punk’s visual aesthetic and general mythos.
Daft Punk returned in 2005 with Human After All, but its minimal and often-abrasive sound was received coolly. A year later, however, Daft Punk went on tour for the first time in nearly a decade and dazzled audiences with a dynamic stage show that centred on a giant light-up pyramid within which the duo performed. Their reputation rose further when rapper Kanye West’s single “Stronger,” which sampled a track from Discovery, became a hit in 2007. In addition, a recording of a Daft Punk concert in Paris, released that same year as Alive 2007, earned the act its first Grammy Award (2009). As electronic dance music increased in popularity over the first decade of the 21st century, Daft Punk’s influence became apparent, especially as other artists in the genre, such as Skrillex and Deadmau5, found success with similarly spectacular live shows.
After composing the sound track to the science-fiction film TRON: Legacy (2010), Bangalter and Homem-Christo released Random Access Memories (2013). In contrast to Daft Punk’s previous recordings, the album was produced in collaboration with dozens of live musicians and employed hardly any electronic beats or samples. The result was hailed as a throwback to the opulent, ambitiously crafted recordings of an earlier musical era—albums such as Fleetwood Mac’s Rumours (1977) and Michael Jackson’s Thriller (1982)—and, in particular, as a love letter to disco. Aided by the pop hit “Get Lucky,” which featured vocals by Pharrell Williams and rhythm guitar by Nile Rodgers (of the influential disco group Chic), the album sold millions of copies worldwide. In the United States, where sales of Daft Punk’s previous releases had not been as strong as elsewhere, Random Access Memories was considered a breakthrough, and in 2014 Daft Punk won five Grammys, including the prize for album of the year.
Daft Punk subsequently collaborated on songs by various musicians, including Williams and Jay-Z. In 2021 the duo broke up. Daft Punk Unchained (2015) is a documentary.
