Dangdut,  Indonesian popular music for dancing that combines local music traditions, Indian and Malaysian film musics, and Western rock. The style emerged in Jakarta in the late 1960s and reached the pinnacle of its popularity in the ’70s and ’80s.
Dangdut music arose in the mid-20th century from the desire of young musicians of urban Indonesia to develop a distinct pan-Indonesian musical style that was both modern and appealing to all socioeconomic strata. To that end, innovative musicians appropriated the so-called Melayu music (also called orkes Melayu, literally “Malay orchestra”) of northern and western Sumatra and injected it with elements of other popular traditions.
Melayu music was itself a syncretic form, a product of the encounter between local, Middle Eastern, Indian, and Western musical traditions. The composition of Melayu ensembles varied widely, with flutes, tambourine-style frame drums (ultimately of Middle Eastern origin), violins, and assorted plucked lutes among the most common instruments. The songs were normally sung in Indonesian (a dialect of Malay), although occasionally some were sung in Arabic. To this Melayu foundation musicians added features of Indian—and the related Malaysian—film music, including an Indian style of melodic ornamentation as well as an Indian-rooted rhythmic character. Most notably, they incorporated the Indian tabla (pair of single-headed drums), which sounded a recurrent rhythmic figure expressible verbally as dang-dut (with the stress on the second syllable). It is from this pervasive rhythm that the new genre drew its name. Although no single element of the new music was uniquely Indonesian, the combination of elements yielded a distinctly Indonesian form.
The primary force behind the development of dangdut was Rhoma Irama, although Elvy Sukaesih, Rhoma’s singing partner for a number of years, and A. Rafik also were among the important pioneers of the genre. While many artists remained somewhat conservative in their dangdut endeavours, Rhoma began to push the genre in new directions in the later 20th century. A former rock musician, he was largely responsible for reworking the dangdut sound through the addition of synthesizers, drum set, electric guitars, and bass; however, he retained the dang-dut rhythmic figure (either in the drums, in the bass, or in both), the Indian-style ornamentation, and the Indonesian language, all of which had become hallmarks of the genre. Rhoma also shifted the dangdut repertoire away from light-romantic songs toward songs that addressed pressing social issues and exhorted listeners to mind the teachings of Islam. In the process of creating a new face for dangdut, Rhoma himself took on the persona of a Western-style rock idol, not only on stage but also on-screen as the star of numerous dangdut movies that were box-office sensations across the country. Most of these movies presented moralistic Muslim messages encoded in an indigence-to-affluence narrative.
Dangdut music rose rapidly in popularity, generating what amounted to a national musical mania in the 1970s and ’80s. At the time, the music appealed foremost to Muslim youths of the lower and lower-middle social classes, while it was widely condemned by the upper classes and the government as a vulgar detriment to society. Indeed, many dangdut songs released during the period were banned from government radio and television broadcasts. By the 1990s, however, the government had come to view the music as an important emblem of Indonesia’s development, and, moreover, the music had attracted a large following across socioeconomic boundaries. Although the mania had subsided by the turn of the 21st century, dangdut music remained a popular—and ubiquitous—form of entertainment, especially in its lighter form, in dance clubs, at parties, and at assorted concert venues throughout the Indonesian- and Malay-speaking areas of Southeast Asia.
