Dionne Warwick, original name Marie Dionne Warrick, Warwick also spelled Warwicke,  (born December 12, 1940, East Orange, New Jersey, U.S.), American pop and rhythm and blues (R&B) singer whose soulful sound earned her widespread appeal. She is perhaps best known for her collaborations with such high-profile artists as Burt Bacharach and Barry Manilow.
Warrick was raised in a middle-class, racially integrated community in East Orange, New Jersey. Her family was both spiritually and musically inclined—her mother managed a renowned gospel choir, the Drinkard Singers, and her father became a gospel record promoter—and Dionne, as everyone called her, began singing in church at a young age. She often played piano or organ for the Drinkard Singers, and she sometimes sang in place of absent adult members. As a teen, she formed a group called the Gospelaires with her sister, Dee Dee. The group enjoyed relative success, singing backup for a number of musicians in local venues and on recordings. Warrick continued to perform with the Gospelaires after enrolling at the Hartt School of the University of Hartford, Connecticut, in 1959. She often made trips to New York to record with the group, and during one of these sessions she met composer and producer Burt Bacharach, who invited her to sing on some demos he was recording with lyricist Hal David. Her singing caught the attention of an executive at Scepter Records, and Warrick was soon signed to the label. In 1962 she released her first single—“I Smiled Yesterday,” with the more popular B side “Don’t Make Me Over”—written and produced by Bacharach and David. Warrick’s surname was misspelled as “Warwick” on the record, and she adopted the mistake as her name thereafter.
The single proved relatively successful, and Warwick subsequently began touring worldwide. In the mid-1960s she began appearing in popular nightclubs and theatres and also on television, including appearances on Hullabaloo and The Red Skelton Hour. Warwick continued to release hit singles and albums throughout the 1960s, largely collaborations with Bacharach and David. Top 10 singles from this period included “Walk On By” (1964), “I Say a Little Prayer” (1967), and “(Theme from) Valley of the Dolls” (1968), the latter of which, by reaching number two on the Billboard pop chart, pushed Warwick further into the spotlight. In 1969 she earned her first Grammy Award, for best female contemporary pop vocal performance, for “Do You Know the Way to San Jose?” (1968). A second Grammy, for best female contemporary vocal performance, followed two years later for “I’ll Never Fall in Love Again.”
After a decade of successful collaborations, Bacharach, David, and Warwick quarreled and parted ways. From 1971 Warwick rendered her surname “Warwicke” on the advice of astrologer friend Linda Goodman but reverted the spelling to “Warwick” some five years later. She had few hits for the majority of the 1970s, with the notable exception of “Then Came You” (1974), a collaboration with the Spinners that topped the charts. Her popularity increased once more in 1979 with the songs “Deja Vu” and “I’ll Never Love This Way Again,” which garnered her Grammy Awards for best female R&B vocal performance and best female pop vocal performance, respectively. She maintained this popularity through the 1980s, and during that time she eventually reconciled with Bacharach, performing on his “That’s What Friends Are For” (1985), which also featured Gladys Knight, Elton John, and Stevie Wonder. The song, the proceeds of which went to funding AIDS research, earned Warwick her fifth Grammy.
Warwick’s commercial success dwindled in the 1990s, and she instead gained attention as the spokesperson for the Psychic Friends Network, hosting their infomercials. In addition to her music, Warwick devoted much of her time to entrepreneurial endeavours—including a skin care and fragrance line and an interior design group—and to charity projects.
Warwick continued to record into the 21st century. Her releases included the gospel album Why We Sing (2008) and two collections of duets, My Friends & Me (2006), on which she sang her old hits with such artists as Cyndi Lauper and Reba McEntire, and Feels So Good (2014), on which her partners included Jamie Foxx and Cee Lo Green. In 2019 Warwick returned to R&B with She’s Back, produced by her son. That year she also received a Grammy Award for lifetime achievement. Her autobiography, My Life, As I See It (written with David Freeman Wooley), was published in 2010.
