Hank Ballard, original name John Henry Kendricks,  (born November 18, 1927, Detroit, Michigan, U.S.—died March 2, 2003, Los Angeles, California), American rhythm-and-blues singer and songwriter best remembered for songs that were frequently as scandalous as they were inventive, most notably the salacious “Work with Me Annie” (1954). He also wrote “The Twist” (1959), which sparked a dance craze in the United States.
Ballard grew up in Alabama but returned to his birthplace when he was a teenager, and there he worked at an automobile-assembly plant before joining the vocal group that would record for Federal and King Records  first as the Royals and then, more successfully, as the Midnighters. In addition to Ballard, the principal members of the Midnighters included Henry Booth (b. March 7, 1934, Montgomery, Alabama, U.S.—d. 1978), Cal Green (b. June 22, 1935, Liberty, Texas, U.S.—d. July 4, 2004, Lake View Terrace, California, U.S.), Charles Sutton, and Sonny Woods (b. March 6, 1935, Detroit, Michigan, U.S.—d. 1984).
Although he was responsible for “The Twist,” a crossover sensation when later covered by  American Bandstand stalwart Chubby Checker, Ballard’s popularity was confined primarily to a wildly appreciative Black audience that made the Midnighters a hit on the chitlin circuit (music venues that attracted African American audiences). “Work with Me Annie”—which prompted a raft of answer songs, most notably “Roll with Me Henry” by Etta James—was opposed by radio programmers who disapproved of its “explicit lyrics.” However, it and the similarly criticized “Sexy Ways,” “Annie Had a Baby,” and “Annie’s Aunt Fannie” were Top Ten rhythm-and-blues hits for the Midnighters in 1954. Later hits included “Finger Poppin’ Time” and “Let’s Go, Let’s Go, Let’s Go” (both 1960).
Both the gospel phrasing with which Ballard infused his high tenor and the scorching guitar of the Midnighters’ backing band played important roles in the development of rock and roll. Ballard pursued a solo career after 1963, performing regularly with the James Brown Revue. After years of relative obscurity, he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1990; the Midnighters were inducted in 2012.
