Kendrick Lamar, in full Kendrick Lamar Duckworth,  (born June 17, 1987, Compton, California, U.S.), American rapper who achieved critical and commercial success with such albums as good kid, m.A.A.d city (2012) and To Pimp a Butterfly (2015).
Duckworth grew up in a high-crime area of Compton, where, ironically, his parents had moved to escape a violent milieu in Chicago. He began writing rhymes as a young teenager, and he released his first mixtape, Youngest Head Nigga in Charge (2003), under the name K. Dot. The music impressed Anthony Tiffith, head of the newly formed record label Top Dawg Entertainment, and he signed the musician. Duckworth put out two more mixtapes as K. Dot—Training Day (2005) and C4 (2009)—before releasing Overly Dedicated (2010) as Kendrick Lamar. He became a popular guest performer on tracks put out by other rappers and also joined fellow Top Dawg artists Ab-Soul, Jay Rock, and ScHoolboy Q in a hip-hop collective known as Black Hippy. In 2011 Top Dawg made Lamar’s album Section.80 available on iTunes, and at a concert that same year Lamar was ceremonially declared the “new king of the West Coast” by veteran rap artists Game, Snoop Dogg, and Dr. Dre.
In 2012 Lamar signed with Dr. Dre’s label Aftermath Entertainment and released his first LP, good kid, m.A.A.d. City; it debuted at number 2 on the Billboard 200 chart and yielded the R&B/hip-hop hits “Swimming Pools (Drank)” and “Poetic Justice.” Critics noted that it was a concept album with an autobiographical narrative. Lamar was nominated for seven 2013 Grammy Awards, including best album and best new artist, but failed to win. The following year, however, his single “i” took the awards for best rap song and best rap performance.
In 2015 Lamar released To Pimp a Butterfly, which was a huge success. The album broke a Spotify record—being streamed more than 9.6 million times—within a week of its release, and U.S. Pres. Barack Obama declared that the single “How Much a Dollar Cost” was his favourite song of 2015. The following year Lamar received 11 Grammy nominations, and he won for best rap performance and best rap song (both for “Alright”), best rap/sung collaboration (for “These Walls”), best music video (for “Bad Blood”), and best rap album (for To Pimp a Butterfly). He also enlivened the ceremony with a vivid performance of  “The Blacker the Berry.”
In March 2016 Lamar unexpectedly released a new album, untitled unmastered, consisting of eight tracks that he described as unfinished demos. Later that year he was nominated for two Grammy Awards, both for his contribution to Beyoncé’s song “Freedom” from her popular 2016 album Lemonade. In 2017 Lamar released another album, titled DAMN., which featured the hit song “HUMBLE.” and was well received by fans and critics alike. He won Grammys for best rap album (DAMN.), best rap song, rap performance, and music video (all for “HUMBLE.”), and best rap/sung performance (“LOYALTY.”; with Rihanna). In addition, DAMN. was the first nonclassical or jazz recording to be awarded the Pulitzer Prize for music.
In 2018 the soundtrack for the film Black Panther was released. Lamar produced and curated the album, a collection of songs “from and inspired by” the movie, and he performed on every track. The single “King’s Dead,” which also featured Jay Rock, Future, and James Blake, won a Grammy for best rap performance.
