Lorde, byname of Ella Marija Lani Yelich-O’Connor,  (born November 7, 1996, Takapuna, New Zealand), New Zealand singer-songwriter who was known for lyrics that exhibited a mature, jaded worldview.
Yelich-O’Connor was raised in the suburbs of Auckland and demonstrated a knack for public performance at an early age. At age 12 she was signed to a development contract with the Universal Music Group after an agent received footage of her singing at a middle-school talent show. A lifelong fascination with royalty and aristocracy inspired her stage name, although she appended an e to the end, as she felt that “Lord” was too masculine.
Working with producer Joel Little, Lorde honed her natural gift with words—her mother was an award-winning poet—and the pair produced The Love Club, a five-track EP that was released for free to the Internet-streaming service SoundCloud with little fanfare in November 2012. Industry tastemakers soon took notice, and The Love Club—and its lead single, “Royals”—rocketed up the charts in New Zealand. The “Royals” buzz rapidly went global, and in August 2013 Lorde became the first female solo artist in 17 years to top the U.S. Billboard alternative chart. A month later Lorde debuted her first full-length album, Pure Heroine. In 2014 Lorde won Grammy Awards in the best pop solo performance and song of the year categories, both for “Royals.”
Lorde embarked on a sold-out North American tour in March 2014, and the following month she joined the surviving members of Nirvana onstage to perform the song “All Apologies” at the ceremony celebrating that band’s induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In August she added to her already-impressive collection of accolades when “Royals” won the MTV Video Music Award for best rock video, making Lorde the first female artist in MTV history to triumph in that category. She then spent time in the studio curating the sound track for The Hunger Games: Mockingjay—Part 1, the 2014 film adaptation of Suzanne Collins’s young-adult best seller. Lorde contributed the single “Yellow Flicker Beat” as well as a cover of “Ladder Song.”
Powered by the lead single “Green Light,” Lorde’s sophomore album, Melodrama (2017), was greeted with an overwhelmingly positive critical reception. Melodrama’s 11 songs explored themes of youth and womanhood with a sound that drew on influences ranging from modern electronic dance music to retro Europop to the soaring vocals of early Kate Bush. Lorde then took a break from music, and during this time she avoided social media and became more involved in various causes, notably visiting Antarctica to explore the impact of climate change; she recounted the journey in the short book Going South (2021). This period also resulted in a musical shift for Lorde, who returned to the studio for Solar Power (2021), which was noted for its breezy, lighter sound.
