Outkast, also styled OutKast,  American rap duo, formed in 1992, that put Atlanta on the hip-hop map in the 1990s and redefined the G-Funk (a variation of gangsta rap) and Dirty South (often profane form of hip-hop that emerged in the U.S. South) music styles with their strong melodies, intricate lyrics, and positive messages.
André Lauren Benjamin (byname André 3000; b. May 27, 1975, Atlanta, Georgia, U.S.) and Antwan André Patton (byname Big Boi; b. February 1, 1975, Savannah, Georgia, U.S.) joined forces at a performing arts high school in Atlanta. Discovering their mutual admiration for hip-hop and the funk musicians who became their stylistic touchstones (Parliament-Funkadelic, Sly and the Family Stone, and Prince), they formed a rap group, 2 Shades Deep. Recording in a basement studio under the guidance of the Organized Noize production team (hit makers for Xscape and TLC), Benjamin and Patton, now known respectively as Dré and Big Boi and collectively as Outkast, had a breakthrough hit single with “Player’s Ball” in 1993.
In 1994 Outkast released their first album, Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik. A critical and commercial success, it highlighted the duo’s originality and penchant for catchy hooks. ATLiens (1996), their follow-up, featured the hit “Elevators (Me and You)” and sold 1.5 million copies. Outkast’s third effort, the double-platinum Aquemini (1998), employed more live instruments and earned a Grammy nomination for the single “Rosa Parks.” As Outkast deepened the sophistication of their frequently life-affirming lyrics and broadened their musical eclecticism, they never lost their unique sense of humour. The group’s image became a signature, especially the increasingly flamboyant wardrobe of Dré (renamed André 3000), and their theatricality and stylish music videos became Outkast hallmarks.
Backed by the hit single “B.O.B” (“Bombs over Baghdad”), Outkast’s fourth studio album, Stankonia (2000), was a huge crossover success. It earned Grammys for best rap album and best performance by a rap duo/group for the heartfelt “Ms. Jackson,” and it placed at or near the top of most critics’ yearly “best of” lists. In 2003 the duo released the double album Speakerboxxx/The Love Below, which highlighted the solo abilities of both artists as they each took the lead on one disc. In the process Outkast both renewed their mastery of “old school” rap, largely on the Big Boi-dominated Speakerboxxx, and continued their assault on the boundaries of hip-hop, primarily on The Love Below, on which André 3000 sang as much as he rapped and included funk stylings. The album topped the charts and won three Grammy Awards in 2004: album of the year, best rap album, and best urban/alternative performance for the boisterous “Hey Ya!” In 2006 André 3000 and Big Boi starred in the musical Idlewild and recorded the soundtrack.
In 2007 Outkast went on hiatus. Three years later Big Boi released the solo album Sir Lucious Left Foot: The Son of Chico Dusty to general acclaim, and he subsequently recorded Vicious Lies and Dangerous Rumors (2012) and Boomiverse (2017). André 3000, meanwhile, confined himself to producing and recording with other artists. Outkast reunited in 2014 and appeared at festivals during most of the year, but the tour did not lead to further recordings or performances. The group reissued Stankonia, which featured previously unreleased material, to commemorate the album’s 20th anniversary in 2020.
