Raï,  a type of Algerian popular music that arose in the 1920s in the port city of Oran and that self-consciously ran counter to accepted artistic and social mores. An amalgam of local Algerian and Western popular-music styles, raï emerged as a major world-music genre in the late 1980s.
In the years just following World War I, the Algerian city of Oran—known as “little Paris”—was a melting pot of various cultures, full of nightclubs and bordellos; it was the place to go for a bawdy good time. Out of this milieu arose a group of female Muslim singers called cheikhas, who rejected the refined, classical poetry of traditional Algerian music. Instead, to the accompaniment of pottery drums and end-blown flutes, they sang about the adversity of urban life in a raw, gritty, sometimes vulgar, and inevitably controversial language that appealed especially to the socially and economically disadvantaged. The cheikhas further departed from tradition in that they performed not only for women but also and especially for men.
The music performed by the cheikhas was called raï. It drew its name from the Algerian Arabic word raï (“opinion” or “advice”), which was typically inserted—and repeated—by singers to fill time as they formulated a new phrase of improvised lyrics. By the early 1940s Cheikha Rimitti el Reliziana had emerged locally as a musical and linguistic luminary in the raï tradition, and she continued to be among the music’s most prominent performers into the 21st century.
After Algeria achieved independence from France in 1962, the country’s younger musicians, notably Bellemou Messaoud and Belkacem Bouteldja, felt that raï needed to be updated in order to be viable in the new social and political atmosphere. They consequently worked to transform the music into a popular dance genre, replacing the traditional flutes and drums with trumpets, saxophones, accordions, and other instruments, while incorporating stylistic elements of rock, flamenco, jazz, and various local traditions. The abrasive quality of the lyrics, however, remained a hallmark of the genre.
Over the following decades, raï increasingly assimilated the sounds of the diverse musical styles that surfaced in Algeria. In the 1980s drum machines, synthesizers, and electric guitars were added to the mix, and singers adopted the title of Cheb (male) or Chaba (female), meaning “young,” to distinguish themselves from the older musicians who continued to perform in the original style. Among the most prominent performers of the new raï were Chaba Fadela, Cheb Hamid, and Cheb Mami. However, by the time the first international raï festival was held in Algeria in 1985, Cheb Khaled had become virtually synonymous with the genre. More festivals followed in Algeria and abroad, and raï became a popular and prominent new genre in the emergent world-music market.
Raï audiences increased exponentially in the 1990s, propelled largely by Cheb Khaled’s stylistic innovations—such as the incorporation of pedal steel guitars and Asian string instruments in his song, “N’ssi N’ssi”—as well as by his rich, passionate voice. Khaled, who dropped Cheb from his name as he grew older, continued to celebrate a carefree lifestyle, conveying a message that ultimately led Islamic extremists to issue a fatwa, or death sentence, against him and those who espoused his ideas; this prompted Khaled to move to France. In Algeria younger artists, including Cheb Hasni, Cheb Nasro, and Cheb Tahar, filled the void created by Khaled’s departure. In 1994, however, the raï community was jolted by the murder in Oran of Cheb Hasni by a militant Islamic group. In the wake of the assassination, new social and political constraints arose that effectively stunted the growth of raï in Algeria. Outside of Algeria, however, raï remained a dynamic tradition, endlessly absorbing new style features from virtually any music with which it came in contact. In the early 21st century the music’s most prominent exponents were—for the most part—the children of North African immigrants to France.
