salsa,  hybrid musical form based on Afro-Cuban music but incorporating elements from other Latin American styles. It developed largely in New York City beginning in the 1940s and ’50s, though it was not labeled salsa until the 1960s; it peaked in popularity in the 1970s in conjunction with the spread of Hispanic cultural identity. The term salsa also refers to a dance that is associated with the music.
The roots of salsa (Spanish: “sauce”) are in the son. Combining elements of the Spanish guitar-playing tradition with the rhythmic complexity and call-and-response vocal tradition of African musical sources, the son originated in rural eastern Cuba and spread to Havana in the first decades of the 20th century. Highly syncopated, it employs an “anticipated” rhythm structure wherein the bass line precedes the downbeat by a half-beat, creating a distinctive pulse. Pioneered by bandleader Arsenio Rodríguez, the son became the framework on which was hung a wide variety of dance-oriented Afro-Cuban musical styles, from the bolero to the conga and from the rumba to the mambo.
Afro-Cuban music spread throughout Latin America, notably to Mexico. However, New York City became the forge for its transformation into salsa, beginning in the 1940s with the contributions of the orchestra led by Cuban émigré Machito (Frank Grillo), which blended Afro-Cuban styles with jazz and big band approaches. Another Cuban émigré, Celia Cruz, became the reigning diva of Afro-Cuban dance music in the 1960s, as it evolved into salsa with smaller ensembles comprising rhythm and horn sections and through huge contributions by a number of musicians of Puerto Rican heritage, most notably bandleaders Tito Rodríguez, Tito Puente (a virtuoso timbale player and vibraphonist), and Eddie Palmieri (a pianist who brought progressive jazz influences into the mix). Frequently but not always up-tempo, or “hot,” salsa grew to incorporate increasingly diverse influences and performers—from Panamanian activist-singer-songwriter Rubén Blades to Mexican American rocker Carlos Santana. Although its international popularity crested in the 1970s, salsa retained an audience into the 21st century.
