Sarah McLachlan ,  (born January 28, 1968, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada), Canadian singer and songwriter who was known for her introspective music. She cofounded (1997) and headlined Lilith Fair, a concert tour featuring female performers almost exclusively.
McLachlan received classical training in guitar, piano, and voice. Rebelling against a conservative upbringing, she focused her musical talents on the popular punk and new-wave music movements of the 1980s. She was discovered by an executive at a Canadian record label when she was 17 and the lead singer of the October Game. After two years at the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design, McLachlan moved to Vancouver, signed a recording contract, and released her debut album, Touch, in 1988. The critically acclaimed recording was followed by such other albums as Solace (1991), Fumbling Towards Ecstasy (1993), and The Freedom Sessions (1995), all of which showcased McLachlan’s talents as a singer, guitarist, and songwriter. Her fans were immediately drawn to her vocal range and the intense emotion that came to define her music.
These qualities were evident in Surfacing (1997), an extremely personal album that was written after months of soul searching. The candidness of such songs as “Sweet Surrender” and “Building a Mystery” earned McLachlan Grammy Awards for best female pop vocal performance and best pop instrumental. She also received Juno (Canadian Music) Awards for best album, best female vocalist, single of the year, and songwriter of the year.
In 1997 McLachlan helped found Lilith Fair, which brought together some of the most talented and popular women artists in the music industry, including Jewel, Tracy Chapman, and Paula Cole. With the success of the festival, McLachlan proved to wary record executives that women artists were as marketable as their male counterparts. Lilith Fair toured until 1999; an attempt to revive the tour in 2010 failed.
McLachlan’s later albums included Mirrorball (1999), which featured live performances; Afterglow (2003); Laws of Illusion (2010); and Shine On (2014), for which she received  the Juno Award for best adult contemporary album. She also released two collections of Christmas music: Wintersong (2006) and Wonderland (2016).
