Susan Boyle,  (born April 1, 1961, Bangour Village Hospital, West Lothian, Scotland), Scottish singer whose appearance on the British television talent show Britain’s Got Talent in 2009 transformed her into an international phenomenon.
Boyle grew up in Blackburn, a small Scottish industrial town, as the youngest of nine children. Because of complications during her birth, she was briefly deprived of oxygen, which left her with mild brain damage; in school she was diagnosed with learning disabilities, for which she was frequently teased and bullied. In 2013, however, she revealed that what had been believed to be brain damage was in fact Asperger syndrome. Boyle was drawn to music and singing as a young child, and at age 12 she began participating in musical productions at school. Her talent was quickly recognized by her teachers, who encouraged her to persist. After graduating from high school, Boyle worked briefly as a cook trainee at West Lothian College before beginning studies at the Edinburgh Acting School. She continued to cultivate her voice, singing in her church choir, at local karaoke bars, and at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe.
In 1995 Boyle unsuccessfully auditioned for the British TV talent show My Kind of People. Four years later her rendition of “Cry Me a River,” which had been featured on a local charity CD, received positive reviews. She consequently exhausted her monetary savings to record a professional demo tape, which she mailed to record companies, radio and TV networks, and various talent competitions. Boyle’s career ambitions were put on hold in 2000 after her sister died. She resumed with professional singing lessons in 2002 and subsequently produced several recordings for local performances and benefits, but she continued to receive only local fame.
Devastated by the death of her mother in 2007, Boyle completely withdrew from singing for nearly two years. In late 2008, however, she applied to audition for Britain’s Got Talent to honour the memory of her mother, who had been a fan of the show and had encouraged her to become a contestant. In April 2009 Boyle appeared on an episode of the show, and her rendition of the song “I Dreamed a Dream” from the musical Les Misérables immediately silenced the cynicism of both the judges and the audience, earning her a standing ovation. Videos of Boyle’s debut on the show (and a later appearance as a semifinalist) were viewed on the Internet by an estimated 100 million people worldwide; she placed second in the final competition.
Boyle’s first studio album, I Dreamed a Dream, debuted at number one on the Billboard charts in November 2009 and was the second best-selling album of 2009, with more than 3.1 million copies sold. The holiday-themed The Gift was released in 2010. Later albums included Someone to Watch over Me (2011), Standing Ovation: The Greatest Songs from the Stage (2012), Hope (2014), and A Wonderful World (2016). Ten (2019), a compilation album, also included four new songs.
In 2012 I Dreamed a Dream, a stage musical based on her life, toured the United Kingdom, with Boyle occasionally making cameo appearances. The following year she made her acting debut in the film drama The Christmas Candle. She also had a memorable cameo in the comedy Zoolander 2 (2016). Boyle’s autobiography, The Woman I Was Born to Be, was published in 2010.
