Yanni, in full Yanni Chryssomallis,  (born November 14, 1954, Kalamata, Greece), Greek-born American composer and keyboardist who was a leading figure in late 20th-century New Age music—a characteristically nonarousing genre of popular music, often entirely instrumental and used for relaxation or meditation.
Yanni Chryssomallis was born into a middle-class family in Greece, and during his childhood his parents encouraged—but by no means pressured—him to play music. At the time, he simply enjoyed making music, never imagining that he would ultimately pursue it as a career. As an adolescent, he was a member of the Greek national swimming team, breaking the national freestyle record at age 14. He went to the United States at age 18 to attend the University of Minnesota, from which he graduated in 1976 with a degree in psychology. It was only after his graduation that he began to focus on music.
Yanni was a founding member of the rock band Chameleon and launched his solo recording career in 1984 with the instrumental album Optimystique. Although unable to read or notate music, he also composed music for films and television. A naturalized U.S. citizen, he lived for some time in Los Angeles, where he recorded for his label, Private Music.
Yanni’s popularity increased steadily from the mid-1980s; his album Reflections of Passion (1990) sold millions of copies, and his Dare to Dream (1992) and In My Time (1993) were both nominated for Grammy Awards. Almost immediately after its release in 1993, the album Live at the Acropolis began to climb Billboard magazine’s charts, and public demand for Yanni and his romantic arpeggio-infused instrumental music surged. In 1994 Public Broadcasting Service stations in the United States repeatedly aired a 90-minute special, Yanni in Concert: Live at the Acropolis, during the network’s annual fund-raising drive. The television spectacular, which Yanni coproduced, elicited record-breaking contributions from viewers and became one of the most popular programs ever shown on American public television.
Yanni was recognized as much for his charismatic stage presence as he was for his music. He typically performed in all-white or all-black attire and would periodically toss his distinctive mane of shoulder-length black hair while displaying a gleaming white smile beneath his dark mustache. Occasionally, while seated at an acoustic piano or standing at one of several synthesizers, he would close his eyes and shake his head slightly, as if basking in the energy of his music and his audience.
From the late 1990s Yanni continued to release predominantly instrumental albums, such as If I Could Tell You (2000) and Ethnicity (2003). In 2009, however, he shifted direction, collaborating with several young singers who created songs from his melodies and performed them on the album Yanni Voices. Mexicanisimo (2010), a collaboration with Mexican musicians, featured traditional Mexican songs. Another instrumental album, Truth of Touch (2011), topped Billboard’s New Age chart. Yanni accompanied such vocalists as Renée Fleming and Plácido Domingo on Inspirato (2014), and he featured synthesizers and other electronic sounds on Sensuous Chill (2016). On In His Purest Form (2020) Yanni played piano versions of his own songs.
