Mountstuart Elphinstone,  (born Oct. 6, 1779, Dunbartonshire, Scot.—died  Nov. 20, 1859, Hookwood, near Limpsfield, Surrey, Eng.), British official in India who did much to promote popular education and local administration of laws.
Elphinstone entered the civil service in Calcutta (now Kolkata) with the British East India Company in 1795. A few years later he barely escaped death when followers of the deposed prince of Oudh (Ayodhya), Wazir Ali, raided British offices at the Benares (Varanasi) residency and massacred all within their reach. Elphinstone transferred to the diplomatic service in 1801 as assistant to the resident at Pune; he was stationed at the court of the peshwa Baji Rao II, titular head of the Maratha confederacy. He won distinction in 1803 as political agent and aide-de-camp to Colonel Arthur Wellesley (brother of the governor-general; later duke of Wellington) in the Second Maratha War.
Elphinstone was appointed resident at Nagpur in 1804, then was transferred to the Maratha court at Gwalior in 1807. In 1808 he was sent to negotiate an alliance with the Afghan ruler Shah Shojāʿ to prevent a Napoleonic advance upon India. Returning to Pune as resident in 1811, he kept the Marathas disunited and used the murder of an envoy from Baroda (now Vadodara) to force a treaty on the peshwa. Elphinstone defeated the peshwa and ended the latter’s efforts against British rule at the Battle of Kirkee (November 1817), though the residency at Pune and Elphinstone’s notes for future literary works were burned.
Elphinstone was largely responsible for the creation of a British administrative system in the Maratha territories annexed in 1818, first as Deccan commissioner and then, from 1819 to 1827, as governor of Bombay (Mumbai). Disliking the Anglicized system of government there, he sought to preserve the good in Maratha institutions and to make allowance for Maratha sentiment. To the raja of Satara he restored a kingdom; to the great territorial magnates he returned lands, privileges, and judicial powers; and to the Brahmans he gave back temple lands and provided awards for learning. He tried to maintain the authority and usefulness of the village headmen and of the tribunals, wherein village elders could administer the law locally. He was a pioneer of state education, and he persisted at a time when others were horrified at the idea of educating the indigenous peoples. Spurred on by his advanced views, the wealthy native inhabitants of Bombay founded, by public subscriptions, the Elphinstone College in his honour.
Elphinstone traveled in Europe from 1827 to 1829; he later twice refused the governor-generalship of India. He thereafter concentrated on writing his two-volume History of India (1841) and on advising the British government on Indian affairs.
