Aeneid,  Latin epic poem written from about 30 to 19 bce by the Roman poet Virgil. Composed in hexameters, about 60 lines of which were left unfinished at his death, the Aeneid incorporates the various legends of Aeneas and makes him the founder of Roman greatness. The work is organized into 12 books that relate the story of the legendary founding of Lavinium (parent town of Alba Longa and of Rome). The town is founded by Aeneas, who was informed as he left the burning ruins of Troy that it was his fate to found a new city with a glorious destiny in the West.
In Book I Aeneas, journeying to his fated destination, encounters foul weather and is forced to land his fleet on the Libyan coast. There he is welcomed by the widowed Dido, queen of Carthage. Books II and III contain Aeneas’s account (told to Dido) of events both natural and supernatural that have led him to her shore. In Book IV Dido confesses her love for Aeneas, who (though he regrets his fate) is then forced by the gods to set sail again. She prepares to kill herself. The Trojans, in Book V, journey to Sicily, where they engage in a series of competitions to commemorate the anniversary of the death of Aeneas’s father, Anchises. They then set sail again. Book VI is the account of Aeneas’s journey to the underworld and Elysium, where he meets the ghosts of Dido and Anchises, among others. In this book the destiny of Rome is revealed. Books VII through XII relate the fate of the Trojans as they reach the Tiber River and are received by Latinus, the king of the region. Other Latins (encouraged by the gods) resent the arrival of the Trojans and the projected marriage alliance between Aeneas and Lavinia, Latinus’s daughter; notable among the resentful are Latinus’s wife and Turnus, leader of a local tribe known as the Rutuli and heretofore Lavinia’s favoured suitor. War breaks out, but the Trojans, with the help of the Etruscans, prevail, and Turnus is killed. As fated, Aeneas marries Lavinia and founds Lavinium.
Homer was Virgil’s model. The story of Aeneas’s journey, recounted in the first six books, is patterned after the Odyssey, with many imitative passages and even direct translations, while the description of the war in the last six books abounds with incidents modeled after those in the Iliad. More basically, however, Virgil made use of another model, Rome’s own national legend about the war fought under Romulus against the Sabines. This legend preserves, in a historical disguise, an original Indo-European myth about a conflict between the gods of sovereignty and war and the gods of fecundity, ending with the unification of the two divine races. In Virgil’s development of this theme, Aeneas and the Etruscans can be seen as representing the gods of sovereignty and war, and the Latins as representing the gods of fecundity.
