Ammianus Marcellinus,  (born c. 330, Antioch, Syria [now Antakya, Tur.]—died  395, Rome [Italy]), last major Roman historian, whose work continued the history of the later Roman Empire to 378.
Ammianus was born of a noble Greek family and served in the army of Constantius II in Gaul and Persia under the general Ursicinus, who was dismissed after he allowed the Persians to capture the city of Amida (now Diyarbakır, Tur.) in 359. Ammianus fought against the Persians under the emperor Julian and took part in the retreat of his successor, Jovian. Leaving the army at Antioch, he traveled to Egypt and Greece, eventually settling in Rome. There he wrote his history of the Roman Empire, in Latin, from the accession of Nerva to the death of Valens, beginning where Tacitus’s Historiae (Histories) ends.
Ammianus’s history, Rerum gestarum libri (“The Chronicles of Events”), consisted of 31 books, of which only the last 18, covering the years 353–378, survive. The first 13 books were already unavailable to scholars in the 6th century. (In light of the need for 18 books to cover 26 years, the first 13 must have been relatively sparse in their account of the period from 98 through 352.) The surviving books give a clear, comprehensive account of events by a writer of soldierly qualities, independent judgment, and wide reading. Drawing upon his own experience, Ammianus supplies vivid pictures of the empire’s economic and social problems. His accounts are especially full and sympathetic toward his commanders, Ursicinus and Julian, and many readers have seen Julian as the hero of the work. Ammianus admired Julian as a man, a soldier, and a leader; yet, although they were both pagans, he criticized Julian’s religious policies. His judgment in political affairs was limited only by his own straightforward attitude. He used the regular techniques of later Roman historiography—rhetoric in his speeches, ethnographical digressions in descriptions, such as that of the culture of the Huns, and biographical conventions in character sketches along with fondness for literary allusion, overabundant metaphor, and much ornament. Although Ammianus was clearly influenced by Tacitus’s Historiae, Cicero is the Latin author he quotes and refers to most often.
