Apuli, also called Apulians,  ancient Italic tribe, one of the populations that inhabited the southeastern extremity of the Italian peninsula. The ancients often called this group of tribes Iapyges (whence the geographic term Iapygia, in which “Apulia” [modern Puglia] may be recognized).
The territory of Apulia included the Salentini and Messapii peoples in the Salentine Peninsula (ancient Calabria) and the Peucetii and Dauni farther north. Ancient tradition insists upon an overseas origin for these tribes, held to be Cretan or Illyrian. Sometimes the designations Iapyges and Messapii are used interchangeably. The Iapygian, or, more commonly, Messapic (Messapian), language is known from a considerable series of public funerary, votive, monetary, and other inscriptions written in the Greek alphabet and found in the Apulian area, especially in the Salentine Peninsula, from words reported by the ancient writers, and from toponomastic (local place-name) data. Messapic is without doubt an Indo-European language, distinct from Latin and from the Umbro-Sabellic dialects, with Balkan and central European analogies. This confirms the overseas provenance of the Iapyges from the Balkans, the more so because there existed in Illyria a tribe called the Iapodes and because a people known as the Iapuzkus lived farther north, on the Adriatic coast of Italy. Rather than a true immigration, however, there was a gradual prehistoric penetration of trans-Adriatic elements. The expansion of the Iapyges must have brought them to Lucania and even to what is now Calabria, as would be deduced from traditional and archaeological indications.
The Apulian civilization, which was considerably influenced by that of the nearby Greek colonies, developed from the 9th to the 3rd century bc. In the most ancient period there were pit graves, sometimes in large stone tumuli. In the Siponto area, near what is now Manfredonia, the graves were accompanied by anthropomorphic stelae with geometric bas-reliefs. Geometrically painted ceramics in linear motifs persisted to the threshold of the Hellenistic Age. Later graves took the form of large trunks and of catacombs with paintings on the sides. Burial was the disposition exclusively used.
Beginning in Archaic times, large cities developed, linked to each other by bonds of confederation. These included Herdonea (now Ordona), Canusium (Canosa di Puglia), Rubi (Ruvo di Puglia), Gnathia, Brundisium (Brindisi), Uria (Oria), Lupiae (Lecce), Rudiae, and Manduria. They preserved their independence, tenaciously defended against the Greeks, until the age of the Roman conquest.
