Battle of the Trebbia River,  (December 218 bce), first major battle of the Second Punic War, in which the Carthaginian forces of Hannibal defeated the Roman army under Tiberius Sempronius Longus on the banks of the Trebbia River. It was Hannibal’s first major victory in Italy, and it swayed many of the Celts of northern Italy to support him.
Roman consul Publius Cornelius Scipio was wounded in a cavalry skirmish with Hannibal at the Ticinus (now Ticino) River in late 218 bce, and he withdrew his forces to Placentia (modern Piacenza), near the confluence of the Trebbia and Po rivers. After reinforcing Scipio’s army, consul Tiberius Sempronius Longus had hoped to engage Hannibal, thinking that he could win glory against the Carthaginian general. Using information gained from his spies, Hannibal correctly gauged the rash character of Sempronius, surmising that he likely could be provoked into battle at a time and place of Hannibal’s choosing. Although his forces were possibly outnumbered by as much as a third (it is estimated that 30,000 Carthaginians and allies faced roughly 42,000 Romans), Hannibal knew that Sempronius was a political appointee without much military experience. He further understood that Roman consuls alternated leadership every other day. Although Scipio, a veteran officer, advocated delaying engagement until winter had passed, Hannibal knew that he needed only wait until Sempronius had assumed command to provoke a confrontation.
It was to Hannibal’s distinct advantage that the two Roman armies were not in a single camp but divided between their commanders. On the eve of the winter solstice, Hannibal drew up his army across the Trebbia from Sempronius’s camp, instructing his men to rest and, upon waking, to grease themselves with fat to insulate against the bitter cold. Hannibal also placed his younger brother Mago in charge of an ambush force that would attack the Romans from behind. Contingents of Numidian cavalry were sent across the freezing river to taunt the Romans, mocking Sempronius with personal insults. Ignoring Scipio’s counsel, Sempronius responded as Hannibal had expected, sending out his army in full force and without breakfast. The Romans were dispatched across the Trebbia in pursuit of the Numidians; the hardy Numidian mounts forded the cold river with little difficulty, whereas the Roman infantry assembled on the far banks of the Trebbia soaked and shivering. The Romans held the clear numerical advantage, but Hannibal’s warm, rested, and well-fed army was far better prepared for battle. As the Romans advanced, Hannibal’s skirmishers took a heavy toll, and many Romans fell to stones hurled by Hannibal’s elite Balearic slingers. Others were trampled by elephants or cut down as they attempted to fall back to the river. The Roman army fought bravely, but it was put to flight when Mago’s force of 2,000 infantry and cavalry emerged from concealment and assaulted the Roman rear. At least 15,000 Romans died at Trebbia, and possibly another 12,000–15,000 were taken prisoner; the Carthaginians suffered approximately 5,000 casualties. Up to 10,000 Romans managed to fight their way through the Carthaginian lines and escape to Placentia, where they remained in camp—as Scipio had originally suggested—until spring.
Sempronius tried to convince the Roman Senate that the battle was not a defeat but rather a temporary setback that he blamed on the weather. This version of events was starkly at odds with the greatly diminished strength of Sempronius’s forces. Although the battle and subsequent winter also extracted a toll on Hannibal’s army—most notably its elephants—the characterization of the battle as a Roman defeat is not debatable. Indeed, many of the Celts of northern Italy were won to Hannibal’s cause by his demonstration that the Romans could be beaten. The battle was just one of the many occasions in the Second Punic War in which a canny Hannibal used nature, the environment, and knowledge of his enemy to augment the strength of his smaller army.
