Battle of Cynoscephalae,  (197 bce), conclusive engagement of the Second Macedonian War, in which Roman general Titus Quinctius Flamininus checked the territorial ambitions of Philip V of Macedonia and bolstered Roman influence in the Greek world.
Hoping to capitalize on the gains he had made during the First Macedonian War (215–205 bce), a conflict he had waged against Roman client states while Rome was largely preoccupied with the Second Punic War, Philip moved against Rhodes and Pergamum, two kingdoms that were within the Roman sphere. The Rhodians inflicted a crushing defeat on Philip’s navy at the Battle of Chios in 201—Polybius reported that the Macedonians lost roughly half their fleet and some 12,000 men—and envoys from Rhodes and Pergamum convinced Rome to declare war on Philip in 200. Conduct of the war was allocated to Flamininus, who had been elected consul in 198. Flamininus arrived in Greece later that year, and he promptly secured the support of the Achaean League against Philip.
The Roman army under Flamininus numbered 26,000 men, of whom about 8,000 were Greeks. Philip’s force was of roughly the same size, and it included some 16,000 heavy infantry fighting in phalanx formation. The Romans were stronger than the Macedonians in cavalry and also fielded some war elephants. After skirmishing near Pherae on terrain that proved unsuitable, Philip, who needed supplies and level ground on which he could deploy his phalanx, marched westward along the northern slopes of some hills which ended in a low range called Cynoscephalae. For three days Flamininus marched along the southern slopes, but out of touch with the enemy. When Philip turned southwest to cross Cynoscephalae toward Pharsalus, his advance force blundered in a mist into some Romans. A fluctuating skirmish developed into a pitched battle that would mark one of the first times that the Macedonian phalanx and the Roman legion—arguably the two most-effective fighting formations in the ancient world—would meet in open combat.
Flamininus drew up his line along the south of the hills, while Philip advanced his centre and right wing over rough ground. Philip’s lieutenant Nicanor was to follow with the Macedonian left wing as soon as possible. Flamininus, however, had kept his own right wing stationary and led his left uphill, driving back a group of Philip’s mercenaries. Unable to wait for Nicanor, Philip launched his main phalanx force at the Roman left, which yielded ground in good order. Thereupon Flamininus galloped over to the Roman right, which routed Nicanor’s wing while it was still in marching formation. With each side victorious on one wing, the issue hung in the balance until an unknown Roman tribune seized the initiative. Detaching 20 maniples (flexible units of 120 men) from the rear of the victorious Roman right wing, he led them against the flank and rear of the previously triumphant Macedonian right. In the process the day was lost for the Macedonians. Philip fled, leaving 8,000 of his troops dead and 5,000 captured. The delay of the Macedonian left wing, the roughness of the ground, and the timely action of a single Roman tribune had secured the victory that day, while the military reforms that Scipio Africanus had introduced to the legion would ensure the superiority of the Roman maniple over the Macedonian phalanx in encounters to come.
Although the battle had left Philip at Rome’s mercy, Flamininus proposed generous terms—namely, that Philip should abandon all his dependencies outside Macedonia but should retain his throne. He was further required to reduce the size of his army, to give up all his decked ships except five, and to pay an indemnity
of 1,000 talents. At the Isthmian Games in 196, Flamininus declared that all Greek states which had been subject to Philip were free and independent of his rule.
