Cyrus The Younger,   (born after 423,  bc—died  401, Cunaxa, Babylonia [now in Iraq]), younger son of the Achaemenian king Darius II and his wife, Parysatis.
Cyrus was the favourite of his mother, who hoped to secure the succession for him instead of her eldest son, Arsaces. When Darius decided to continue the war against Athens and give support to the Spartans, Parysatis persuaded him to appoint the young Cyrus as satrap (governor) of Lydia, Phrygia, and Cappadocia and commander in chief of the Achaemenian forces in Asia Minor (407). Cyrus’ friendly alliance with Lysander, the commander of the Spartan fleet, assured Sparta of victory.
In 405 Cyrus was called to his father’s deathbed, and in 404, when Arsaces became king as Artaxerxes II, Cyrus was accused by Tissaphernes, satrap of Caria, of plotting his brother’s murder. On the intercession of Parysatis, however, Cyrus was pardoned and sent back to his satrapy. On his return, Cyrus began preparations to seize the throne. He used a quarrel with Tissaphernes over the Ionian cities as a pretext for gathering a large army and also pretended to prepare an expedition to Pisidia, in the Taurus Mountains. In the spring of 401 Cyrus started out with about 20,000 men, many of whom were Greek mercenaries. When he reached the Euphrates River at Thapsacus, he announced that he was marching against Artaxerxes. He advanced unopposed into Babylonia; but Artaxerxes, warned at the last moment by Tissaphernes, was hastily gathering an army. The two forces met at the Battle of Cunaxa, north of Babylon, where Cyrus was slain. The Greek troops of Cyrus, after their commanders had been treacherously seized by Tissaphernes, forced their way to the Black Sea.
The courage and ability of Cyrus were highly praised by the Greeks, especially by the historian Xenophon (one of the Greek mercenaries), who in his Anabasis wrote the history of the Greek retreat; but from the standpoint of the Achaemenians Cyrus was a traitor who, to gain his own ends, used hostile Greeks to attack the empire.
