Domitian, Latin in full Caesar Domitianus Augustus, original name (until ad 81) Titus Flavius Domitianus,  (born Oct. 24, ad 51—died Sept. 18, ad 96, Rome [Italy]), Roman emperor (ad 81–96), known chiefly for the reign of terror under which prominent members of the Senate lived during his last years.
Titus Flavius Domitianus was the second son of the future emperor Vespasian and Flavia Domitilla. During the civil war of ad 69 over the imperial crown, Domitian remained unharmed in Rome, but on December 18 he took refuge in the Capitol with his uncle Flavius Sabinus, escaping into hiding when the Capitol was stormed by supporters of Vitellius. On the entry of his father’s supporters into Rome two days later he was saluted as Caesar, and he became praetor next year. He attempted to turn the repressive military campaign of Petillius Cerialis in the Rhineland into a triumphal operation of his own; and for this and other excesses he is said to have required his father’s pardon when the latter arrived at Rome in autumn ad 70. Domitian, however, was princeps juventutis (an imperial prince) and was consul six times in Vespasian’s lifetime; moreover, it was recognized that he would eventually succeed his brother Titus, who had no son and was 11 years older than Domitian. On Vespasian’s death, in June 79, Domitian expected the same position as Titus had received under Vespasian, in particular, tribunician power and some form of imperium. These were not granted, and Domitian was evidently antagonistic to his brother and is alleged to have hastened his death, which occurred on Sept. 13, 81.
As emperor, Domitian was hated by the aristocracy. From the Trajanic writers Tacitus and Pliny the Younger (Suetonius is less partisan) it is hard to disentangle stock vituperation from genuine belief, but it seems certain that cruelty and ostentation were the chief grounds of his unpopularity, rather than any military or administrative incompetence. Indeed, his strict control over magistrates in Rome and the provinces won Suetonius’ praise. In his secretariat he used both freedmen and knights, some of whom retained their posts after his death; and his consilium of close advisers, including senators, involved no departure from precedent. In legislation he was severe, and he incurred censure for attempting to curb vices from which he himself was not immune. It might be fairer to criticize him for undue paternalism. An edict ordaining destruction of half the provincial vineyards was typical: it was designed to encourage the growing of grain and to limit the importing of wine into Italy (where, meanwhile, no increased output was permitted), but Domitian was unable to carry the matter through. Pliny the Younger’s letters to Trajan show that Domitian’s administrative decisions were not usually revoked.
His military and foreign policy was not uniformly successful. Domitian was the first emperor since Claudius (43) to campaign in person. Both in Britain and in Germany advances were made by the Romans early in the reign, and the construction of the Rhine-Danube limes (“fortified line”) owes more to Domitian than to any other emperor. But consolidation in Scotland was halted by serious wars on the Danube, where Domitian never achieved an entirely satisfactory settlement and, worse still, lost two legions and many other troops. This, though admitted even by Tacitus to be due to the slackness or rashness of his commanders, was naturally held against Domitian at Rome. It did not affect his popularity with the army, however, whose pay he had wisely raised by one-third in ad 84.
The real issue was his own constitutional and ceremonial position. He continued his father’s policy of holding frequent consulates (he was consul ordinarius every year from 82 to 88); he became censor for life in 85, with consequent control over senatorial membership and general behaviour; he wore triumphal dress in the Senate; and he presided, wearing Greek dress and a golden crown, over four yearly games on the Greek model, with his fellow judges wearing crowns bearing his own effigy among effigies of the gods. According to Suetonius, a grave source of offense was his insistence on being addressed as dominus et deus (“master and god”).
The execution of his cousin Flavius Sabinus in 84 was an isolated event, but there are hints of more general trouble about 87. The crisis came with the revolt of Antonius Saturninus, governor of Upper Germany, on Jan. 1, 89. This was suppressed by the Lower German army, but a number of executions followed, and the law of majestas (treason) was later employed freely against senators. The years 93–96 were regarded as a period of terror hitherto unsurpassed.
Among Domitian’s opponents was a group of doctrinaire senators, friends of Tacitus and Pliny and headed by the younger Helvidius Priscus, whose father of the same name had been executed by Vespasian. Their Stoic views were probably the cause of Domitian’s expulsions of “philosophers” from Rome on two occasions. At least 12 former consuls were executed during his reign, but there is no reason to think they were Stoics.
Domitian’s financial difficulties are a vexing question. Cruelty came earlier in his reign than rapacity, but eventually he regularly confiscated the property of his victims. His building program had been heavy: Rome received a new forum (later called Forum Nervae) and many other works. Then there were Domitian’s new house on the Palatine and his vast villa on the Alban Mount. Meanwhile, the increased army pay was a recurrent cost. Probably only his confiscations averted bankruptcy in the last years. The execution of his cousin Flavius Clemens in 95 convinced his closest associates that no one was safe. The conspiracy that caused his murder on Sept. 18, 96, was led by the two praetorian prefects, various palace officials, and the emperor’s wife, Domitia Longina (daughter of Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo). Nerva, who took over the government at once, must clearly have been privy. The Senate was overjoyed at Domitian’s death, and his memory was officially condemned, but the army took it badly; the next year they insisted on the punishment of those responsible.
