E. G. Squier,  (born June 17, 1821, Bethlehem, N.Y., U.S.—died  April 17, 1888, Brooklyn, N.Y.), U.S. newspaper editor, diplomat, and archaeologist who, with the physician and archaeologist Edwin H. Davis, conducted the first major study of the remains of the pre-Columbian North American Mound Builders. He also carried out explorations in Central America, Peru, and Bolivia in an effort to find the origins of the Mound Builder civilization.
As a young man, Squier went to the heartland of the Ohio mound country to edit a newspaper at Chillicothe and began to explore the prehistoric earthworks. Between 1845 and 1847 he and Davis probed some 200 mounds, studied about 100 earthwork enclosures, and collected a large number of artifacts. Their findings appeared in the beautifully illustrated Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley (1848), the first publication of the Smithsonian Institution. Immediately recognized as a major work of American archaeology, it remains significant to the present time. In addition to summarizing contemporary knowledge of the mounds, it also served as a model for later research. Squier’s subsequent study of the mounds in New York was described in another valuable work, Aboriginal Monuments of the State of New York (1851).
In 1849 Squier went to Nicaragua as U.S. chargé d’affaires to Central America and secured an agreement, never ratified, permitting U.S. construction of an interoceanic canal across Nicaragua. The mission allowed him to travel widely and explore antiquities around Granada and on the islands in Lake Nicaragua. His findings appeared in Nicaragua: Its People, Scenery, Monuments, and the Proposed Interoceanic Canal, 2 vol. (1852). For the next 20 years, while occupied with developing a railway across Honduras, he wrote several books and a number of papers on the archaeology, ethnology, and linguistics of Honduras, Nicaragua, and El Salvador. As U.S. commissioner to Peru (1863–65), he settled financial claims and was able to visit a number of ancient sites, including the remains of the pre-Inca Chimú civilization, then scarcely known. His observations were published in Peru: Incidents of Travel and Exploration in the Land of the Incas (1877).
