Fulvia,  (died 40 bc, Sicyon, Greece), in Roman history, the wife of Mark Antony, and a participant in the struggle for power following the death of Julius Caesar.
Fulvia was the daughter of Marcus Fulvius Bambalio of Tusculum. She was first married to the demagogic politician Publius Clodius Pulcher. Their daughter Claudia was subsequently the wife of Octavian (the future Augustus). In 52 bc Clodius was murdered by a political rival, Milo; his body was carried to Rome and placed in the atrium of his house, where Fulvia made a show of her grief and displayed her husband’s wounds to the people in order to inflame them against Milo and his party. The result was a brief period of public disorder and the temporary banishment of Milo.
Fulvia next married Caius Scribonius Curio, who died in Africa in 49 bc, and in 44 she married Mark Antony. She apparently was deeply in love with him and had great ambition for him. During the proscriptions of 43 bc—from which she enriched herself—Fulvia was reported to have viewed with pleasure the heads of Rufus and Cicero, Antony’s victims.
After Antony and Octavian had deprived Lepidus of his place in the triumvirate and Antony was living with Cleopatra, Fulvia conspired with Antony’s brother, Lucius Antonius, against Octavian, who was given the unpopular task of taking land from Italians to give to Caesar’s veterans. Perhaps out of jealousy, wanting to force Antony’s return to Italy, Fulvia induced Lucius Antonius to rebel against Octavian. Coinage shows that, at least initially, Antony knew and approved of her actions, even if he later repudiated them. During the winter of 41–40 bc, Lucius Antonius was besieged in Perusia (present-day Perugia) and starved into surrender. Octavian’s propaganda, confirmed by surviving sling bullets with abusive comments on them, blamed the problems on Fulvia. Perusia was sacked, but Lucius Antonius was spared and given a command in Spain (where he died), while Fulvia was allowed to escape unharmed and crossed over into Greece, where she met with the returning Antony at Athens. His extreme anger with her over her meddling is supposed to have caused her profound grief. Her death soon after came at an opportune time for Antony, because it made possible his marriage to Octavian’s sister, Octavia, which cemented the reconciliation with Octavian that he had achieved upon his return to Italy. Fulvia’s sons with Mark Antony, Marcus Antonius Antyllus and Jullus Antonius, were important (and embarrassing) figures during the reign of Augustus.
