Gene Savoy, in full Douglas Eugene Savoy,  (born May 11, 1927, Bellingham, Wash., U.S.—died Sept. 11, 2007, Reno, Nev.), American explorer and amateur archaeologist who discovered and explored more than 40 Inca and pre-Inca cities in Peru. Deeply interested in religious topics, Savoy also was the founder of a theology that he named Cosolargy.
At age 17 Savoy enlisted in the U.S. Navy. After World War II he attended the University of Portland and worked briefly as a journalist. He became eager to begin exploring after reading Hiram Bingham’s Lost City of the Incas (1952). Savoy moved to Peru and organized his first archaeological expedition in 1957.
Throughout the latter half of the 20th century, Savoy made a series of expeditions to Peru, discovering various Inca and pre-Inca archaeological sites. In 1964 he discovered Vilcabamba, the secret mountain stronghold where the Incas hid from Spanish conquerors in the 16th century. His discovery disproved Bingham’s notion that Vilcabamba and Machu Picchu were the same place. In 1965 Savoy took credit for the original discovery of the site he named Gran Pajatén, a pre-Inca stone city, but this finding was contested by other researchers. In 1969 he sailed a raft of ancient Peruvian design from Peru to Panama in an effort to prove that the people of the Andes had contact with the Pacific coast of Mesoamerica, and in 1997 he sailed a wooden catamaran from Peru to Hawaii to demonstrate that ancient Peruvians could have sailed on the open seas. His discovery of several thousand stone structures known as Gran Vilaya in 1985 demonstrated that the Peruvian forests—in addition to the Andes and the coast—had been locations of ancient settlement, particularly by a people known as the Chachapoya. The Gran Saposoa ruins, which Savoy brought to the world’s attention after encountering them in a northern Peruvian cloud forest in 1999, added credence to this theory. Savoy wrote a number of books about his archaeological expeditions, including Antisuyo: The Search for the Lost Cities of the Amazon (1970). Noted for his larger-than-life persona, he was dubbed “the real Indiana Jones” by People magazine.
Savoy was also intrigued by the beliefs of ancient religious groups, especially those of the Essenes, an ascetic Jewish sect that apparently revered the Sun and (he believed) presaged the coming of Jesus Christ. Developing a theology that he called “Cosolargy,” Savoy proposed that Christ’s Second Coming is manifest as the “spiritual Sun,” a celestial force perpetually generating divine energy from the thought and will of God in order to regenerate the physical world. Illuminated by the “transformed sunlight” that carries this Christ force, human beings can become spiritual coparticipants with God in the renewal not only of themselves but of the world. In 1959 Savoy established the International Community of Christ, Church of the Second Advent to promote Cosolargy. Throughout his life he wrote more than 60 volumes on religious topics.
