Geoffrey Wainwright, in full Geoffrey John Wainwright,  (born September 19, 1937, Angle, Pembrokshire, Wales—died March 6, 2017, Pontfaen, Pembrokeshire, Wales), British archaeologist who was most widely known for his work with archaeologist Timothy Darvill supporting their theory that the prehistoric British monument Stonehenge was a place of healing.
Wainwright earned a bachelor’s degree in archaeology from University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire (now part of Cardiff University) in 1958 and a Ph.D. from the University College London Institute of Archaeology in 1961. He served (1961–63) as professor of environmental archaeology at the Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda in India. He then became an inspector of ancient monuments for Britain’s Ministry of Works.
His 1966 large-scale rescue excavations at the Neolithic henge Durrington Walls in Wiltshire were revolutionary in extent and were among those that changed the general practice of British archaeology. The promptness of his reporting on his excavations also became a model for best practices. In 1975 he instituted the Central Excavation Unit, a rapid-response excavation team. He was promoted in 1980 to principal inspector of ancient monuments, and he served (1989–99) as chief archaeologist of the preservation agency English Heritage. He was credited with putting British archaeology on a professional and well-organized footing.
Wainwright and Darvill were convinced that the great effort required to move the bluestones that make up much of the monument from the Preseli Mountains in Wales to Stonehenge meant that the stones must have been regarded as extraordinarily significant. They learned that the stones were associated with holy healing wells in Wales and were believed to be imbued with mystical properties. In 2008 Wainwright and Darvill undertook the first excavation at Stonehenge in 44 years, and they declared that their findings bolstered their theory. The findings included bluestone chips buried with bodies that showed indications of illness or injury, such as the Amesbury Archer (discovered in 2002). The pair also found charcoal deposits that suggested to them that annual gatherings took place at Stonehenge perhaps as late as the 17th century.
Wainwright was president of the Prehistoric Society (1981–85) and of the Society of Antiquaries (2007–10). He was appointed MBE in 1991, and in 2006 he was honoured with the British Academy’s Grahame Clark Medal for contributions to prehistoric archaeology.
