Harriet Ann Boyd Hawes, née Harriet Ann Boyd,  (born Oct. 11, 1871, Boston, Mass., U.S.—died March 31, 1945, Washington, D.C.), American archaeologist who gained renown for her discoveries of ancient remains in Crete.
Harriet Boyd graduated from Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts, in 1892; thereafter she taught ancient and modern languages for four years, first as a private tutor in Henderson, North Carolina, and then at a girls’ school in Wilmington, Delaware. In 1896 she entered the American School of Classical Studies in Athens. Recent archaeological finds in Crete had inspired her to take up studies there, but she found no encouragement for her ambition to do field work. Having saved enough money to finance a trip to Crete, Boyd also visited the excavation at Knossos being worked by British archaeologist Arthur J. Evans, who suggested she explore the region around Kavousi. The discovery of Iron Age tombs there provided material for her master’s thesis; the degree was awarded to her by Smith College in 1901. She had since 1900 held an instructorship in Greek archaeology, epigraphy, and modern Greek at Smith, and she retained the appointment until 1906, although in 1903 and 1904 she was again on leave of absence in Crete.
From May 1901 Boyd’s interest centred on a rich site she discovered at Gournia, an outlying district of Kavousi. She was the first archaeologist to discover and completely excavate an Early Bronze Age Minoan town site, and her work there won her worldwide fame. In 1904 Cretan authorities permitted her to ship to the American Exploration Society a small selection of artifacts unearthed at Gournia; these eventually entered the collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City, the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, and the University Museum in Philadelphia. Her definitive report on the Gournia excavation was published as Gournia, Vasiliki and Other Prehistoric Sites on the Isthmus of Hierapetra, Crete (1908). In March 1906 Boyd married Charles H. Hawes, a British anthropologist. Her husband collaborated with her on the popular Crete: The Forerunner of Greece (1909), but for several years thereafter she abandoned scholarly work.
From 1920 to 1936 she lectured on pre-Christian art at Wellesley (Massachusetts) College, and in 1936 she and her husband retired to a farm in Alexandria, Virginia.
