Jean-François Champollion,  (born December 23, 1790, Figeac, France—died March 4, 1832, Paris), French historian and linguist who founded scientific Egyptology and played a major role in the decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphs.
At age 16 Champollion had already mastered six ancient Oriental languages, in addition to Latin and Greek, and delivered a paper before the academy of Grenoble, France, in which he asserted, incorrectly, that Coptic was the ancient language of Egypt. At 19, following studies in Paris, he became professor of history at the lycée of Grenoble (1809–16).
Deciphering hieroglyphs became his constant preoccupation. Following the modest success of the English physicist Thomas Young in attempting to decipher the Rosetta Stone, which was engraved with a Greek text along with hieroglyphic and demotic versions, Champollion at last began to piece together the puzzle of the hieroglyphs. In 1821–22 he started publishing papers on the hieroglyphic and hieratic elements of the Rosetta Stone, and he went on to establish an entire list of hieroglyphic signs and their Greek equivalents. He was first to recognize that some of the signs were alphabetic, some syllabic, and some determinative—i.e., standing for a whole idea or object previously expressed. Though many doors still awaited opening, the key to understanding ancient Egypt had at last been found. His brilliant discoveries met with opposition, however, often bitter and personal, from some other scholars.
Champollion became curator of the Egyptian collection at the Louvre (1826), conducted an archaeological expedition to Egypt (1828), and received the chair of Egyptian antiquities, created specially for him, at the Collège de France (1831). In addition to an Egyptian grammar (1836–41) and dictionary (1841–43), his published works include Précis du système hiéroglyphique des anciens Égyptiens (1824; “Primer of the Hieroglyphic System of the Ancient Egyptians”) and Panthéon égyptien; ou, collection des personnages mythologiques de l’ancienne Égypte (incomplete, 1823–25; “Egyptian Pantheon; or, Collection of the Mythological Figures of Ancient Egypt”).
