Joaquín Torres-García,  (born July 28, 1874, Montevideo, Uruguay—died Aug. 8, 1949, Montevideo), Uruguayan painter who introduced Constructivism to South America.
In 1891 Torres-García moved with his family from Uruguay to Spain, where they lived in Barcelona. In 1894 he began studying academic painting at Barcelona’s Academy of Fine Arts. By 1896 he had begun to rebel against the conservative style of the academy and to explore Impressionism and Post-Impressionism in works that reflect the influence of Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec. Garden of the Gallery of Fine Arts (c. 1897) impressionistically depicts the upper-class patrons of a museum.
By 1900 Torres-García had adopted a style closer to the modern Classicism of French artist Pierre Puvis de Chavannes. Torres-García would work in this style for the next 16 years. In paintings such as Study for a Composition with Feminine Figures (c. 1909–12), in which two seminude female figures stand in a landscape, he explored the Greek roots of Classicism while still utilizing Modernist aesthetics, particularly in terms of his handling of paint and semi-flattened forms. Among his interests was the creation of a Catalan Classicism.
In 1916 Torres-García began to adopt a more Modernist aesthetic and to depict scenes of urban life. Barcelona Street Scene (1917) blends stylized figures and vehicles with the lettering of signs in a flattened composition that illustrates his familiarity with Cubism. His work became increasingly two-dimensional.
In 1920 he left Europe for New York City, where his work appeared in Société Anonyme exhibitions. He returned to Europe in 1922 and became familiar with the Constructivist neoplasticism of Piet Mondrian and Theo van Doesburg. Although he never completely rejected nature as those artists did in their grid paintings, Torres participated in the Constructivist Cercle et Carré (“Circle and Square”) group and its magazine. The two-dimensionality of his work evolved into an explicit grid structure, which he filled with symbols such as fish, human figures, and geometric forms, as in Constructivist Composition (1931). In the 1930s he became interested in pre-Columbian art.
In 1934 Torres-García returned to Montevideo. He arrived determined to introduce Modernist and Constructivist aesthetics to Uruguayan artists. The following year he founded the Association of Constructivist Art in Montevideo and gave a seminal lecture, “The School of the South,” which argued for the importance of both South American and North American schools of modern art.
He increasingly explored pre-Columbian art as the basis for an American Modernism, and he began a series of stone-and-cement monuments, such as Cosmic Monument (1938), that were visually similar to Inca stonework. The monument utilizes a grid composition filled with symbols drawn from pre-Columbian and Greek art. In 1943 he established the Taller (“Workshop”) Torres-García, a school in which students learned the principles of Constructivist art. The studio influenced the direction of art in Uruguay, Argentina, and elsewhere for a generation after Torres-García’s death.
