Kavadh I, also spelled Qobād,  (died Sept. 13, 531), king of the Sāsānian empire of Persia (reigned 488–496 and 498/499–531). He was a son of Fīrūz and succeeded Fīrūz’ brother Balāsh as ruler.
Time spent in youth as a hostage in the hands of the Hephthalites after their first defeat of his father gave Kavadh valuable military experience and connections, which he later turned to good use. After the deposition of his uncle Balāsh in ad 488, he was called to the throne. At first he was largely dependent on the feudal chief Zarmihr (elsewhere called Sokhra), but when he contrived to eliminate this over-powerful protector, the hostility of the nobles, with tribal unrest in Armenia and western Iran, led to his deposition in favour of a brother, Jamasp.
Kavadh was incarcerated in the “Castle of Oblivion” in Susiana but escaped (in a romantic version his wife takes his place in the dungeon) and, helped by a nobleman, Siyavush (Seoses), fled to the Hephthalites. Their king arranged a marriage between Kavadh and the Hephthalite king’s daughter, who was a granddaughter of Fīrūz. He also gave Kavadh a powerful army with which to recover the Persian throne, which Kavadh did without opposition in ad 498 or 499. Kavadh next applied to the Byzantine emperor Anastasius I for subsidies with which to placate his auxiliaries. Payment being refused, he led his troops against Anatolia and seized the cities of Theodosiopolis (Erzurum) and Amida (Diyarbakır). He later returned Amida in return for a heavy indemnity.
When Justin I succeeded to the Byzantine throne in 518, Kavadh’s main concern was to ensure the succession of his favourite son, Khosrow (later Khosrow I), by a peace agreement under which Khosrow would be adopted and sponsored by the Byzantine emperor. Justin rebuffed the proposal, and a new breach resulted.
About the same time, Kavadh was deeply influenced by the Mazdakites, a heterodox religious sect. Finally persuaded of the danger of the Mazdakites, he had them assemble as if for a meeting and then massacred them. Kavadh died after drafting the fiscal reforms that won fame for his successor. His written testament sufficed to place Khosrow on the throne. 
