Lucius Appuleius Saturninus,  (died 100 bc), Roman politician who, with Gaius Servilius Glaucia, opposed the Roman Senate from 103 to 100, at first with the cooperation of the prominent general Gaius Marius.
Saturninus turned against the leaders of the Senate when, while serving as quaestor (financial administrator) at the port city of Ostia (probably in 105), he was stripped of his supervision of the grain supply by the leader of the Senate, Marcus Aemilius Scaurus. From 103 through 100 he used the office of tribune of the plebs (at the time, a position that reinforced popular sovereignty) to harass the Senate and build his own power. As tribune in 103, he successfully championed several measures against strong senatorial opposition: he sought the support of the Roman urban proletariat by a law that drastically reduced the price of the monthly grain ration; he won the backing of the popular general Gaius Marius by a bill that granted generous pieces of land to the men who had served under Marius in the Jugurthine War (111–105); and he set up the first standing criminal court to try charges of treason (maiestas) and used it against senators who opposed him. Quintus Caecilius Metellus Numidicus, as censor for 102, tried unsuccessfully to expel Saturninus and his colleague Gaius Servilius Glaucia from the Senate. The next year Saturninus was able to win acquittal on a capital charge because he had the backing of the equites (knights), whose support had been won by Glaucia’s bill restoring to them the exclusive right of constituting the juries in the permanent criminal courts.
In 100 Saturninus was tribune again, Marius was consul for the sixth time, and Glaucia was praetor. Turmoil surrounded passage of Saturninus’s proposals for land allotments in Cisalpine Gaul (now northern Italy) for Marius’s soldiers discharged after service in the Cimbric War and for the establishment of Latin colonies for other veterans in Sicily, Macedonia, and Achaea. Saturninus was elected tribune again for 99, but Marius, suspicious of Saturninus’s true goals, disallowed Glaucia’s candidacy for the consulship. Violence in the electoral assembly led to the murder of a hostile candidate, Gaius Memmius. Saturninus then tried to use the Plebeian Assembly to reinstate Glaucia’s candidacy for the consulate. The Senate, at the motion of the senior senator Marcus Scaurus, passed the “ultimate decree of the Senate,” a declaration of martial law. Marius as consul accepted the command, and Saturninus and Glaucia surrendered to Marius, who locked them in the Senate house. Their enemies tore off the building’s roof and stoned them and their followers to death, while Marius did nothing. Some of Saturninus’s legislation was rescinded after his death.
Saturninus’s policies as tribune and the senatorial response to them marked a further step in the spiraling violence that was to lead to the fall of the Roman Republic.
