Marcus Aemilius Scaurus,  (born c. 163 bc—died c. 89 bc), a leader of the Optimates (conservative senatorial aristocrats) and one of the most influential men in the Roman government about 100 bc. Marcus Tullius Cicero, in his speech “In Defense of Fonteius,” wrote that the world was almost ruled by a nod of Scaurus’s head.
Scaurus was born into an impoverished patrician family and acquired wealth in business before entering public life. With the backing of the family of the Metelli, Scaurus obtained the consulship in 115; in that year he defeated several Alpine tribes and was awarded a triumph. He was then chosen princeps senatus (“senior senator”), a position he held until his death. In 112 Scaurus headed an embassy to the Numidian king Jugurtha. According to his political opponents, he was one of the nobles bribed by Jugurtha in 111 to accept a peace unfavourable to Rome, and in order to avoid exposure, Scaurus had himself appointed (109) to the commission established to inquire into such allegations. As censor in 109 he directed construction of a highway, the Via Aemilia, through Pisa to Dertona (modern Tortona, Italy). When L. Appuleius Saturninus was removed from the post of grain commissioner at Ostia sometime before 104, Scaurus took charge of the grain supply. In 100 Scaurus, as senior senator, moved the “ultimate decree of the Senate” against Saturninus and his followers, who were then legally massacred. In 91 he supported an attempt by the tribune Livius Drusus to extend the franchise to Rome’s Italian allies. With the outbreak of the Social War his enemies brought him to trial (90) on a charge of intriguing with the allies, but he was acquitted. Scaurus married Caecilia Metella, who later married the dictator L. Cornelius Sulla; Scaurus’s daughter, Aemilia, married Gnaeus Pompey.
Ancient evaluations of Scaurus’s character were coloured by political prejudice: Cicero praised him highly, while Sallust, an opponent of the Optimates, presented a far less flattering portrait in his monograph Jugurtha. Scaurus’s autobiography, perhaps the first in literary history, has been lost.
