Sir Mortimer Wheeler, in full Sir Robert Eric Mortimer Wheeler,  (born September 10, 1890, Glasgow, Scotland—died July 22, 1976, Leatherhead, near London, England), British archaeologist noted for his discoveries in Great Britain and India and for his advancement of scientific method in archaeology.
After education at Bradford Grammar School and University College London and military service in World War I, Wheeler directed excavations of Roman remains in Essex in 1919–20. He received a Ph.D. from the University of London in 1920 and then conducted excavations in Wales (1921–27) and in Hertfordshire (1930–33), where he unearthed a pre-Roman settlement near St. Albans. Excavating at Maiden Castle in Dorset (1934–37), he found evidence of a settlement dating from the Neolithic Period, prior to 2000 bce. He conducted further excavations in Brittany and Normandy (1938–39).
After serving in World War II, Wheeler was made director general of archaeology for the government of India (1944–47), where his research focused on the origins and development of the Indus civilization. From 1948 to 1955 he held the chair of archaeology of the Roman Provinces at the University of London’s Institute of Archaeology. He was knighted in 1952 and made a Companion of Honour in 1967. His other distinctions included being chairman of the Ancient Monuments Board for England, a trustee of the British Museum, president of the Society of Antiquaries, and a fellow of the Royal Society. His numerous writings include an extensive number of technical works as well as the popular books Archaeology from the Earth (1954) and Still Digging (1955), an autobiography. Wheeler popularized his subject on television.
Perhaps the most important of Wheeler’s accomplishments were a focus on problem-oriented excavation and the creation of meticulous techniques for excavating sites and recording the materials therein. Among other innovations, he developed the use of a Cartesian coordinate system, or three-dimensional grid, with which to record the location of materials found in archaeological excavations. Highly unusual at the time—archaeologists of his era were generally intent on acquiring beautiful objects rather than resolving questions about the past—his techniques have become de rigueur in the field.
Despite Wheeler’s many achievements, however, 21st-century investigations revealed that his ethical behaviour was flawed. Not only did he give one of his wives an ancient artifact from Mohenjo-daro (now in Pakistan) that was not his to give, but also he was widely considered, in the words of London’s Daily Mail, “a bully, a ’sex pest’ and a ’groper’ in his private life.…”
