Pasargadae, Persian Pāsārgād,  first dynastic capital of the Persian Achaemenian dynasty, situated on a plain northeast of Persepolis in southwestern Iran. According to tradition, Cyrus II (the Great; reigned 559–c. 529 bce) chose the site because it lay near the scene of his victory over Astyages the Mede (550). The name of the city may have been derived from that of the chief Persian tribe, the Pasargadae, although it is possible that the original form of the name was Parsagadeh (“Throne of Pars”). In 2004 the ruins were designated a UNESCO World Heritage site.
As an expression of the architectural genius of the Achaemenids prior to the accession of Darius I (the Great; reigned 522–486 bce), when Persepolis replaced Pasargadae as the dynastic home, Pasargadae stands alone. Indeed, the majestic simplicity of the architecture at Pasargadae reflects a sense of balance and beauty that was never equaled in either earlier or later Achaemenian times. The principal buildings stand in magnificent isolation, often with a common orientation but scattered over a remarkably wide area. Although no single wall enclosed the whole site, a strong citadel commanded the northern approaches, and individual enclosure walls protected the more important monuments.
The dominant feature of the citadel is a huge stone platform, projecting from a low, conical hill. Two unfinished stone staircases and a towering facade of rusticated masonry were evidently intended to form part of an elevated palace enclosure. An abrupt event, however—perhaps related to the death of Cyrus—brought the work to a halt, and a formidable mud-brick structure was erected on the platform instead. It is possible that the building represents the famous treasury surrendered to Alexander the Great in 330 bce.
To the south of the citadel, on more or less level ground, was an extensive walled park with elaborate irrigated gardens surrounded by a series of royal buildings. Those cleared by modern excavations include a tall, square tower almost identical in size and shape to the Kaʿbeh-ye Zardusht at the Naqsh-e Rostam tomb site at Persepolis; two spacious palaces, each adorned with fragments of sculpture and each bearing trilingual inscriptions in the name of Cyrus; and a fourth building, designed as the sole entrance to the park, which is notable for the unique four-winged figure with an Egyptian-style triple-atef crown that still stands on a surviving doorjamb. Once surmounted by a trilingual inscription in Old Persian, Elamite, and Babylonian saying “I, Cyrus, the King, the Achaemenian,” this grave-faced figure appears to represent an Achaemenian version of the four-winged genius (guardian spirit) found on palace doorways in Assyria.
Farther south again, the tomb of Cyrus still stands almost intact, its simple lines and massive strength a perfect foil for the rigours of its upland location. Constructed of huge white limestone blocks, its gabled tomb chamber rests on a rectangular stepped plinth, with six receding stages. The Greek historian Arrian tells of Alexander’s grief at finding the tomb open and despoiled on his return from his Indian campaign in 324 bce. Alexander’s general Aristobulus, who was charged with restoring the tomb, also left some description not only of the interior furnishings of the monument, in which the body of Cyrus lay in a gold sarcophagus on a gold couch, but also of the tomb’s exterior appointments, including a description of the well-watered, lush gardens that once surrounded it.
At the extreme southern end of the site, where the Sīvand (Pulvār) River cuts through the narrow Bolāghī Gorge on its way to Persepolis, an impressive rock-cut road or canal still indicates the course of the ancient highway that once linked Pasargadae and Persepolis. Finally, the northwest corner of the settlement harbours a walled area known as the “sacred precinct,” where a large terraced mound looks down on a pair of freestanding fire altars. Although the entire enclosure undoubtedly was the site of important religious ceremonies, there is no proof that it contained the famous shrine of the goddess Anahiti, said to be the location where certain traditional rites were celebrated at the beginning of each monarch’s new reign.
In Islamic times the tomb acquired fresh fame and sanctity as the tomb of the mother of the Hebrew king Solomon. During the 13th century, large numbers of columns and other building materials were transported from the neighbouring Achaemenian palaces in order to erect a congregational mosque around the base of the monument. Toward the end of the 14th century, a caravansary with stone foundations was constructed about 200 yards (180 metres) to the north of the tomb.
