Province, Latin Provincia, plural Provinciae,  in Roman antiquity, a territorial subdivision of the Roman Empire—specifically, the sphere of action and authority of a Roman magistrate who held the imperium, or executive power. The name was at first applied to territories both in Italy and wherever else a Roman official exercised authority in the name of the Roman state. Later the name implied Roman possessions outside Italy from which tribute was required.
Under the republic (c. 509–31 bc), when each province was formed, the Senate drew up a special charter, or lex provinciae (provincial law), based on the report of the general who had conquered the province. This charter defined the province’s territorial limits and the number of towns that it included, as well as the rights and duties of the provincials, especially the kind and amount of tribute that they had to pay. The Senate also appointed a Roman magistrate to rule each province, together with a quaestor and up to three legati (lieutenants). Assisted by his staff, the governor exercised complete control over his province. The virtual autonomy of provincial governors in republican times often tempted them to widespread extortion and other abuses against provincials. Provincial administrative reforms at the beginnings of the empire, however, provided for a division of powers, and procurators were appointed to look after provincial finances. Upon assuming the government of a province, the governor would issue an edict to supplement the lex provinciae; during his tenure he was not bound by the edicts of his predecessors. Governors were either consuls or praetors, and these were called proconsuls and propraetors when their powers were extended for more than a year. The Senate decided which provinces would be governed by consuls and which by praetors. The praetors and consuls would then draw lots to determine their particular provinces.
Under the empire (from 27 bc), provinces were divided into two classes: senatorial provinces were governed by former consuls and former praetors, both called proconsuls, whose term was annual; imperial provinces were governed by representatives of the emperor (called propraetorian legates), who served indefinitely. Roman provincial government allowed for considerable local autonomy. Roman officials were few and, particularly in the eastern provinces, relied heavily upon locally recognized leaders if they were friendly to Rome. Augustus, who reigned from 27 bc to ad 14, initiated for the first time a general policy regarding governing practices to provide efficient and just administration.
