Psamtik I, Psamtik also spelled Psammetichus,  (died 610 bce), governor, later king (reigned 664–610 bce) of ancient Egypt, who expelled the Assyrians from Egypt and reunited the country, founding its 26th dynasty (664–525 bce; see ancient Egypt: The Late period [664–332 bce]).
According to the Greek historian Herodotus, he was one of 12 corulers and secured the aid of Greek mercenaries in order to become sole ruler. After an abortive rebellion by his vassals against the Assyrian ruler of Egypt in 663, Psamtik was unexpectedly restored as governor of Athribis, a city of the Nile River delta, by the Assyrian king. Later, rejecting his vassal status, he negotiated an alliance with Gyges, the king of Lydia in Asia Minor, which enabled him to subdue the other Assyrian princes and vassals in the delta (658–651). He established his capital at Sais, his native city, in the western delta, and proceeded to reform Egypt’s government. To remove the last vestiges of the rule of the kings of Kush—the African kingdom south of Egypt, which had persisted after the Assyrian raid of 663—he negotiated the adoption of his daughter Nitocris by the priestess of the Theban god Amon, thus securing control over the considerable wealth of the temples. Thebes remained under its own governor, an appointee of the Kushites, but Psamtik installed a new official as governor of the south and also created the post of administrator of Middle Egypt. In addition, he placed military garrisons along the Nile throughout Upper and Middle Egypt.
To counteract the power of the resident military class, Psamtik organized a Greek mercenary corps as part of his army. He also encouraged a policy of large property donations to temples by the wealthy nobility. Partly as a response to the recent foreign domination, he encouraged a revival of Old Kingdom (c. 2575–c. 2130 bce) ideals in religion and art in Egypt.
Psamtik probably remained neutral following the death of Gyges, his Lydian ally, in 653. With the spectacular rise of Babylon, however, he sent reinforcements to the beleaguered Assyrians in 614. Having successfully regained Egypt’s independence and fostered its prosperity, he left a strong kingdom to his son.
