Quintus Sertorius,  (born c. 123 bc, Nursia, Sabini—died  72 bc), Roman statesman and military commander who, defying the Roman Senate, became independent ruler of most of Spain for eight years.
After acquiring some reputation in Rome as a jurist and orator, Sertorius fought in Gaul against the invading Cimbri and Teutons (105 and 102) and in 97 served in Spain. In 90 he was quaestor in Cisalpine Gaul and commanded an army in the Social War.
During the civil war (87–86) between the supporters of Lucius Cornelius Sulla and Gaius Marius, Sertorius supported Marius and was prominent in the latter’s successful seizure of Rome. Sertorius was praetor in 83 and was assigned the Spanish provinces, for which he left immediately. When Sulla sent two legions against him, Sertorius retreated to Mauretania. Sertorius returned to Spain in 80, and his bravery and eloquence gained him the allegiance of the Lusitanians as well as of many Roman refugees and deserters. With these forces he was able to overthrow the Sullan governor of Farther Spain, Quintus Metellus Pius. Sertorius was the ruler of all Nearer Spain and most of Farther Spain by the end of 77. He was soon joined by M. Perperna and other armed supporters of the unsuccessful anti-Sullan rebel Marcus Lepidus. In 77 a Roman army under Gnaeus Pompey arrived to reestablish the Senate’s control in Spain. For several years Sertorius skillfully kept the armies of both Pompey and Metellus Pius at bay and retained his rule over Spain. In 74, however, the tide began to turn against Sertorius. The Iberians’ morale declined, and Sertorius, driven to harsh measures to maintain order, lost popularity. In 72 he was murdered in a conspiracy headed by Perperna and other officers jealous of his authority.
Sertorius was in revolt perhaps less against Rome than against the constitution Sulla had imposed on Rome. He established in Spain a senate of 300 members drawn mainly from Roman immigrants but probably including a few Spaniards. Strict and severe with his soldiers, he was considerate of the local inhabitants. He was accompanied everywhere by a white fawn, which, while supposedly communicating to him the advice of the goddess Diana, served to promote his popularity among the superstitious tribesmen.
