Ramses IV, Ramses also spelled Ramesses or Rameses,  (died 1150 bce), king of ancient Egypt (reigned 1156–50 bce) who strove through extensive building activity to maintain Egypt’s prosperity in an era of deteriorating internal and external conditions.
Upon his accession, Ramses compiled a lengthy document (the Harris Papyrus) recording his father’s gifts to the gods, blessings for his son, and a survey of his reign. Soon afterward the new king undertook a vast building program. In his first year the graywacke (coarse sandstone) quarries in the Wadi Hammāmāt, east of Coptos (modern Qifṭ) in Upper Egypt, were surveyed and reopened to extract building stone. More quarrying occurred the next year, and cutting of the royal tomb began after the gang of workmen assigned to it was doubled. The greatest activity occurred in the third year of his reign, when three expeditions quarried stone in the Wadi Hammāmāt, including one consisting of 8,368 men, of whom 5,000 were soldiers, led by the high priest of Amon, Ramsesnakht. The king started two temples at Dayr al-Baḥrī in western Thebes, one of which was a colossal mortuary temple that, if finished, would have been the largest ever built. He also completed the decoration of the sanctuary and surrounding chambers in the temple of Khons at Karnak. He left inscriptions at many places throughout Egypt. In return for these works, Ramses asked for a reign longer than that of his predecessor of the 19th dynasty (1292–1190 bce), Ramses II.
A judicial papyrus of the following reign, however, reveals that problems existed in Egypt during Ramses IV’s reign. At Elephantine, near modern Aswān, a group of officials began extensive criminal careers that went unpunished for 10 years. Also during Ramses’ reign, Ramsesnakht was able to secure control of many key priestly offices for his family. Finally, in Palestine, only the Sinai copper mines remained in Egypt’s possession.
Already middle-aged when he ascended the throne, Ramses IV died after six years of rule, leaving most of his projects uncompleted. He was succeeded by Ramses V, who was probably his son.
