Scipio Africanus the Younger, also called Scipio Aemilianus, Latin Scipio Africanus Minor, in full Publius Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus Africanus (Numantinus),  (born 185/184 bc—died  129 bc, Rome), Roman general famed both for his exploits during the Third Punic War (149–146 bc) and for his subjugation of Spain (134–133 bc). He received the name Africanus and celebrated a triumph in Rome after his destruction of Carthage (146 bc). He acquired the (unofficial) name Numantinus for his reduction of Spanish Numantia (133 bc).
Scipio was the second son of Lucius Aemilius Paullus Macedonicus, hero of the Third Macedonian War and son of the consul (of the same name) who fell at the Battle of Cannae in 216. Paullus himself, twice consul, was an outstanding Roman leader who combined traditional Roman virtues with a keen interest in Greek culture. Soon after Scipio’s birth, Paullus divorced his wife Papiria, and it was probably after their father’s remarriage that Scipio and his elder brother, Quintus Fabius Maximus Aemilianus, were adopted into other families, although both remained in close contact with their natural father. While the elder brother was adopted by a grandson, or possibly a son, of Quintus Fabius Maximus Cunctator, the famous general of the Second Punic War, Scipio himself was adopted by Publius Scipio, the son of Scipio Africanus the Elder. Thus Scipio succeeded to the family tradition of two of Rome’s greatest generals—the victor against Hannibal of Carthage and the conqueror of Perseus of Macedonia.
Scipio’s upbringing is described in a passage of Plutarch’s biography of his father, Aemilius Paullus, who
This education, based on a combination of Greek and Roman culture, set the direction of Scipio’s further interests. He was introduced to military life in 168, when he and his brother served under their father in the Third Macedonian War. At the decisive Battle of Pydna he followed up the routed enemy with such dash that he was reported missing and was feared killed. After the battle, his father put him in charge of the Macedonian royal game preserves in order to develop his strength and courage; his intellectual development was enriched with a legacy of books from the Macedonian royal library.
The most significant influence on Scipio’s character was his friendship with the Greek historian Polybius, one of the thousand Achaean leaders who had been deported and detained without trial in Italy. Scipio and his brother persuaded the authorities to allow Polybius to remain in Rome, where he became a close friend and mentor of the two young men. No doubt Scipio was oppressed by the thought of the responsibility that he would have on becoming the head of the great house of the Scipios (it is uncertain when his adoptive father, Publius Scipio, died) as well as in representing the Aemilii. Under Polybius’ guidance, he was determined to prove a worthy representative and to pursue the normal aims of a Roman noble: honour, glory, and military success.
Polybius emphasized two aspects of Scipio’s character, his personal morality and his generosity. Of the former, he tells how Scipio sought to excel all his contemporaries in his reputation for temperance at a time when morals were generally declining and young men were becoming increasingly corrupt, partly because they had “caught the dissoluteness of Greek customs” and partly because of the great influx of public and private wealth as a result of the Macedonian War; “in about five years Scipio secured a general recognition of his character for goodness and purity” and generosity. Polybius, however, does not draw attention to an element of cruelty in Scipio’s character that is noticeable in several episodes of his life; it may generally have had a deterrent purpose and not been an unusual trait in the Roman character, but not every Roman general celebrated a victory by throwing deserters to the wild beasts.
Scipio’s early political apathy was soon cast aside; by 152 he had probably been elected quaestor, which was the first rung of an official career, and had entered the Senate. But at the same time, he was also pursuing his cultural interests: he was among the young nobles who were attracted by the lectures of three visiting Athenian philosophers whose views on political morality shocked more old-fashioned Romans, such as Cato. Scipio achieved public acclaim in 151. A series of disasters to Roman armies in Spain resulted in such reluctance to undertake military service in the peninsula that, in a dispute over the levy, the consuls who were responsible for it were even temporarily imprisoned by the tribunes who opposed the levy. In the crisis, Scipio, who had been assigned to Macedonia, inspired confidence by volunteering to serve in Spain instead; his example was immediately followed by other officers and men.
Serving as military tribune to Lucius Lucullus, Scipio displayed great personal courage in the Spanish campaigns; in 151 he killed a Spanish chieftain who had challenged him to single combat, and at Intercatia he won the mural crown (corona muralis), which was awarded to the first man to mount the walls of an enemy town. In 150 he was sent by Lucullus to Africa to obtain some elephants from the Numidian king Masinissa, the friend of his grandfather Africanus. While there he witnessed a great but indecisive battle between Masinissa and the Carthaginians; the latter then asked him to arrange a settlement, but, in the event, negotiations broke down. Scipio then left Africa, but he was soon to return not as a peacemaker but as a conqueror. When back in Rome, at Polybius’ request, he managed to gain the somewhat grudging support of old Cato (whose son had married Scipio’s sister Aemilia) for a proposal to release the 300 Achaean internees who still survived without trial. They had been held in Italy since the end of the Third Macedonian War (171–168). Thus a great blot on Rome’s good name was at length partially removed.
In 150 war with Carthage was in the air. When it eventually broke out the following year, Scipio returned to Africa with the Roman army, serving again as military tribune, and his service was very effective. The two consuls besieged Carthage by land and sea, but later in the year, after one had returned to Rome, the Carthaginians launched a night attack upon the camp of the isolated Manilius, a situation that was retrieved only by the skill of Scipio. During the winter Scipio again displayed conspicuous ability when Manilius led two unsuccessful expeditions against the Carthaginian forces in the interior. Again he came into the limelight when the aged Masinissa, on the point of death, asked that the grandson of his friend Africanus arrange the future of his kingdom. Scipio decided to divide Numidia between the king’s three sons and thereby avoided any danger that a united Numidia might have presented.
