Strategus, plural Strategi, Greek Stratēgos, plural Stratēgoi,   in ancient Greece, a general, frequently functioning as a state officer with wider functions; also, a high official in medieval Byzantium.
An annual board of 10 strategi was introduced in Athens during the reorganization of the tribal system under Cleisthenes (c. 508 bc), each of the 10 tribal units being represented in the army by a taxis (“regiment”) led by a strategus. At the Battle of Marathon in 490, the 10 strategi formed a council, which advised the polemarch. After 487, when the archons came to be chosen by lot, the polemarch was superseded by the strategi as commander of the army, and the command of the taxeis passed to taxiarchs subordinate to them. Usually several strategi were assigned to a particular operation; sometimes one strategus alone received command of a small-scale campaign, and occasionally all 10 may have been employed on a major undertaking. When more than one strategus shared command of a campaign, they were in law equal, and any predominance that one of them may have exercised depended on his personal qualities.
In the 5th century the strategi exercised political influence, especially in foreign affairs. They may have had special rights of access to the Boule (council), which prepared the agenda for the Ecclesia (assembly). Sometimes they conducted negotiations with foreign states, but treaties needed ratification by the Ecclesia. They were often included among the officers required to swear to treaties on behalf of the state. The importance of the office was further enhanced by two aspects: it was elective, as opposed to the magistracies filled by lot, and allowed the strategi indefinite reelection. Men commanding public confidence could thus establish themselves in considerable power, owing to the continuity and time afforded by the office.
In Hellenistic Greece the strategi became supreme magistrates in most federations and leagues (e.g., the Achaean and Aetolian). Alexander the Great and his generals and the Macedonian kings also appointed officers with this title. Strategi as civil governors of nomes—having almost completely lost their military character—appeared in Egypt in the 3rd century bc and continued under Roman rule until the 4th century ad.
