Titus Quinctius Flamininus,  (born c. 229 bc—died 174 bc), Roman general and statesman who established the Roman hegemony over Greece.
Flamininus had a distinguished military career during the Second Punic War, serving as military tribune under Marcus Claudius Marcellus in 208 bc. Elected quaestor (financial administrator) in 205, he exercised the authority (imperium) of a praetor (a high-level magistrate) at Tarentum in southern Italy. After the defeat of Carthage at the Battle of Zama in 202, he was one of a commission of 10 (decemvir) who distributed land to the veterans of the victorious general, Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus, in 201; in 200 he became one of a commission of three (triumvir) who settled veterans in the town of Venusia. These veterans helped elect him consul for 198. He went to Greece with a fresh army to continue the Second Macedonian War against Philip V of Macedon.
After an initial victory over Philip, he devoted himself to winning over the Greek cities and leagues by diplomacy and, in the case of the Achaean League, by force. Negotiations for a peace settlement with Philip at Nicaea in Locris broke down when Flamininus demanded that Philip evacuate all of Greece. He planned to make peace if the Senate appointed a successor for 197, but he promised to continue the war if he was prorogued (continued in office). His friends in Rome persuaded the Senate to prorogue Flamininus and to insist that Philip accept Flamininus’s terms. By spring 197 Flamininus had made allies of most of Greece and defeated the isolated Philip at the Battle of Cynoscephalae. The great Macedonian phalanx that had conquered the Persian army for Alexander the Great (4th century bc) was surpassed by the Roman legion, which had emerged from the Second Punic War (218–202) as the most potent fighting force in the Mediterranean world.
Philip and the Macedonians were driven from Greece, but Flamininus frustrated the attempts of his allies, the Aetolian Confederacy, to dominate other cities in northern Greece. At the Isthmian Games of 196, in a spectacular ceremony reported by the Greek statesman and historian Polybius, Flamininus proclaimed all Greeks in Europe and Asia free and autonomous. (The inclusion of the Greek cities of Asia was aimed at undermining the influence and plans of Antiochus III.) The Romans won a difficult war with King Nabis of Sparta. Like Philip, Nabis kept his throne, but he was not allowed to dominate other cities in southern Greece and so provided a balance of power with Rome’s ally, the Achaean League.
In 194 all Roman troops were withdrawn from Greece, where Flamininus was given divine honours. In Rome he celebrated an unprecedented three-day triumph (Livy 34.52), and the Greeks erected a bronze statue with a Greek inscription for him. Flamininus’s success was built on an ambiguity. For Greeks the proclamation of freedom meant self-rule, but in Roman law a freed slave (libertus) became the client of his former master and still owed his patron respect and political obedience.
In 193 Antiochus was invited into Greece by the Aetolians, still smarting from the frustration of their ambitions by Flamininus. When Antiochus refused to withdraw, Flamininus announced that Rome’s next mission was the liberation of the Greek cities of Asia. The victorious war was fought by Scipio Africanus and his brother, but Flamininus remained active in diplomacy, rewarding his friends of the Achaean League and annexing Zacynthus for Rome. He was elected censor for 189.
In 183 he was sent on a diplomatic mission to negotiate a peace treaty with Prusias I of Bithynia. (Prusias had remained neutral during Rome’s war with Antiochus only to see control of Phrygia given to Rome’s ally Eumenes II of Pergamum.) Flamininus not only confirmed the transfer of Phrygia to Pergamum, but he also demanded the surrender of Hannibal, who had served Prusias against Rome, because he had served Antiochus. Hannibal committed suicide rather than surrender to the Romans. Flamininus worked with the Senate to name Demetrius, Philip’s younger son, as his heir instead of his older son, Perseus. According to Polybius, Philip was shown a letter from Flamininus promising Demetrius the throne (though the Roman historian Livy expresses his belief that the letter was forged), and Philip reluctantly put Demetrius to death (181). This diplomatic failure was the last that was heard of Flamininus until his death in 174.
Flamininus developed the policy of turning the cities, leagues, and kingdoms of the Hellenistic world into the clients of Rome and of himself, a policy that became the basis of the Roman hegemony of the Mediterranean. The Greeks were freed, but, like Roman freedmen, they were expected to follow Rome’s explicit instructions and even implicit hints. Flamininus initially won almost unbounded devotion by his charm, intelligence, and knowledgeable admiration for Greek culture, but in the end he aroused hostility by his unscrupulous interference in Greek politics. By both his strengths and faults, he laid the foundation for the Roman domination of the Greek world.
