Zahi Hawass,  (born May 28, 1947, Al-ʿUbaydiyyah, Egypt), Egyptian archaeologist and public official, whose magnetic personality and forceful advocacy helped raise awareness of the excavation and preservation efforts he oversaw as head of Egypt’s Supreme Council of Antiquities (SCA). He served as Egypt’s minister of antiquities in 2011.
Hawass grew up near Damietta, Egypt, and entered Alexandria University with the intention of becoming a lawyer. He eventually changed his course of study to Greek and Roman archaeology, but it was not until after graduation (B.A., 1967) that he developed a passion for the subject, while working as an inspector for the Department of Antiquities (the forerunner of the SCA). Following a one-year postgraduate course in Egyptology at Cairo University, Hawass won a Fulbright fellowship and enrolled in a Ph.D. program in Egyptology at the University of Pennsylvania, from which he graduated in 1987. He then returned to Egypt, where he was named general director of antiquities for the Giza pyramids complex as well as for the historical sites at Ṣaqqārah and Al-Wāḥāt al-Baḥriyyah (Bahariya Oasis).
At Giza in 1990, Hawass discovered a necropolis that housed the tombs of the pyramid builders, which proved, contrary to then-popular fringe theories, that the pyramids were indeed erected by Egyptians. Hawass’s frequent outspoken denunciations of the alternative theorists, whom he termed “pyramidiots,” established his international reputation. His profile was further raised in the late 1990s when he began the excavation of an extensive collection of tombs at Bahariya Oasis. The site became known as the Valley of the Golden Mummies after the tombs’ well-preserved denizens, the most that had ever been found at a single site.
By the time he was appointed secretary-general of the SCA in 2002, Hawass had appeared on numerous American television programs promoting Egypt’s archaeological heritage. His ubiquitous media presence made him one of the most recognizable figures in Egypt but also one of the most divisive. Critics noted his tendency toward glib self-aggrandizement, which minimized the accomplishments of other antiquities workers, and charged that he too often privileged public relations over science. (Few of his scientific findings were published in peer-reviewed journals.) At the same time, Hawass was lauded for reclaiming Egyptology—for decades the province of Western scholars—for Egyptians. His zealous promotional efforts were seen to have engendered national pride and to have helped attract tourism.
As head of the SCA, Hawass directed several other excavation projects that led to significant findings, including the discovery in 2008 of an Old Kingdom pyramid at Ṣaqqārah that was determined to belong to a queen of Teti. He also initiated the Egyptian Mummy Project, which used modern forensic techniques such as CAT scans to study both royal and nonroyal mummies. As a result of that project, in 2007 Hawass announced that he had identified the remains of Hatshepsut, and in 2010 it was determined that Tutankhamen was the son of Akhenaton and probably died of complications from malaria and bone disease. In 2009, facing mandatory retirement, Hawass was appointed Egypt’s vice minister of culture, with responsibility for the SCA. Among his ongoing endeavours was the repatriation of several notable Egyptian artifacts from foreign museums, including the Rosetta Stone and the bust of Nefertiti.
In January 2011, after Egyptian Pres. Hosni Mubarak shuffled his cabinet following antigovernment protests, Hawass was appointed to the newly created position of minister of antiquities. However, after protests forced Mubarak to step down as president on February 11, Hawass remained in his position for only a few weeks; he resigned in March—to protest, he said, the insufficient security for museums and archaeological sites following the onset of protests, which had resulted in looting. Less than a month after his resignation, he was reappointed by Egypt’s interim prime minister, Essam Sharaf. However, Hawass faced increasingly vocal criticism from Egyptian archaeologists who denounced his domineering management style and questioned his financial dealings. Opposition to Hawass culminated in a series of demonstrations calling for his removal, led by Egyptian archaeologists outside the headquarters of the ministry of antiquities. In July 2011 Hawass was one of more than a dozen government ministers removed from their posts in a cabinet reorganization meant to defuse widespread popular protests against the Egyptian interim government.
