Zelia Maria Magdalena Nuttall,  (born Sept. 6, 1857, San Francisco, Calif., U.S.—died April 12, 1933, Coyoacán, Mex.), American archaeologist, remembered for her extensive investigations of ancient Mexico.
Nuttall was the daughter of a physician. Through her mother’s Mexican ancestry she had early developed an interest in that country, and on a visit there in 1884 she studied some archaeological artifacts. Her paper on the small terra-cotta heads found at Teotihuacan was published in 1886 in the American Journal of Archaeology. The paper attracted attention in scholarly circles and won her appointment as honorary special assistant in Mexican archaeology at Harvard University’s Peabody Museum and, the next year, a fellowship in the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
From 1886 to 1899 Nuttall lived in Europe, headquartered in Dresden, Germany, but traveling widely for study and to attend scholarly congresses. The results of her wide-ranging investigations were published in The Fundamental Principles of Old and New World Civilizations (1901), in which she traced cultural parallels between ancient Middle Eastern and American civilizations and hypothesized that culture may have been carried to the Western Hemisphere by Phoenician explorers; in Codex Nuttall (1902), a facsimile of a pictographic historical record of ancient Mexico that she had discovered in a private library in England; and in The Book of the Life of the Ancient Mexicans (1903), which printed in facsimile the Codex Magliabecchiano, a similar pictographic work that she had found in Florence.
After a brief stay in the United States in 1899–1902, she settled in the Casa Alvarado in Coyoacán, a suburb of Mexico City. There she continued her investigations. In 1904 she was field director of the Reid-Crocker archaeological mission from the University of California, where she had already served as an adviser to the department of anthropology. In 1908 she was made honorary professor in the National Museum of Mexico. From 1911 to 1917 she was abroad during Mexico’s revolutionary disturbances, and during that time she published New Light on Drake: Documents Relating to His Voyage of Circumnavigation, 1577–1580 (1914).
