Amsterdam News, also called New York Amsterdam News,  one of the most influential and oldest continuously published African American newspapers, based in Harlem in New York City. It predominately treats issues in African American culture, especially events in and issues concerning New York City and environs, from a Black perspective. Since 2009 it has also been published online.
Amsterdam News was founded by James Anderson, who published the first edition on December 4, 1909. At that time there were already some 50 newspapers for Blacks in the United States. Anderson produced the paper at his home on 65th Street and Amsterdam Avenue in the San Juan Hill neighbourhood of New York City. It began as a four-page weekly (at 2 cents per copy) that covered only metro city items, Black social events, and the events at the local YMCA. Less than a decade later, the offices were relocated to 135th Street in Harlem.
By 1930 the Amsterdam News had become so successful that it was the second Black newspaper in the United States (after the Chicago Defender) to have its circulation tracked. In 1932 the paper expanded and opened a Brooklyn office, but its prosperity was short-lived. In 1935—in the middle of the Great Depression—the Amsterdam News was threatened by a labour strike, one of the first such disputes between Black management and Black workers. Thus it was that the paper became the first completely unionized Black newspaper in the United States.
In the 1930s and ’40s the Amsterdam News became a prominent voice for Black Americans. The newspaper supported the Republican Party until the New Deal era of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, when it shifted its support to the Democratic Party.
In the 1950s and ’60s the newspaper gave strong support to the American civil rights movement, particularly the leadership of Martin Luther King, Jr. The paper also chronicled the emergence of the more radical Black leader Malcolm X and the Nation of Islam. In the mid-1970s the newspaper took a more militant position on Black civil rights and spoke out against police brutality. By the end of that decade, however, the newspaper had begun to moderate its focus on social issues.
Since its founding, a number of prominent African Americans have contributed to the Amsterdam News, including civil rights leader W.E.B. Du Bois, congressman Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., and Roy Wilkins, executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
