Associated Press (AP),  cooperative 24-hour news agency (wire service), the oldest and largest of those in the United States and long the largest and one of the preeminent news agencies in the world. Headquarters are in New York, N.Y.
Its beginnings can be traced to 1846, when four New York City daily newspapers joined a cooperative venture to provide news of the Mexican-American War. In 1848 six papers pooled their efforts to finance a telegraphic relay of foreign news brought by ships to Boston, the first U.S. port of call for westbound transatlantic ships. By 1856 the cooperative had taken the name New York Associated Press. It sold its service to various regional newspaper groups, and pressure from the regional customers forced changes in its control. Midwestern newspaper publishers formed the Western Associated Press in 1862, and in 1892 it broke from the New York Associated Press and was incorporated separately in Illinois as the Associated Press.
In 1900 the regional organizations merged, and the modern AP was incorporated. The Chicago Inter Ocean, a newspaper that did not have AP membership, had brought an antimonopoly suit, and the AP moved to New York, where association laws permitted the group to continue its strict control of membership, including blackballing of applicants for membership by existing members. In the early 1940s Marshall Field III, who had established the Chicago Sun, fought his exclusion from the AP service. Prosecution under the federal antitrust powers ended the AP’s restrictive practices.
In 1967 the AP partnered with the U.S. financial information and publishing firm Dow Jones & Co., Inc., to launch the AP–Dow Jones Economic Report, which transmitted business, economic, and financial news across the globe. As computers began to replace typewriters for many tasks—including writing, editing, and archiving—the AP launched a series of new technological initiatives, including DataStream (1972), a high-speed news-transmission service; LaserPhoto (1976), which enabled transmission of the first laser-scanned photographs; the “electronic darkroom” (1979), which electronically cropped, formatted, and transmitted photos; and LaserPhoto II (1982), the first satellite colour-photograph network. For many years the AP had leased more than 400,000 miles (644,000 km) of telephone wire to carry its transmissions, but its use of radio teleprinters—begun in 1952—began mitigating the need for leased wires, a trend that increasing employment of satellite transmissions carried on as subscribers installed appropriate antennas.
In the early 1980s the AP’s staff was made up of some 2,500 reporters and correspondents, in bureaus in more than 100 U.S. and 50 other cities around the world, who collected and relayed to member papers news from about 100 countries. Staff efforts were augmented by those of more than 100,000 reporters of member papers. The agency had more than 6,500 newspaper clients in the early 1980s.
The Associated Press Stylebook and Briefing on Media Law, first published in 1977, became the standard style guide for newswriting in the United States. The AP continued to diversify, launching a series of new ventures including Associated Press Television (1994; later renamed Associated Press Television News), a London-based global video news service; AP All News Radio (1994), a 24-hour radio news network; and the WIRE (1996), an online news service providing continuously updated audio, photos, text, and video.
In the early 21st century the AP began focusing on various reader initiatives including an online blog; asap, a multimedia news service targeting younger subscribers and members; citizen journalism; and the Mobile News Network for mobile phone users. The AP employs some 4,100 administrative, communications, and editorial workers worldwide. Over the decades, the news agency has received more than four dozen Pulitzer Prizes.
