Chicago Tribune,  daily newspaper published in Chicago, one of the leading American newspapers and long the dominant, sometimes strident, voice of the Midwest.
The newspaper—as well as its parent company and later media conglomerate, the Tribune Company—was founded in 1847 by three Chicagoans. However, the paper was close to bankruptcy in 1855, at which time Joseph Medill and five partners bought it. Medill, a Canadian-born editor who became an Ohio newspaper publisher, made the Tribune a profitable operation while using it to promulgate his Free-Soil and abolitionist views. In addition, he made the Tribune one of the most influential early advocates of Abraham Lincoln for the U.S. presidency. The paper gained in stature through its coverage of the American Civil War. Following the war, it called repeatedly for government reforms, and Medill was elected mayor of Chicago. He bought a controlling ownership interest in the Tribune in 1874 and continued as publisher until his death.
The Tribune, politically liberal in outlook for much of the 19th century, became increasingly conservative under the leadership of Medill’s grandson Robert R. McCormick. From 1914 to 1925, McCormick shared the responsibilities of publisher and editor in chief with his cousin Joseph Medill Patterson. After Patterson left to become publisher and editor in chief of the New York Daily News, McCormick became the Tribune’s guiding force. A colourful figure in American journalism, McCormick was particularly noted for his nationalist-isolationist views, embodied in his unceasing opposition to the presidency (1933–45) of Franklin D. Roosevelt and even to the candidacy (1950) of Dwight D. Eisenhower, a moderate Republican.
After McCormick’s death in 1955, the paper took fewer editorial risks but became known for its thorough coverage of Chicago and Midwestern commerce, industry, agriculture, and social life, as well as government and politics. However, in the late 1960s, under publisher Harold Grumhaus (1969–73) and editor Clayton Kirkpatrick (1969–79), the generally conservative-leaning paper’s partisan slant was tempered with a broader and more diverse perspective.
At the turn of the 21st century, the Tribune underwent a series of leadership changes and began to venture into new initiatives, including a free tabloid edition, RedEye (2002), which was geared toward younger readers. However, because of increasing financial difficulties in a struggling newspaper industry, the Tribune subsequently underwent a period of major restructuring that included employee buyouts and job cuts.
For years the Tribune formed the basis of the Tribune Company (later Tribune Media). However, in 2014 the company’s publishing division was spun off, and the Tribune became a subsidiary of the newly formed venture, Tronc, Inc.
Over the decades, the Tribune has received approximately 25 Pulitzer Prizes.
