Detroit Free Press,  daily newspaper, one of the most widely circulated in the United States, published in Detroit, Michigan.
Founded by Sheldon McKnight, The Democratic Free Press and Michigan Intelligencer was first published in 1831 when Detroit was a small frontier town. The first daily newspaper in Michigan, the Free Press championed statehood for the then territory and was one of the first American newspapers to publish a Sunday edition, beginning in 1853. The Free Press became noted for its coverage of the American Civil War; later in the century it added feature writers and columnists, including the poet Edgar A. Guest, and it initiated a women’s section and a Washington, D.C., bureau. It retained its editorial independence after it was bought by John S. Knight in 1940 and also after the merger in 1974 that formed Knight Ridder newspapers.
Extended competition between the Detroit Free Press and the daily Detroit News, owned by the Gannett newspaper chain, resulted in heavy financial losses by both newspapers and threatened to collapse the Free Press. In 1989, following the approval of the U.S. attorney general, the papers’ advertising, business, production, and circulation departments were combined under a joint operating agreement (JOA) into a new company, the Detroit Newspaper Agency, owned equally by Knight Ridder and Gannett. The two newspapers retained distinct editorial staffs and continued to publish separate daily editions, although they published combined Saturday and Sunday editions. The Free Press led the News in circulation in the early years after the JOA. In 1995, after prolonged friction with management, about 2,500 members of six different unions went on a 19-month strike against the jointly run newspapers, and unresolved issues persisted even after the workers returned. Although the newspapers continued to publish during the strike, they lost nearly $100 million before settling, and even 10 years later circulation figures for the daily and weekend editions had not made a significant recovery. The strike was costly for the labour unions as well: the Teamsters paid about $30 million toward legal fees and strike benefits. Seeing great value in the future of the Detroit media market, Gannett purchased the Free Press from Knight Ridder in 2005.
