Freedom’s Journal,  weekly newspaper (1827–29) that was the first newspaper owned and operated by African Americans in the United States. It was based in New York City.
Freedom’s Journal was founded in March 1827 when a group of free Blacks gathered to establish a newspaper intended to serve the African American community and to counter the racism that often appeared in the mainstream press. Samuel Cornish, a Presbyterian minister, and John Brown Russwurm, one of the first African Americans to graduate from a U.S. college, were chosen senior editor and junior editor, respectively. The newspaper’s first issue, which was four pages long, appeared on March 16, 1827.
Freedom’s Journal printed editorials against both slavery and advocates of colonization who called for repatriating Blacks to Africa, and it challenged racist attacks against African Americans that appeared in other newspapers. The editors hoped to reach African Americans in both the South and the North and build a national sense of Black unity and pride. They also sought to raise African American consciousness by publishing articles about African culture and heritage. In addition, Freedom’s Journal featured general news stories.
The newspaper proved popular, and it eventually circulated in 11 states as well as the District of Columbia. It also appeared in Canada, Europe, and Haiti. In addition to its editors and staff, Freedom’s Journal employed agents to handle subscriptions, and one such worker was David Walker, who wrote a famous antislavery tract (1829) that urged slaves to fight for their freedom.
In September 1827 Cornish resigned from Freedom’s Journal, reportedly over a disagreement with Russwurm concerning colonization. While Cornish opposed repatriation, his colleague supported it, believing that white hatred and fear of free African Americans was too strong to overcome. After Cornish left, Russwurm continued to edit and write for Freedom’s Journal, but many believed that the newspaper became more hesitant and compromising in its tone and views, suffering from the departure of Cornish’s more-militant editorials. Sales began to decline, especially after Russwurm expressed support for the American Colonization Society, a pro-colonization organization that most of the newspaper’s readers rejected. Freedom’s Journal’s last issue appeared on March 28, 1829. Russwurm subsequently moved to Liberia, where he founded another paper, the Liberia Herald. In May 1829 Cornish tried to resurrect Freedom’s Journal as The Rights of All, but the newspaper ceased publication several months later.
