Gannett Co., Inc.,  one of the largest newspaper publishers in the United States, with interests in newspaper Web sites and television broadcasting as well. The company also publishes a number of newspapers and periodicals in the United Kingdom and Europe. It is headquartered in McLean, Va.
The company was started by Frank Ernest Gannett, who in 1906 began buying small newspapers in New York state. The company was incorporated in 1923, and it grew as Gannett continued to purchase the newspapers of small and medium-sized cities. These newspapers were usually the only ones published in their city and so could be run very profitably. The company’s growth was further spurred by the attention it paid to advertising and circulation and by its tight control of costs. By the late 1980s the Gannett Co. owned more than 80 daily newspapers with a total circulation of more than 6 million. In 1982 the company began publishing USA Today, the United States’ first national, general-interest newspaper. In subsequent years the company purchased newspapers in larger cities, including the Des Moines Register (1985), the Detroit News (1986, sold in 2005), and both of the newspapers in Louisville, Ky. This pattern of buying up all the newspapers in an area, slashing subscription rates to levels which (according to critics) only a national conglomerate could sustain, and then raising advertising rates once control over the local market had been secured brought Gannett severe criticism as well as lawsuits. Smaller community and privately owned newspapers have charged the media giant with predatory practices and violations of antitrust laws. Not helping Gannett’s image was the frank admission of brash business tactics by former Gannett chairman Allen Neuharth in his autobiography, Confessions of an S.O.B. (1989).
Meanwhile, Gannett continued to expand through acquisitions that included Multimedia Inc., a firm that syndicated talk shows and owned newspapers and television stations throughout the South (purchased in 1995), and Newsquest plc, one of the United Kingdom’s largest regional newspaper publishers (purchased in 1999). The company added to its U.K. properties by acquiring newspaper publisher Newscom (2000) and Scottish newspaper firm SMG Publishing (2003). In 2005 Gannett sold its share in the Detroit News and acquired full ownership of the Detroit Free Press, the city’s leading daily paper.
By the early 21st century Gannett published some 100 daily newspapers, which had a combined daily circulation exceeding 7 million. Gannett supports the Gannett Foundation, a charitable organization that contributes to community-development projects in cities and towns where Gannett owns newspapers or television stations.
