Milwaukee Journal Sentinel,  daily newspaper published in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. It is regarded as Wisconsin’s leading newspaper and generally accounted as one of the great regional dailies of the United States.
The paper was founded in 1882 by Lucius W. Nieman as the Milwaukee Daily Journal, an independent, community-oriented newspaper, and was renamed The Milwaukee Journal in 1890. It became noted for its coverage of Milwaukee and state affairs, gained extensive statewide circulation, and became distinguished for its editorial stance. It tended over the years to support progressive or liberal candidates for political office and maintained an international point of view. After World War I it supported the League of Nations and, later, the United Nations. In a heavily German American community, The Milwaukee Journal exposed the Nazi underpinning of the German American Bund in the 1930s and attacked Wisconsin’s U.S. Sen. Joseph R. McCarthy for his unfounded accusations of communist sympathy in the 1950s.
Nieman died in 1935 and his wife in 1936; part of their fortune went to establish the Nieman fellowships for working journalists at Harvard University. Harry J. Grant had become editor of The Milwaukee Journal in 1919, and after the Niemans’ deaths he organized a plan whereby employees could buy stock in the company; more than 700 did so, and the employees eventually acquired control of the paper. In 1962 the employee-owned corporation bought the Milwaukee Sentinel from the Hearst Corporation. After running the two papers independently, the company, now called Journal Communications, merged them in 1995, renaming them the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. In 2014 Journal Communications merged with the E.W. Scripps Company, and the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel became the flagship of a new newspaper publisher, Journal Media Group, Inc. Two years later Journal Media Group was sold to Gannett Co., Inc., which thereby acquired the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel and several other daily newspapers.
The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel received Pulitzer Prizes in 2008, 2010, and 2011. Before the name change, The Milwaukee Journal had received five.
