National Enquirer, formerly (1926–57) New York Evening Enquirer,  American weekly newspaper based in Boca Raton, Florida, and best known for its celebrity gossip, crime news, and investigative reporting. Owned by American Media, Inc., and distributed nationwide, the Enquirer is commonly termed a “supermarket tabloid” because of its wide availability at grocery-store checkout counters. It is also sold on newsstands and through subscriptions and is published in an online version.
The Enquirer began in 1926 as the New York Evening Enquirer, a Sunday weekly. It was founded by a former advertising man, William Griffin, with funds from newspaper magnate William Randolph Hearst. At Hearst’s behest the Enquirer experimented with journalistic methods and standards, such as embellishing stories to attract more reader attention; Hearst would then adopt the more-successful techniques for his own papers. The Enquirer primarily covered politics, sports, theatre news, and human-interest stories. The paper never achieved great financial success, and its fortunes suffered further from the poor reception of the isolationist editorials Griffin wrote for it during World War II.
It was bought in 1952 by Generoso Pope, Jr., the son of the late owner of the Italian-language daily Il Progresso Italo-Americano. Under Pope’s ownership the Enquirer converted to a tabloid format in 1953. It foundered during the first years, but circulation rose dramatically after Pope refocused its editorial direction to emphasize sensational stories such as those involving murder and gore, and used vivid eye-catching headlines. He took the paper national and renamed it the National Enquirer in 1957; it turned a profit for the first time the following year.
In the mid- to late 1960s the National Enquirer began to sell in supermarkets, which, more and more, were replacing the smaller markets, corner stores, and newsstands that had been the paper’s main outlets. To increase its appeal to a family audience, the Enquirer moved away from its more lurid headlines and articles while entertaining readers with sensational stories of paranormal occurrences, celebrity gossip, medical anomalies, and “freaks” such as animals with multiple heads. In 1971 the editorial offices moved from the New York area to Lantana, Florida. Average weekly circulation continued to grow, reaching its peak for that decade at 5.7 million copies in 1978.
In the early 1980s, seeking to expand in the face of increased competition from other publications, the National Enquirer began advertising itself on a large scale and courting major national advertisers. After Pope’s death in 1988, GP Group Acquisitions bought his operations, which included a sister tabloid, the Weekly World News (known for even more sensational stories, such as those of alien visitations, and regularly featured “news updates” of a quasi-human creature named “Bat Boy”). In 1994 the company—which by then included a range of other publications—changed its name to American Media, Inc.
The National Enquirer remained perhaps the best-known U.S. supermarket tabloid into the 21st century. Despite its reputation for providing more entertainment than hard journalism, it broke a number of stories that were later confirmed by the mainstream media. Among them was the revelation in 2007 of an extramarital affair by then-presidential candidate John Edwards; for its coverage of the story, the National Enquirer was nominated in two journalism categories in the 2010 Pulitzer Prize competition.
