New York Daily News,  morning daily tabloid newspaper published in New York City, once the newspaper with the largest circulation in the United States.
The New York Daily News was the first successful tabloid newspaper in the United States. It was founded in 1919 as the Illustrated Daily News by Joseph Medill Patterson and was a subsidiary of the Tribune Company of Chicago. After a few months the paper changed its name to the Daily News. It attracted readers with sensational coverage of crime, scandal, and violence, lurid photographs, and cartoons and other entertainment features. By 1930 its circulation had risen to 1,520,000, reaching 2,000,000 in the next decade.
The New York Daily News found abundant subject matter in the United States of the 1920s. Like other popular dailies, it emphasized political wrongdoing such as the Teapot Dome Scandal and social intrigue such as the romance between Wallis Simpson and King Edward VIII that led to his abdication. The paper devoted much attention to photography; it was an early user of the Associated Press wirephoto service in the 1930s and developed a large staff of photographers.
By the 21st century the Daily News was no longer able to hold the city’s attention with a single headline, as it had done in 1975 with its screamer, “Ford to City: Drop Dead,” but the paper continued to provide strong coverage of local news and sports. Long locked in a circulation battle with the New York Post, its even more sensational rival tabloid, the Daily News nevertheless survived as one of the nation’s top-selling newspapers, albeit with a daily circulation (more than 200,000 by 2016) much diminished from its mid-20th-century peak. At the turn of the 21st century, the newspaper was owned by New York News, Inc., with businessman Mortimer B. Zuckerman as its chairman and copublisher. In 2017, however, as the Daily News’s circulation continued to drop, it was announced that Zuckerman was selling the newspaper to Tronc, a Chicago-based media company. According to various reports, Tronc agreed to pay $1 and assume all the paper’s liabilities.
