Pravda, (Russian: “Truth”)  newspaper that was the official organ of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union from 1918 to 1991. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, numerous publications and Web sites continued under the Pravda name.
Pravda published its first issue on May 5, 1912, in Saint Petersburg. Founded as a workers’ daily, the paper eventually became an important organ of the Bolshevik movement, and Vladimir Lenin exercised broad editorial control. It was repeatedly suppressed by the tsar’s police, reappearing each time with a different name, until it finally emerged in Moscow in 1918 to assume its role as the official party paper. During the Soviet era, Pravda was distributed nationwide, offering its readers well-written articles and analyses on science, economics, cultural topics, and literature. There were letters from readers and officially sponsored and approved materials to indoctrinate and inform its readers on Communist theory and programs. Its treatment of foreign affairs generally was limited to domestic matters within foreign countries. International relations was left to the official Soviet government newspaper Izvestiya. Pravda’s pages featured pleasing makeup, occasional photography, and attractive typography. It carried no Western-style scandal or sensational news; rather, it sought to encourage unity of thought on the part of its readers by stressing and interpreting the party line. Many of its editorials were reprinted in other Soviet and Soviet-bloc papers.
After the demise of Communist power in the Soviet Union in 1991, Pravda’s readership shrank precipitously. In 1992 the paper was sold to a Greek investor. Pravda became the voice of conservative-nationalist opposition, yet it continued to suffer declining readership. A period of instability ensued—which included closure in 1996—before the paper became the chief organ of the Communist Party of the Russian Federation in 1997. While this remained the only print edition of Pravda, editors associated with the Soviet-era publication launched the Web site Pravda.ru, which was not connected to the Communist Party organ. It presented tabloid-style Russian nationalist commentary in a number of languages, including English. In 2000 Ukrainian dissident journalist Georgy Gongadze founded Ukrainska Pravda (“Ukrainian Truth”) shortly before he was killed by Ukrainian security forces. The publication survived his death and became one of Ukraine’s most-respected news sites.
