Sports Illustrated,  monthly sports magazine that originated in 1954 and was developed by Henry Luce, the creator of Time magazine. It is the leading sports magazine in the United States. Sports Illustrated is published by Meredith Corporation, though the magazine’s intellectual property is owned by Authentic Brands Group.
Luce started Sports Illustrated as an attempt to diversify the publications owned by Time Inc. The first issue of the weekly magazine was released on August 16, 1954. The early issues, however, lacked focus, covering both popular spectator sports and elite activities such as rugby; as a result, the magazine struggled in its early years. After 1960, when Andre Laguerre took over as managing editor, Sports Illustrated focused on premier sporting events, allowing people to read more about what they had seen on television or read about in newspapers. Laguerre was thus able to gain millions of new readers and generate billions of dollars in profit. With Laguerre at the helm, Sports Illustrated began to feature both high-calibre photography and outstanding sports journalism. The magazine also published occasional pieces by such literary giants as William Saroyan, Robert Frost, and William Faulkner.
Sports Illustrated won a number of National Magazine Awards over the years. Its best-selling issue is the so-called swimsuit issue, featuring photos of fashion models, athletes, and other celebrities. Several offshoots of the magazine were published, including Sports Illustrated Kids, Sports Illustrated Almanac, Sports Illustrated Women, and Sports Illustrated on Campus.
In 1990 Sports Illustrated became part of Time Warner, which was formed by the merger of Warner Communications and Time Inc. When the latter was spun off in 2014, it retained Sports Illustrated. In 2018 Meredith Corporation gained control of the magazine through its acquisition of Time Inc., and that year Sports Illustrated, which faced declining subscriptions, began publishing its regular edition biweekly. In 2019 the magazine’s intellectual property was sold to Authentic Brands Group for $110 million. As part of the deal, Meredith would continue to publish Sports Illustrated through a licensing agreement. In 2019, however, the digital company TheMaven acquired the magazine’s publishing rights for at least 10 years. Sports Illustrated became a monthly publication in 2020, though it continued to release special issues.
