The Economist,  weekly magazine of news and opinion published in London and generally regarded as one of the world’s preeminent journals of its kind. It provides wide-ranging coverage of general news and particularly of international and political developments and prospects bearing on the world’s economy. The publication is known for its social-libertarian slant and maintains that free markets provide the best method of running economies and governments. All articles except special reports are published without bylines (there is also no masthead), thereby presenting to readers a unified face.
The Economist was founded in 1843 by Scotsman James Wilson with assistance from the Anti-Corn Law League as a voice against England’s Corn Laws, regulations governing the import and export of grain. Wilson’s son-in-law Walter Bagehot, who served as editor of The Economist from 1861 to 1877, expanded the publication’s coverage into politics and strengthened its focus on U.S. affairs (Bagehot’s name continues to grace the publication, in the name of the column at the end of the section on Britain).
In the early 20th century, The Economist’s socially and politically prominent editor Sir Walter Layton (1922–38) was influential in establishing the publication as an authority. By 1938 half The Economist’s sales were overseas. Layton’s successor, Geoffrey Crowther (1938–56), thus continued to expand its foreign affairs and business coverage. The magazine’s in-depth coverage of the Pearl Harbor attack in 1941 and the subsequent heavy focus on the United States led to a continual increase in American readership, which rose sharply in the 1970s. During the late 20th century the publication continued to expand its coverage to other areas, including the arts and book reviews.
In the early 21st century The Economist was completely redesigned to provide enhanced features such as enriched navigational information, full-colour editorial layouts (2001), and an online audio version (2007). In 2009 The Economist had an international circulation of more than one million, with American readership accounting for more than half the total.
The Economist also produces an annual forecast of the upcoming year as well as an annual Pocket World in Figures. The Economist is part of The Economist Group, which includes the Economist Intelligence Unit, which provides industry analysis, and EuroFinance, which organizes conferences on treasury strategies; it also publishes analysis of European news through European Voice and U.S. news and politics through Roll Call and CQ Weekly (a Congressional Quarterly publication).
