The Atlantic, formerly The Atlantic Monthly,  American journal of news, literature, and opinion that was founded in 1857 and is one of the oldest and most-respected magazines in the United States. Formerly a monthly publication, it now releases 10 issues a year and maintains an online site. Its offices are in Washington, D.C.
The Atlantic Monthly was created by Moses Dresser Phillips and Francis H. Underwood in Boston, and the first issue was published in November 1857. The journal quickly became known for the quality of its fiction and general articles, contributed by a long line of distinguished editors and authors that includes James Russell Lowell, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, and Oliver Wendell Holmes. In 1869 The Atlantic Monthly created a sensation when it published an article by Harriet Beecher Stowe about Lord Byron and his salacious personal life. Stowe intended the article to “arrest Byron’s influence upon the young”; instead, it fascinated young readers, whose outraged parents canceled 15,000 subscriptions.
In the early 1920s The Atlantic Monthly expanded its coverage of political affairs, featuring articles by such figures as Theodore Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson, and Booker T. Washington. The high quality of its literature—notably, serialized novels, including best sellers—and its literary criticism preserved the magazine’s reputation as a lively literary periodical with a moderate worldview.
In the 1970s, increasing publication and mailing costs, far outstripping revenues from subscriptions and meagre advertising sales, nearly shut The Atlantic Monthly down. Mortimer Zuckerman bought the magazine in 1980, but, despite his efforts, the publication continued to struggle. In 1999 he sold it to David G. Bradley, owner of the National Journal Group.  Bradley invested millions in The Atlantic Monthly and oversaw numerous changes. The number of issues dropped to 11 in 2001 and 10 in 2003. In 2004 the magazine’s masthead was changed to The Atlantic, which had previously been used in 1981–93. Three years later a similar change was made to its corporate name. In addition, the magazine moved its offices from Boston to Washington, D.C., in 2006. The relocation reflected The Atlantic’s increasing focus on politics.
Under Bradley’s stewardship, The Atlantic experienced strong growth, much of which came from its digital operations. In 2017 it was announced that the Emerson Collective was acquiring a majority stake in the publication; the organization, which largely focused on immigration and education reform, was founded and headed by Laurene Powell Jobs, a noted philanthropist and the widow of Steve Jobs.
