The Progressive,  American monthly magazine devoted to social and political progressivism. Since its founding in 1909 by Robert La Follette, a pioneer of the Progressive movement in the United States, the publication has promoted peace, civil liberties, social justice, and human rights. The Progressive is based in Madison, Wis.
As the governor of Wisconsin and later as a U.S. senator, La Follette was renowned for his labour reforms, his efforts to regulate corporations, and his antiwar sentiments. Since its founding The Progressive has endured periods during which the political climate was distinctly hostile to the causes that La Follette championed. Initially titled La Follette’s Weekly, the magazine adopted its current name in 1929 and was issued monthly after 1948. Although its tenets remain relatively unchanged, the magazine today encompasses investigative reporting, original works by American poets, and interviews with leading politicians, authors, actors, and activists. The magazine has also featured articles by prominent social critics, including Upton Sinclair, Helen Keller, George Orwell, Gore Vidal, Martin Luther King, Jr., and Ralph Nader.
In its defense of free speech, nonviolence, and democratic ideals, the magazine frequently investigates corporate malfeasance, political corruption, and other abuses of power. In 1954 The Progressive was one of the first media outlets to denounce Wisconsin Sen. Joseph McCarthy for leading witch hunts of alleged communists or communist sympathizers. Twenty-five years later the U.S. government attempted to prevent the magazine from publishing an article that purported to reveal the operating principles of the hydrogen bomb; the ensuing legal battle became a significant First Amendment case. In 2002 editor Matthew Rothschild criticized the George W. Bush administration in a cover story entitled “The New McCarthyism,” and in subsequent regular updates Rothschild continued to point out infringements of civil liberties reminiscent of the McCarthy era.
