The Baltimore Sun,  morning newspaper published in Baltimore, long one of the most influential dailies in the United States. It was founded in Baltimore in 1837 by A.S. Abell as a four-page tabloid. Abell dedicated The Sun to printing the news without regard to its editors’ prejudices, and within a year its circulation exceeded 12,000. It began as a penny paper aimed at a mass audience, but as it developed, The Sun came to be directed especially to a serious, intellectual, and issue-oriented readership. Its growth was slow but solid, as Abell rejected the prevailing wisdom that a newspaper should be a mouthpiece for a political party and held instead to an independent political line.
Through much of its history, The Sun has excelled at coverage of national and international news, at the same time placing less emphasis on local news. The Sun compiled an outstanding record in covering the Mexican War of 1846–48, in one famous instance reporting the fall of Vera Cruz (1847) before official tidings of the event reached the U.S. government. Its editors’ discretion kept The Sun from being shut down by Union censors during the American Civil War.
Abell’s death in 1888 gave control of the paper to his three sons, and they carried on in the founder’s tradition. The Sunday Sun was first published in 1901 and was turned over to the editorship of the astute and acerbic H.L. Mencken in 1906. The Evening Sun was created out of the Baltimore World, bought in 1910. The Sun papers have always provided outstanding war coverage, particularly in World War II. The Sun newspapers, together with their corporate owner, the A.S. Abell Company, were bought by the Times Mirror Company in 1986. In 2000 the Times Mirror merged with the Tribune Company, and The Baltimore Sun thereby became a subsidiary of the latter. An Internet version of the paper was launched in 1996. In 2014 the publishing division of the Tribune Company was spun off, and The Sun became part of the newly formed company, which was eventually named Tronc, Inc.
