The Times,  daily newspaper published in London, one of Britain’s oldest and most influential newspapers. It is generally accounted, with The Guardian and The Daily Telegraph, one of Britain’s “big three” and has long been recognized as one of the world’s greatest newspapers.
Founded by John Walter on January 1, 1785, as The Daily Universal Register, the newspaper began as a 2 1/2-penny broadsheet whose main function was to publicize a system of typography in which Walter was then interested. It became The Times on January 1, 1788, publishing commercial news and notices, along with some scandal. The founder’s son, John Walter II, took over the newspaper in 1803. He expanded it from 4 pages to 12 large pages, and, by the time control of the paper passed to his son, John Walter III, in 1848, the foundations of The Times’s reputation as Britain’s preeminent national journal and daily historical record had been laid.
Under its first great liberal editor, Thomas Barnes (editor from 1817 to 1841), The Times developed into a strong independent newspaper popularly described as the “Thunderer.” By the mid-1800s it had become a widely respected influence on British public opinion, and its circulation had grown from 5,000 in 1815 to 40,000 in 1850. The Times maintained rigorous standards of reporting and writing and strove for meticulous accuracy. It came to be ruled by tradition, although its editorial views were independent, articulate, and strong. It was also seen as the very epitome of the British establishment, yet repeatedly it introduced innovative changes. John T. Delane became editor in 1841, and in his 36-year tenure his brilliant journalistic imprint was left on every aspect of the paper. In the midst of expanding The Times’s national coverage, he hired the world’s first war correspondent, William Howard Russell, to cover the Crimean War (1853–56). The British government first learned of Russian peace proposals in The Times.
Late in the 19th century, overspending and the inadvertent publication of a forgery against the Irish hero Charles Stewart Parnell brought The Times’s finances, reputation, and circulation to a serious low. As part of a recovery effort, The Times entered into an agreement with the publishers of Encyclopædia Britannica for advertising and selling the 9th and 10th editions. It was not until 1908—when the sensationalist press lord Alfred Harmsworth, 1st Viscount Northcliffe, purchased the paper—that The Times was financially secure, but its editorial reputation continued to deteriorate until Lord Northcliffe’s death in 1922.
In the 1950s, when Sir William Haley, then the director general of the BBC, became the editor (1952–67), The Times once again became a great newspaper. Makeup and editorial changes were introduced to make the paper livelier and more interesting. News was put permanently on its front page in 1966 in place of advertisements. Later that year it was announced that Roy Thomson, owner of The Sunday Times, was acquiring the paper, and, beginning the following year, the two papers were published by the newly created Times Newspapers Ltd. In 1978, disputes between management and labour over a range of issues, including the implementation of modern typesetting and printing equipment, led to the suspension of publication for nearly a full year. But the newspaper and its reputation survived, and The Times continued to thrive.
In 1981 Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation acquired the paper through its purchase of Times Newspapers. In 2013 News Corporation divided its print and its television and film holdings into separate conglomerates, and ownership of the paper was transferred to the reconstituted News Corporation.
