Vanity Fair, formerly (1913) Dress and Vanity Fair,  American magazine that covers culture, fashion, and politics. The first version of the magazine appeared in Manhattan in 1859. It was reintroduced by Condé Nast Publications in 1914.
Three different versions of Vanity Fair magazine existed during the 1800s: a humorous Manhattan-based weekly (1859–1863), a British publication known for satirical prose and for Sir Leslie Ward’s brilliant caricatures (1868–1914), and an American theatre magazine (1890). In 1913 Condé Nast Publications purchased Vanity Fair and introduced an unsuccessful hybrid magazine called Dress and Vanity Fair. Reintroduced in 1914, Vanity Fair became a cultural force during the Jazz Age, publishing the work of modern artists, illustrators, and writers while also popularizing celebrity portraiture. Vanity Fair ceased publication in 1936 after merging with Vogue magazine and did not reappear until it was relaunched by Condé Nast in 1983. Edited by Tina Brown, the magazine appealed to the extravagant consumerism of young professionals during the 1980s. The new Vanity Fair featured portraits of celebrities on its cover and discussed scandals, money, and popular culture.
In 1991 Vanity Fair began publishing an international edition. The following year, the magazine improved the quality of its articles and increased its financial returns under a new editor, Graydon Carter. Carter introduced articles on national and world affairs and created special issues (including the Hollywood Issue) and the International Best-Dressed List. Carter retired in 2017 and was succeeded by Radhika Jones.
Vanity Fair is best known for its celebrity portraits and the controversy that occasionally surrounds its more risqué images. In addition, the magazine has earned a reputation for lively writing, in-depth reporting, and insightful social commentary. A predominately female readership fueled Vanity Fair’s circulation of more than one million in the first decade of the 21st century.
