Vogue,  influential American fashion and lifestyle magazine. It was founded in 1892 as a weekly high-society journal, created by Arthur Baldwin Turnure for New York City’s social elite and covering news of the local social scene, traditions of high society, and social etiquette; it also reviewed books, plays, and music. Condé Montrose Nast, the founder of Condé Nast Publications, bought Vogue in 1909 and transformed it into a women’s fashion magazine focused on beauty, composure, and etiquette.
Vogue soon became known for its distinctive photographs and high editorial quality. Nast hired the best illustrators and photographers of the day, and they produced covers for the magazine that were consistently sophisticated and occasionally revolutionary. In 1932, for example, Vogue became one of the first magazines to print a colour photo on its cover. In the 1960s the magazine redefined the look of female models, eschewing shapely figures to highlight thin, gender-neutral physiques. Vogue’s August 1974 cover was the first to picture an African American model.
In 1988 Anna Wintour became editor of Vogue and immediately transformed Vogue covers by emphasizing the woman’s body, rather than just her face, as well as by frequently featuring Hollywood actresses as opposed to traditional fashion models, thereby sparking an international trend. Wintour also began Teen Vogue (2003) and Men’s Vogue (2005–08) in the United States. In 2003 she and the Council of Fashion Designers of America (CFDA) jointly inaugurated the CFDA/Vogue Fashion Fund, which offered financial support and business mentoring to the “next generation” of American fashion designers.
In 2009 the film documentary The September Issue—which chronicled the production of the magazine’s record-breaking 840-page September 2007 issue—was released to critical acclaim. Later that year Vogue launched Fashion’s Night Out, a joint global initiative encouraging people to patronize international designers and retailers during the global financial crisis; the now annual affair marked the largest shopping event in history.
Vogue has enjoyed international success, with both standard and special editions published around the globe. One of the world’s most prominent fashion magazines, it has heavily influenced the development of the fashion magazine industry and continues to shape modern fashion trends. In 2009 The New York Times christened Vogue “high fashion’s bible.”
