Electronic configuration, also called electronic structure,  the arrangement of electrons in energy levels around an atomic nucleus. According to the older shell atomic model, electrons occupy several levels from the first shell nearest the nucleus, K, through the seventh shell, Q, farthest from the nucleus. In terms of a more refined, quantum-mechanical model, the K–Q shells are subdivided into a set of orbitals (see orbital), each of which can be occupied by no more than a pair of electrons. The table below lists the number of orbitals available in each of the first four shells.
The electronic configuration of an atom in the shell atomic model may be expressed by indicating the number of electrons in each shell beginning with the first. For example, sodium (atomic number 11) has its 11 electrons distributed in the first three shells as follows: the K and L shells are completely filled, with 2 and 8 electrons respectively, while the M shell is only partially filled with one electron.
The electronic configuration of an atom in the quantum-mechanical model is stated by listing the occupied orbitals, in order of filling, with the number of electrons in each orbital indicated by superscript. In this notation, the electronic configuration of sodium would be 1s22s22p63s1, distributed in the orbitals as 2-8-1. Often, a shorthand method is used that lists only those electrons in excess of the noble gas configuration immediately preceding the atom in the periodic table. For example, sodium has one 3s electron in excess of the noble gas neon (chemical symbol Ne, atomic number 10), and so its shorthand notation is [Ne]3s1.
Elements in the same group in the periodic table have similar electronic configurations. For example, the elements lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium, cesium, and francium (the alkali metals of Group I) all have electronic configurations showing one electron in the outermost (most loosely bound) s orbital. This so-called valence electron is responsible for the similar chemical properties shared by the above-mentioned alkali elements in Group I: bright metallic lustre, high reactivity, and good thermal conductivity.
