Infrasonics,  vibrational or stress waves in elastic media, having a frequency below those of sound waves that can be detected by the human ear—i.e., below 20 hertz. The range of frequencies extends down to geologic vibrations that complete one cycle in 100 seconds or longer.
In nature such waves occur in earthquakes, waterfalls, ocean waves, volcanoes, and a variety of atmospheric phenomena such as wind, thunder, and weather patterns. Calculating the motion of these waves and predicting the weather using these calculations, among other information, is one of the great challenges for modern high-speed computers.
The reflection of man-made seismic shocks has helped to identify possible locations of oil and natural gas sources. Distinctive rock formations in which these minerals are likely to be found can be identified by sonic ranging, primarily at infrasonic frequencies. With an array of seismic detectors, a computational form of holography may be achieved.
One of the most important examples of infrasonic waves in nature is in earthquakes. Three principal types of earthquake waves exist: the S-wave, a transverse body wave; the P-wave, a longitudinal body wave; and the L-wave, which propagates along the boundary of stratified mediums. L-waves, which are of great importance in earthquake engineering, propagate in a similar way to water waves, at low velocities that are dependent on frequency. S-waves are transverse body waves and thus can only be propagated within solid bodies such as rocks. P-waves are longitudinal waves similar to sound waves; they propagate at the speed of sound and have large ranges.
When P-waves propagating from the epicentre of an earthquake reach the surface of the Earth, they are converted into L-waves, which may then damage surface structures. The great range of P-waves makes them useful in identifying earthquakes from observation points a great distance from the epicentre. In many cases, the most severe shock from an earthquake is preceded by smaller shocks, which can be detected by seismographs and provide advance warning of the greater shock to come. Underground nuclear explosions also produce P-waves, allowing them to be monitored from any point in the world if they are of sufficient intensity. The development of extremely sensitive detectors to monitor such explosions has contributed to the maintenance of the Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty, which was signed in 1963 and banned all tests of nuclear weapons except those conducted underground so as to limit the amount of radioactive fallout in the atmosphere.
Infrasonic disturbances of the atmosphere that may extend to 50 km (30 miles) above Earth’s surface are often associated with severe earthquakes. These waves can travel considerable distances around the globe.
Human perception of low-frequency sound waves propagating in air does not have a well-defined cutoff point. Above about 18 hertz sound waves appear to have tonality; below this frequency the individual compression waves may be distinguished. Driving an automobile with an open window may generate an infrasonic resonance. The sonic boom of supersonic aircraft contains significant levels of infrasound. In certain circumstances occupational exposure to infrasound may be severe: transformer rooms, compressor plants, engine rooms, and air handlers and blowers in buildings may all produce levels that are extremely high and cause discomfort. Studies have shown that many people experience adverse reactions to large intensities of infrasonic frequencies, developing headaches, nausea, blurred vision, and dizziness. The mechanisms by which infrasonics may be perceived by humans and their physiological effects are incompletely understood.
A number of animals are sensitive to infrasonic frequencies, as indicated in the table. It is believed by many zoologists that this sensitivity in animals such as elephants may be helpful in providing them with early warning of earthquakes and weather disturbances. It has been suggested that the sensitivity of birds to infrasound aids their navigation and even affects their migration.
