Alexander McGillivray,  (born c. 1759—died February 17, 1793, Pensacola, Florida [U.S.]), Scots-French-Indian who became the principal chief of the Creek Indians in the years following the American Revolution. He was largely responsible for the Creeks’ retention of their tribal identity and the major part of their homeland for another generation.
In a letter to the Spanish commandant at Pensacola in 1783, McGillivray identified himself as “a Native of and a chief of the Creek Nation.” The penmanship and the name made that statement seem improbable, but it was correct. McGillivray was, in fact, of mixed Indian and European blood. His father was Lachlan McGillivray, a Scottish trader. His mother was Sehoy Marchand, a French-Creek woman. By blood McGillivray was thus only one-quarter Indian. But the Creeks, with whom descent was matrilineal, had no difficulty in claiming McGillivray as Creek. As was the custom, his early upbringing was primarily by his mother and, though bilingual, was in the ways of her people.
At 14 McGillivray was sent to Charleston, South Carolina, for tutoring and served a short apprenticeship in a countinghouse in Savannah, Georgia. He might have stayed on, but the American Revolution intervened. His father was proscribed as a loyalist, and his properties were confiscated. Father and son decided to go home, Lachlan to Scotland and Alexander to the Creek nation, where he was given status as a chief and where the British commissioned him colonel and Indian agent. During the American Revolution the Creeks were opportunists. Some of them fought alongside the Revolutionaries, while McGillivray contributed toward keeping a larger number on the loyalist side.
By 1782 British military defeats made it clear that the Creeks would lose their British connection. Deeply distrusting American land speculators and encroaching settlers, McGillivray put out feelers for Spanish support and suggested a council at Pensacola, West Florida. There, on June 1, 1784, he and governors Esteban Miró and Arturo O’Neill signed a treaty headed “Articles of Agreement, Trade, and Peace.” Spain would extend a protectorate over the Creeks within Spanish territorial limits and would supply an adequate trade. McGillivray’s more remarkable success was in persuading the Spanish that the trade should be in English goods and that a contract for the purpose should go to a British merchant, William Panton.
Over the next several years, McGillivray staunchly resisted overtures from Georgia and the United States to concede lands and trading privileges. On occasion he sent raiding parties to clear the Indian hunting grounds. Then, in 1788, Miró gave notice that Spanish support would be reduced. McGillivray indicated that in the circumstances he could not refuse discussions with commissioners sent by Georgia and the U.S. Congress.
In 1789 President George Washington sent distinguished commissioners to negotiate with the Creeks. The commissioners proposed a boundary well into the Creek hunting lands and recognition of U.S. sovereignty over the entire Creek area. Bolstered by reactivated Spanish support, McGillivray objected. Obtaining no concession, he and his companions decamped. Washington then sent another commissioner to invite McGillivray and a delegation of chiefs to come to New York City to make a treaty “as strong as the hills and as lasting as the rivers.”
With the commissioner, the delegation members traveled overland to New York City, where they were welcomed by the newly formed political Society of St. Tammany. Secretary of War Henry Knox and McGillivray worked out the terms of a treaty specifying American sovereignty over Creek lands within the limits of United States territory and setting a line near the Altamaha River separating Georgian and Creek lands. McGillivray accepted a U.S. Army commission as a brigadier general and a salary of $100 a month, but he did not promise U.S. trade except in the event of war between Britain and Spain, at the time a possibility.
In 1792 McGillivray went to New Orleans, Louisiana, to establish a better understanding with the Spanish. The new treaty specified that the Creeks would order Americans off their lands and that Spain would guarantee territorial integrity within Spanish limits and provide sufficient arms and ammunition. Although the Spanish urged that the Americans be driven back, McGillivray wisely pursued a much less aggressive course.
En route home, McGillivray contracted a violent fever that immobilized him for months. He had never been robust and was sickly, plagued by severe headaches and afflicted by gout, rheumatism, and the symptoms of venereal disease. He died at Pensacola in his 34th year. Panton, in whose garden he was buried, attributed his death to “gout of the stomach” and “perepneumonia.” Neither Panton nor the Spaniards found a suitable replacement for him, nor did his tribesmen the Creeks, though the policies he had put into effect carried on and served the Creek nation well.
