Charles Francis Adams,  (born Aug. 18, 1807, Boston, Mass., U.S.—died  Nov. 21, 1886, Boston), U.S. diplomat who played an important role in keeping Britain neutral during the U.S. Civil War (1861–65) and in promoting the arbitration of the important “Alabama” claims.
The son of Pres. John Quincy Adams and the grandson of Pres. John Adams, Charles was early introduced to a cosmopolitan way of life when his father was appointed minister to Russia in 1809. He graduated from Harvard in 1825, and then, during his father’s presidency (1825–29), lived for two years in the White House, studying law and moving freely among the political leaders of the period.
In the 1840s Adams served for six years as a member of the Massachusetts legislature and as the editor of a party journal, the Boston Whig. He felt, however, that the Whigs should take a more forthright position against the extension of slavery into the territories, and when, in 1848, the so-called Conscience Whigs broke with the party to form the antislavery Free-Soil Party, Adams received the vice-presidential nomination of the new coalition.
The emergence of the Republican Party in 1856 offered Adams the permanent political affiliation he was seeking, and he was elected to the U.S. Congress from his father’s old district in 1858. When the Republicans won at the polls two years later, Adams was named ambassador to Great Britain by his close friend William H. Seward, the new secretary of state.
Civil war broke out in April 1861, and, when Adams arrived in London the following month, he found that Great Britain had already recognized Confederate belligerency. So much sympathy was shown in England for the South that Adams’ path for the next seven years was strewn with difficulties, but his logic, reserve, and directness appealed to the British, and gradually he won their support.
His main mission was to prevent the British from abandoning neutrality, and, with the issuance of the Emancipation Proclamation (Jan. 1, 1863), the immediate danger of diplomatic recognition of the South was over. Adams then laboured to prevent the building or the outfitting at British shipyards of privateers for Confederate use. He had not been able to prevent the sailing (May 1862) of the highly effective commerce destroyer “Alabama,” but his vigorous protestations of the obligations of neutrals succeeded in preventing further launchings. Furthermore, he persistently argued the British government’s responsibility for the estimated $6,000,000 worth of damage done by the “Alabama” to Federal merchant vessels. During this long and taxing period in Anglo-American relations, Adams’ judicious and balanced conduct greatly enhanced the reputation of his country abroad.
From 1871 to 1872 Adams served as U.S. arbiter on the international commission that met at Geneva to settle the “Alabama” claims. His name is inseparable from this seminal work in forwarding the concept of world law through arbitration. He edited Works of John Adams (1850–56) and Memoirs of John Quincy Adams (1874–77).
