Émile Derlin Zinsou,  (born March 22/23, 1918, Ouidah, Dahomey [now Benin]—died July 28, 2016, Cotonou, Benin), nationalist politician and president (1968–69) of Dahomey (now Benin), noted for the success of his attempts to solve his country’s overwhelming economic and financial problems.
Zinsou, though trained as a physician, became active in journalism and politics after World War II. He became secretary to Deputy Sourou Migan Apithy of the French National Assembly in 1946 and later served as Apithy’s minister of commerce (1957). In 1960 Zinsou was elected to the Dahomeyan Assembly and was also made president of the Supreme Court (1960–62). After independence (Aug. 1, 1960) he held several posts, including that of minister of foreign affairs, and traveled widely, gaining international respect, especially as ambassador to France.
After a period of military rule, the generals called on Zinsou in 1968 to become president. After winning approval in a popular referendum, he threw himself into his new job. However, the country was divided, there was little respect for governmental authority, the economy was stagnating, and administrative costs were prohibitive. Zinsou was able to reduce the deficit in 1969, but as the year wore on, his stringent economic measures, including an attempt to stop routine border smuggling, eroded his precarious popular support. In December he was overthrown by the army chief of staff. Zinsou stood in the 1970 presidential election but received only a small number of votes. He later left the country and took up residence in Paris, where he emerged as the primary opposition leader in exile against the Marxist regime that had taken root in Dahomey. In 1975 he was implicated in an unsuccessful coup attempt in Dahomey and was sentenced, in absentia, to death.
In the late 1980s the country—by then known as Benin—began a period of democratic transition. Zinsou returned to Benin and established a political party, the National Union for Democracy and Progress, but otherwise was not particularly active in Beninese politics. In 1999 he helped organize mediation efforts aimed at ending the civil war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Zinsou was also active in the International Organization of La Francophonie, which promotes cooperation among French-speaking countries.
