Frederick William IV,  (born Oct. 15, 1795, Cölln, near Berlin—died  Jan. 2, 1861, Potsdam, Prussia), king of Prussia from 1840 until 1861, whose conservative policies helped spark the Revolution of 1848. In the aftermath of the failed revolution, Frederick William followed a reactionary course. In 1857 he was incapacitated by a stroke, and his brother, the future William I, became regent (1858–61).
Frederick William was the son of the future king Frederick William III and Louisa of Mecklenburg-Strelitz. He was educated by tutors, mainly experienced civil servants. Though he was completely unsoldierlike by nature, his experiences in the German War of Liberation (1813–15) against Napoleon left lasting traces on his political and intellectual development. He became and remained a disciple of the German Romantic movement, with its nostalgia for the Middle Ages. Romanticism appealed to his extremely sensitive dilettante artistic nature. A draftsman interested in architecture and landscape gardening, he was a patron of Christian Daniel Rauch, a noted sculptor, and Karl Friedrich Schinkel, an architect and city planner. His marriage in 1823 to Elizabeth of Bavaria, a convert to Lutheranism, proved happy, although they had no children.
As crown prince, Frederick William developed romantic-conservative convictions that led him to approach even politics as a question of ideas and problems rather than as a matter of hard reality. Conservative philosophers, men of letters, and politicians were among his friends and the men he admired. Even though barely 20, he used his influence to restrict the promised constitution of 1815 to the creation of district and provincial estates, in which the landed aristocracy had an overwhelming majority. For him liberalism meant revolution: a modern constitution was “a scrap of paper” interposed as an intolerable barrier between the patriarchal, divinely justified king and his people. Though he was no absolutist and had no genuine will to domination, yet, by his romanticizing mystique and his unlimited respect for the alleged “organic growth” of the medieval estates, he stood irreconcilably opposed to the political ideas of the 19th century and to the heritage of the French Revolution. Tensions were not lessened by his genuine personal piety. As for him, cultural homogeneity outweighed political unity, but he was fundamentally opposed to the movement toward a German national state; after Prussia’s occupation by Napoleon, he regarded his country’s close alignment with Austria as essential. He never contested the Habsburg empire’s primacy, which he saw as consecrated by history; for the king of Prussia he claimed only the military dignity of an “arch-general” of the empire.
Frederick William quickly disappointed the great hopes aroused by his accession in 1840, for he was by no means willing to fulfill the constitutional aspirations of the Liberals. In 1842 he permitted only “united committees” of the provincial estates; and in 1847, after long delay, he summoned not a popular representative assembly but the United Diet, comprising all the provincial estates, with the right to grant taxes and loans but without the right to meet at regular intervals. This unwieldy body remained his ideal, even though the narrow limits of his concessions immediately produced a conflict (the Diet’s refusal of the proposed loan for the Berlin–Königsberg railway) and even though this first assembly of all Prussia powerfully increased the people’s self-confidence on the eve of the Revolution of 1848.
Despite belated attempts to organize a common resistance by the German governments, Frederick William was eventually completely overwhelmed by the revolution in March 1848, which was inspired by the revolution of the preceding month in France. He could neither prevent the street fighting in Berlin by last-minute concessions nor ride the wave; after the withdrawal of the troops to barracks, he masked his submission to the revolution by a processional ride through Berlin under the black and red and golden flag, the symbol of the united Germany, by paying homage to the bodies of the victims of the soldiery, and by his promise that “Prussia is henceforth merged in Germany.” Finally he had to convene a Prussian national assembly. Under the influence of his entourage, however, he roused himself to a stubborn resistance: he appointed his uncle, the Count of Brandenburg (a son of Frederick William II’s last morganatic marriage), prime minister; removed the assembly from Berlin and then dissolved it; and imposed a constitution the first moderately liberal draft of which was modelled on that of Belgium. These measures restored the leading role to the crown and its instruments, the army and the bureaucracy, firmly supported by the recently formed Conservative party.
When, on April 3, 1849, Frederick William refused the imperial crown offered by the national assembly in Frankfurt am Main—because as a true conservative he would accept it only from the German princes—he destroyed the constitution drafted by that assembly. Under Russian and English pressure, moreover, he had withdrawn Prussian support of the rising in the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein, aimed at overthrowing Danish rule there. Next, however, largely contravening his previous policy, he attempted to establish a German union under Prussian leadership (1849–50)—though this, as a “Little German” federation, should remain allied with a “wider” federation embracing Austria. When Austria challenged this union, the King shrank from war, preferring capitulation at the Punctation of Olmütz convention. Though Prussia had to return to the federal Diet at Frankfurt am Main, Prussian leadership of the German customs union, which excluded Austria, remained unchallenged.
In religious affairs Frederick William, in 1841, settled the “Cologne church conflict” on terms very favourable to the Roman Catholics, with whom, largely influenced by his love for the old and picturesque, he had great sympathy; he also furthered the reconstruction of Cologne cathedral. On the other hand, he actively promoted the joint Anglican-Lutheran bishopric of Jerusalem.
The final years of his reign were a period of reaction. Frederick William, rejecting the bureaucratic absolutism of his prime minister Otto von Manteuffel, worked above all for recasting the constitution of 1848 in a conservative mold. This included the disastrous introduction of three-class suffrage according to income in 1850 instead of universal suffrage, the retention of the monarchical character of army and bureaucracy, the reestablishment of the conservative district assemblies and the provincial diets, and the conversion (1854) of the first chamber into a house of lords entirely dominated by the predominantly aristocratic landowners. He believed this house of lords to be modelled on the English upper house, but in a political testament he implored his successors to refuse to take the oath on the Prussian constitution.
In 1857 a stroke resulted in paralysis. From this time on, with the exception of brief intervals, the King’s mind was clouded, and his brother William (afterward emperor) took on the duties of government, becoming regent in 1858. Frederick William died at Sanssouci Palace in 1861.
