Jefferson Davis, in full Jefferson Finis Davis,  (born June 3, 1808, Christian county, Kentucky, U.S.—died December 6, 1889, New Orleans, Louisiana), president of the Confederate States of America throughout its existence during the American Civil War (1861–65). After the war he was imprisoned for two years and indicted for treason but was never tried.
Jefferson Davis was the 10th and last child of Samuel Emory Davis, a Georgia-born planter of Welsh ancestry who had fought in the American Revolution.  When Jefferson Davis, who was named for Thomas Jefferson, was age three, his family settled on a plantation called Rosemont in Woodville, Mississippi. At age seven he was sent for three years to a Dominican boys’ school in Kentucky, and at age 13 he entered Transylvania College, Lexington, Kentucky. He later spent four years at the United States Military Academy at West Point, graduating 23rd in a class of 33 in 1828. At both Transylvania and West Point, Davis’s best friend was the future Confederate general Albert Sidney Johnston. In the class behind Davis at West Point were two other cadets who would become prominent Confederate generals, Robert E. Lee and Joseph E. Johnston.
Davis served as a lieutenant in the Wisconsin Territory and afterward in the Black Hawk War under the colonel and future president Zachary Taylor, whose daughter Sarah Knox would become Davis’s wife. According to a contemporary description, Davis in his mid-20s was “handsome, witty, sportful, and altogether captivating.” After being posted in Arkansas for two years, Davis resigned his commission in 1835, married Knox, and became a planter near Vicksburg, Mississippi, on land given to him by his wealthy eldest brother, Joseph. Within three months his bride died of malarial fever. Grief-stricken, Davis stayed in virtual seclusion for seven years, creating a plantation out of a wilderness and reading prodigiously in constitutional law and world literature.
In 1845 Davis, a Democrat, was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives and married Varina Howell, a Natchez, Mississippi, aristocrat who was 18 years his junior and the granddaughter of a former governor of New Jersey. In 1846 Davis resigned his seat in Congress to serve in the Mexican-American War as a colonel in command of the First Mississippi volunteers. He became a national hero for winning the Battle of Buena Vista (1847) with tactics that won plaudits even in the European press. After returning to Mississippi severely wounded, he entered the Senate and soon became chairman of the Military Affairs Committee. In 1851 Davis ran unsuccessfully for governor of Mississippi. Pres. Franklin Pierce made him secretary of war in 1853. Davis enlarged the army, strengthened coastal defenses, and directed three surveys for railroads to the Pacific. He was also a forceful advocate for what became the Gadsden Purchase.
In 1857, after Pierce left office, Davis returned to the Senate. During the period of mounting intersectional strife, Davis spoke widely in both North and South, urging harmony between the sections. In the 1860 presidential election, Davis opposed the candidate of Northern Democrats Stephen A. Douglas, a champion of popular sovereignty, and joined Southern Democrats in supporting John C. Breckinridge, who demanded federal government protection for slave holdings in the territories and ran on a separate ticket. When South Carolina withdrew from the Union in December 1860, Davis still opposed secession, though he believed that the Constitution gave a state the right to withdraw from the original compact of states. He was among those who believed that the newly elected president, Abraham Lincoln, would coerce the South and that the result would be disastrous.
On January 21, 1861, 12 days after Mississippi seceded, Davis made a moving farewell speech in the Senate and pleaded eloquently for peace. Before he reached his Brierfield plantation, he was commissioned a major general to head Mississippi’s armed forces and prepare its defense, but within two weeks the Confederate Convention in Montgomery, Alabama, chose him as provisional president of the Confederacy. Davis was surprised at the news of his election. Unlike many Southern leaders, he had expected war and hoped to become the commander in chief of the Southern armies. In his inaugural address on February 18, 1861, Davis said, in part,
His first act was to send a peace commission to Washington, D.C., to prevent an armed conflict. Lincoln refused to see his emissaries and the next month decided to send armed ships to Charleston, South Carolina, to resupply the beleaguered Union garrison at Fort Sumter. Davis reluctantly ordered the bombardment of the fort (April 12–13), which marked the beginning of the American Civil War. Two days later Lincoln called for 75,000 volunteers, a move that brought about the secession of Virginia and three other states from the Union.
Davis faced a dire crisis. A president without precedent, he had to mold a brand-new nation in the midst of a war. With only one-fourth the white population of the Northern states, with a small fraction of the North’s manufacturing capacity, and with inferior railroads, no navy, no powder mills, no shipyard, and an appalling lack of arms and equipment, the South was in poor condition to withstand invasion. But at Bull Run (Manassas, Virginia) on July 21, 1861, the Confederates routed Union forces. In the meantime, with makeshift materials, Davis created factories for producing powder, cannon, side arms, and quartermaster stores. In restored naval yards gunboats were constructed, and the South’s inadequate railroads and rolling stock were patched up repeatedly. Davis sent agents to Europe to buy arms and ammunition, and he dispatched representatives to try to secure recognition from England and France.
Davis made the inspired choice of Robert E. Lee as commander of the Army of Northern Virginia in June 1862. While Davis’s military judgment was occasionally at fault, he wisely gave Lee wide scope in conducting the war over the next three years. Perhaps Davis’s most serious mistake as commander in chief was the excessive importance he attached to defending the Confederate capital at Richmond, Virginia, at the expense of operations farther west, including the defense of the key Confederate fortress at Vicksburg, Mississippi.
Davis had innumerable troubles during his presidency, including a squabbling Congress, a dissident vice president, Alexander H. Stephens, and the constant opposition of extreme states’ rights advocates, such as North Carolina Gov. Zebulon Vance, who objected vigorously to the conscription law he had enacted over much opposition in 1862. But despite a gradually worsening military situation, unrelieved internal political tensions, a continuing lack of manpower and armament, and skyrocketing inflation, he remained resolute in his determination to carry on the war, and Lee remained both his most valuable field commander and his most loyal personal supporter. Even during the siege of Petersburg, when Lee’s army was immobilized and starving, Davis asserted to an audience in Richmond on February 6:
