Maria Carolina,   (born Aug. 13, 1752, Vienna [Austria]—died  Sept. 8, 1814, Vienna), queen of Naples and wife of King Ferdinand IV of Naples. She held the real power in Naples, and, under the influence of her favourite, Sir John Acton, 6th Baronet, who was reputed to be her lover, she adopted a pro-British, anti-French policy.
The daughter of the empress Maria Theresa of Austria, Maria Carolina married in 1768 Ferdinand IV, who allowed her to assume much of the power in the kingdom. By a clause in the marriage contract, she entered the council of state, the kingdom’s ruling body, when she had given birth to a male heir (1777). She soon brought about the downfall of the liberal minister Bernardo Tanucci and changed the court’s pro-Spanish policy to a pro-British one. Influenced mainly by Acton and possibly by the execution of her sister Marie Antoinette by the French, she took Naples into the first Austro-British coalition against the French Revolution and sent Neapolitan warships to join the British fleet near Toulon (1793).
Naples joined the second coalition against France, but Maria Carolina and Ferdinand had to flee before the French (December 1798), who seized Naples, making it the Parthenopean Republic. After the overthrow of the republic (June 1799), the king and queen returned to Naples, where a massacre of the republic’s partisans, in violation of the peace agreement, took place, for which the royal couple must bear at least partial responsibility.
In 1805 Maria Carolina once more engaged Naples in a war with France, calling the British and Russian fleets to her aid, but the French again occupied the kingdom, forcing the royal family to flee to Sicily (January 1806). She is said to have encouraged plundering in Calabria by Cardinal Ruffo’s army of brigands, whose former leader, Fra Diavolo, had received a pension and an estate from her. She finally quarreled with the British ambassador, Lord George Bentinck, who persuaded Ferdinand to exile her from the island (1811). She returned to Austria, where she died three years later.
