Bob Wills, in full James Robert Wills,  (born March 6, 1905, near Kosse, Texas, U.S.—died May 13, 1975, Fort Worth, Texas),  American bandleader, fiddler, singer, and songwriter whose Texas Playboys popularized western swing music in the 1930s and ’40s.
Taught to play the mandolin and fiddle by his father and other relatives, Wills began performing in country string bands in Texas in the late 1920s. In 1933 he formed the Playboys (later His Texas Playboys) as a traditional string band, to which he added drums, amplified steel and standard guitar, and horns—instruments theretofore foreign to country music. Gathering a stellar combination of players (whose number varied from 6 to 22), Wills became the King of Western Swing, an up-tempo country jazz that drew on Dixieland, big band, minstrelsy, pop, blues, and various ethnic (Czech, German, Cajun, and Mexican) styles. Among the key Playboys were vocalist Tommy Duncan, steel-guitarist Leon McAuliffe (famous for “Steel Guitar Rag”), and arranger Eldon Shamblin, one of the pioneers of the electric guitar. During performances Wills gleefully called out the names of the musicians as they were featured and, when the spirit moved him, hollered his trademark “ah-ha!”
After being based in Texas and Oklahoma, Wills moved the band to California in 1943, where they remained popular into the 1950s, when the advent of television diminished dance-hall attendance. In 1964, after a second heart attack, Wills folded the Texas Playboys but continued as a solo performer until 1973, when he fell into a coma after a recording session. Best remembered for the songs “New San Antonio Rose” (1940) and “Faded Love” (1950), Wills infused his innovative, adaptable musical vision with charismatic energy, leaving an indelible mark not only on country music but also on rock and influencing such performers as Merle Haggard as well as the outlaw music of Willie Nelson and Waylon Jennings. Wills was inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame in 1968.
