Carter Family,  singing group that was a leading force in the spread and popularization of the songs of the Appalachian Mountain region of the eastern United States. The group consisted of Alvin Pleasant Carter, known as A.P. Carter (b. April 15, 1891, Maces Spring, Virginia, U.S.—d. November 7, 1960, Kingsport, Tennessee), his wife, Sara, née Sara Dougherty (b. July 21, 1898, Flatwoods, Virginia—d. January 8, 1979, Lodi, California), and his sister-in-law Maybelle Carter, née Maybelle Addington (b. May 10, 1909, Nickelsville, Virginia—d. October 23, 1978, Nashville, Tennessee).
The family’s recording career began in 1927 in response to an advertisement placed in a local newspaper by a talent scout for Victor records. Over the next 16 years, with two of Sara’s children and three of Maybelle’s (Helen, June, and Anita) also appearing, they recorded more than 300 songs for various labels, covering a significant cross section of the mountain music repertory, including old ballads and humorous songs, sentimental pieces from the 19th and early 20th centuries, and many religious pieces. They later performed extensively on radio and popularized many songs that became standards of folk and country music; some of these were “Jimmy Brown, the Newsboy,” “Wabash Cannonball,” “It Takes a Worried Man to Sing a Worried Song,” and “Wildwood Flower.”
The Carter Family was remarkable not only for its prolific recording but also for the musical accomplishment—and balance—of its members. A.P. was the group’s songsmith. He was an avid collector of oral tradition as well as an adept arranger of rural regional repertoire for consumption by a broader audience. A.P. composed many new songs for the group, replicating the style of the traditional material. Sara, with her strong alto voice, was typically the lead singer, supported by Maybelle’s harmonies and A.P.’s bass and baritone interjections. The instrumental anchor of the Carter Family was Maybelle, who was a skilled performer on guitar, banjo, and autoharp. She developed a unique finger-picking technique on guitar that continues to be emulated by many guitarists today.
In 1943 the Carter Family disbanded, and its members subsequently formed various other groups. Maybelle (“Mother”) Carter performed with her daughters, as a soloist, and later with her son-in-law Johnny Cash, whose gritty songs of social commentary had already propelled him to the top of the country-and-western music industry. In the 1950s the Carter Family re-formed and appeared intermittently, with a changing lineup. The original Carter Family was the first group admitted to the Country Music Hall of Fame.
