Faron Young,  (born Feb. 25, 1932, Shreveport, Louisiana,—died Dec. 10, 1996, Nashville, Tenn.), . American singer, one of the most popular country music performers of the 1950s, 60s, and early 70s. He was known as the “Young Sheriff," which he later changed to the “Singing Sheriff"; his band was the Country Deputies. He was posthumously inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame in 2000.
Young was the youngest of six children of an impoverished Shreveport dairyman. Shut out by his father after the death of a favorite son, Young craved attention throughout his life. He was a born entertainer and gifted singer, but he battled with alcoholism, abusive behavior, and depression. Combining his mother’s gregariousness with his father’s emotional distance, he developed into a man who cursed excessively and gave public affection freely but let few people get close to him emotionally.
His KWKH radio performances on the Louisiana Hayride country music show in 1951 provided exposure that garnered him a Capitol Records contract at age 19. He moved to Nashville in 1952 and joined the Grand Ole Opry.
Then his draft notice arrived, and he "cried like a rat eatin’ a red onion." His self-penned "Goin’ Steady" approached number two on the Billboard country music charts as he graduated from basic training. Assigned to Special Services of the Third U.S. Army for his two-year enlistment, Young fronted a band called the Circle A Wranglers. They entertained troops throughout the Southeast and assisted the U.S. Army recruiting effort.
Immediately following his 1954 discharge, Young formed the Country Deputies band, which backed him for the next forty years. Band members who went on to fame included Johnny Paycheck, the Wilburn Brothers, Roger Miller, Lloyd Green, and Darrell McCall.
"Live Fast, Love Hard, Die Young" (1955) was Young’s first chart topper. "Alone With You" stayed at the top for 13 weeks in 1958, and his recording of Willie Nelson’s "Hello Walls" spent nine weeks there in 1961. Following a series of hits in the 1960s, "It’s Four in the Morning" (1972) became his last number-one hit. Throughout his career, he stayed loyal to fans who wanted steel guitar, fiddle, and a shuffle beat. Although he could sing like Dean Martin and Perry Como, he chose not to record in the crooner style.
A hot country music property in the 1950s, he starred in four low-budget movies, Hidden Guns (1956), Daniel Boone, Trail Blazer (1956), Raiders of Old California (1957), and Country Music Holiday (1958). During the 1960s, he appeared in numerous country music movies as himself.
Young became an influential Nashville businessman, beginning with his purchase and leadership of trade magazine Music City News in 1963. He owned or co-owned publishing companies, a race track, a golf course, and other Nashville ventures. His Music City News Awards show, which began in 1967, pioneered the concept of fan-voted awards. The show still exists as the CMT Music Awards.
Fellow entertainer Billy Walker accurately described Young as having "two personalities. His good side showed up when he wasn’t drinking, and his bad side showed up when he was. He shelled out a lot of money to help people." Young usually carried hundred dollar bills, which he readily gave to anyone in need, friends and strangers alike. Charley Pride, the most successful African American singer that country music had known to date, called Young "one of my best supporters in the early days and that helped break some ground for me. When someone who is considered a diehard redneck stands beside a black man and says, ’Hey, I like this guy,’ it disarms people who might have been reluctant to associate with him."
After retiring from performing in 1993, Young frequently expressed his displeasure at how older artists were ignored and unappreciated. He declined requests from friends such as Jeannie Seely to guest on the Grand Ole Opry. By 1996, he had alienated himself from his children and ex-wife. Emphysema gave him serious breathing problems, and prostatitis held him in constant pain. He sold his tour bus, found a new home for his dog, cleaned out his storage room, and gave away many of his possessions.
Friends and acquaintances always expected the unexpected from Faron Young. But nobody expected him to put a .38 caliber pistol to his temple on December 9, 1996, and pull the trigger. He died 24 hours later.
