Kenny Chesney, in full Kenneth Arnold Chesney,  (born March 26, 1968, Luttrell, Tennessee, U.S.), American country-music singer, songwriter, and guitarist whose contemplative ballads and hard-core party songs, onstage energy, approachable character, and sophisticated concert productions made him one of the most popular performers of the late 20th and early 21st centuries.
Chesney spent most of his childhood in the small town where he was born, near Knoxville, Tennessee. His parents divorced when he was just a few years old. When he was a teenager, Chesney moved with his mother and sister to Knoxville. Although he enjoyed listening to bluegrass, rock, and country rock as a youth, it was not until the middle of his sophomore year as a business major at East Tennessee State University that he developed any serious interest in making music himself. When he received a guitar from his mother as a Christmas present, he was drawn to it, picking out familiar tunes, writing his own songs, and practicing for several hours a day. Within just a few months, he began to play in venues near campus, performing mostly covers of tunes by country artists such as George Jones and Hank Williams, Jr. He also played his own compositions, which he recorded and sold on cassette tapes at his performances.
By the time Chesney graduated with a bachelor’s degree in advertising in 1990, he had decided to pursue a career in music. In 1991 he moved to the capital of country music, Nashville, where he played a regular gig in an unremarkable honky tonk. In a quest for greater professional opportunity, he auditioned for a local music-publishing company and received a songwriting contract in 1992. His compositional skills led to a recording contract the following year with Capricorn Records, for which he recorded his debut album In My Wildest Dreams (1994). Shortly thereafter, Capricorn dissolved its country-music division, and Chesney, who had already gained a notable following as both a performer and a songwriter, was quickly picked up by the BNA record label. His first album for that company, All I Need to Know (1995)—a mixture of love songs, ballads, and upbeat honky-tonk tunes—sold well, but his next album, the lighter and livelier Me and You (1996), sold more than 500,000 copies.
Chesney’s frequently professed aim as a musician was both to connect with people and to encourage them to live life to its fullest. To that end he typically sang about common life experiences, such as finding love and the challenges of personal relationships, that resonated broadly with his audiences. He also cultivated a down-to-earth public persona, in part by mingling with his audiences before and after his shows, normally wearing the black or white cowboy hat that became a sartorial trademark early in his career. Onstage, Chesney delivered increasingly energetic performances, intensified through sophisticated equipment and effects that in the 1990s were more characteristic of rock-music productions.
“She’s Got It All” from the 1997 album I Will Stand was Chesney’s first number-one hit on Billboard’s country songs chart. Two years later Everywhere We Go, with its traditional country-music sound, sold more than two million copies and positioned Chesney solidly within the musical mainstream. Most of his subsequent albums, while still clearly country, incorporated stronger rock- and pop-music elements, and many—such as No Shoes, No Shirt, No Problems (2002), All I Want for Christmas Is a Real Good Tan (2003), Lucky Old Sun (2008), and Hemingway’s Whiskey (2010)—were evocative of life in the tropics. Between 2000 and 2010, 10 of his albums reached the top spot on Billboard’s country albums chart. Indeed, by the second decade of the 21st century, Chesney had become one of the most popular musicians of the day, with some two dozen number-one country hits and cumulative album sales of more than 30 million. Following the release of Welcome to the Fishbowl (2012), he toured with friend and fellow country musician Tim McGraw, selling out stadiums across the continental United States.
On Life on a Rock (2013), Chesney brought shades of introspection to his typically breezy, sun-dappled songs. The Big Revival (2014) debuted atop the country albums chart and yielded three hit singles. Chesney was more reflective on Cosmic Hallelujah (2016), and in 2017 he released Live in No Shoes Nation, his eighth album to reach the number-one spot on the Billboard 200 chart. His later recordings included Songs for the Saints (2018) and Here and Now (2020).
Chesney garnered numerous awards during the course of his rise to stardom. His first major honour came from the Academy of Country Music (ACM), which in 1997 named him the top new male vocalist. The ACM declared him Entertainer of the Year four years in a row (2004–07), and the Country Music Association bestowed the same honour, also four times (2004, 2006–08). Few artists had so dominated any one decade of country music.
