Miranda Lambert, in full Miranda Leigh Lambert,  (born November 10, 1983, Longview, Texas, U.S.), American country music singer-songwriter who crafted a repertoire in the early 21st century that ranged from rowdy revenge fantasies to sensitive ruminations on domestic life. Her recordings, along with her feisty down-home personality, resonated widely with audiences and made her a favourite of the country music establishment.
Lambert was raised primarily in the northeastern Texas town of Lindale. Surrounded by country music as a child—her father played the guitar at home—she developed an appreciation for both the mainstream country stars of the time and outlaw-style singer-songwriters such as Merle Haggard. At the age of 16, Lambert entered a local talent show, and after committing to learn guitar and write her own songs, she began performing at honky-tonk bars. At the time, her parents worked as private detectives and sometimes sheltered abused women, and her exposure to kitchen-table stories of betrayal and desperation coloured her songwriting. With a musical career in sight, she arranged to graduate early from high school, and in 2001 she self-released her first album, Miranda Lambert.
In 2003 Lambert appeared on Nashville Star, a televised talent competition, modeled after American Idol, for aspiring country musicians. Although she did not win, her spirited performances caught the attention of record-company executives, who signed her to a contract. Following the sweetly nostalgic single “Me and Charlie Talking” (2004), Lambert released the album Kerosene in 2005. Although its songs made only a modest impression on country radio, the album eventually found an audience, which consisted largely of young women who admired her artistic self-determination (she had a writing credit on all but one song) and her earthy demeanour. The rollicking title track, on which Lambert inhabited the role of a wronged woman hell-bent on revenge, scored a Grammy Award nomination and secured her a reputation as a charismatic spitfire. She continued to channel unvarnished emotions on the critically acclaimed Crazy Ex-Girlfriend (2007). Fueled by such hits as the seething “Gunpowder & Lead,” the record sold more than one million copies in the United States and won her the first of several Academy of Country Music (ACM) Awards for album of the year.
Nevertheless, Lambert did not fully emerge as a major country star until the release of her next album, Revolution (2009). Though she did not entirely abandon the raucous fare for which she was best known, the sprawling collection found ample room for her reflective side. The wistful “The House That Built Me” became Lambert’s first song to top the Billboard country singles chart, and it earned her a Grammy Award (for best female country vocal performance), among numerous other honours.
In 2011 Lambert married fellow country singer Blake Shelton, whose high-profile role as a coach on the TV singing contest The Voice contributed to their tabloid-friendly image as a Nashville power couple. (They divorced in 2015.) That year also saw the debut of Pistol Annies, a group that Lambert had formed with friends Ashley Monroe and Angaleena Presley. The trio’s well-regarded Hell on Heels (2011) was swiftly followed by Lambert’s own Four the Record (2011), which featured the hit single “Over You,” an elegiac ballad she wrote with Shelton. She subsequently contributed to another Pistol Annies album, Annie Up (2013), before releasing her fifth solo album, the Grammy-winning Platinum (2014). In 2017 Lambert collected her eighth consecutive ACM award for female vocalist of the year as well as her seventh Country Music Association award in that category. In addition, The Weight of These Wings (2016) was her fifth recording to win ACM album of the year. She also received praise for the country-rock Wildcard (2019), which later was awarded the Grammy for best country album.
