Shania Twain, original name Eilleen Regina Edwards,  (born August 28, 1965, Windsor, Ontario, Canada), Canadian musician who, with her mix of country melodies and pop vocals, became one of the most popular crossover artists of the mid-1990s.
Twain took the surname of her stepfather, Jerry Twain, at a young age. After the family moved north to Timmins, Ontario, she developed an exceptional singing voice and by age eight was performing in clubs to help supplement her parents’ irregular income. During high school she sang with a Top 40 cover band called Longshot. At age 21 she moved to Toronto, where she worked during the day while singing in clubs at night. Less than a year later, however, her parents were killed in a traffic accident, and she returned home to raise her sister and two brothers.
Twain continued to sing in clubs, and in 1991 she attracted the attention of producer Norro Wilson, who took her to Nashville, Tennessee, to record her first album. She changed her name to Shania, meaning “I’m on my way,” a nod to her stepfather’s Ojibwa heritage. Her first album, Shania Twain, sold only 100,000 copies, but her talent caught the eye of another producer, Robert John (“Mutt”) Lange, who had a highly successful career producing albums for Def Leppard, Bryan Adams, and Michael Bolton. Twain and Lange, who immediately began writing songs together, also became romantically involved and married in 1993. Two years later Twain released her second album, The Woman in Me. It was a critical and commercial success, selling more than 18 million copies and winning a Grammy Award for country album of the year.
For her third album, Come On Over (1997), Twain produced chart-topping hits on both the country and pop charts, and the following year she embarked on her first tour of North America. By 1999 Come On Over had sold more than 10 million copies, which made Twain the best-selling female country musician and the first female recording artist in any genre to have two consecutive albums top the 10 million mark in copies sold. In 2002 she released the highly anticipated Up!. The double album contained both country and pop versions of the songs. Her Greatest Hits collection, featuring a duet with country artist Billy Currington, appeared in 2004.
In the ensuing years, Twain largely avoided the public eye, though her 2010 divorce from Lange was tabloid fodder. Her hiatus ended in 2011 when she starred in the reality television series Why Not? with Shania Twain and published the autobiography From This Moment On. In the same year, she was inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame and received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. During this time she also resumed her music careeer. After releasing the single “Today Is Your Day” (2011), she had a residency show titled Shania: Still the One (2012–14) at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas. In 2017 Twain released the chart-topping Now, her first studio album in 15 years. She launched another Las Vegas residency, Let’s Go!, in 2019.
