Allah, Arabic Allāh (“God”),  the one and only God in Islam.
Etymologically, the name Allah is probably a contraction of the Arabic al-Ilāh, “the God.” The name’s origin can be traced to the earliest Semitic writings in which the word for god was il, el, or eloah, the latter two used in the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament). Allah is the standard Arabic word for God and is used by Arabic-speaking Christians and Jews as well as by Muslims. The association of the word specifically with Islam comes from the special status of Arabic as the language of Islam’s holy scripture, the Qurʾān: since the Qurʾān in its original language is considered to be the literal word of God, it is believed that God described himself in the Arabic language as Allāh. The Arabic word thus holds special significance for Muslims, regardless of their native tongue, because the Arabic word was spoken by God himself.
Allah is the pivot of the Muslim faith. The Qurʾān stresses above all Allah’s singularity and sole sovereignty, a doctrinal tenet indicated by the Arabic term tawḥīd (“oneness”). He never sleeps or tires, and, while transcendent, he perceives and reacts to everything in every place through the omnipresence of his divine knowledge. He creates ex nihilo and is in no need of a consort, nor does he have offspring. Three themes preponderate in the Qurʾān: (1) Allah is the Creator, Judge, and Rewarder; (2) he is unique (wāḥid) and inherently one (aḥad); and (3) he is omnipotent and all-merciful. Allah is the “Lord of the Worlds,” the Most High; “nothing is like unto him,” and this in itself is to the believer a request to adore Allah as the Protector and to glorify his powers of compassion and forgiveness.
Allah, says the Qurʾān, “loves those who do good,” and two passages in the Qurʾān express a mutual love between him and humanity. Although he is infinitely forgiving, according to the Qurʾān, there is one infraction that God will not forgive in the hereafter: the sin of associationism, or polytheism (shirk). The God of the Qurʾān proclaims himself to be the one and the same as the God who has communicated with humanity through his various emissaries (rusul) who came to different communities, including the Jewish and Christian prophets.
Muslim scholars have collected, in the Qurʾān and in the Hadith (the sayings of the Prophet Muhammad), the 99 “most beautiful names” (al-asmāʾ al-ḥusnā) of Allah, which describe his attributes. These names have become objects of devoted recitation and meditation. Among the names of Allah are the One and Only, the Living One, the Subsisting (al-Ḥayy al-Qayyūm), the Real Truth (al-Ḥaqq), the Sublime (al-ʿAẓīm), the Wise (al-Ḥakīm), the Omnipotent (al-ʿAzīz), the Hearer (al-Samīʿ), the Seer (al-Baṣīr), the Omniscient (al-ʿAlīm), the Witness (al-Shahīd), the Trustee (al-Wakīl), the Benefactor (al-Raḥmān), the Merciful (al-Raḥīm), the Utterly Compassionate (al-Raʾūf), and the Constant Forgiver (al-Ghafūr, al-Ghaffār).
The profession of faith (shahādah) by which a person is introduced into the Muslim community consists of the affirmation that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is his messenger. For pious Muslims, every action is opened by an invocation of the divine name (basmalah). The formula in shāʾa Allāh, “if Allah wills,” appears frequently in daily speech. This formula is the reminder of an ever-present divine intervention in the order of the world and the actions of human beings. Muslims believe that nothing happens and nothing is performed unless it is by the will or commandment of Allah, although humans are individually responsible for the moral choices they make at any given moment. As signified by the term Islam, the personal attitude of a Muslim believer, therefore, is a conscious submission to God. Such submission is not blind and passive but should be purposeful and based on the knowledge of God and his commandments through his revelations.
