Amitabha, (Sanskrit: “Infinite Light”)  also called Amitayus (“Infinite Life”), Japanese Amida, Chinese Emituo Fo,  in Mahayana Buddhism, and particularly in the so-called Pure Land sects, the great saviour buddha. As related in the Sukhavati-vyuha-sutras (the fundamental scriptures of the Pure Land sects), many ages ago a monk named Dharmakara made a number of vows, the 18th of which promised that, on his attaining buddhahood, all who had faith in him and who called upon his name would be reborn in his paradise and would reside there in bliss until they had attained enlightenment. Having accomplished his vows, Dharmakara reigned as the buddha Amitabha in the Western Paradise, called Sukhavati, the Pure Land.
Devotion to Amitabha came to the fore in China about 650 ce and from there spread to Japan, where it led in the 12th and 13th centuries to the formation of the Pure Land school and the True Pure Land school, both of which continue to have large followings today. Depictions of Amitabha’s Pure Land and of Amitabha descending to welcome the newly dead are beautifully expressed in the raigō paintings of Japan’s late Heian period (897–1185).
Amitabha as a saviour figure was never as popular in Tibet and Nepal as he was in East Asia, but he is highly regarded in those countries as one of the five “self-born” buddhas (dhyani-buddhas) who have existed eternally. According to this concept, he manifested himself as the historical Buddha Gotama and as the bodhisattva (“buddha-to-be”) Avalokiteshvara. His colour is red, his posture one of meditation (dhyana-mudra), his symbol the begging bowl, his mount the peacock, his consort Pandara, his family Raga, his element water, his sacred syllable “ba,” or “ah,” his skandha (element of existence) sanjna (perceptions of sense objects), his direction the west, his sense perception taste, his sense organ the tongue, and his location in the human body the mouth.
As a bestower of longevity, Amitabha is called Amitayus, or “Infinite Life.” In China and Japan the two names are often used interchangeably, but in Tibet the two forms are never confounded, and Amitayus is worshiped in a special ceremony for obtaining long life. He is depicted wearing ornaments and a crown and holding the ambrosia vase from which spill the jewels of eternal life.
