Cheng Huang, (Chinese: “Wall and Moat”) also known as Chenghuang Shen, Wade-Giles romanization Ch’eng Huang,  in Chinese mythology, the City God, or the spiritual magistrate and guardian deity of a particular Chinese city. Because dead spirits reputedly informed the god of all good and evil deeds within his jurisdiction, it was popularly believed that devout prayers offered in Cheng Huang’s temple would be liberally rewarded. The wide popularity of his cult was also due in part to imperial approbation. In 1382 his temples were appropriated by the government, and people were directed to offer sacrifices to the protector of their city.
Traditionally, before assuming a new post, local officials used to pass the night in Cheng Huang’s temple seeking guidance. When difficult problems of law later presented themselves, officials returned to the temple, in hopes that Cheng Huang would reveal the answer in a dream.
When a death occurred, relatives or close friends of the deceased visited Cheng Huang’s temple to report the fact so that records could be kept up to date. Once or twice a year the deity’s figure was carried through the city streets on a tour of inspection. He was preceded by assistants, among whom were a tall figure in black (Hei Laoye) and a short figure in white (Bai Laoye) who watched over the city night and day.
Tang dynasty (618–907) officials, wishing to enhance the prestige of Chinese gods, provided Cheng Huang, as well as other gods, with an ancient lineage. He was thus identified with Shui Rong (their names have the same meaning), one of the Eight Spirits to whom Emperor Yao is said to have offered sacrifice in prehistoric times. Actually, there is no mention of Cheng Huang in Chinese literature until the 6th century ce.
In practice, a Cheng Huang was often a deceased local official who had been deified because he served his community with distinction in bygone days. It was possible for a city to change the identity of its local Cheng Huang by simply forgetting the old god and welcoming a new protector to the existing temple with a joyous celebration.
