Giambattista Basile,  (born c. 1575, Naples—died  Feb. 23, 1632, Giugliano, Campania), Neapolitan soldier, public official, poet, and short-story writer whose Lo cunto de li cunti, 50 zestful tales written in Neapolitan, was one of the earliest such collections based on folktales and served as an important source both for the later fairy-tale writers Charles Perrault in France in the 17th century and the brothers Grimm in Germany in the 19th century, and for the Italian commedia dell’arte dramatist Carlo Gozzi in the 18th century.
Basile was a soldier as a young man and began a career in government after moving to Naples in 1608. He later was part of the Mantuan court of Ferdinando Gonzaga, and then moved on to become governor, successively, of several small Italian states.
Basile was most at home in Naples, and during his career he became fascinated with the folklore, customs, literature, music, and dialect of the Neapolitan people. He began serious study of things Neapolitan and began to collect fairy tales and folktales, setting them down in a lively Neapolitan style with much local flavour and all the ornament and flamboyance of his influential contemporary Giambattista Marino.
Basile’s collection, Lo cunto de li cunti (1634; “The Story of Stories”; best Italian translation B. Croce, 1925; best English translation N.B. Penzer, The Pentamerone, 2 vol., 1932), was published posthumously under the anagrammatic pseudonym Gian Alesio Abbattutis and referred to by its first editor as Il pentamerone because of the similarity of its framework to that of Boccaccio’s Decameron.
In Lo cunto de li cunti, a prince and his wife, a slave who has been posing as a princess, are entertained for 5 days by 10 women, who tell them 50 stories, among which are the familiar tales of Puss in Boots, Rapunzel, Cinderella, Snow White and Rose Red, the Three Oranges, and Beauty and the Beast. On the last day of storytelling, the real princess appears, tells her story, and ousts the deceptive slave.
Basile also wrote Italian and Spanish verse. Le muse napolitane (1635) was a series of satirical verse dialogues on Neapolitan mores.
