Holy Grail, also called Grail,  object sought by the knights of Arthurian legend as part of a quest that, particularly from the 13th century, had Christian meaning. The term grail evidently denoted a wide-mouthed or shallow vessel, though its precise etymology remains uncertain.
The legend of the Grail possibly was inspired by Greek, Roman, and Celtic mythologies, which abound in horns of plenty, magic life-restoring caldrons, and the like. The first extant text to give such a vessel Christian significance as a mysterious holy object was Chrétien de Troyes’s late 12th-century unfinished romance Perceval; ou, le conte du Graal, which introduces the guileless rustic knight Perceval, whose dominant trait is innocence and who quests for the Grail. In this poem, the religious is combined with the fantastic. In the 13th century, Robert de Boron’s verse trilogy Joseph d’Arimathie, Merlin, and Perceval (sometimes called, together, the Estoire dou Graal) extended the Christian significance of the legend, while Wolfram von Eschenbach gave it profound and mystical expression in his epic Parzival. (In Wolfram’s account, the Holy Grail became a precious stone, fallen from heaven.)
Prose versions of Robert de Boron’s works began to link the Holy Grail story even more closely with Arthurian legend. A 13th-century German romance, Diu Krône, made Gawain the Grail hero. The Queste del Saint Graal (which forms part of the Vulgate cycle [c. 1210–30]) introduced a new hero, Galahad. Sir Thomas Malory’s Le Morte Darthur, completed about 1470 and printed in 1485, transmitted the essence of the Queste del Saint Graal to English-speaking readers and helped it to exert the widest influence on the legend of the Holy Grail.
Robert de Boron’s poem recounted the Holy Grail’s early history, linking it with the cup used by Christ at the Last Supper and afterward by Joseph of Arimathea to catch the blood flowing from Christ’s wounds as he hung upon the Cross. The Queste del Saint Graal transformed the quest for the Holy Grail into a search for mystical union with God and made the pure knight Galahad the Grail’s ideal hero. Only Galahad could look directly into it and behold the divine mysteries that cannot be described by human tongue. The Queste del Saint Graal was influenced by the mystical teachings of St. Bernard de Clairvaux, the states of grace it describes corresponding to the stages by which St. Bernard explained an individual’s rise toward perfection in the mystical life. The work gained an added dimension by making Galahad the son of Lancelot, thus contrasting the story of chivalry inspired by human love (Lancelot and Guinevere, who was Arthur’s queen) with that inspired by divine love (Galahad). In the last branch of the Vulgate cycle, the final disasters were linked with the withdrawal of the Holy Grail, symbol of grace, never to be seen again.
The legend of the Holy Grail came to form the culminating point of Arthurian romance, and it was to prove an enduring and fruitful theme across the arts, present in numerous works as disparate as Richard Wagner’s opera Parsifal, James Russell Lowell’s parable The Vision of Sir Launfal, Jay Z’s album Magna Carta Holy Grail, and the film Monty Python and the Holy Grail.
