Mount Tai, Chinese (Pinyin) Tai Shan or (Wade-Giles romanization) T’ai Shan,  mountain mass with several peaks along a southwest-northeast axis to the north of the city of Tai’an in Shandong province, eastern China. Mount Tai consists of a much-shattered fault block, mostly composed of archaic crystalline shales and granites and some ancient limestones. The highest point, Tianzhu Peak, reaches a height of 5,000 feet (1,524 metres). Mount Tai was originally known as Daizong or Daishan. Since Qin times (221–207 bce) it has also been known as Dongyue (“Eastern Mountain”), one of the five holy mountains of China, and has usually ranked as the first among them; the other four are: Mount Heng in Hunan province (south), Mount Hua in Shaanxi province (west), Mount Heng in Shanxi province (north), and Mount Song in Henan province (central).
Historically important in the cult of official state rituals, Mount Tai was the site of two of the most spectacular of all the ceremonies of the traditional Chinese empire. One of them, called feng, was held on top of Mount Tai and consisted of offerings to heaven; the other, called chan, was held on a lower hill and made offerings to earth. These ceremonies are often referred to together as fengchan (worship of heaven and earth) and were believed to ensure a dynasty’s fortunes. They were carried out at rare intervals—during the Xi (Western) Han dynasty (206 bce–25 ce) in 110, 106, 102, and 98 bce; during the Dong (Eastern) Han dynasty (25–220 ce) in 56 ce; and by emperors of the Tang dynasty (618–907) in 666 and again in 725.
Mount Tai was not only the site of imposing state ceremonies. It was also home to powerful spirits for whom rituals were performed in spring for a good harvest and in autumn to give thanks for a harvest completed. Since Mount Tai was the chief ceremonial centre for eastern China, rites were also performed to seek protection from floods and earthquakes.
Mount Tai became associated with a wide range of beliefs that were derived from folk religion and connected with Daoism, a philosophy integral to Chinese life and thought for more than 2,000 years. It was considered to be the centre of the yang (male) principle, the source of life, and from the Dong Han period onward it was believed that the spirits of Mount Tai determined all human destiny and that after death the souls of people returned to Mount Tai for judgment. The name of the most important spirit, originally Taishan Fujun (“Lord of Mount Tai”), was, with the emergence of organized Daoism, changed to Taiyue Dadi (“Grand Emperor of Mount Tai”). In Ming times (1368–1644) the centre of the popular cult was transferred from the spirit himself to his daughter, Taishan Niangniang (“The Lady of Mount Tai”)—also called Bixia Yunjun (“Goddess of the Colourful Clouds”)—whose cult had begun to grow from about 1000 and who became a northern Daoist equivalent to the Buddhist Guanyin (Kuan-yin) or to Avalokitesvara (bodhisattva of mercy), whose cult was powerful in central and southern China.
The slopes of Mount Tai have long been covered with temples and shrines dedicated to the complex pantheon of associated spirits. In the past, vast numbers of pilgrims visited it annually, and a great festival was held in the third month of the Chinese year. Mount Tai has a long history of grandeur, and, in addition to religious structures, it has many towers, pavilions, and other cultural relics. Designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1987, it is an important part of Chinese history and culture.
