Piasa bird,  mythical monster depicted in a painting on a cliff overlooking the Mississippi River north of Alton, Illinois, U.S.
The French explorer Jacques Marquette provided the earliest extant account of figures painted on the bluffs near what is today Alton, which he and Louis Jolliet saw on their trip down the Mississippi in 1673. According to 
a translation
 of Marquette’s diary, they came upon “two painted monsters” that were
In his diary, Marquette marveled at the technical skill of the painting—he found it difficult to believe that it had been created by “any savage”—and claimed that the section of the cliff on which it appeared would have made its creation difficult at best. Marquette also claimed to have made a sketch of these monsters, but that sketch was later lost.
Several other 17th-century accounts exist, but, according to 
an article by the scholar Wayne C. Temple
, the last creditable one dates to 1698, when the observer claimed that the painting had nearly disappeared. These accounts differ on the details of the “monsters” depicted, and at least one suggests that the painting included an unremarkable-looking horse. Temple’s article claims that there exist no accounts of paintings near Alton between 1699 and the first decade of the 19th century and that those from the early 19th century are contradictory. A sketch made of the painting in 1825 has survived. It depicts a horned, seemingly scaly creature that suggests some of the exotic details claimed by Marquette.
In 1836 John Russell, a former professor from a town near Alton, published 
an account of the painting
 that also provided a backstory for the figure depicted in it. According to Russell, this creature is known as the Piasa; the “name is Indian, and signifies in the language of the Illini, ‘the bird that devours men.’” The Piasa once terrorized Native American villages, Russell claimed, killing many warriors before it was slain by the chief Ouatoga, who had offered himself as bait and had 20 warriors with poisoned arrows wait in ambush for the monster. When the Piasa swooped down to attack Ouatoga, it was killed by the barrage of poisoned arrows, thus saving the tribe. To this story, which Russell attributed to “all the tribes of the Upper Mississippi, and those who have inhabited the valley of the Illinois,” he added a vivid description of a cave filled with the bones of all those killed by the Piasa, estimated to be in the thousands.
Russell later acknowledged to his son that he had fabricated this account, but, within a few years of his article’s publication, this legend of the Piasa was being repeated and elaborated upon, such that it became widely accepted. A variety of explanations of the painting exist today, ranging from credible attempts to place what Marquette claimed he saw into the broader context of Native American culture and the history of European colonization of North America to outlandish claims about Chinese exploration of the Mississippi.
The painting of the Piasa (or Piasa Bird) continues to be a local landmark in Alton, though some or all of the cliff on which the original painting appeared was quarried and thus destroyed during the 19th century. The painting was re-created and restored several times during the 20th century. A major restoration occurred in the 1990s, when it measured about 50 feet wide by 20 feet tall (15 by 6 metres), though it was subsequently vandalized.
