Books of Samuel,  two Old Testament books that, along with Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, and 1 and 2 Kings, belong to the tradition of Deuteronomic history first committed to writing about 550 bc, during the Babylonian Exile. The two books, which were originally one, are principally concerned with the origin and early history of the monarchy of ancient Israel. The work bears the name of Samuel apparently because he is the first of its principal figures and was instrumental in the selection of the first two kings. In 1 Samuel, Samuel is treated as prophet and judge and Israel’s principal figure immediately before the monarchy, and Saul as king. In 2 Samuel, David is presented as king.
There are numerous parallels, repetitions, and discrepancies within the books of Samuel. Different accounts are given of the origin of the monarchy (1 Samuel 9:1–10:16 and 1 Samuel 8; 10:17–27); there are two accounts of the rejection of Saul as king (1 Samuel 13:8–14 and 1 Samuel 15:10–31) and two more of David’s introduction to Saul (1 Samuel 16 and 1 Samuel 17). One account of the slaying of Goliath attributes the act to David (1 Samuel 17) and the other to Elhanan (2 Samuel 21:19). Some scholars assume that the books of Samuel were composed from two or three continuous sources; others suggest a compilation of independent narratives of varying lengths. The latter view has gained the wider acceptance. The longest independent narrative, an excellent example of historical writing, is the “court history of David” (2 Samuel 9–20; 1 Kings 1–2). The several independent narratives and fragments were presumably collected by the Deuteronomic historian and joined together in the production of his work (Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, 1 and 2 Samuel, 1 and 2 Kings). The author exercised considerable care in his use of traditional material, for everything is made to serve in an overall theological perspective. The conflicting accounts of the origin of the monarchy, reflecting pro- and anti-monarchical attitudes, are intentionally held in tension as a backdrop for the divine promise to the house of David in 2 Samuel 7, guaranteeing its permanence and warning that the iniquity of any reigning king will bring the punishment of Yahweh. The rest of the history is shaped to illustrate the validity of these claims.
The promise in 2 Samuel 7 that divine favour will rest permanently on the Davidic dynasty is crucial for understanding the writer’s theological motivation for producing his history in the exilic period. He hoped for a restoration of his people and was convinced that one of the conditions for such a restoration was to recognize the divine legitimation of the house of David. He was also convinced that the kings of a restored Davidic monarchy would prosper in proportion to the degree of their faithfulness to the Law of Moses.
