Book of Joshua, Joshua also spelled Josue,  the sixth book of the Bible, which, along with Deuteronomy, Judges, 1 and 2 Samuel, and 1 and 2 Kings, belongs to a tradition of Jewish history and law, called Deuteronomic, that was first committed to writing about 550 bce, during the Babylonian Exile. The book, named after its leading character, is the first of the Former Prophets in the Jewish canon. It tells the story of the Israelite occupation of Canaan, the Promised Land. Many ancient traditions are preserved in the book, but they are coloured by the historian’s personal point of view.
The book can be divided into three sections: the conquest of Canaan (chapters 1–12), the distribution of the land among the Israelite tribes (chapters 13–22), and Joshua’s farewell address and death (chapters 23–24). Because the possession of Canaan was fulfillment of the oft-repeated promise to the patriarchs, the Book of Joshua has usually been regarded as the completion of a literary unit comprising the first six books of the Bible. Scholars who hold this point of view have attempted to identify in Joshua the same source documents that are found in the preceding books. There has been, however, a growing tendency to view Joshua as the beginning of a history that continues in the books that follow.
The author of Joshua lived at a time when the people of Israel were exiles in Babylonia and had lost the land they once possessed. Consequently, his retelling of history is coloured by a hope for the repossession of his homeland. The original conquest of the Promised Land is told with great zeal, and the historian repeatedly emphasizes the help of Yahweh in the conquest. The allotment of the land to various tribes is made to include territory that never belonged to Israel or that came into Israel’s possession at a much later time. This account again reflects the historian’s hope that the former glory of the Israelite nation will be restored. The farewell address of Joshua (chapter 24) sets forth the conditions for Yahweh’s maintenance of Israel in the land. The crux of the matter is this: “If you forsake the Lord and serve foreign gods, then he will turn and do you harm, and consume you, after having done you good” (24:20).
