Gog and Magog,  in the Hebrew Bible, the prophesied invader of Israel and the land from which he comes, respectively; or, in the Christian Scriptures (New Testament), evil forces opposed to the people of God. Although biblical references to Gog and Magog are relatively few, they assumed an important place in apocalyptic literature and medieval legend. They are also discussed in the Qurʾān (see also Yājūj and Mājūj).
In 1 Chronicles 5:4 (see Chronicles, books of the), Gog is identified as a descendant of the prophet Joel, and in Ezekiel 38–39, he is the chief prince of the tribes of Meshech and Tubal in the land of Magog, who is called upon by God to conquer the land of Israel. With a great coalition of forces from throughout the world, Gog and his entire army will invade Israel “like a cloud covering the earth” (38:16)  and will plunder and loot the cities. God, however, will send terrible natural disasters that will destroy Gog and his forces. The defeat of Gog will demonstrate the greatness and holiness of God and restore good relations between God and his people.
In the Revelation to John (20:7–10), the names Gog and Magog are applied to the evil forces that will join with Satan in the great struggle at the end of time. After Satan has been bound and chained for 1,000 years, he will be released and will rise up against God; he will go forth and deceive the nations of the world—Gog and Magog—gathering them together in great numbers to attack the saints and Jerusalem, the city God loves. God will send fire from heaven to destroy them and will then preside over the Last Judgment.
The biblical passages concerning Gog and Magog became the focus of later exegetes, who made repeated attempts to associate them with specific individuals and places. Gog has been identified by modern scholars with Gyges, a 7th-century bce king of Lydia, and with the Akkadian god Gaga; and it has also been argued that the name Magog is derived from an Akkadian word meaning “the land of Gyges.” In the 1st century ce the Jewish historian Josephus claimed that Gog and Magog were the Scythians, and in the 5th and 6th centuries they were held to be the Huns. Gog and Magog were equated with the Magyars in the 10th century and with the entire Muslim world, led by Muhammad and Saladin, in the Middle Ages. In both Jewish and Christian apocalyptic writings and other works, they were also identified with the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel.
One of the most important legends associated with Gog and Magog was that of Alexander’s Gate, said to have been built by Alexander the Great to imprison these uncivilized and barbaric people until the end of time. In medieval legends of Antichrist and the Last Emperor, Gog and Magog were allied with the armies of Satan. And in various prophetic texts, Gog and Magog participated in the persecutions led by Antichrist, preceded Antichrist as a sign of his coming, or emerged following the defeat of Antichrist in the struggle prior to the Last Judgment. According to Joachim of Fiore, a Calabrian abbot and theologian, Gog is the “Final Antichrist.” In Joachim’s view, Gog will come just before the Last Judgment but only after the defeat of an earlier antichrist and a period of millennial peace.
An independent legend of Gog and Magog surrounds two colossal wooden effigies in the Guildhall, London. They are thought to represent two giants who were taken to London to serve as porters at the gate of the royal palace after their race was destroyed by Brutus the Trojan, the legendary founder of London (Troia Nova, or New Troy). Effigies of Gog and Magog have existed in London from the time of Henry V (reigned 1413–22). The first figures were destroyed in the Great Fire (1666) and were replaced in 1708. The second pair was destroyed in a German air raid in 1940 and again replaced in 1953.
In the legends recounted by the medieval English historian Geoffrey of Monmouth, Gogmagog, or Goëmagot, was a giant chieftain of Cornwall who was slain by Brutus’s companion Corineus.
