Gospel According to Matthew,  first of the four New Testament Gospels (narratives recounting the life and death of Jesus Christ) and, with The Gospels According to Mark and Luke, one of the three so-called Synoptic Gospels (i.e., those presenting a common view). It has traditionally been attributed to St. Matthew the Evangelist, one of the 12 Apostles, described in the text as a tax collector (10:3). The Gospel According to Matthew was composed in Greek, probably sometime after 70 ce, with evident dependence on the earlier Gospel According to Mark. There has, however, been extended discussion about the possibility of an earlier version in Aramaic. Numerous textual indications point to an author who was a Jewish Christian writing for Christians of similar background. The Gospel According to Matthew consequently emphasizes Christ’s fulfillment of Old Testament prophecies (5:17) and his role as a new lawgiver whose divine mission was confirmed by repeated miracles.
After tracing the genealogy of Jesus back to Abraham, the evangelist mentions certain details related to the infancy of Christ that are not elsewhere recorded—e.g., St. Joseph’s perplexity on learning that Mary is pregnant, the homage of the Wise Men, the flight into Egypt to escape Herod’s soldiers, the massacre of the innocents, and the return of the holy family from Egypt. Matthew then describes the preaching of St. John the Baptist, the call of the Apostles, and major events in the public ministry of Jesus. The final section describes the betrayal, Crucifixion, burial, and Resurrection of Christ.
Exegetes view the main body of the Gospel as five extended sermons, one of which includes the memorable Sermon on the Mount (chapters 5–7). Numerous parables are recorded, some very well known but not set down by the other evangelists. One passage, “And I tell you, you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church” (16:18), has become the basis of Roman Catholic belief in the divine institution of the papacy. Matthew’s version of the Lord’s Prayer (6:9–15) is used in the liturgies of the Christian churches.
