Gospel According to John,  fourth of the four New Testament narratives recounting the life and death of Jesus Christ. John’s is the only one of the four not considered among the Synoptic Gospels (i.e., those presenting a common view). Although the Gospel is ostensibly written by St. John the Apostle, “the beloved disciple” of Jesus, there has been considerable discussion of the actual identity of the author. The language of the Gospel and its well-developed theology suggest that the author may have lived later than John and based his writing on John’s teachings and testimonies. Moreover, the facts that several episodes in the life of Jesus are recounted out of sequence with the Synoptics and that the final chapter appears to be a later addition suggest that the text may be a composite. The Gospel’s place and date of composition are also uncertain; many scholars suggest that it was written at Ephesus, in Asia Minor, about 100 ce for the purpose of communicating the truths about Christ to Christians of Hellenistic background.
John’s Gospel differs from the Synoptic Gospels in several ways: it covers a different time span than the others; it locates much of Jesus’ ministry in Judaea; and it portrays Jesus discoursing at length on theological matters. The major difference, however, lies in John’s overall purpose. The author of John’s Gospel tells us that he has chosen not to record many of the symbolic acts of Jesus and has instead included certain episodes in order that his readers may understand and share in the mystical union of Christ’s church, that they “may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing you may have life in his name” (20:30). This motive pervades the narrative, as do a kind of mystic symbolism and repeated emphasis on the incarnation. The author begins his account with a pronouncement on the incarnation that clearly intimates Genesis (“In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.”). The author continually adds interpretative comments of his own to clarify Jesus’ motives. In the narration of certain miraculous deeds, for example, the feeding of the 5,000 (6:1–15), which appears in all four Gospels, John’s version is explained as symbolic of a deeper spiritual truth (“I am the bread of life; . . .”). Throughout John’s Gospel, Jesus openly presents himself as the divine Son of God, not hiding his identity as he does in The Gospel According to Mark. Thus, the author of John’s Gospel does not merely narrate a series of events but singles out details that support an ordered theological interpretation of those events.
Because of its special theological character, the Gospel According to John was considered in ancient times to be the “spiritual Gospel,” and it wielded a profound and lasting influence on the development of early Christian doctrine.
