Gospel According to Luke,  third of the four New Testament Gospels (narratives recounting the life and death of Jesus Christ) and, with The Gospels According to Mark and Matthew, one of the three Synoptic Gospels (i.e., those presenting a common view). It is traditionally credited to St. Luke, “the beloved physician” (Col. 4:14), a close associate of the St. Paul the Apostle. Luke’s Gospel is clearly written for Gentile converts: it traces Christ’s genealogy, for example, back to Adam, the “father” of the human race rather than to Abraham, the father of the Jewish people. The date and place of composition are uncertain, but many date the Gospel to 63–70 ce, others somewhat later.
Like St. Matthew, Luke derives much of his Gospel from that of St. Mark, generally following Mark’s sequence and incorporating about 50 percent of Mark’s material into his work. The Gospels of Luke and Matthew, however, share a good deal of material not found in The Gospel According to Mark, suggesting that the two evangelists may have had access to another common source.
Despite its similarities to the other Synoptic Gospels, however, Luke’s narrative contains much that is unique. It gives details of Jesus’ infancy found in no other Gospel: the census of Caesar Augustus, the journey to Bethlehem, Jesus’ birth, the adoration of the shepherds, Jesus’ circumcision, the words of Simeon, and Jesus at age 12 in the temple talking with the doctors of the law. It also is the only Gospel to give an account of the Ascension. Among the notable parables found only in Luke’s Gospel are those of the good Samaritan and the prodigal son.
Luke’s Gospel is also unique in its perspective. It resembles the other synoptics in its treatment of the life of Jesus, but it goes beyond them in narrating the ministry of Jesus, widening its perspective to consider God’s overall historical purpose and the place of the church within it. Luke, and its companion book, Acts of the Apostles, portray the church as God’s instrument of redemption on Earth in the interim between the death of Christ and the Second Coming. The two books combined provide the first Christian history, outlining God’s purpose through three historical epochs: the epoch of the Law and the prophets, which lasted from ancient Israel to the time of St. John the Baptist; the epoch of Jesus’ ministry; and the epoch of the church’s mission, from the Ascension to the return of Christ.
