Hui-neng, Pinyin Huineng,  (born 638, southwest Kwangtung, China—died  713, Kwangtung), the sixth great patriarch of Zen (Ch’an in Chinese) Buddhism and founder of the Southern school, which became the dominant school of Zen, both in China and in Japan.
As a young and illiterate peddler of firewood, Hui-neng heard the Chin-kang ching (“Diamond Sutra”) and traveled 500 miles (800 km) to the area in North China where the fifth Ch’an patriarch, Hung-jen (601–674), was expounding this text. According to legend, in a dramatic poetry contest in 661 the senior monk, Shen-hsiu (605?–706), wrote, “The mind is the stand of a bright mirror. . . . / Do not allow it to become dusty,” but Hui-neng wrote, “Buddha-nature is forever clear and pure, / Where is there any dust?” Thereupon the fifth patriarch transmitted the law to Hui-neng.
Hui-neng returned to South China, reaching Canton in 676. He was ordained priest and for the next 37 years propagated the law. In a sermon that has been recorded as the Liu-Tsu t’an-ch’ing (“Platform Scripture of the Sixth Patriarch”), he declared that all people possess the buddha-nature and that one’s nature is originally pure. Instead of reading scriptures, building temples, making offerings, reciting the name of the Buddha, and praying for rebirth in paradise, one should simply seek to discover one’s own nature, in which all buddhas and Buddhist doctrines are immanent. The way to discover one’s own nature is through calm and wisdom, which will be attained when one is freed from deliberate thought and from attachment to things. The traditional method of sitting in meditation is useless, for tranquillity is not motionlessness but is the state of having an unperturbed inner nature and an absence of erroneous thought. If one sees one’s own nature, enlightenment will follow—suddenly, without external help.
In pronouncing this radical doctrine of sudden enlightenment, Hui-neng rejected all traditional Buddhist concepts, works, and practices and created a wide schism between his Southern school and the Northern school led by Shen-hsiu, who had advocated gradual enlightenment.
