Jefferson Bible, original title The Philosophy of Jesus,  abridgment of the New Testament compiled by Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826), who rearranged the text of the Gospels into an account of the life and ministry of Jesus that eschews mention of any supernatural or miraculous elements.
Jefferson exemplified the rationalistic bent of many Enlightenment intellectuals and also quietly professed a form of Deistic Christianity. He held both that God’s creation could be understood scientifically and that Jesus taught “the most sublime” code of ethics, which had been obscured by almost two millennia of Christian doctrines about original sin and tales of miracles. This later accretion of superstition and myth, he believed, could be stripped away by anyone who adopted a reasoned approach. In 1803, during his first term as president of the United States (1801–05), Jefferson discussed with his friend Benjamin Rush (1746–1813) his desire to produce a more authentic edition of Jesus’ teachings than had been traditionally presented. His effort to enlist the Unitarian minister and chemist Joseph Priestley (1733–1804) for the project was frustrated by the latter’s death; thus, the task fell to Jefferson himself. He clipped from two King James Bibles the statements attributed to Jesus in the Gospels and pasted them into a 46-page scrapbook that distilled “the philosophy of Jesus of Nazareth.” He had hoped that this compendium would promote moral virtues among American citizens; however, he also felt that it had been “hastily” done and that a more rigorous “scientific” approach was needed.
Jefferson may have begun preparing this more rigorous revision of scripture as early as 1804 or 1805, but he performed most of the editing a decade later. He worked with English and French Bibles and two versions of the New Testament in Greek with Latin translations. He clipped text from each and pasted it into a scrapbook in parallel columns that presented a narrative that began with Jesus’ unmiraculous birth, recounted his ministry, and ended with his burial in the sealed tomb. Jefferson deleted all mention of miracles, of the Old Testament (Hebrew Bible) prophecies held by Christian tradition to foretell Jesus’ role as the messiah, and of the Virgin Birth and Resurrection. Jesus’ identification in the Gospel According to John with the Word of God (a term that Jefferson believed was rooted in a mistranslation of the Greek logos as “word” rather than “reason”) and the accounts of the founding of the church in the Acts of the Apostles were also removed. Jefferson’s 84-page vision of Christianity, completed about 1819 and given the title The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth Extracted Textually from the Gospels in Greek, Latin, French & English, instead stressed Jesus’ moral teachings, particularly the Beatitudes from the Sermon on the Mount. Jefferson bound the scrapbook in red leather.
Jefferson mentioned his redaction of Christian scripture to close friends but never published it; the finished product was intended solely for his own personal use. The Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., purchased it from Jefferson’s granddaughter in 1895. The first published edition appeared in 1904, a century after Jefferson began the project; several English-only editions subsequently appeared. In 2011 the Smithsonian displayed the restored scrapbook and also published a special facsimile edition.
