Johann Oecolampadius, German Johannes Huszgen,  (born 1482, Weinsberg, Württemberg [Germany]—died November 23, 1531, Basel, Switzerland), German humanist, preacher, and patristic scholar who, as a close friend of the Swiss reformer Huldrych Zwingli, led the Reformation in Basel.
A student at Heidelberg, Oecolampadius left in 1506 to become tutor to the sons of the Palatinate’s elector and in 1510 became preacher at Weinsberg. In 1513 he went to Tübingen for further study; he became versatile in Greek, Latin, and Hebrew and came into contact with humanism. In 1515 Oecolampadius moved to Basel, where he assisted the humanist scholar Desiderius Erasmus (c. 1466–1536) in preparing his edition of the Greek New Testament. Over the next several years, Oecolampadius produced translations of works by various Greek Fathers of the Church, including Saints Gregory of Nazianzus, Basil, John of Damascus, John Chrysostom, and Theophylact. In 1518 he became cathedral preacher at Augsburg. His mystical leanings and scholarly temperament led him to enter the Brigittine monastery at Altomünster in 1520, but his growing disillusionment with the Roman Catholic view that the bread and wine of the Eucharist are transubstantiated into the body and blood of Christ and his increasing admiration for Martin Luther caused him to leave in 1522. After serving briefly as chaplain at Ebernburg Castle at the invitation of the German nobleman Franz von Sickingen, he returned to Basel, and in 1523 he became lecturer and professor at the university, where he had earned a doctorate in 1518.
Lecturing in three languages to large audiences and preaching at St. Martin’s Church, Oecolampadius soon became the dominant figure in the city. At Baden in 1526 he debated for the Reformation against Roman Catholicism, and again in 1528 he supported the reformers at the disputation at Bern. During this period Oecolampadius became renowned as a preacher. In a series of writings, particularly in De genuina verborum domini expositione (1526; “On the Correct Interpretation of the Words of the Lord”), he supported Zwingli’s view that the Eucharist was only a remembrance and not a reenactment of Christ’s sacrifice on the cross. After helping to shape the local ordinances promulgated at Easter in 1529 to establish the Reformation in Basel, Oecolampadius defended Zwingli’s position again at the Colloquy of Marburg (October 1529), where he debated Luther. Returning to Basel, in 1530 he opposed the dominant role of local authorities in church affairs and preached in favour of a church discipline in which pastors and lay elders shared in church government. He drafted the Confession of Basel, a statement of Reformed doctrine composed of 12 articles; the confession was compiled in fuller form in 1532 by his successor Oswald Myconius and adopted by the Basel city authorities in 1534. When, in 1531, Zwingli was slain in the Battle of Kappel, the result of political divisiveness over efforts to expand the Reformation, Oecolampadius was overwhelmed by shock and died soon afterward.
