Letters of Peter, also called Epistles of St. Peter the Apostle, abbreviation Peter,  two New Testament writings attributed to St. Peter the Apostle but perhaps written during the early 2nd century. The Letters of Peter, together with the Letter of James, the three Letters of John, and the Letter of Jude, are part of the seven so-called Catholic Letters. As the history of the New Testament canon shows, the Catholic Letters were among the last of the biblical literature to be settled on as canonical before the agreement of East and West in 367 CE. During the 2nd and 3rd centuries, only 2 John and 2 Peter were universally recognized. The First Letter of Peter and the Second Letter of Peter generally are placed as the 21st and 22nd books of the New Testament.
The First Letter of Peter, addressed to persecuted Christians living in five regions of Asia Minor, exhorts the readers to emulate the suffering Christ in their distress, remembering that after his Passion and death Jesus rose from the dead and is now in glory. The Christians are urged to repay evil with goodness and to love one another and are cautioned to safeguard their reputation as good citizens of high morality, thereby removing all doubt about the injustice of their sufferings. The question of authorship has not been solved to the satisfaction of scholars. Whereas the fluent Greek style and certain historical references seem to argue against Petrine authorship, the description of a primitive church organization, for example, seems to indicate an early composition, with the actual writing perhaps done by a secretary of or spokesman for Peter.
The Second Letter of Peter is principally concerned with the Second Coming of Christ. The author attributes the apparent delay to God’s patience in allowing time for universal redemption and notes that in the sight of God 1,000 years are like one day. The writer also warns against false teachers, whose conduct is as immoral as their words are deceptive. They, and those who follow them, says the writer, will be destroyed in a great conflagration that will precede “new heavens and a new earth in which righteousness dwells” (3:13). Though the author explicitly identifies himself as Peter, numerous textual difficulties created doubts as early as the 3rd century about the actual authorship, which have been reinforced by subsequent scholarship.
