Letters of Paul to Timothy, also called Epistles of St. Paul the Apostle to Timothy, abbreviation Timothy,  either of two New Testament writings addressed to St. Timothy, one of St. Paul the Apostle’s most faithful coworkers. The First Letter of Paul to Timothy and the Second Letter of Paul to Timothy are the 15th and 16th books of the New Testament canon. Together with the Letter of Paul to Titus, they have been called Pastoral Epistles since the end of the 18th century, because all three deal principally with church administration and the growth of heresies and were addressed to individuals rather than congregations. The interpretation of the letters depends in part on who actually wrote them. The majority of scholars doubt Paul’s authorship of the letters but vigorously dispute to what degree they reflect Pauline ministry. Those who regard the epistles as  “deutero-Pauline” (in the tradition of Paul but not written by him) usually date them to between 80 and 100 ce.
The First Letter of Paul to Timothy insists on the need to shun unorthodox teachings and dangerous speculations and reiterates the qualities expected of bishops and deacons. It exhorts Timothy to fulfill his duties faithfully and to instill in his congregation traditional beliefs, notions of proper conduct, and respect for one another. He is encouraged to lead a life of exemplary conduct and given rules for church order and discipline for the group as a whole and for the individuals that compose it.
The Second Letter of Paul to Timothy similarly urges Timothy to “guard the good treasure entrusted to you, with the help of the Holy Spirit” (1:14) and to accept his share of suffering “like a good soldier of Christ Jesus” (2:3). He is further admonished to “have nothing to do with stupid and senseless controversies” (2:23) and to avoid people “of corrupt mind and counterfeit faith” (3:8). Toward the end, the letter mentions many individuals by name—some who are dear friends, others who wrought harm. Timothy is asked to visit soon, even though the writer believes he is “already being poured out as a libation, and the time of my departure has come” (4:6).
