Mangal-kavya, (Bengali: “auspicious poems”)  a type of eulogistic verse in honour of a popular god or goddess in Bengal (India). The poems are sometimes associated with a pan-Indian deity, such as Shiva, but more often with a local Bengali deity—e.g., Manasa, the goddess of snakes, or Shitala, the goddess of smallpox, or the folk god Dharma-Thakur. These poems vary greatly in length, from 200 lines to several thousand, as in the case of the Chandi-mangal of Mukundarama Chakravarti, a masterpiece of 16th-century Bengali literature.
Mangal-kavya are most often heard at the festivals of the deities they celebrate. There is some disagreement among scholars as to whether or not the poems actually constitute an essential part of the ritual, without which it would be incomplete and not efficacious. Some of them, however, such as the Manasa-mangal, have become so popular that village singers, or gayaks, often sing them for the amusement and edification of a village audience.
Mangal poetry, unlike the texts of the Vedic tradition, is noncanonical literature and so has changed not only over the centuries but also from singer to singer, each performer being free to incorporate his own favourite legends and observations on the society around him. The texts are thus valuable not only as religious documents but also historically. The large number of variants, even among those texts that have been committed to writing, does, however, make dating extremely difficult.
Mangals cannot be characterized by content, except by saying that they all tell the story of how a particular god or goddess succeeded in establishing his or her worship on Earth. The popular Manasa-Mangal, for example, tells how the Bengali snake goddess Manasa conquered the worshippers of other deities by releasing her powers of destruction in the form of snakes. The Dharma-mangal, which celebrates the merits of the folk god Dharma-Thakur, also contains an account of the creation of the world.
Mangals are similar in form despite the wide variance in length. They are written for the most part in the simple payar metre, a couplet form with rhyme scheme aa bb, etc., an appropriate form for oral literature. Another characteristic of mangal poetry is its earthy imagery, drawn from village, field, and river, quite different from the elaborate and sophisticated imagery more typical of Sanskritic and court poetry. An exception is the 18th-century poem Annada-mangal by Bharat-chandra, a court poet who used the mangal form not as an expression of faith but as a frame for a witty, elaborate, sophisticated tale of love.
