Saint Ephraem Syrus, Syrian Aphrem, also called Ephraim the Syrian, Ephraem also spelled Ephrem, bynames Deacon of Edessa and Harp of the Holy Spirit,  (born c. 306, Nisibis, Mesopotamia [now Nusaybin, Turkey]—died June 9, 373, Edessa, Osroëne [now Şanlıurfa, Turkey]; Western feast day June 9, Eastern feast day January 28), Christian theologian, poet, hymnist, and doctor of the church who, as doctrinal consultant to Eastern churchmen, composed numerous theological-biblical commentaries and polemical works that, in witnessing to the common Christian tradition, have exerted widespread influence on the Greek and Latin churches. He is recognized as the most authoritative representative of 4th-century Syriac Christianity. Pope Benedict XV named him a doctor of the church in 1920.
Deacon to Bishop James of Nisibis, Mesopotamia (now Nusaybin, Turkey), and tutor in theology, Ephraem went to teach at the academy in Edessa, Osroëne (now Şanlıurfa, Turkey), when his native town was ceded to the Persians in 363; his record of these events in verse, Carmina Nisibena (“Songs of Nisibis”), constitutes a valuable historical source. Declining any higher office in the church (he escaped being consecrated bishop by feigning madness) and tempering his natural irascibility by monastic asceticism, he produced a wealth of theological literature. The 5th-century Byzantine historian Sozomen credits Ephraem with more than 1,000 writings, composed of approximately 3,000,000 lines. As a biblical exegete, Ephraem wrote commentaries on the Old Testament books of Genesis and Exodus and annotated the important 2nd-century Syriac-Greek version of the New Testament, the Diatessaron. His favourite literary form was verse, in which he composed treatises, sermons, and hymns; the result, in early Syriac, is often tedious because of expansive metaphor and allegory. Much of his hymnology was directed against the principal heresies of his day, particularly the teachings of Marcion and Bardesanes, 2nd-century Gnostics. Certain hymns attacked Christological heterodoxy, especially Arianism, while others extolled the church as the continuation of Christ on earth, the theology of faith, the moral superiority of virginity, and the phases of Christ’s mission in his Passion and Resurrection. According to historians of the 5th century, Christians gave enthusiastic prominence to these hymns in their liturgical assemblies. Ephraem further emphasized devotion to the Virgin Mary, particularly her sinlessness and exemplary fidelity. Additional doctrinal themes integrated in his prose and poetry include the Trinitarian teaching on the eternity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; the union of divinity and humanity in Christ; the essential function of the Holy Spirit in prayer, especially in rendering Christ’s actual presence in the celebration of Communion; the resurrection of all men, wherein he maintained the traditional Syriac belief that each individual would need to await the end of the world (the Last Judgment) to gain heavenly beatitude. Ephraem’s graphic description of heaven and hell contributed to the inspiration of Dante’s Divine Comedy.
