The Book of Jeremiah, also called The Prophecy Of Jeremias,  one of the major prophetical writings of the Old Testament. Jeremiah, a Judaean prophet whose activity spanned four of the most tumultuous decades in his country’s history, appears to have received his call to be a prophet in the 13th year of the reign of King Josiah (627/626 bc) and continued his ministry until after the siege and capture of Jerusalem by the Babylonians in 586 bc. Many of his oracles concerned the turbulent events of his times.
The major parts of the book are usually delineated as follows: prophecies against Judah and Jerusalem (chapters 1–25), narratives about Jeremiah (chapters 26–45), prophecies against foreign nations (chapters 46–51), and a historical appendix (chapter 52). The prophecies in the first part of the book derive mostly from Jeremiah himself. The second part, which is mostly prose and usually speaks of Jeremiah in the third person, probably owes its composition to Baruch, the scribe who, according to chapter 36, wrote the prophecies against Israel and Judah and all the nations from Jeremiah’s dictation. The prophecies against foreign nations may derive in part from Jeremiah; the appendix was largely taken from 2 Kings 24:18–25:30.
An unusual feature of this book is the “confessions” of Jeremiah, a group of individual laments reflecting the personal struggles precipitated by the prophet’s role as the spokesman of a message so unpopular that it evoked imprisonments and threats to his life. These confessions make the personal history of Jeremiah more accessible than that of any other Old Testament prophet.
The literary history of the book is long and complex. Its basic stratum consists of Jeremiah’s oracles against Judah and Jerusalem, some of which are probably identical with the words that Baruch wrote on the scroll from Jeremiah’s dictation. Other collections of sayings and reports concerning Jeremiah (especially in chapters 26–45) were probably compiled by Baruch somewhat later. To these two blocks of material were added material from the latest period of Jeremiah’s activity as well as from other sources (especially in chapters 46–51). The book, therefore, is the product of a long process of growth, with several redactors responsible for the inclusion and arrangement of materials.
