Letters of Paul to the Corinthians, also called Epistles of St. Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians, abbreviation Corinthians,  either of two New Testament letters, or epistles, addressed by St.Paul the Apostle to the Christian community that he had founded at Corinth, Greece. The First Letter of Paul to the Corinthians and The Second Letter of Paul to the Corinthians are the seventh and eighth books of the New Testament canon.
The First Letter of Paul to the Corinthians, probably written about 53–54 ce at Ephesus, Asia Minor, deals with problems that arose in the early years after Paul’s initial missionary visit (c. 50–51) to Corinth and his establishment there of a Christian community. The letter is valuable for its illuminations both of Paul’s thoughts and of the problems of the early church. Saddened by reports of dissension among the converts of various Apostles, Paul begins his letter with a reminder that all are to be regarded “as servants of Christ and stewards of God’s mysteries” (4:1). Then, while answering questions sent from Corinth, he addresses matters of immorality, marriage and celibacy, the conduct of women, the propriety of eating meat offered to idols, and the worthy reception of the Eucharist. To members of the community quarreling about the nature and distribution of spiritual gifts, Paul replies that jealousy among those working in the Spirit of God is as irrational as jealousy between the eye and the ear: both are essential to the well-being of the body as a whole. Then, in one of the most significant of all Pauline texts (chapter 13), the apostle explains to his fellow Christians that no gift of God—whether it be the gift of tongues, faith that moves mountains, or knowledge of mysteries—has meaning unless it is accompanied by love. He also reaffirms the reality of Christ’s Resurrection—doubted or denied by some—as the very foundation of Christian faith.
The Second Letter of Paul to the Corinthians was written from Macedonia in about 55 ce. The letter, which may have been written after an actual visit by Paul to Corinth, refers to an upheaval among the Christians there, during the course of which Paul had been insulted and his apostolic authority challenged. Because of this incident, Paul resolved not to go to Corinth again in person. Instead, he evidently wrote an intervening letter (2:3–4; 7:8, 12), now lost, in which he told the Corinthians of his anguish and displeasure. Presumably, he sent a fellow worker, St. Titus, to deliver the letter to the community at Corinth. In the second letter, Paul expresses his joy at the news, just received from Titus, that the Corinthians had repented, that his (Paul’s) authority among them had been reaffirmed, and that the troublemaker had been punished. After expressing his happiness and relief, Paul urges the Corinthians to respond generously to his plea for contributions to assist the poor of Jerusalem.
The last four chapters of the letter, a sharp and vigorous defense of Paul’s apostolic authority, differ markedly in tone from the earlier chapters, suggesting that chapters 10–13 may have been written earlier, before Paul had received Titus’s message. Some scholars view these chapters as a misplaced part of another letter to the Corinthians, thus supporting the speculation about the loss of some intervening communication.
