Pali canon, also called Tipitaka (Pali: “Triple Basket”) or Tripitaka (Sanskrit),  the complete canon, first recorded in Pali, of the Theravada (“Way of the Elders”) branch of Buddhism. The schools of the Mahayana (“Greater Vehicle”) branch also revere it yet hold as scripture additional writings (in Sanskrit, Chinese, Tibetan, and other languages) that are not accepted as canonical by Theravada Buddhists. It is thought to be the oldest complete canon within Buddhism.
The contents of the canon, said to largely represent the words of the Buddha (born c. 6th–4th century bce), were transmitted orally and first written down in Pali within the Theravadan communities of Sri Lanka, probably during the 1st century bce. The canon also appeared in Sanskrit among the Sarvastivada (“Doctrine That All Is Real”), Mahasanghika (“Great Community”), and other schools that did not survive the demise of Buddhism in India. The Pali texts constitute the entire surviving body of literature in that language.
Each school had its own canonical collection that differed somewhat from others in the contents of particular texts, which texts it included, and the ordering of texts within the canon. There was more agreement on the first two sections, the Vinaya Pitaka (“Basket of Discipline”) and the Sutta Pitaka (“Basket of Discourse”; Sutra Pitaka) than on the third, the Abhidhamma Pitaka (“Basket of Special [or Further] Doctrine”; Abhidharma Pitaka).
The first of the three, which is also the earliest and smallest, provides for the regulation of monastic life. The second and largest contains sermons and doctrinal and ethical discourses attributed to the Buddha or, in a few cases, to his disciples. The basic texts produced by Mahayana schools are also called sutras and are often considered to have been revealed by the Buddha after he had passed into nirvana. The Abhidhamma Pitaka, which was apparently accepted only by the Sarvastivadins and the Theravadins—and in two quite different forms—is basically a schematization of doctrinal material from the sutras. All three sections of the canon contain, as well, an abundance of legends and other narratives.
