Yahwist source, abbreviated as J,  (labeled J after the German transliteration of YHWH), an early source that provides a strand of the Pentateuchal narrative. The basis for identifying a strand of the Pentateuch as the writing of the Yahwist—the Yahwist strand being represented specifically in Genesis 2–16, 18–22, 24–34, 38, and 49; Exodus 1–24, 32, and 34; Numbers 11–12, 14, and 20–25; and Judges 1—is not only the use of the name Yahweh for God but also the use of Yahweh in association with other indications. For example, in the Yahwist source, the name given to Moses’ father-in-law is Reuel, the mountain is always named as Sinai, and the Palestinians are referred to as Canaanites. In the source known as E in which God is called Elohim, Moses’ father-in-law is Jethro, the mountain is called Horeb, and the Palestinians are called Amorites.
One can see examples of these different sources when comparing similar biblical stories. For example, the Creation myth of Genesis 1:1 has God/Elohim create the world, then Genesis 2:5–25 has God/Yahweh make the world; these two Creation myths differ from each other on both substantive and stylistic issues. There are other places in which the biblical narrative covers the same ground two or more times. For example, in Genesis there are three stories in which a patriarch fools a foreign king about the status of the patriarch’s wife, claiming her instead to be his sister. This event is reported between Abraham and Pharaoh over Sarah (12:10–20), with Abraham and Abimelekh over Sarah (20:2–18), and with Isaac and Abimelekh over Rebekah (26:1–11). Moreover, there are two Flood stories in Genesis 7: in the first only certain animals (e.g., seven pairs of clean animals and seven pairs of birds) are brought onto the Ark (Genesis 7:2–3), while in the second all living animals are brought in pairs to the Ark (Genesis 7:8–9 and 7:14–16).
These and other indications have persuaded biblical scholars that there are four strands interwoven in the Pentateuch: the Yahwist, Elohist, Deuteronomist, and Priestly—hence J, E, D, and P. The Yahwist’s account, written in the time of David and Solomon around 950 bce, asks these questions about the Jewish empire: For what purpose was this empire created? For how long will it exist? Why was the gift of the empire granted to the Jews? J is a firm and final statement. At this point in history, the Jews looked backward in time to account for the period of greatness at hand. The Yahwist’s account, produced at the height of the glory of the Davidic monarchy, told the story of the federation of the tribes of Israel, now a single kingdom under Solomon—with a focus on Zion and Jerusalem, the metropolis of the federation.
