Zarathustra, also spelled Zarathushtra, Greek Zoroaster,  (born traditionally c. 628 bce, possibly Rhages, Iran—died c. 551 bce), Iranian religious reformer and prophet, traditionally regarded as the founder of Zoroastrianism.
A major figure in the history of world religions, Zarathustra has been the object of much scholarly attention, in large part because of his apparent monotheism (his concept of one god, whom he referred to as Ahura Mazdā, or the “Wise Lord”), his purported dualism (evident in the stark distinction he drew between the forces of good and the forces of evil), and the possible influence of his teachings on subsequently emerging Middle Eastern religions (e.g., Judaism).
The student of religion is confronted by several problems concerning Zarathustra. The first concerns the dates of his birth and death, which cannot be ascertained with any degree of certainty. According to Zoroastrian tradition, he flourished “258 years before Alexander” (the Great) conquered Persepolis—the capital of the Persian Achaemenian dynasty—in 330 bce. Tradition also records that he was 40 years old when he converted Vishtāspa, most likely a king of Chorasmia (an area south of the Aral Sea in Central Asia), in 588 bce, thus indicating that his birth date was 628 bce. Some modern scholars, however, have suggested that he may have flourished around 1200 bce, while others have argued that he lived more than a millennium earlier than the traditional dates.
Other problems concern the content and influence of Zarathustra’s teachings. It is not clear, for example, what part of Zoroastrianism derives from Zarathustra’s tribal religion and what part was new as a result of his visions and creative religious genius; the extent to which the later Zoroastrian religion of the Sāsānian period (224–651 ce) genuinely reflected the teachings of Zarathustra; and the extent to which the sources—the Avesta (the Zoroastrian scriptures) with the Gāthās (older hymns), the Middle Persian Pahlavi books, and reports of various Greek authors—offer an authentic guide to Zarathustra’s ideas.
According to the sources, Zarathustra probably was a priest. Having received a vision from Ahura Mazdā, who appointed him to preach the truth, Zarathustra apparently was opposed in his teachings by the civil and religious authorities in the area in which he preached. Confident in the truth revealed to him by Ahura Mazdā, Zarathustra apparently did not try to overthrow belief in the older Iranian religion, which was polytheistic. He did, however, place Ahura Mazdā at the centre of a kingdom of justice that promised immortality and bliss. Though he attempted to reform ancient Iranian religion on the basis of existing social and economic values, his teachings at first aroused opposition from those whom he called the followers of the Lie (dregvant).
Zarathustra’s teachings, as noted above, centred on Ahura Mazdā, who is the highest god and alone is worthy of worship. According to the Gāthās, Ahura Mazdā is the creator of heaven and earth—i.e., of the material and the spiritual world. He is the source of the alternation of light and darkness, the sovereign lawgiver, and the very centre of nature. He is surrounded by six or seven beings, or entities, which the later Avesta calls amesha spentas, or “beneficent immortals.” The names of the amesha spentas frequently recur throughout the Gāthās and may be said to characterize Zarathustra’s thought and his concept of god. In the words of the Gāthās, Ahura Mazdā is the father of Spenta Mainyu (the Good Spirit), of Asha Vahishta (Justice, or Truth), of Vohu Manah (Righteous Thinking), and of Armaiti (Devotion). The other three beings (entities) of this group are said to personify qualities attributed to Ahura Mazdā: Khshathra Vairya (Desirable Dominion), Haurvatāt (Wholeness), and Ameretāt (Immortality). This does not exclude the possibility that they, too, are creatures of Ahura Mazdā. The good qualities represented by these beings are also to be earned and possessed by Ahura Mazdā’s followers. This means that the gods and humankind are both bound to observe the same ethical principles. If the amesha spentas show the working of the deity while at the same time constituting the order binding the adherents of the Wise Lord, then the world of Ahura Mazdā and the world of his followers (the ashavan) come close to each other.
Zarathustra’s teaching about Ahura Mazdā is apparently disturbed by a pronounced dualism: the Wise Lord has an opponent, Angra Mainyu, or Ahriman (the Destructive Spirit), who embodies the principle of evil; his followers, having freely chosen him, also are evil. This ethical dualism is rooted in the Zoroastrian cosmology. He taught that in the beginning there was a meeting between Spenta Mainyu and Ahriman, who were free to choose—in the words of the Gāthās—“life or not life.” This original choice gave birth to a good and an evil principle. Corresponding to the former is a kingdom of justice and truth and to the latter the kingdom of the Lie (Druj), populated by the daevas, the evil spirits (originally prominent old Indo-Iranian gods). However, the cosmogonic and ethical dualism is not a strict one, because Ahura Mazdā is the father of both spirits, who were divided into the two opposed principles only through their choice and decision.
The Wise Lord, together with the amesha spentas, will at last vanquish the spirit of evil. This message, implying the end of the cosmic and ethical dualism, seems to constitute Zarathustra’s main religious reform. His faith in Ahura Mazdā resolves the old strict dualism. The dualist principle, however, reappears in an acute form in a later period, after Zarathustra. It is achieved only at the expense of Ahura Mazdā (by then called Ormazd), who is conflated by later Zoroastrian theologians with Spenta Mainyu and brought down to the level of his opponent, Ahriman. At the beginning of time, the world was divided into the dominions of the good and of the evil. Between these, each individual is bound to decide. The same is true of the spiritual beings, who are good or bad according to their choices. From their freedom of decision it follows that human beings are finally responsible for their fates. Through their good deeds, righteous persons (ashavan) earn an everlasting reward, namely integrity and immortality. Those who opt for the Lie  (Druj) are condemned by their own conscience as well as by the judgment of the Wise Lord and must expect to continue in the most miserable form of existence, one more or less corresponding to the Christian concept of hell. According to Avestan belief, there is no reversal and no deviation possible once a person’s decision has been made. Thus, the world is divided into two hostile blocks, whose members represent two warring dominions. On the side of the Wise Lord are the settled herdsmen or farmers, caring for their cattle and living in a definite social order. The follower of the Lie is a thieving nomad, an enemy of orderly agriculture and animal husbandry.
The Gāthās, the early hymns, many of which may have been written by Zarathustra, are eschatological (concerned with last things). Almost every passage contains some reference to the fate awaiting individuals in the afterlife. Each act, speech, and thought is viewed as being related to an existence after death. The earthly state is connected with a state beyond, in which the Wise Lord will reward the good act, speech, and thought and punish the bad. This motive for doing good seems to be the strongest available to Zarathustra in his message. After death an individual’s soul must pass over the Bridge of the Requiter (Činvat), which everyone looks upon with fear and anxiety. After judgment is passed by Ahura Mazdā, the good enter the kingdom of everlasting joy and light, and the bad are consigned to the regions of horror and darkness. Zarathustra, however, goes beyond this, announcing an end phase for the visible world, “the last turn of creation.” In this last phase, Ahriman will be destroyed, and the world will be wonderfully renewed and be inhabited by the good, who will live in paradisiacal joy. Later forms of Zoroastrianism teach a resurrection of the dead, a teaching for which some basis may be found in the Gāthās. Through the resurrection, the renewal of the world bestows a last fulfillment on the followers of the Wise Lord.
