New Acropolis Museum,  museum in Athens, Greece, built to house the archaeological remains of the ancient Acropolis site that were formerly housed in the original Acropolis Museum (first opened in 1876). The New Acropolis Museum opened in June 2009.
The simple exterior of the 226,000-square-foot (21,000-square-metre) building, designed by Swiss American architect Bernard Tschumi, was intended to resemble the nearby Parthenon. In addition to adjusting the dimensions and modeling the columns to mirror those of the Parthenon exactly, Tschumi’s design also incorporated seismic technology in anticipation of the region’s frequent earthquakes. Among the museum’s many treasures are artifacts from the Archaic, Classical, and Roman periods. All were found in the Parthenon, on the slopes of the Acropolis, or in other extant structures on the site. Notable works from the collection include the original Caryatids, the relief of Nike Adjusting Her Sandal, and portions of the Parthenon frieze. The museum also has hundreds of marble sculptures.
Although the New Acropolis Museum was scheduled to be completed in time for the Athens Olympic Games in 2004, a series of archaeological discoveries on the site—including those of private homes from the early Christian period that contained artifacts such as marble busts, mosaic flooring, and amphorae—delayed its construction. The design plan was changed so that visitors would be able to peer through transparent floor panels to view the artifacts beneath their feet. In addition, an excavation site featuring the remains of an ancient village can be seen near the museum’s entrance.
Controversy continued over possession of the Elgin Marbles, a collection of ancient Greek sculptures that were removed from the Parthenon by British ambassador Thomas Bruce, 7th Lord Elgin, at the beginning of the 19th century. The Elgin Marbles are currently housed in the British Museum in London, but the Greek government has frequently demanded their return. The New Acropolis Museum was built in large part to house these treasures, and in anticipation of their return a top floor gallery of the museum, named Parthenon Hall, has been set aside for their display.
