Nizār Qabbānī,  (born March 21, 1923, Damascus, Syria—died April 30, 1998, London, Eng.), Syrian diplomat and poet whose subject matter, at first strictly erotic and romantic, grew to embrace political issues as well. Written in simple but eloquent language, his verses, some of which were set to music, won the hearts of countless Arabic speakers throughout the Middle East and Africa.
Qabbānī, who was born into a middle-class merchant family, was also the grandnephew of the pioneering Arab playwright Abū Khalīl Qabbānī. He studied law at the University of Damascus (LL.B., 1945), then began his varied career as a diplomat. He served in the Syrian embassies in Egypt, Turkey, Lebanon, Britain, China, and Spain before retiring in 1966 and moving to Beirut, Lebanon, where he founded the Manshurāt Nizār Qabbānī, a publishing company. Meanwhile, he also wrote much poetry, at first in classic forms, then in free verse, which he helped establish in modern Arabic poetry. His poetic language is noted for capturing the rhythms of everyday Syrian speech.
The suicide of his sister, who was unwilling to marry a man she did not love, had a profound effect on Qabbānī, and much of his poetry concerns the experiences of women in traditional Muslim society. Verses on the beauty and desirability of women filled Qabbānī’s first four collections. Qasāʾid min Nizār Qabbānī (1956; “Poems by Nizār Qabbānī”) was a turning point in his art; in it he expressed resentment of male chauvinism. It also included his famed “Bread, Hashish and Moon,” a harsh attack on weak, impoverished Arab societies that live in a haze of drug-induced fantasies. Thereafter, he often wrote from a woman’s viewpoint and advocated social freedoms for women. His ʿAlā hāmish daftar al-naksa (1967; “Marginal Notes on the Book of Defeat”) was a stinging critique of unrealistic Arab leadership during the Six-Day War with Israel. Among his more than 20 poetry collections, the most noted volumes are Ḥabībatī (1961; “My Beloved”) and Al-rasm bi-al-kalimāt (1966; “Drawing with Words”). Qaṣāʾid ḥubb ʿArabīyah (“Arabian Love Poems”) was published in 1993.
