Brian K. Kobilka, in full Brian Kent Kobilka,  (born May 30, 1955, Little Falls, Minnesota, U.S.), American physician and molecular biologist whose research on the structure and function of cell-surface molecules known as G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs)—the largest family of signal-receiving molecules found in organisms—contributed to profound advances in cell biology and medicine. For his discoveries, Kobilka shared the 2012 Nobel Prize for Chemistry with American physician and molecular biologist Robert J. Lefkowitz.
Kobilka graduated with B.S. degrees in biology and chemistry in 1977 from the University of Minnesota Duluth and then enrolled at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut, to study medicine. He received an M.D. from Yale in 1981. Three years later, after completing a residency in internal medicine at Barnes Hospital (later Barnes-Jewish Hospital) at Washington University Medical Center in St. Louis, Missouri, Kobilka joined Lefkowitz’s laboratory at Duke University Medical Center in Durham, North Carolina. There, working as a postdoctoral fellow, he successfully pieced together the full DNA sequence for the mammalian beta2-adrenergic receptor from fragments of genomic DNA that had been amplified in genetically engineered bacteria. (Lefkowitz’s team previously had struggled to sequence the receptor because of its limited natural production in cells.) Kobilka’s feat demonstrated his talent for technological innovation and made possible the team’s groundbreaking realization that all GPCRs possess seven domains that cross the cell membrane, each of which served a fundamental role in receptor activity.
In 1989–90 Kobilka established a laboratory at Stanford University, where he had received a professorship in medicine and molecular and cellular physiology. He continued to investigate the relationship between GPCR structure and function, using adrenergic receptors as model systems. He became known for his application of innovative biophysical techniques, most notably his use of X-ray crystallography, in which an X-ray beam is projected onto a protein crystal to create a diffraction pattern that can then be used to deduce the protein’s atomic structure in three dimensions. Kobilka spent two decades working out a process to generate protein crystals of the beta2-adrenergic receptor that were sufficiently large for synchrotron analysis. The receptor’s shifting conformation further complicated the crystallization process. In 2011, however, having enlisted the help of colleagues in the United States and Europe, Kobilka finally published the first high-resolution view of transmembrane signaling by the beta2 receptor. The development was considered a milestone in biology and made possible the production of crystals of other GPCRs. Of particular significance was the opportunity to investigate the structures of GPCRs of pharmacological relevance, which could facilitate the development of drugs that targeted specific receptors, thereby enhancing therapeutic benefits while minimizing side effects.
Kobilka was a founder of the biotech company ConfometRx, which focused on the development of GPCR-based drug discovery technologies. He was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 2011.
