Joachim Frank,  (born September 12, 1940, Siegen, Germany), German-born American biochemist who won the 2017 Nobel Prize for Chemistry for his work on image-processing techniques that proved essential to the development of cryo-electron microscopy. He shared the prize with Swiss biophysicist Jacques Dubochet and British molecular biologist Richard Henderson.
Frank received a bachelor’s degree in physics from the University of Freiburg in 1963. He then received a master’s from the University of Munich in 1967 and a doctorate from the Technical University of Munich in 1970. From 1970 to 1972, he had a postdoctoral fellowship that allowed him to travel to the United States, where he worked at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California; the University of California, Berkeley; and Cornell University, in Ithaca, New York. He was a visiting scientist at the Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry in Munich from 1972 to 1973 and a senior research assistant at the Cavendish Laboratory from 1973 to 1975. He then joined the Wadsworth Center of the New York State Department of Health at Albany as a senior research scientist in 1975. Beginning in 1977, he also held appointments at the State University of New York at Albany.
Frank devised a way to observe individual molecules that were only faintly visible with electron microscopy. The problem with observing a group of individual molecules with electron microscopy is that the intense electron beam destroys the specimen. Frank and his colleagues devised a method of using the poor-quality images that resulted from employing a less intense electron beam by averaging them. In 1978 Frank and his colleagues successfully used this approach to image the enzyme glutamine synthetase.
In the early 1980s, Frank and Dutch biophysicist Marin van Heel devised statistical methods to determine a particle’s three-dimensional structure from two-dimensional images. The image of a particle is represented as a vector. Similar vectors are assumed to be from particles with similar orientations, and the images of such similar particles are then averaged together. Frank and his colleagues also devised a software system, SPIDER, that was able to perform this image analysis.
In 1981 Frank, Adriana Verschoor, and Miloslav Boublik used the averaging technique to obtain high-quality electron-microscope images of ribosomes. Throughout the ’80s, Frank and his collaborators concentrated their work on ribosomes. They switched to cryo-electron microscopy, which uses frozen specimens and thus allows the ribosomes to maintain their shape.
In 2003 Frank joined Columbia University in New York as a senior lecturer. He became a professor in the department of biological sciences and of biochemistry and molecular biophysics in 2008.
