Advertisement, also called ad,  a public announcement—generally print, audio, or video—made to promote a commodity, service, or idea through various media, including billboards, direct mail, print magazines and newspapers, radio, television, and the World Wide Web. While advertising is used to a limited extent in every modern society, often by some agency or service of government, it is in countries with economies based on competition that advertising is ubiquitous.
The first ads were generally circulated by public criers, who in ancient times announced the sale of various products to passersby. An advertisement offering a reward for a runaway slave, discovered in the ruins of Thebes and estimated to be 3,000 years old, demonstrated that printed advertisements also existed during this period. The oral advertisement, however, remained the most popular form of advertising until the invention of the printing press about 1450, after which advertisements became more plentiful and sophisticated, the advertiser using persuasion and suggestion to increase patronage. During the 18th and 19th centuries, advertisements were still carried on handbills, posters, and leaflets; however, such media lacked the tremendous circulation of newspapers and magazines, which carried the majority of advertisements during that period.
Newspaper and magazine advertisements popularized jingles and slogans, offered the latest fashions, and guaranteed cures with patent medicines. Advertising media expanded with the development of radio in the 1920s and television in the 1940s, and advertisements became more influential and complex, often based on the results of motivational research. In the second half of the 20th century, television was rivaled only by periodicals as the most popular medium for advertisements, which had so pervaded modern society that there was hardly a public or private area in which they were not seen—from billboards, shop signs, and clothing labels to mail-order catalogs and brochures.
In the early 21st century, with an intensely competitive consumer market, advertisers increasingly used digital technology to call greater attention to products. In 2009, for example, the world’s first video advertisements to be embedded in a print publication appeared in Entertainment Weekly magazine. A thin battery-powered screen implanted in a page could store up to 40 minutes of video via chip technology and would automatically begin to play when the reader opened the page. See also history of publishing; marketing.
