Agency shop,  place of employment where union members pay union dues and other workers pay service fees to the union to cover the cost of collective bargaining. An agency shop agreement allows the employer to hire both union and nonunion workers without harming the trade union; the practice is considered to be a form of union security. The legality of agency shops varies widely from country to country, and such agreements are generally highly regulated in developed countries.
Agency shops are common in the school environment in many places. A union and a school board may enter into agency shop agreements when employees decline union membership but are still part of collective bargaining units. Such employees are often required to pay service fees, though the legal issues associated with such fees have generated significant litigation in the area of collective bargaining. Under such arrangements, employees are given the choice of joining the union and paying full dues or, as an alternative, paying only a service fee to cover the direct costs associated with collective bargaining.
In the United States, the Supreme Court upheld the legal permissibility of agency shop service fees for nonunion employees in the 1977 case of Abood v. Detroit Board of Education. The Court ruled that a government employer and the union may reach an agreement requiring employees to pay an agency service fee encompassing the costs of collective bargaining, contract administration, and grievance adjustment. However, Abood clarified that objecting nonunion employees had a constitutional right to withhold payment of any agency service fees that supported political and ideological causes. In other words, objecting nonunion employees could be compelled to pay only those expenses directly related to collective bargaining, and mandatory agency service fees could not be used by unions to subsidize ideological or political causes or perspectives. On the basis of Abood, all public employees had a constitutional right to prevent a union from spending part or all of their required agency service fees on political contributions or costs associated with the advancement of political views that were unrelated to the union’s duties as an exclusive bargaining representative.
In Janus v. American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees (2018), the Supreme Court overturned Abood and invalidated the agency shop for all public-sector employees, holding that mandatory service fees effectively compel nonunion employees to subsidize union speech on matters of “great public importance” (because the unions’ collective bargaining concerns and affects public policies regarding government budgets, taxes, and related issues).
