Andean Community, Spanish Comunidad Andina (CAN), formerly (1969–97) Andean Group,  South American organization founded to encourage industrial, agricultural, social, and trade cooperation. Formed in 1969 by the Cartagena Agreement, the group originally consisted of Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Chile; Venezuela joined in 1973 but withdrew in 2006, and Chile withdrew in 1977. Peru suspended its membership in 1992 but resumed it in 1997. CAN’s headquarters are in Lima, Peru.
CAN’s Andean Integration System consists of several institutions, all of which seek to facilitate integration. They include the Andean Presidential Council, an organization of the presidents of member countries that coordinates integration efforts; the Commission of the Andean Community, which is CAN’s primary policy-making institution; the Andean Parliament, comprising members of national legislatures, though it was scheduled to become a directly elected parliament early in the 21st century; the five-member Court of Justice of the Andean Community, which interprets CAN laws to ensure that they are uniformly applied in each country; the Latin American Reserve Fund, which seeks to harmonize monetary and fiscal policies; the Andean Development Corporation, which encourages trade and investment; and various business and labour advisory councils. Many of CAN’s goals, such as the establishment of a customs union and the development of ambitious industrial programs, had not been realized when the organization ratified the Quito Protocol in 1987, which aimed to strengthen the organization’s institutions and reaffirmed its members’ commitment to closer economic relations. In the 1990s CAN attempted, with mixed success, to achieve a level of economic integration among its members similar to that of the European Union.
In 1993 a free-trade zone was created for Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, and Venezuela. That year the Andean Group also began negotiations to harmonize its customs policy and reached an agreement in 1994 on a common external tariff that covered 90 percent of imports. CAN later endorsed an accord between Colombia, Venezuela, and Mexico to phase out tariffs and began developing a framework to define a joint foreign policy in 1998. In the same year, negotiations with Mercosur (the Southern Common Market)—a South American regional economic organization composed of Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay—resulted in an agreement to establish a free-trade zone from Mexico to Argentina. Following extensive negotiations, the free-trade zone went into effect on July 1, 2004.
