BHP Billiton,  international natural resources company, formed in 2001 by the merger of BHP Ltd. and Billiton PLC. One of the world’s largest mining companies, it is involved in the production of iron, steel, copper, silver, aluminum, oil, and gas. The company also has interests in engineering and transportation. BHP Billiton’s headquarters are in Melbourne, Australia.
BHP Ltd. was registered in Victoria on Aug. 13, 1885, as Broken Hill Proprietary Company Limited (BHP). The company took its name from Broken Hill, a city along a range in New South Wales where a rich silver, lead, and zinc lode was discovered in 1883. In the late 1880s and ’90s, Broken Hill had the richest silver mine in the world, and, though the returns on various minerals gradually decreased, BHP’s mines there did not close until 1939. In 1900 BHP began its transition to steel, opening iron mines near Spencer Gulf in that year, later experimenting with smelting, and finally in 1915 opening the giant Newcastle Iron and Steel Works in New South Wales. Other collieries and steelworks (such as at Port Kembla, Whyalla, and Kwinana) were developed or purchased over the years so that BHP became the enterprise responsible for virtually all the iron and steel production in Australia. To transport the coal, limestone, iron, dolomite, manganese, and other elements of steelmaking, as well as the finished products, BHP operated a huge private fleet, one of the world’s largest.
BHP’s search for petroleum and gas began in 1954, but active drilling and production began only after 1964, the year that BHP entered into formal collaboration with Esso Exploration Australia, Inc., a subsidiary of Exxon (then called Standard Oil of New Jersey). BHP also had subsidiaries engaged in various other activities, such as wire production, shipbuilding, equipment manufacture, and the production of cement, bricks, and related materials. In 1983 the company acquired a controlling interest in Utah International Inc., a major producer of metallurgical coal in Australia, with holdings in copper, iron ore, and steam coal in various countries. In 2000 BHP officially changed its name to BHP Limited.
In 2001 BHP announced plans to merge with Billiton PLC, a British company that was established in 1860 to mine tin on Billiton (Belitung) island in Indonesia and later opened mines in South America, Canada, South Africa, and Australia; its interests also included aluminum smelters and steel and nickel operations. At the time of its merger, BHP Billiton was the largest diversified resources company in the world, with operations in some 20 countries.
