Bimetallism,   monetary standard or system based upon the use of two metals, traditionally gold and silver, rather than one (monometallism). The typical 19th-century bimetallic system defined a nation’s monetary unit by law in terms of fixed quantities of gold and silver (thus automatically establishing a rate of exchange between the two metals). The system also provided a free and unlimited market for the two metals, imposed no restrictions on the use and coinage of either metal, and made all other money in circulation redeemable in either gold or silver. A major problem in the international use of bimetallism was that, with each nation independently setting its own rate of exchange between the two metals, the resulting rates often differed widely from country to country.
In an attempt to establish the bimetallic system on an international scale, France, Belgium, Italy, and Switzerland formed the Latin Monetary Union in 1865. The union established a mint ratio between the two metals and provided for use of the same standard units and issuance of coins. The system was undermined by the monetary manipulations of Italy and Greece (which had been admitted later) and came to a speedy end with the Franco-German War (1870–71). The future of the bimetallic standard apparently had been sealed at an international monetary conference held in Paris in 1867, when most of the delegates voted for the gold standard.
Supporters of bimetallism offer three arguments for it: (1) the combination of two metals can provide greater monetary reserves; (2) greater price stability will result from the larger monetary base; and (3) greater ease in the determination and stabilization of exchange rates among countries using gold, silver, or bimetallic standards will result.
Arguments advanced against bimetallism are: (1) it is practically impossible for a single nation to use such a standard without having international cooperation; (2) such a system is wasteful in that the mining, handling, and coinage of two metals is more costly; (3) because price stability is dependent on more than the type of monetary base, bimetallism does not provide greater stability of prices; and (4) most importantly, bimetallism in effect freezes the ratio of the prices of the two metals without regard to changes in their demand and supply conditions. Such changes can disrupt attempts to maintain the double standard. See also Gresham’s law. 
