British Airways PLC,  British air transport company formed in April 1974 in the fusion of British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC, formed in 1939), British European Airways (BEA, formed in 1946), and their associated companies. The company, state-owned from its inception, was privatized in 1987. Its major subsidiaries include BA CityFlyer, which serves destinations in the United Kingdom and continental Europe, and OpenSkies, which flies between Paris and New York City. Headquarters are at Harmondsworth in the London borough of Hillingdon, near Heathrow Airport.
The airline’s history began on March 31, 1924, when, with the award of government subsidies, four small postwar companies (Handley Page Transport Ltd., Instone Air Line Ltd., Daimler Airway, and British Marine Air Navigation Co.) merged to form Imperial Airways Ltd., one of the pioneers of intercontinental air routes. Inheriting 1,760 miles (2,830 km) of British and cross-Channel routes, Imperial Airways spanned Europe and Asia as far as India, Malaya, Hong Kong, and Australia and linked imperial territories in Africa as far as South Africa.
Meanwhile, three other airlines (Hillman’s Airways Ltd., Spartan Air Lines Ltd., and United Airways Ltd.) had merged in 1936 to form British Airways, to handle domestic and northern European flights. In November 1938, following parliamentary investigations of alleged inefficiencies, the government decided to merge and nationalize Imperial Airways and British Airways. The result was the British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC), formally established in 1939. In 1946 British European Airways (BEA), formerly a division of BOAC, was split off to become a government corporation in its own right, responsible primarily for British air services in the British Isles and continental Europe.
On May 2, 1952, BOAC introduced the world’s first jet passenger service (from London to Johannesburg) with the de Havilland Comet 1. On October 4, 1958, it began operating the world’s first transatlantic jet service (between London and New York City).
Following recommendations of a special committee, Parliament enacted the Civil Aviation Act of 1971, which led in 1974 to the formal dissolution of BOAC and BEA and the vesting of their assets and liabilities in the new British Airways. One of its first achievements was the inauguration, jointly with Air France, of the world’s first scheduled supersonic passenger service on January 21, 1976, using the Concorde; the British flew initially from London to Bahrain and in 1977 to New York City, the French from Paris to Rio de Janeiro. Financial losses, however, led British Airways to cease its Concorde operations in October 2003, several months after Air France had ended its supersonic service.
In early 1987 the British government sold off British Airways to the public by means of a huge stock offering. Later that year the newly privatized company acquired its smaller British rival, British Caledonian Airways, which had routes between Britain and the United States. At the start of the 21st century, British Airways remained one of the largest air carriers in the world.
In 2007 British Airways was fined $300 million by the U.S. Department of Justice for price-fixing. In the same year, British Airways launched BA CityFlyer and purchased the French airline L’Avion, which was renamed OpenSkies. In subsequent years the company continued to pursue mergers with other airlines, most notably Iberia. In 2011 it officially merged with the Spanish airline to form the holding company International Airlines Group. Each airline, however, continued to operate under its own name.
