Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC),  public broadcasting service over AM and FM radio networks and television networks in English and French, two national cable television channels, and shortwave radio, among other media in Canada. Advertising sales and, primarily, annual appropriations from Parliament finance the CBC’s operations. It is especially noted for the high quality of its news and public affairs programs. Headquarters are in Ottawa, Ont.
The CBC was created as a radio service by the Canadian Parliament in the Broadcasting Act, in 1936. On English and French networks it presented a mixture of news, documentaries, dramas, classical music, entertainment, and educational programs. The CBC began offering television programs in French and English in Montreal, Que., and Toronto, Ont., in 1952. Among its most popular programs was Hockey Night in Canada, weekly broadcasts of National Hockey League games. Montreal is the network’s principal source for programming in French, and Toronto is its main source for programming in English; Vancouver, B.C., and Winnipeg, Man., are other important sources of English-language programming. Programs in both languages originate in Ottawa. Apart from its networks, the CBC has, on national cable television, a full-time news channel. With the Canadian ministry of defense, the CBC operates an armed forces broadcasting service; the CBC also operates an international shortwave radio service.
The CBC’s microwave network, stretching from British Columbia to Nova Scotia, is about 4,000 miles (6,400 km) long, one of the world’s longest. The CBC’s Northern Service broadcasts to remote frontier and far northern regions. Local CBC radio stations provide news and public affairs programs, and provincial stations are the sources of educational programs.
From its inception the CBC was intended to convey Canadian culture and to be an instrument of national unity. These objectives have been difficult to achieve given the popularity and proliferation of competing programs from the United States. Therefore, quotas mandate the percentages of CBC programming that must be of Canadian origin.
