Chain store,  any of two or more retail stores having the same ownership and selling the same lines of goods. Chain stores account for an important segment of retailing operations in the Americas, western Europe, and Japan. Together with the department store and the mail-order company, chain stores represent the first successful application of large-scale integrated methods to a form of retailing.
Regular chain stores must be distinguished from franchises and from voluntary or cooperative chains, in which the retail units preserve their individual ownership. The latter get to keep their own profits and bear their own financial losses, while in regular chains the central organization assumes full responsibility for the financial condition of its selling units.
Chain distribution methods existed in China as early as 200 bc and in 17th-century Japan. An early American chain of trading posts was operated by the Hudson’s Bay Company before 1750. For the most part, however, retail chain stores were not significant until the end of the 19th century. Their most substantial growth, both in Europe and in the United States, occurred between 1890 and the 1920s. The pressure of small retailers during the 1930s resulted in legislation that restricted chains in a number of European countries, but the majority of the laws were repealed after World War II.
The strongest chains have been those of department stores, grocery stores, limited-price variety stores, ready-to-wear apparel stores such as the Gap, and drugstores. Many banks, hotels, and motion-picture theatres also belong to chains. Chains vary in size from local ones (i.e., serving a single city or metropolitan area) to regional ones (serving a major part of the country) to national or even international ones. They also vary in the class of goods sold, ranging from the inexpensive goods of  Target or Wal-Mart to the elitist jewels of Cartier or Tiffany & Co.
Most large chain store organizations link together a central unit with warehouse units (i.e., wholesale-distribution centres) and selling units (i.e., retail stores). The central unit contains the administrative offices, while the warehouses handle inbound shipments of goods and send outbound shipments to the individual retail stores. Buying may be a function of both the central unit and the warehouses, but selling and related operations are performed only in the separate retail units. Some chain store organizations even have their own manufacturing facilities and thus carry vertical integration a step farther. Tracking of sales and inventory makes the operation even more efficient by providing constant data on popular products, consumer preferences, and product availability.
The principal advantages of chain stores include the ability of the central purchasing unit to buy on favourable terms, lower operating costs, the ability to place advertising for all selling units at one time, and the freedom to experiment in one selling unit without risk to the whole operation. Chains are able to buy on more favourable terms than single-unit stores owing to the volume of the central unit’s purchases and its ability to bring specialized buying skills to bear in those purchases. Chains can also achieve significant economies by combined wholesaling and retailing operations within the same business organization, since this structure improves coordination between the two branches and spares the wholesaler from both credit risks and the need for a sales staff. (See economy of scale.) Many chains achieve further economies by limiting their stock of merchandise to items in widespread demand. The low operating costs achieved by all these factors have enabled chain stores to reduce their selling prices in relation to single-unit stores, as well as to operate on slimmer profit margins. Besides selling in large volume at low prices, the large-scale chains’ most significant innovations have been in the area of improved retailing practices. Chain stores pioneered the clean, modern-appearing, well-planned store that has an efficient layout and modern interior lighting.
The main competitive disadvantage of chain store organizations is their centralized direction and their rigidly standardized operating procedures, which tend to limit individual selling units’ flexibility and hinder useful innovations. Chain stores also tend to offer fewer customer services than individual stores.
