Chevron Corporation, also known as (1906–11) Standard Oil Company (California), (1911–26) Standard Oil Co. (California), (1926–84) Standard Oil Company of California (Socal), and (2001–05) ChevronTexaco Corporation,  U.S. petroleum corporation that was founded through the 1906 merger of Pacific Oil Company and Standard Oil Company of Iowa. One of the largest oil companies in the world, it acquired Gulf Oil Corporation in 1984, Texaco Inc. in 2001, and Unocal Corporation in 2005. Chevron engages in all phases of petroleum operations, from exploration, production, and refining to marketing and research. It also produces a wide range of petrochemicals and polymers, owns interests in coal and mineral mining, and produces geothermal energy. Headquarters are in San Ramon, California.
Chevron’s origins trace back to 1879 with the founding of Pacific Coast Oil Company, which became California’s major oil producer and refiner. In 1900 the Standard Oil Company (see Standard Oil Company and Trust) purchased Pacific Coast Oil and six years later combined it with its own West Coast marketing operations, including Iowa Standard, to form Standard Oil Company (California). In 1911, when the U.S. Supreme Court dissolved the giant New Jersey-based Standard Oil combine, the California-based company became an autonomous entity with its own oil fields, pipelines, tankers, refineries, and markets. In 1926 it acquired the properties of Pacific Oil Company (previously owned by Southern Pacific Railroad) and became the Standard Oil Company of California, or Socal. Soon Socal, with wells and refineries extending from California to Texas, was the dominant oil company in the western United States.
Socal began a new era of expansion overseas after company geologists discovered vast quantities of oil in Bahrain and Saudi Arabia in the early 1930s. In 1933 Socal signed a concession with the Saudi state, forming the California Arabian Standard Oil Company, or Casoc. In 1936 Socal brought the Texas Company (Texaco) into Casoc, and a joint marketing enterprise to sell the Middle Eastern oil was formed—the Caltex group of companies, owned jointly by Socal and Texaco. Casoc was renamed the Arabian American Oil Company (Aramco) in 1944, and in 1948 Socal and Texaco sold shares in Aramco to other U.S. oil companies, most notably Standard Oil of New Jersey (later Exxon Mobil).
In 1939 Socal began operations in Louisiana and later offshore in the Gulf of Mexico. Canadian production began in 1941. Subsidiaries and affiliates later were formed in Libya, Nigeria, Spain, Indonesia, and elsewhere. In 1961 the company purchased Standard Oil Company (Kentucky) in order to extend its U.S. market area into the southeastern states.
Beginning in 1973, Socal’s holdings in the Middle East were steadily diminished as Saudi Arabia assumed ownership of Aramco, finally nationalizing it in 1980. In order to maintain its oil and gas reserves, the renamed Chevron Corporation acquired Gulf Oil in 1984 in one of the largest corporate mergers of its time. Following this merger, Chevron operated in more than 90 countries, either directly or through affiliates. In 2001 Chevron acquired Texaco to create ChevronTexaco Corporation. In 2005 the company resumed the Chevron Corporation name and then purchased Unocal, which had significant oil and gas fields in the Gulf of Mexico and Asia. These mergers made Chevron the second largest oil company in the United States (behind Exxon Mobil), though only about one-quarter of its oil and gas production was located in that country.
