Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), in full Board of Trade of the City of Chicago,  the first grain futures exchange in the United States, organized in Chicago in 1848. The Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) began as a voluntary association of prominent Chicago grain merchants. By 1858 access to the trading floor, known as the “pit,” was limited to members with seats on the exchange, who traded either for their own accounts or for their clients. In 1859 the Board of Trade received a charter from the Illinois legislature and was given power to set quality controls. At first, grain was sold by sample, but soon a system of inspection and grading was introduced to standardize the market and facilitate trading. The Board of Trade was eventually to become one of the largest of the world’s futures markets in terms of volume and value of business.
The Chicago Board of Trade Building is located at 141 West Jackson Boulevard and presides over the city’s financial district. The skyscraper was designed by John A. Holabird and John Wellborn Root, Jr., during the heyday of Art Deco, and they included many of the most-popular characteristics of that decorative style. Construction began in 1929 and was completed the following year.
The plentiful gray Indiana limestone piers, dark windows, and spandrels—so recessed they practically disappear—work together to give the building a striking vertical emphasis. Its streamlined geometric and abstract exterior ornamentation and the building’s throne-shaped massing are also indicative of the period’s Art Deco trend. A faceless aluminum statue of Ceres, the Roman goddess of food plants, by artist John Storrs, stands atop the building’s pyramidal roof. The straight lines on her garment and her machine-made appearance make the statue the quintessential Art Deco ornament for this completely stylized structure.
The building’s ornamentation also communicates the activity inside. Just above the original trading floor on the exterior are eight bovine heads representing the livestock traded. A Mesopotamian farmer holding wheat and a Native American holding corn make several appearances around the building and represent some of the options dealt with on the building’s multiple trading floors.
After more than a century of trading exclusively in agricultural products such as corn and wheat, the CBOT broadened its transactions to include financial contracts (1975), futures contracts (1982), and futures-options contracts (1997). In 1994 the open outcry method of trading (by which traders would literally shout their orders) started to be replaced by electronic trading systems. In 2005 the CBOT became a subsidiary of a new public corporation, CBOT Holdings, and in 2007 the corporation merged with Chicago Mercantile Exchange Holdings Inc., a financial futures exchange specializing in options, foreign currency futures, and interest rates. The new firm—officially known as CME Group Inc., a CME/Chicago Board of Trade Company—handled transactions in financial products, commodities, and alternative futures products such as weather and real estate. In 2015 the CME Group closed most of its trading pits for futures contracts, replacing the era of open outcry trading—which had been the main method of trading futures contracts throughout CBOT’s history—with online trading systems.
