CNN, in full Cable News Network, Inc.,  television’s first 24-hour all-news service, a subsidiary of WarnerMedia. CNN’s headquarters are in Atlanta.
CNN was created by maverick broadcasting executive Ted Turner as part of his Turner Broadcasting System (TBS), allegedly because industry professionals had told him it could not be done. After four years in development, CNN signed on the air June 1, 1980, with a news telecast anchored by the husband-and-wife team of Dave Walker and Lois Hart. Initially derided by its more affluent competitors as “the Chicken Noodle Network” because of its comparatively meagre financial resources, CNN endured an arduous struggle to earn respect in the broadcast world. Maturing and expanding along with the cable industry itself, CNN maintained a loyal following by offering what the major networks did not: full, continuous coverage of all news events, both large and small. Its mantra throughout this period was “Go live, stay with it and make it important.” Endeavouring to accommodate its worldwide audience, CNN adopted a policy of banning such exclusionary words and phrases as “foreign” and “here at home” from its newscasts.
In 1986 the network scooped the competition with its on-the-spot coverage of the Challenger space shuttle disaster. Five years later CNN again trumped the other networks with its live “in-country” telecasts of the Persian Gulf War. Covering the battle from both sides of the conflict, CNN’s team of correspondents—including Bernard Shaw, Peter Arnett, and John Holliman—became familiar faces. Other prominent CNN reporters and commentators have included Daniel Schorr, Wolf Blitzer, Catherine Crier, Mary Alice Williams, Christiane Amanpour, and Paula Zahn. The “voice of CNN” is provided by distinguished actor James Earl Jones, whose recorded voice regularly intones, “This is CNN.”
In addition to its news broadcasts, CNN offered a steady diet of daily and weekly prime-time series, beginning with Moneyline (1980–2001; later called Lou Dobbs Moneyline [2001–03] and Lou Dobbs Tonight [2003–09]) and continuing with such efforts as Crossfire (1982–2005), Evans and Novak (1980–98, cohosted by newspaper columnists Rowland Evans and Robert Novak; renamed Evans, Novak, Hunt & Shields [1988–2002] when Al Hunt and Mark Shields joined the program), and The Capitol Hill Gang (1988–2005). Hosted by Larry King and long one of CNN’s most popular series, the nightly Larry King Live (1985–2010) was also for a number of years cable television’s highest-rated interview program. More-recent staples of CNN programming include Anderson Cooper 360° (2003– ) and The Situation Room (2005– ). In 2013 the channel started adding documentary and reality television programs to its schedule, notably Anthony Bourdain: Parts Unknown (2013–18), an award-winning travel show hosted by former chef Bourdain.
In 1996 CNN, along with the rest of the Turner Broadcasting System, was absorbed by entertainment conglomerate Time Warner Inc. (later called WarnerMedia).
