Comprehensive Thrift and Bank Fraud Prosecution and Taxpayer Recovery Act,  provision of the U.S. Crime Control Act signed into law in 1990 that increased penalties for persons found guilty of bank fraud. The Comprehensive Thrift and Bank Fraud Prosecution and Taxpayer Recovery Act was part of a series of acts designed to help reduce fraud in the United States. It primarily dealt with the prevention of financial misconduct by banking institutions.
Proposed by Sen. Joe Biden and cosponsored by Sen. Strom Thurmond, the act broadened banking law enforcement by expanding the prevention and punishment of financial misconduct through a number of provisions. In particular, the act increased criminal penalties and allowed for imprisonment if a banking official was found to have concealed assets from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), to have obstructed government examination of a financial institution, or to have committed bank fraud. Prison sentences for banking officials guilty of bank fraud or embezzlement were increased to a maximum of 30 years.
In addition, persons previously found guilty of certain crimes, such as perjury or breach of trust, were prohibited from working or participating at a financial institution for at least 10 years. Under the legislation, undercapitalized banks, or those banks whose operations were hampered by a lack of capital, were prohibited from making indemnification payments to parties related to the affected cash-strapped institutions. After penalties for misconduct were assessed, the act directed the U.S. Sentencing Commission to restore properties or money lost through financial violations to related bank crime victims.
The Comprehensive Thrift and Bank Fraud Prosecution and Taxpayer Recovery Act also amended other laws related to financial crimes in order to protect assets from wrongful disposition. The Federal Deposit Insurance Act and the Federal Credit Union Act were amended to provide clearer guidelines for asset attachment procedures. The amendment improved the procedures for dealing with financial misconduct cases and modified the federal response structure for crimes by financial institutions. Reporting requirements for the attorney general were changed to specify that the attorney general must compile reports on major criminal investigations related to finance and present reports that detail the status of each federal juridical district and the actions of the Financial Institutions Unit.
The act further established the National Commission on Financial Institution Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement to research and reach conclusions concerning the causes of problems associated with the savings and loan scandals of the 1980s in the United States, which led to the enactment of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA). FIRREA was amended to increase appropriations over the next two financial years (1991–93) to the attorney general, Internal Revenue Service, and the federal court system in order to better prosecute and ameliorate bank crimes.
U.S. banking officials initially were unsure of the eventual implications of the sweeping provisions of the Comprehensive Thrift Act and Bank Fraud Prosecution and Taxpayer Recovery Act of 1990. However, they were able to circumvent certain new regulations by acting as an individual independent of a financial institution. Still, the act provided the attorney general and the FDIC with more power to take action against banks operating in a fiscally unsound manner and to recover assets that were improperly lost by financial institutions or citizens.
