Corporate finance,   the acquisition and allocation of a corporation’s funds, or resources, with the objective of maximizing shareholder wealth (i.e., stock value). In the financial management of a corporation, funds are generated from various sources (i.e., from equities and liabilities) and are allocated (invested) for desirable assets.
The first function of corporate finance, resource acquisition, refers to the generation of funds from both internal and external sources at the lowest possible cost to the corporation. Two main categories of resources are equity (i.e., owners’ equity) and liability. Examples of equity are proceeds from the sale of stock, returns from investments, and retained earnings. Liabilities include bank loans or other debt, accounts payable, product warranties, and other types of commitments from which an entity derives value. 
Resource allocation, the second function of corporate finance, is the investment of funds with the intent of increasing shareholder wealth over time. Two basic categories of investments are current assets and fixed assets. Current assets include cash, inventory, and accounts receivable. Examples of fixed assets are buildings, real estate, and machinery. In addition, the resource allocation function is concerned with intangible assets such as goodwill, patents, workers, and brand names.
It is the job of a corporation’s financial manager or managers to conduct both of the aforementioned functions in a manner that maximizes shareholder wealth, or stock price. Financial managers must balance the interests of owners, or shareholders; creditors, including banks and bondholders; and other parties, such as employees, suppliers, and customers. For example, a corporation may choose to invest its resources in risky ventures in an effort to offer its shareholders the potential for large profits. However, risky investments may reduce the perceived security of the company’s bonds, thus decreasing their value in the bond market and increasing the rate of interest that the firm must pay to borrow money in the future. Conversely, if the corporation invests too conservatively, it could fail to maximize the value of its equity. If the firm performs better than other companies, its stock price will rise, in theory, enabling it to raise additional funds at a lower cost, among other benefits.
Practical issues and factors influenced by corporate finance include employee salaries, marketing strategies, customer credit, and the purchase of new equipment. See also business finance.
