Craigslist, formerly Craig’s list,  private corporation operating over the Internet to provide classified advertisements, community information services, and community forums. Most of these listings are restricted to specific locations, which include some 500 cities in 50 countries.
Craig’s list was launched in 1995 by Craig Newmark, a software engineer, as a free e-mail service that described upcoming events in the San Francisco Bay area of California. Over time, Newmark set up a Web site with a forum for members to communicate with one another. As an increasing number of users began to interact with the site, its content was adapted to accommodate more community participation. Following incorporation as Craigslist in 1999, the Web site began charging fees for classified job advertisements in major cities, which, along with brokered apartment listings in New York City, are its only source of revenue. Users can post information, join in local discussions, buy and sell goods in the classified section, and find jobs and romance.
In 2000, following the hiring of businessman James Buckmaster as chief executive officer, Craigslist began expanding its services into new markets. Starting with Boston that year, by 2005 there were Craigslist sites for cities in every U.S. state. In 2001 the organization launched its first foreign site, serving Vancouver, B.C., Can. This was soon followed by Craigslist sites for many other cities around the world, including Montreal, London, Seoul, Sydney, and Buenos Aires.
One of the world’s most iconic e-commerce companies, Craigslist posts millions of job advertisements each month. Craigslist has been one-quarter owned by another online firm, eBay, since 2004.
In November 2008 Craigslist reached an agreement with 40 state attorneys general regarding “erotic services” advertisements on its Web sites. In order to curb ads for prostitution and other illegal sex-oriented businesses, Craigslist agreed to set up a more stringent verification program before accepting personal ads. Among the changes, advertisers must provide a telephone number and a credit card number, with the latter being charged a small fee for each personal service ad. It is assumed that having to provide a verifiable phone number and usable credit card will discourage sex operators from posting on Craigslist.
