Currier & Ives,  firm whose lithographs were among the most popular wall hangings in 19th-century America. The prints of Nathaniel Currier (b. March 27, 1813, Roxbury, Massachusetts, U.S.—d. November 20, 1888, New York, New York) and James Merritt Ives (b. March 5, 1824, New York, New York, U.S.—d. January 3, 1895, Rye, New York), which typically depict the history and customs of the American people, also provide a valuable historical record of a time when news photography was still unknown.
After undertaking apprenticeships in Boston and Philadelphia, Currier set up a print publishing company in New York City in 1834. He hired Ives as his bookkeeper in 1852 and made him a partner in 1857, creating the firm of Currier & Ives, which lasted, eventually under the management of their sons, until 1907.
In an era before photojournalism, Currier met the public’s demand for graphic representation of recent events. In 1835 he printed a lithograph, The Ruins of the Merchants’ Exchange, four days after the building burned, and in 1840, three days after the event, he issued a coloured print of a steamship burning on Long Island Sound. In partnership with Ives, who had a flair for gauging popular interests, he expanded his range from depictions of disasters to political satire and other topical subjects, as well as to dramatic or slightly sentimentalized scenes such as steamboat races, boxing matches, sleigh rides in the country, and fashionable soirees. Touting itself as “Publishers of Cheap and Popular Pictures,” the firm sold prints ranging in price from 5 cents to $3, depending on the size. The firm sold retail as well as wholesale, establishing outlets in cities across the country and in London. Between 1840 and 1890 it published more than 7,000 prints.
While never purporting artistic greatness, Currier & Ives insisted on fine craftmanship and the best lithographic materials. Most designs were created by house staff; others were commissioned from young artists such as Louis Maurer, Thomas Worth, and Arthur Fitzwilliam Tait. As the firm was not equipped for chromolithography, prints were hand-coloured by a dozen or more women in assembly-line fashion, one colour to a worker. The colours favoured were clear and simple, and the drawing was bold and direct. Though their methodology was ultimately rendered obsolete by automation and the photograph, Currier & Ives prints became valuable records of the politics, history, and manners of 19th-century America.
