Dazibao, (Chinese: “big character poster”),  in the People’s Republic of China (PRC), prominently displayed handwritten posters containing complaints about government officials or policies. The posters typically constitute a large piece of white paper on which the author has written slogans, poems, or even longer essays in large Chinese characters with ink and brush. The posters are hung on a wall or a post and often serve as a means of protest against governmental incompetence or corruption. Because the posters are typically written anonymously, they are a popular means of expressing dissatisfaction with local officials who might be able to exact revenge if a complaint were made in a more public setting. Moreover, because of the low expense of creating a poster, they effectively provide a mechanism for political communication and, if placed in a prominent place, such as a university bulletin board or a city wall, might be viewed by hundreds of people or even reprinted in an official press venue.
Historically, dazibao have been influential in several important social movements during the communist era, including the anti-rightist campaign (1957), the Cultural Revolution (1966–76), and the Democracy Wall movement (1978–80). During the Cultural Revolution a poster which claimed that Peking University was controlled by antirevolutionaries came to the attention of Mao Zedong, who had its contents republished nationally. The posters soon became common throughout the nation and typically attacked local officials. Officials who find themselves accused in a poster might be suspended from their positions, be placed under arrest, or even become the subjects of physical attack. The right to compose dazibao was guaranteed as one of the “four great rights” in the 1975 state constitution of the People’s Republic of China, but in 1980 the right was removed. During the Tiananmen Square incident (1989), and in spite of their illegality, dazibao again became a symbol of democratic sentiment.
