Electronic product environmental assessment tool (EPEAT),  online evaluation and procurement tool that helps consumers select environmentally friendly electronic products. It sets environmental criteria for examining desktop computers, laptops, computer monitors, printers, workstations, thin clients, televisions, and other electronic devices throughout their life cycles. Only those products whose attributes conform to EPEAT’s 23 required environmental criteria, which are rooted in American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards, can be registered as EPEAT products.
EPEAT was designed under a grant from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in response to purchasers’ demands for a tool that would help them choose environmentally friendly electronics, as well as to manufacturers’ calls for clear procurement standards. EPEAT was created in 2003 and launched in 2006 and is overseen by the Green Electronics Council (GEC). In 2007 all U.S. federal agencies were required by an executive order signed by Pres. George W. Bush to ensure that at least 95 percent of their electronics acquisitions were EPEAT-registered products, unless no EPEAT standard existed for that product.
EPEAT has gained growing recognition in information technology markets and has spread far beyond U.S. borders. This is partly because the EPEAT criteria contain or are consistent with international standards and formal requirements of other countries and jurisdictions, such as the European Union’s directive on Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE). More than 3,600 products were EPEAT-registered by 2011.
The EPEAT process consists of two key elements: registration and verification. To register desktops, laptops, monitors, and other products, the manufacturer declares that the products conform with the 23 required environmental criteria—such as the identification and removal of parts containing hazardous materials and the use of at least 65 percent reusable or recyclable materials. Manufacturers then sign a formal Memorandum of Understanding with EPEAT, which requires them to provide accurate product and company information and to pay annual fees.
EPEAT also contains 28 optional environmental performance criteria. The required and optional criteria are clustered into eight categories:
The EPEAT-registered products are ranked in three tiers, depending on the extent to which they meet the optional environmental performance criteria:
Purchasing EPEAT-registered products results in various quantifiable benefits, such as reduced electricity use, reduced use of toxic materials (which precludes the disposal of toxic wastes), and lowered emissions. The GEC annually estimates the total environmental benefits arising from the acquisition of all EPEAT-registered products.
