Elf Aquitaine, in full Société Nationale Elf Aquitaine (French: “Elf Aquitaine National Society”),  former French petroleum and natural resources group that was acquired by Totalfina in 2000 to create TotalFinaElf, renamed Total SA in 2003.
Elf Aquitaine was descended directly from two agencies established by the French state in the 1930s and ’40s to promote the country’s energy autonomy by producing natural gas and crude oil on home territory. In 1939 the Régie Autonome des Pétroles (RAP; “Autonomous Petroleum Administration”) was set up to exploit a gas deposit found near Saint-Marcet in the foothills of the Pyrenees, and in 1941 the Société Nationale des Pétroles d’Aquitaine (SNPA; “National Society for Petroleum in Aquitaine”) was founded to explore further in the southwest of the country. In 1949 and again in 1951 important deposits were struck by SNPA drills near the mountain village of Lacq. Under the direction of the state-owned Bureau de Recherches de Pétrole (BRP; “Bureau of Petroleum Research”), founded in 1945, the RAP and SNPA also expanded into French dependencies in North and West Africa, particularly Algeria, Congo (Brazzaville), and Gabon. During the 1950s and ’60s the RAP and SNPA, along with other companies fully or partly owned by the state, built or purchased distribution networks, refineries, and retail outlets throughout France. In 1966 the RAP, SNPA, and other companies were gathered into a single holding company, the Entreprise de Recherches et d’Activités Pétrolières (ERAP; “Enterprise for Petroleum Research and Activity”), which in 1967 created the Elf brand name for its service stations.
Beginning the 1960s, the SNPA diversified into chemicals, at first petrochemicals and plastics but later, through its subsidiary Sanofi, into pharmaceuticals as well. The loss of holdings in Algeria after that colony’s independence in 1962, followed by the oil shocks of the 1970s, threatened the security of the French oil industry. In 1976 the SNPA and the ERAP group were formally merged into a single company, the Société Nationale Elf Aquitaine. Elf Aquitaine became France’s second oil company, behind the older Compagnie Française des Pétroles (“French Petroleum Company”), the direct ancestor of Total. The French state held a majority interest in Elf Aquitaine until 1994–96, when it sold off all but a remaining “golden share,” which gave it the right to approve or veto major decisions by the company’s board. The golden share was ruled illegal by the European Court of Justice in 2002 and was sold by the French government.
By the late 1990s Elf Aquitaine was at the centre of a sensational corruption scandal, former officers being accused of having passed billions of taxpayers’ francs to officials in Africa and Europe in exchange for business agreements favourable to the company and French politicians. Legal investigations and prosecutions continued after the purchase of Elf Aquitaine by Totalfina.
