Exxon Corporation, also known as (until 1972) Standard Oil Company (New Jersey),  former oil and natural resources company that merged with Mobil Corporation as Exxon Mobil in 1999.
The former Exxon company was founded in 1882 as part of the Standard Oil trust (see Standard Oil Company and Trust), which in 1899 became the holding company for all companies previously grouped in the trust. In 1911 the U.S. Supreme Court ordered it to divest itself of 33 of its American subsidiaries. Meanwhile, the New Jersey company had become, in essence, a “multinational” corporation. In 1888 it organized Anglo-American Oil Company (predecessor of Esso Petroleum Company) to market oil in the British Isles and, two years later, acquired a major interest in the German firm that would become Esso AG. In 1898 it gained control of Imperial Oil Limited, Canada’s leading oil company. A few of the many later acquisitions (complete or partial) included Humble Oil & Refining Company (1919), Tropical Oil Company of Colombia (1920), Standard Oil Company of Venezuela (1921), Creole Petroleum Company of Venezuela (1928), Turkish Petroleum Company (1928), and Arabian-American Oil Company (later ARAMCO; 1948).
In 1926 the New Jersey company introduced the trade name Esso (representing the abbreviation for Standard Oil, “S.O.”) and applied it to many of its products and companies. Other Standard Oil companies, however, later contested the name in the courts and succeeded in barring its use in several states. Thus, in 1972, Standard Oil Company (New Jersey) became Exxon Corporation, and many subsidiaries and affiliates, such as Humble, also switched to the Exxon name. Many foreign affiliates, however, retained the Esso name.
Prior to its merger with Mobil, Exxon had developed businesses in every phase of the petroleum industry, from oil fields to service stations. It also handled oil transport through pipelines and operated one of the world’s largest fleets of tankers. Exxon’s other interests included natural gas, coal, nuclear fuels, chemicals, and mineral ores such as copper, lead, and zinc.
