Fairchild Semiconductor Corporation,  American electronics company that shares credit with Texas Instruments Incorporated for the invention of the integrated circuit. Founded in 1957 in Santa Clara, California, Fairchild was among the earliest firms to successfully manufacture transistors and integrated circuits. Headquarters now are in South Portland, Maine, while research and production facilities are located across the United States and in Asia.
In 1957 Fairchild Camera and Instrument Corporation was considering entering the semiconductor business when eight engineers from the Shockley Semiconductor Laboratory in Palo Alto, California, resigned en masse because of the management regime of founder William Shockley, coinventor of the transistor. Led by Robert Noyce and Gordon Moore, the group—labeled by Shockley the “traitorous eight”—presented themselves to Fairchild. Each engineer agreed to contribute $500 of his own money as a stake in the venture. (When the eight later sold their stakes back to Fairchild, each received $250,000.)
Fairchild Semiconductor’s first products were silicon-based transistors for military and later industrial applications. Jean Hoerni, one of the founding engineers, realized that depositing a silicon-oxide film on the silicon wafers from which the transistors were cut would reduce the contamination that had plagued production. Noyce took Hoerni’s development one step further. Noyce realized that it was unnecessary to cut the silicon wafer into individual transistors; rather, different components could be created in the same wafer and connected along the surface by the deposition of a line of conductive metal (a “wire”). He thus conceived the method for making an integrated circuit. Although Fairchild filed a patent application in 1959 for this planar process, it soon cross-licensed integrated circuit patents with coinventor Texas Instruments while the companies battled in the courts to a split decision 10 years later. Unlike Texas Instruments, Noyce did not use military funding to develop the company’s initial manufacturing techniques.
In 1961 Fairchild brought the integrated circuit (IC) to market at a price of $120 per chip. At that time, however, any electronics firm could wire together high-end transistors to produce the same circuits for much less. A buyer had to have a serious space constraint to justify purchasing ICs. Fortunately for Fairchild, the U.S. space program had just such a problem, and the IC was the solution. By 1969 the Apollo program alone had purchased one million silicon chips, a significant fraction of them manufactured by Fairchild.
By the time Noyce and Moore left in 1968 to found Intel Corporation, former Fairchild Semiconductor employees had started dozens of new electronics companies, including National Semiconductor Corporation, Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., and LSI Logic Corporation, in the surrounding region—an area now known as Silicon Valley. Companies descended from Fairchild were often referred to as Fairchildren.
By the late 1970s Fairchild proved unable to compete with the Fairchildren. In 1979 Schlumberger Limited, a French company primarily known for supplying oil field services and equipment, acquired the company and its historic name. Less than a decade later Schlumberger attempted to sell the firm to Fujitsu Limited of Japan. After the U.S. government quashed the sale, National Semiconductor purchased Fairchild in 1987 but also was unable to turn it into a profitable business. In 1996 National spun off Fairchild as an independent firm in South Portland, where Fairchild had been operating the world’s longest continuously functioning semiconductor fabrication facility. Fairchild also manufactures integrated circuits for consumer electronics in California, Utah, and South Korea, with assembly and test facilities in the Philippines and Malaysia.
