Fox Broadcasting Company,  American television broadcasting company founded in 1986 by media magnate Rupert Murdoch. It is a subsidiary of the media conglomerate 21st Century Fox. Its headquarters are in Beverly Hills, California.
With the considerable financial backing of Murdoch, the network began with 79 affiliate stations that reached 80 percent of homes in the United States. Its first broadcast, a late-night talk show hosted by comedian Joan Rivers, aired on October 9, 1986. The following March, the network expanded into prime-time programing on Saturday and Sunday nights. Barry Diller, CEO, and Jamie Kellner, president, were responsible for Fox’s programming philosophy, which appealed to the young, affluent audiences advertisers favoured. Over the next seven years, the company increased broadcast hours until the network was on the air seven nights a week and gained more affiliates, making it available across the country.
Early hits for the company in the late 1980s included the comedy Married…with Children, which aired for 11 seasons; The Simpsons, the longest running sitcom and animated series in U.S. history; the police drama 21 Jump Street; and two of prime time’s longest-running shows, the true-crime profile America’s Most Wanted and the reality-based COPS. Fox achieved mainstream success in the 1990s with youth-oriented melodramas, including Beverly Hills, 90210, Melrose Place, and Party of Five; the science-fiction drama The X-Files; the sketch-comedy In Living Color; and the comedy-drama Ally McBeal. It also added programming divisions for children (4Kids TV and Fox Kids) and a division for sports (Fox Sports), putting it on a par with the established broadcasting companies ABC, CBS, and NBC. In 2002 Fox sold its children’s divisions and the Fox Family Channel to the Walt Disney Company.
Fox News Channel, a satellite and cable news network, was launched in 1996 and soon attracted more regular viewers than any other news network. Popular opinion shows included The O’Reilly Factor with host Bill O’Reilly and Hannity & Colmes with hosts Sean Hannity and Alan Colmes. Hannity & Colmes was replaced by Hannity when Colmes left the show in 2009. A radio division, Fox News Radio, was introduced in 2003. Despite its slogan “fair and balanced,” however, the network’s coverage was widely perceived as favouring politically conservative viewpoints.
In 2005 Fox launched Fox Reality Channel, which aired solely reality-based programming. The channel was shuttered in 2010. Later prime-time hits for Fox included the dramas The O.C. and 24, the reality show American Idol, the animated comedy Family Guy, and the musical Glee.
When Murdoch’s conglomerate News Corporation split into separate publishing and television/film entities in 2013, Fox Broadcasting was among the companies transferred to his media holding company 21st Century Fox.
