General strike,  stoppage of work by a substantial proportion of workers in a number of industries in an organized endeavour to achieve economic or political objectives. A strike covering only one industry cannot properly be called a general strike.
The idea of a general strike, as a deliberate part of the tactics of collective bargaining, apparently originated in Great Britain, where the term had entered the language by the 1830s. Later in the century in France, syndicalist thinkers believed that workers could achieve a social revolution by using a general strike to directly overthrow the owners of industry.
General strikes first became possible with the growth of large trade unions late in the 19th century. Two large general strikes occurred in Belgium in 1893 and 1902 in support of universal manhood suffrage. A large-scale strike took place in Sweden in 1902 over similar issues and was followed by one in Italy in 1904 protesting the use of soldiers as strikebreakers. The general strike that gripped Russia during the Revolution of 1905 forced the tsar to issue the October Manifesto, in which he promised to create a constitution and a national legislature. In 1909 another general strike was staged in Sweden, this time in response to the wage-freeze and lockout policies adopted by employers who faced falling profits. Nearly half of the country’s total workforce struck, and the stoppage lasted a month before the strike was settled. The Swedish general strike showed that major economic reforms could be achieved without resorting to violence.
A general strike in Berlin thwarted a right-wing takeover of the German government in 1920. In 1926 Britain faced one of the largest of all general strikes, which was undertaken by the Trades Union Congress (TUC) in support of the nation’s coal miners, who were in a bitter dispute with the mine owners. About three million of Britain’s five million trade union members joined the strike, which was intended to force the government to intervene in the coal dispute. The strike lasted only nine days and ended on May 12, however, after the TUC realized that it was unable to disrupt the government’s essential public services.
General strikes have been infrequent in Europe since World War II. Notable exceptions were the outbreak of a general strike in France (May 1968), touched off by student demands for educational reform, and nationwide strikes for social security and educational reform in Italy (November 1968) involving more than 12 million workers. France was again the scene of a general strike (November 24–December 12, 1995) that shut down public transportation, hospitals, mail delivery, and many other public utilities and services in protest against the French government’s plans to cut welfare and other social benefits.
In the United States, organized labour has generally accepted the inviolability of the collective contract and thus has, in principle, opposed the general strike. In some Asian and African countries, trade unions allied with independence movements often resorted to general strikes as a means of political protest during colonial rule. In contemporary times, the small scope of industry in those countries has tended to limit trade union activity. Wherever organized trade unions exist in those countries, however, they have continued to use the general strike as an instrument for achieving economic as well as political ends.
