Halliburton, in full Halliburton Co., also called (1919–20) New Method Oil Well Cementing Co. or (1920–60) Halliburton Oil Well Cementing Co.,  American oil-field services, engineering, and construction company that operates worldwide. It is a global leader in the so-called “upstream” oil industry (petroleum exploration and production). Company headquarters offices are in Houston, Texas, and Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
Company founder Erle P. Halliburton learned how cement can be used to protect and seal oil-well bores while employed by the Perkins Oil Well Cementing Co. in California in 1916. He was soon dismissed from that company, supposedly for changing procedures without authorization, and eventually found his way to Burkburnett, Texas, where oil was discovered in 1918. The following year he formed the New Method Oil Well Cementing Co. and offered its services to drillers. In 1920 New Method became Halliburton Oil Well Cementing Co. (HOWCO), and it soon established headquarters in Duncan, Oklahoma.
Erle Halliburton was an innovative technician who devised and patented many improvements to the oil-well cementing process. One of his earliest and most important inventions was the jet mixer, a truck-mounted machine for mixing water and lime to make the cement used in the wells. As the American petroleum industry grew, Erle Halliburton’s patents made HOWCO an indispensable part of it. In need of additional capital to finance expansion, Halliburton incorporated his company in 1924 and brought in several large petroleum businesses as joint owners. (HOWCO did not offer its stock to the public until 1948.) The company made its first overseas sales in 1926, when it sold cementing units to an English firm for use in Burma (now Myanmar). In the 1930s HOWCO opened research laboratories and increased the range of services it provided. The company deployed a barge-mounted cementing rig in the Gulf of Mexico in 1938, thus establishing itself in offshore services, which eventually became a major segment of the petroleum industry. It established a presence on the West Coast in 1940 by purchasing Perkins Oil Well Cementing, the company where Erle Halliburton had once worked. HOWCO opened its first South American office, in Venezuela, in the same year and its first European office, in Italy, in 1951.
In 1949 the company acquired an exclusive license to practice hydraulic fracturing, a newly invented technique for releasing hitherto inaccessible oil and gas deposits from underground rock formations. Fracking, as the technique later came to be called, proved to be very profitable for HOWCO. Erle P. Halliburton died in October 1957, by which time his company had 20,000 employees. In 1959 HOWCO acquired Otis Engineering, another company active in oil-field equipment and services. The following year HOWCO shortened its name to Halliburton Co. to reflect the expanded scope of its operations. The company moved its headquarters from Oklahoma to Dallas in 1961. A major expansion and diversification came with acquisition of Brown & Root, Inc., a Texas-based engineering and construction company, in 1962. Engineering and construction came to be a very important part of Halliburton.
Dick Cheney, who served as U.S. secretary of defense in the administration of George H.W. Bush (1989–93), became chairman and chief executive of Halliburton Co. in 1995. He continued the program of expansion by acquisition. His most notable purchase was Dresser Industries, formerly a major competitor, in 1998. In previous decades a Dresser unit had done extensive work with asbestos, leaving Halliburton with heavy liability for asbestos-related health issues. In 2002 the company agreed to pay approximately $5 billion in cash and stock to settle all claims. Dresser’s M.W. Kellogg engineering subsidiary was combined with Brown & Root to form Halliburton’s Kellogg Brown & Root (KBR) division.
Cheney left Halliburton in 2000 to join the George W. Bush presidential campaign, and he later served as vice president in the Bush administration (2001–09). During Bush’s first term, U.S.-led forces embarked on wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. Halliburton, principally through its KBR subsidiary, received bigger U.S. government reconstruction contracts than any other company for work in the two countries. Many of the contracts were awarded without competitive bidding. Critics charged favouritism at the time, and KBR was later accused of mismanagement. In 2006 Halliburton spun off KBR into a separate corporation.
Halliburton relocated its headquarters from Dallas to Houston in 2003. Four years later David J. Lesar, chairman and CEO, moved his office to Dubai, United Arab Emirates. Lesar stated that the Eastern Hemisphere had become the company’s most important market, but some critics called it a tax-avoidance maneuver. The company’s position was that it had one “corporate office” in Dubai and another in Houston.
Halliburton received more unwanted attention in connection with the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. On April 20, 2010, a surge of gas tore through a concrete core Halliburton had recently installed in BP’s Deepwater Horizon oil rig off the coast of Louisiana. The gas ignited, killing 11 workers on the platform, and the riser (vertical pipe) ruptured, spilling several million barrels of oil into the Gulf of Mexico. In 2013 the company agreed to pay a $200,000 penalty after pleading guilty to criminal charges that its employees had destroyed evidence. The following year a civil court found Halliburton negligent and apportioned its liability of the disaster at 3 percent. The company settled claims with plaintiffs for some $1.1 billion.
