Harris v. Quinn,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court, on June 30, 2014, held (5–4) that workers who are paid by the state of Illinois to provide in-home personal assistance to adults unable to care for themselves (because of age, disability, or injury) cannot be required to pay service fees to a union to help fund its collective-bargaining activities on their behalf. In so ruling, the Court criticized, but declined to overturn, its earlier decision in Abood v. Detroit Board of Education (1977), which had established that such compulsory service fees do not violate the right of nonunion public employees to freedom of association under the First Amendment.
Harris v. Quinn arose in 2010 when a group of personal assistants in Illinois—among them Pamela Harris—filed a class-action lawsuit in U.S. district court, naming as defendants Gov. Pat Quinn of Illinois (in his capacity as governor), the Service Employees International Union Healthcare Illinois & Indiana (SEIU-HII), SEIU Local 73, and the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) Council 31. The personal assistants alleged that their freedoms of association and speech had been infringed by the “fair share” provision of the state’s Public Labor Relations Act (PLRA), which permitted collective-bargaining agreements between the state and labour unions to include clauses requiring nonunion state employees to pay service fees to the union representing their bargaining unit. Such fees, according to the PLRA, would cover the nonunion employees’ “proportionate share of the costs of the collective bargaining process, contract administration and pursuing matters affecting wages, hours and other conditions of employment.” Under a 2003 amendment to the PLRA, personal assistants had been specifically recognized as state employees “for the purposes of coverage under the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act.”
After the district court dismissed the suit with prejudice (precluding the filing of another suit on the same grounds), the Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit affirmed the relevant part of the district court’s ruling, holding that the fair-share provision as applied to personal assistants was constitutional because the assistants were state employees “within the meaning of Abood.” The Supreme Court then granted the plaintiffs’ petition for certiorari, and oral arguments were heard on January 21, 2014.
In an opinion for a 5–4 majority written by Justice Samuel A. Alito, Jr., the Court reversed the relevant part of the Seventh Circuit’s holding and remanded the case for further consideration. The Court began by arguing that personal assistants in Illinois were very different from the kind of public employee to which Abood had originally applied. Whereas Abood concerned “full-fledged” public employees (specifically, public school teachers in Detroit), the personal assistants were, in the Court’s novel terminology, “partial” or “quasi” public employees. Unlike full-fledged public employees, for example, personal assistants were hired by private parties—“customers”—who determined (with the approval of a physician) what the assistants’ job duties would be. The customer, rather than the state, also trained, directed, and evaluated the personal assistant’s work and imposed disciplinary action, including termination, if necessary. Beyond paying the personal assistants’ salaries (with funds provided by Medicaid), the state, in the Court’s view, imposed only minimal conditions on their qualifications, duties, performance reviews, and other matters. Nor did personal assistants enjoy most of the rights and benefits granted to full-fledged state employees, such as health insurance, paid vacations, retirement benefits, indemnification for actions taken during the course of employment, and protection under the Illinois Whistleblower Act. 
In addition, the Court argued, the Abood decision itself was “questionable on several grounds.” Not only did it misunderstand the precedents on which it was justified (Railway Employees’ Dept. v. Hanson [1956] and Machinists v. Street [1961]), it also failed to appreciate, in the special case of public-sector unions, the conceptual and practical difficulties involved in distinguishing collective-bargaining activities and expenditures from political or ideological activities and expenditures. Moreover, according to the Court, Abood crucially relied on the dubious empirical assumption that compulsory service fees are necessary to maintain a union’s status as the exclusive representative of a bargaining unit (which in turn is necessary, in Abood’s words, “to promote the cause of labor peace”). 
Because personal assistants in Illinois were partial rather than full-fledged public employees and because Abood was arguably flawed, “we refuse to extend Abood to the new situation now before us,” the Court declared. Given that Abood was not controlling, the constitutionality of the fair-share provision as applied to personal assistants in Illinois depended upon “generally applicable First Amendment standards.” As the Supreme Court declared in Knox v. Service Employees (2012), quoting its earlier decision in Roberts v. United States Jaycees (1984), the provision had to serve a “ ‘compelling state interes[t]…that cannot be achieved through means significantly less restrictive of associational freedoms.’ ”  Finding that none of the state interests presumably furthered by the fair-share provision met that standard, the Court concluded that the provision was unconstitutional and, thus, that personal assistants in Illinois could not be required to pay service fees. Despite its significant doubts about Abood’s soundness, the Court left that decision in place, because answering the question presented did not require it to reach so far. Alito’s opinion was joined by Chief Justice John G. Roberts, Jr., and by Justices Anthony Kennedy, Antonin Scalia, and Clarence Thomas. 
In a lengthy and sharply worded dissent, Justice Elena Kagan argued that, contrary to the majority’s view, the fair-share provision as applied to personal assistants in Illinois “fall[s] squarely within Abood’s holding.” She dismissed the majority’s criticism of Abood as “potshots” and “gratuitous dicta” (opinion not essentially related to the question presented) and insisted—in response to what she took to be the majority’s suggestion that Abood could be overruled in a future case—that the decision was “deeply entrenched” and “impossible for this Court to reverse.” (Notwithstanding Kagan’s dissent, Abood was eventually overruled by the Court in Janus v. American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees [2018]). Kagan’s opinion was joined by Justices Stephen Breyer, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Sonia Sotomayor. 
