HSBC Holdings PLC,  bank holding company based in London that originated as the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, Ltd., in 1865, with offices in Hong Kong, Shanghai, and London. It was established at a time of growing trade between China, India, and Europe. Before the close of the 19th century, the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation had become a leading banker for governments, including those of Hong Kong and China, in addition to many British government interests. Through its emphasis on financing international trade, the bank had opened early branches in Japan in 1866, India in 1867, the Philippines in 1875, and Singapore in 1877.
The bank weathered two world wars and episodes of civil unrest. Although many Asian offices were closed and a significant number of staff members imprisoned by the Japanese during World War II, the bank’s Hong Kong headquarters reopened in 1946 and became involved in postwar reconstruction. Within a few years, however, branches in mainland China were forced to close, owing to civil war and political and economic change. To counter these limitations, the bank began expanding its operations beyond China; it established the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation of California as a subsidiary in 1955, having already conducted business in San Francisco since 1865 and New York City since 1880. Operations in the Middle East were established through the purchase of the British Bank of the Middle East in 1959. In regions where it was already conducting business, the bank diversified its services and investments by acquiring interest in banks such as Hang Seng of Hong Kong in 1965, which soon became an important mortgage lender.
Given its status as a diversified global banking corporation, Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation reorganized as a holding company, HSBC Holdings PLC, in 1991. Its 1992 acquisition of Midland Bank, which at the time was the United Kingdom’s largest commercial bank, made HSBC one of the largest bank and financial companies in the world. Numerous acquisitions followed, including Household Financial, a U.S. finance company that specialized in loans and mortgages to lower- and middle-market clients, purchased in 2003.
