Intelsat, formerly in full (1973–2001) International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, also called (1964–73) International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium,  company that provides satellite communication services. Intelsat owns more than 50 communications satellites and the ground stations from which they are controlled. Its headquarters are in Luxembourg.
Intelsat was founded as a public-private consortium in 1964 by the telecommunication agencies of 18 nations, including the United States, which proposed the organization. The transmitting and receiving apparatus in each country was owned by the Intelsat member, the telecommunication agency from that country. Within 10 years the membership of Intelsat had grown to include agencies from 86 countries, and by 2001 about 150 countries were members.
The consortium contracted with the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) to launch its satellites. The first of these was Early Bird, later renamed Intelsat I, which was placed in a stationary orbit over the Atlantic Ocean at the Equator in 1965. Early Bird was the first operational commercial satellite providing regular telecommunications and broadcasting services between North America and Europe. Early Bird was followed by Intelsat II F-2 and II F-3, launched in 1967 and covering the Pacific Ocean region, and Intelsat III F-3, launched in 1969 and covering the Indian Ocean region. Intelsat’s satellites in geostationary orbit provided nearly global coverage. On July 20, 1969, 19 days after Intelsat III F-3 was placed over the Indian Ocean, the landing of the first human on the Moon  was broadcast live through the global network of Intelsat satellites to more than 600 million television viewers.
Intelsat’s satellites were a key part of the global communications network during the second half of the 20th century. Many events that were watched worldwide, like the Olympic Games or the World Cup, used the Intelsat system. The Direct Communication Link, or “Hot Line,” between the White House in Washington, D.C., and the Kremlin in Moscow was converted in 1978 from a terrestrial cable to a service transmitted over Intelsat satellites. In 2000, 70 countries used Intelsat for all international telecommunications.
During the late 1990s, however, Intelsat was facing competition from private telecommunications companies, and its governing structure had grown unwieldy from having too many members. Therefore, Intelsat became a private company in 2001, with its public services under the oversight of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (ITSO), based in Washington, D.C. In 2005 Intelsat was acquired by Zeus Holdings Limited, a company formed by the investment firms Apax Partners, Apollo Management, Madison Dearborn Partners, and Permira. Intelsat was then acquired in 2008 by Serafina Holdings, Limited, a company formed by the investment firms BC Partners and Silver Lake.
