investment bank, also called merchant bank,  firm that originates, underwrites, and distributes new security issues of corporations and government agencies. Unlike a savings bank, an investment bank is a commercial bank that does not accept deposits. The investment (or merchant) banking house operates by purchasing all of the new security issue from a corporation at one price and selling the issue in smaller units to the investing public at a price sufficiently high to cover expenses of sale and earn a profit. The major responsibility for setting the public offering price rests on the investment bank because it is in close contact with the market, is familiar with current interest rates and yields, and is best able to judge the probable demand for the issue in question.
In the underwriting and distribution of most security issues a syndicate of investment banking firms is organized. If the amount of capital sought is large enough to prevent one investment banking firm from undertaking the risk of purchasing the entire issue, the investment bank that initiates the issue with the corporation will organize a group of investment bankers to divide the liability for the purchase. In such a case the originator will act as manager of the group.
If the market coverage that can be obtained by the members of the syndicate is deemed insufficient, selected dealers are used to bring about a wider distribution. Securities are sold to the dealers at a reduction in price (known as a concession), which reimburses the dealer for his expenses and is meant to provide him with a profit.
When new securities are to be issued, an investment firm having close contact with the corporation is likely to be asked to originate the issue. This process often is called private negotiation. An alternative arrangement is competitive bidding, under which the corporation itself settles upon the terms of the issue to be offered and then invites all banking firms to submit bids. The issue will be sold to the highest bidder.
