J.C. Penney, in full J.C. Penney Corporation, Inc., formerly J.C. Penney Stores Company (1913–24) and J.C. Penney Co. (1924–68),  American retail company, founded in 1902 by James Cash Penney and today engaged in marketing apparel, home furnishings, jewelry, cosmetics, and cookware. In the early 21st century the company operated more than 800 stores in the United States and Puerto Rico. It is a subsidiary of J.C. Penney Company, Inc., and its headquarters are in Plano, Texas.
On April 14, 1902, founder Penney and two partners opened the Golden Rule dry-goods store in the small town of Kemmerer, Wyoming. During the following two years they opened stores in two other Wyoming frontier towns. In 1907 Penney bought out his original partners and took on new ones, beginning with Earl Corder Sams (president of the company from 1914 to 1946). When the firm was incorporated on January 17, 1913, as the J.C. Penney Stores Company, there were 34 stores in the American West. The following year the company’s headquarters were moved to New York City. In 1927 J.C. Penney Co. became a publicly traded corporation listed on the New York Stock Exchange, and by 1929 it had increased the number of its stores to 1,392.
Penney retired in 1946, taking the title of honorary chairman, but his conservative policies remained influential for at least another decade. (For example, for many years, any employee known to use tobacco or liquor, even privately, was discharged.) In 1958 the firm’s traditional policy of strict cash-and-carry, long advocated by Penney as a means of protecting his customers from burdensome debt, gave way to selling on credit with the help of store credit cards. In addition, the company’s emphasis on apparel and notions was soon broadened to include a more-complete range of hard and soft goods and more-fashionable merchandise. Such diversification allowed J.C. Penney to compete more directly with other national department stores, particularly Sears, Roebuck and Co. and Montgomery Ward & Co. As well, those companies’ success with mail-order sales encouraged J.C. Penney to enter the catalog field by acquiring the General Merchandise Co. in 1962. The first Penney Catalog was issued the following year.
Overseas operations began in 1968–69, when it acquired Sarma, SA, a Belgian retail chain; and in 1971 it inaugurated stores in Italy under the name J.C. Penney, SpA. In 1988 the firm relocated its headquarters from New York City to Plano, Texas, near Dallas. J.C. Penney opened stores in Mexico and Chile in 1995. It closed its international merchandising division in 2003.
By the early 21st century, J.C. Penney had entered a period of declining sales, and it undertook various efforts to boost revenue. In 2006 the company announced a partnership with Sephora, a cosmetics chain, to open Sephora outlets inside select J.C. Penney stores. Two years later it launched the American Living brand (discontinued 2012), a line of clothing, accessories, and home decor developed by the American fashion designer Ralph Lauren. Other brand additions included Linden Street home furnishings and several clothing lines for juniors and young men. A significant percentage of J.C. Penney’s revenue was from online purchases by the 2010s, and the company discontinued its catalog sales.
Amid continued poor sales—which worsened during the COVID-19 pandemic—J.C. Penney’s holding company filed for bankruptcy protection in May 2020.
