Kroger Co., formerly (1883–1902) Great Western Tea Company and (1902–46) Kroger Grocery and Baking Co.,  American chain of supermarkets and related retail businesses. In the early 21st century, Kroger was the world’s third largest retailer and the largest chain of freestanding supermarkets in the United States. Corporate headquarters are in Cincinnati, Ohio.
The Kroger Co. traces its origins back to a business called the Great Western Tea Company, founded by Bernard H. (“Barney”) Kroger and B.A. Branagan in Cincinnati in 1883. Kroger, a former coffee-and-tea salesman, soon bought out Branagan’s interest, and by 1885 he had a chain of four groceries. In 1901 he established a bakery, thus serving as his own supplier and driving down costs. The company later came to own many other food-processing facilities. The chain had grown to 40 stores by 1902, when it was incorporated as Kroger Grocery and Baking Co. Kroger bought a meat company in 1904 and set up its first in-store meat departments, thus taking its customers another step closer to one-stop food shopping.
By 1920 the company had begun a process of rapid expansion beyond the Cincinnati area. Kroger sold his shares and retired from the business in 1928. The following year the company was operating 5,575 stores—more than ever before or since. By the 1930s, street-corner grocery stores were being replaced by supermarkets, which were larger in size but fewer in number. The company assumed its present name in 1946.
In 1979 Kroger became the second largest supermarket chain in the United States. The company preserved its independence in 1988 by fending off a leveraged buyout bid by the Kohlberg Kravis Roberts investment firm.   Meanwhile, the process of expansion continued. Some chains continued to operate under their former names after becoming Kroger units; these included Dillons, Food-4-Less, Fred Meyer, Fry’s, Harris Teeter, Jay-C, King Soopers, QFC, Ralphs, Roundy’s, and Smith’s. The Fred Meyer acquisition, completed in 1999, made Kroger the largest retail grocer in the United States. The Fred Meyer superstores sold jewelry and many other types of general merchandise in addition to grocery items. Even the standard Kroger stores typically included a pharmacy, and some also featured gas stations.
