Laissez-faire, (French: “allow to do”)  policy of minimum governmental interference in the economic affairs of individuals and society. The origin of the term is uncertain, but folklore suggests that it is derived from the answer Jean-Baptiste Colbert, comptroller general of finance under King Louis XIV of France, received when he asked industrialists what the government could do to help business: “Leave us alone.” The doctrine of laissez-faire is usually associated with the economists known as Physiocrats, who flourished in France from about 1756 to 1778. The policy of laissez-faire received strong support in classical economics as it developed in Great Britain under the influence of the philosopher and economist Adam Smith.
Belief in laissez-faire was a popular view during the 19th century. Its proponents cited the assumption in classical economics of a natural economic order as support for their faith in unregulated individual activity. The British philosopher and economist John Stuart Mill was responsible for bringing this philosophy into popular economic usage in his Principles of Political Economy (1848), in which he set forth the arguments for and against government activity in economic affairs.
Laissez-faire was a political as well as an economic doctrine. The pervading theory of the 19th century was that individuals, pursuing their own desired ends, would thereby achieve the best results for the society of which they were part. The function of the state was to maintain order and security and to avoid interference with the initiative of individuals in pursuit of their own desired goals. But laissez-faire advocates nonetheless argued that government had an essential role in enforcing contracts as well as ensuring civil order.
The philosophy’s popularity reached its peak around 1870. In the late 19th century the acute changes caused by industrial growth and the adoption of mass production techniques proved the laissez-faire doctrine insufficient as a guiding philosophy. In the wake of the Great Depression in the early 20th century, laissez-faire yielded to Keynesian economics—named for its originator, the British economist John Maynard Keynes—which held that government could relieve unemployment and increase economic activity through appropriate tax policies and public expenditures. Keynesianism attracted wide support and influenced government fiscal policies in many countries. Later in the 20th century, the notion of laissez-faire was revived by the school of monetarism, whose leading exponent was the American economist Milton Friedman. Monetarists advocated carefully controlled increases in the rate of growth of the money supply as the best means of achieving economic stability.
