Life insurance,  method by which large groups of individuals equalize the burden of financial loss from death by distributing funds to the beneficiaries of those who die. Life insurance is most developed in wealthy countries, where it has become a major channel of saving and investment.
Upon the death of the insured, the beneficiary may choose to accept a lump-sum settlement of the face amount of the life insurance policy, receive the proceeds over a given period, leave the money with the insurer temporarily and draw interest on it, or use it to purchase an annuity that guarantees regular payments for life.
The four basic types of life insurance contracts are term life, whole life, variable life, and universal life. Under term insurance contracts, a set amount of coverage, such as $50,000 or $500,000, is issued for a specified period of time. The premiums on such policies tend to increase with age, meaning that premium costs will be higher for a 60-year-old than for a 30-year-old. This is the case for new policies as well as renewals of existing policies. Protection expires at the end of the period, and there is no cash value remaining.
Whole life insurance, which runs for the whole of the insured’s life, is established with a fixed premium and a fixed payout amount. Most whole life contracts also accumulate a cash value that is paid when the contract matures or is surrendered; the cash value is less than the policy’s face value. While the fixed premiums represent a means of controlling costs in the future, the fixed payout offers no opportunity to protect against inflation.
Variable life insurance is similar to whole life insurance in that the insured obtains a fixed-premium life insurance policy that provides for a minimum death benefit. It differs, however, in that the insured’s policy holdings are allocated to variable investment accounts (i.e., portfolios that invest in securities or bonds) that operate much like mutual funds. If the accounts perform well, they can provide substantial gains in the value of the insured’s policy. If they perform poorly, they can result in a loss. Income from the accounts can be used to pay annual premiums or can be added to the value of the policy.
Universal life insurance policies are distinguished by flexible premiums and adjustable levels of coverage. Although the coverage is permanent (it does not expire, as does term insurance), the value of the policy may vary according to the performance of the investments on which it is based. After an initial premium is paid by the insured, there may not be any contractually scheduled premium payments, provided that the cash value of the policy is sufficient to pay the cost of protection each month (as well as any other related expenses or charges incurred by the insurer). An annual report is provided to the policyholder that shows the status of the policy, including the death benefit, the amount of insurance in force, the cash value and surrender value, and any transactions made within the policy during the previous year.
