Marketing board,   organization set up by a government to regulate the buying and selling of a certain commodity within a specified area. An example is the former Cocoa Marketing Board of Nigeria (which, after 1977, functioned as the Nigerian Cocoa Board and controlled marketing of tea and coffee, as well). The powers of marketing boards range from advisory and promotional services to full control over output and sales.
The simplest type of board is one established to carry out market research, promote sales, and furnish information; it is usually financed by a fee levied on all sales of the products concerned. Examples of this type include the Tea Propaganda Board of Sri Lanka and the Tobacco Export Promotion Council of Zimbabwe. Other boards are empowered to regulate terms and conditions of sale, usually by establishing packing standards and quality analysis.
The prime motive in the establishment of most marketing boards is to stabilize producer prices, particularly in the case of products designed primarily for those export markets in which price fluctuations are most violent. Marketing boards are also used for domestically consumed products whose perishability requires that outlets be set up in advance.
The boards may stabilize and raise average prices through the manipulation of commodity flows, with the objective of maintaining reasonably high levels of demand in all markets at all times. This approach is characteristic of marketing programs for fruits, vegetables, and nuts in California.
In economies in which this approach is administratively difficult, other means of stabilization have been tried. In the Middle East and Latin America, for example, marketing boards and branches of public banks or development institutes have been furnished with capital in order to purchase basic grains, to maintain buffer stocks, and to sell on open markets alongside other traders. The objective, in these cases, has been to increase incentives to producers by buying to maintain a minimum price level and to protect low-income consumers by selling from accumulated stocks when prices are rising.
Where products are produced primarily for export, the boards may seek protection from fluctuating world prices. In one approach, practiced widely in West Africa, a reserve fund is accumulated when export prices are high and is drawn upon to maintain prices to farmers when they are low. In countries in which this type of marketing board operates, the board is granted a monopoly of all export sales, and domestic purchases are made through licensed agents and the board’s own buying stations. Compare cartel.
