Michelin, in full Compagnie Générale des Établissements Michelin,  leading French manufacturer of tires and other rubber products. Headquarters are at Clermont-Ferrand.
Founded in 1888 by the Michelin brothers, André (1853–1931) and Édouard (1859–1940), the company manufactured tires for bicycles and horse-drawn carriages before introducing pneumatic tires for automobiles in the 1890s. To show that demountable pneumatic tires could be used successfully on motor vehicles, the Michelins equipped a car with such tires held onto the rims by bolts and entered and drove it in the 1895 Paris–Bordeaux road race. Although they did not win the race, they created popular interest in pneumatic tires. Their company became a major producer of tires in Europe. In 1948 Michelin was the first to introduce steel-belted radial tires.
The company established its first foreign plant at Turin, Italy, in 1906 and today operates facilities in a number of countries. Michelin was reorganized as a holding company in 1951, with interests in tires, other rubber products, and synthetic rubber.
The company also publishes an international series of travel guides known as Michelin guides (French: Guide Michelin) and a series of road maps. The guides were initiated by André Michelin, whose aim was to promote tourism by car and thus to support his tire industry. The first Red Guide (1900), an aid to travel in France, was a pocket-size, alphabetical listing of French towns of interest that were large enough to contain hotels and garages. It included the prototypical rating symbols for which Michelin has become famous; this now-extensive list of symbols indicates such features of lodgings as comfort level (from luxurious to modest comfort) and the presence of such amenities as swimming pools, gardens, tennis courts, and air conditioning. The Red Guide also includes restaurant ratings, noting those that provide serviceable but inexpensive meals as well as a select few (indicated by the presence of three stars) that provide “cooking worth a special journey.” In 1957 the company began publishing Red Guides to other western European countries, including guides to Spain and Portugal, Italy, Great Britain and Ireland, the Benelux countries (Belgium, Netherlands, and Luxembourg), and West Germany.
In addition to the Red Guides, the most popular of the Michelin guides, Michelin offers supplementary Green Guides, which can be of aid to the traveler in search of more information on the museums, natural wonders, and other points of interest in a region. Michelin also publishes a great number of highly detailed and informative maps.
