NCR Corporation, formerly (1884–1974) National Cash Register Co.,  American manufacturer of cash registers, computers, and information-processing systems.
Although James Ritty invented the cash register in 1879, it was John H. Patterson (1844–1922) who, through aggressive marketing and innovative production and sales techniques, made the cash register a staple of the marketplace. Dissatisfied with his work as a coal dealer, Patterson in 1884 purchased for $6,500 a controlling interest in the ailing National Manufacturing Company, a maker of cash registers, in a rundown section of Dayton, Ohio. Patterson improved the cash register, making it simpler to use, and sent out his highly motivated sales force to place the product in stores. He paid his salesmen generous commissions and introduced the idea of exclusive territory for each salesman. To allay customer fears of maintaining such complex machinery, he established a force of repairmen to service the products after the sale.
The company evolved in the 20th century, complementing its production of cash registers with the introduction of accounting machines in the 1920s, electronic products during World War II, business forms and computer hardware and software in the ’60s, and microelectronics in the ’70s. In the latter decade, under the leadership of presidents William S. Anderson and Charles E. Exley, Jr., NCR continued to develop new technology and expand its markets, but the company also underwent a thorough reorganization that included a sharp reduction in its labour force and the decentralization of its operations away from Dayton.
In 1991 the company was purchased by the AT&T Corporation and was renamed Global Information Solutions. As part of AT&T’s split into three separate companies in 1996, the NCR Corporation was spun off to AT&T shareholders and resumed its original name. NCR’s products include automated teller machines (ATMs), electronic office equipment, supermarket scanners, semiconductors, and multiuser computer systems. The company also operates a worldwide network of data-processing centres for businesses that do not have in-house data-processing systems.
