Novartis AG,  Swiss company that is one of the world’s largest manufacturers of pharmaceuticals. It was formed in 1997 from the merger of two major Swiss drug companies, Ciba-Geigy AG and Sandoz AG. Novartis is headquartered in Basel.
Ciba-Geigy originated in the merger of two smaller Swiss firms, Ciba AG and J.R. Geigy SA. Ciba developed from a silk-dyeing business owned by Alexander Clavel, who began manufacturing the synthetic dye fuchsine in 1859. In 1873 Clavel sold his business to a partnership, Bindschedler & Busch, which expanded the range of dyestuffs produced. In 1884 the firm was transformed into a limited-liability company called the Gesellschaft für Chemische Industrie Basel (“Society of Chemical Industry in Basel”), the last words of which produced the acronym Ciba, which became its familiar name. (In 1945 the company’s name legally became Ciba AG.) In addition to dyes, Ciba became known for pharmaceuticals, which it began making in 1900. By then it had become the largest chemical company in Switzerland.
Geigy dates to 1758, when Johann Rudolf Geigy set up shop in Basel as a chemist and druggist; his son and grandson branched into dyes for the textile industry. In 1868 the founder’s great-grandson, Johann Rudolf Geigy-Merian, assumed command, creating a flourishing dyestuff company that went public in 1901 and was named J.R. Geigy SA in 1914. In the 1930s and ’40s it branched out into agricultural chemicals and pharmaceuticals. One of Geigy’s researchers, Paul Müller, won a Nobel Prize in 1948 for discovering the insecticidal properties of DDT.
Sandoz AG originated in 1886, when Alfred Kern and Edouard Sandoz founded a firm in Basel to make synthetic dyes. The new firm, Chemische Fabrik Kern & Sandoz (“Chemical Company Kern & Sandoz”), grew rapidly, and in 1895, the year it began making pharmaceuticals, it was transformed into a joint-stock company called Chemische Fabrik vormals Sandoz (“Chemical Company formerly Sandoz”). In the 1920s and ’30s it began making cleaning agents and other household products.
Ciba, Geigy, and Sandoz collectively constituted the entire chemical industry of Switzerland. In 1918 the three companies joined together to form a cartel, the Interessengemeinschaft Basel (“Basel Syndicate”), or Basel IG, in order to compete with the German chemical cartel IG Farben. All three companies also established or acquired factories in various European countries and in the United States. In 1929–32 the Basel IG joined with IG Farben and French and British chemical firms to form the Quadrapartite Cartel, which lasted until the outbreak of World War II in 1939. Though each participant in the cartel retained its legal autonomy, the companies, by signed agreement, entered into a division of markets and some joint manufacturing. Basel IG survived the war, but it dissolved in 1951 partly out of regard for U.S. antitrust legislation.
All three Swiss companies prospered and continued to diversify in the decades after World War II, though Sandoz earned an unwelcome notoriety in the 1960s when one of its inventions, a potent hallucinogen called LSD, became a favourite illicit drug in the United States and Europe. In 1970 Ciba and Geigy merged to form Ciba-Geigy AG, and in 1996, in the midst of a wave of consolidations and mergers sweeping the pharmaceutical industry, this company merged with Sandoz AG to form one of the largest drug companies in the world. This merger was one of the largest in corporate history up to that time. Novartis AG has affiliates in about 140 countries and is engaged in the development, manufacture, and marketing of pharmaceuticals, herbicides and insecticides, over-the-counter medications, veterinary medicines, and garden products. Nearly half the company’s annual revenue is earned in the United States.
