opium trade,  in Chinese history, the traffic that developed in the 18th and 19th centuries in which Western countries, mostly Great Britain, exported opium grown in India and sold it to China. The British used the profits from the sale of opium to purchase such Chinese luxury goods as porcelain, silk, and tea, which were in great demand in the West, while addiction to opium became widespread in China, leading to social and economic problems there.
Opium, a narcotic drug that is obtained from the unripe seedpods of the opium poppy (Papaver somniferum), was native to what is now the country of Turkey. It was first introduced to China by Turkish and Arab traders in the late 6th or early 7th century ce. Taken orally to relieve tension and pain, the drug was used in limited quantities until the 17th century. At that point, the practice of smoking tobacco spread from North America to China, and opium smoking soon became popular throughout the country. Opium addiction increased, and opium importations grew rapidly during the first century of the Qing dynasty (1644–1911/12). By 1729 it had become such a problem that the Yongzheng emperor (ruled 1722–35) prohibited the sale and smoking of opium. That failed to hamper the trade, and in 1796 the Jiaqing emperor outlawed opium importation and cultivation. In spite of such decrees, however, the opium trade continued to flourish.
Early in the 18th century the Portuguese found that they could import opium from India and sell it in China at a considerable profit. By 1773 the British had discovered the trade, and that year they became the leading suppliers of the Chinese market. The British East India Company established a monopoly on opium cultivation in the Indian province of Bengal, where they developed a method of growing opium poppies cheaply and abundantly. Other Western countries also joined in the trade, including the United States, which dealt in Turkish as well as Indian opium.
Britain and other European countries undertook the opium trade because of their chronic trade imbalance with China. There was tremendous demand in Europe for Chinese tea, silks, and porcelain pottery, but there was correspondingly little demand in China for Europe’s manufactured goods and other trade items. Consequently, Europeans had to pay for Chinese products with gold or silver. The opium trade, which created a steady demand among Chinese addicts for opium imported by the West, solved this chronic trade imbalance.
The East India Company did not carry the opium itself. Because of the Chinese ban, the company farmed it out to “country traders”—i.e., private traders who were licensed by the company to take goods from India to China. The country traders sold the opium to smugglers along the Chinese coast. The gold and silver the traders received from those sales were then turned over to the East India Company. In China the company used the gold and silver it received to purchase goods that could be sold profitably in England.
The amount of opium imported into China increased from about 200 chests annually in 1729 to roughly 1,000 chests in 1767 and then to about 10,000 per year between 1820 and 1830. The weight of each chest varied somewhat—depending on point of origin—but averaged approximately 140 pounds (63.5 kg). By 1838 the amount had grown to some 40,000 chests imported into China annually. The balance of payments for the first time began to run against China and in favour of Britain. Meanwhile, a network of opium distribution had formed throughout China, often with the connivance of corrupt officials. Levels of opium addiction grew so high that it began to affect the imperial troops and the official classes.
The widespread opium addiction in China was causing serious social and economic disruption there. The attempts by the Qing dynasty to enforce the opium restrictions included such measures as destroying more than 20,000 chests of opium—about 1,400 tons of the drug—that British merchants had warehoused at Canton (Guangzhou) in 1839. China’s enforcement efforts, and the Western countries’ response to those efforts, eventually resulted in two armed conflicts known as the Opium Wars, both of which China lost and which resulted in various measures that contributed to the decline of the Qing and ultimately saw the dynasty toppled in favour of republican China in the early 20th century.
The first war, between Britain and China (1839–42), did not legalize the trade, but it did halt Chinese efforts to stop it. It also expanded British trading privileges, establishing five treaty ports in which foreigners could live and work outside Chinese legal jurisdiction, trading with whomever they pleased. Furthermore, China was required to pay Britain a large indemnity and cede Hong Kong Island to the British.
In the second Opium War (1856–60; also known as the Arrow War or the Anglo-French War in China), which was fought between a British-French alliance and China, the Chinese government was forced to legalize the trade, though it did levy a small import tax on opium. Among other concessions, China ceded to the British the southern portion of the Kowloon Peninsula adjacent to Hong Kong. By the end of the war, opium imports to China had reached 50,000 to 60,000 chests a year, and they continued to increase for the next three decades.
By 1906, the importance of opium in the West’s trade with China had declined, and the Qing government was able to begin to regulate the importation and consumption of the drug. In 1907 China signed the Ten Years’ Agreement with India, whereby China agreed to forbid native cultivation and consumption of opium on the understanding that the export of Indian opium would decline in proportion and cease completely in 10 years. The trade was thus almost completely stopped by 1917.
Opium smoking and addiction remained a problem in China during the subsequent decades, however, since the weakened central republican government, which had overthrown the Qing dynasty in 1912, could not wipe out the native cultivation of opium. Although opium trade routes extending from the southeastern and southwestern regions of Asia closed temporarily during World War II (1939–45), cultivation of the plant continued and even prospered in areas of China. Opium smoking was finally eradicated by the Chinese communists after they came to power in 1949.
