Petrobras, abbreviation of Petróleo Brasileiro S.A.,  Brazilian oil and gas company  that was founded in  1953 to engage in the exploration, production, refining, and transport of domestic petroleum and petroleum products. Originally a state-owned monopoly, Petrobras became majority-owned by the state but competes against other Brazilian companies as well as against foreign companies. Petrobras also forms partnerships with domestic and foreign companies, and it operates in more than 25 countries around the world. It is the largest corporation in both Brazil and South America. Its  headquarters are in Rio de Janeiro.
Petrobras’s prominence has been based on the remarkable growth of Brazil’s crude oil production, which rose from 2,700 barrels per day in 1953 to more than 2,000,000 barrels per day in 2010. The key to this growth was Petrobras’s discovery and subsequent exploitation of large deepwater oil fields in the Campos Basin, off the coast of Rio de Janeiro state, in the 1970s and ’80s. These offshore fields, now supplemented by oil and gas fields in other basins such as Santos and Espírito Santo, account for the majority of Petrobras’s oil production and the bulk of its proven reserves. The company operates numerous refineries in Brazil and other countries, and its service stations are present throughout South America. Through its petrochemicals division, it produces base chemicals such as ethane, propylene, and benzene. It also produces biodiesel from oilseed plants and is a major distributor of ethanol for use in Brazil’s ambitious gasohol program.
Petrobras was granted a monopoly over Brazil’s imports of crude oil in 1963, and it took over Brazil’s privately owned refineries after they were nationalized in 1964. In 1995, as part of a campaign to privatize state-owned industries, the Brazilian government proposed a constitutional amendment ending Petrobras’s monopoly over exploitation of the country’s oil and natural gas. With the passage of the amendment in 1997, these industries were opened to foreign competition for the first time, obliging Petrobras to submit competitive bids to the Agência Nacional do Petróleo (ANP; National Petroleum Agency), the state organ responsible for granting concessions to produce oil and gas on Brazilian territory. At the same time, the amendment relieved Petrobras of its old requirement to meet production quotas, while allowing the company to enter joint ventures with foreign companies to produce, refine, and distribute oil and natural gas products in Brazil.
In 2006 a consortium between Petrobras and British and Portuguese companies made the first of several important oil and gas discoveries some 250 km (150 miles) offshore in the Santos Basin. Located under 2,000 metres (6,500 feet) of water and as much as 5,000 metres (16,500 feet) of oceanic crust, these so-called pre-salt finds (located below thick salt formations) were so large that they held out the possibility of reestablishing Brazil as a world-class petroleum producer. The Brazilian state responded by creating a new agency, Petrosal, to regulate production of the reserves, and it mandated that Petrobras be involved in every project in the pre-salt zone.
Beginning in late 2014, Petrobras—already suffering from declining international oil prices—found itself at the centre of a huge political scandal. A sweeping investigation alleged that Petrobras officials, the ruling Workers’ Party and some of it members, and members of its coalition partner, the Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement, had received millions of dollars in kickbacks for contracts with Petrobras, principally from construction firms.
