Pixar Animation Studios,  motion-picture studio, from 2006 a wholly owned subsidiary of the Disney Company, that was instrumental in the development and production of computer-animated films in the late 20th and early 21st centuries. Pixar’s feature-length releases, which consistently achieved worldwide commercial success, were lauded not only for their visual innovations but for their intelligent and emotional storytelling. Its headquarters are located in Emeryville, California.
Pixar originated in the 1970s at the New York Institute of Technology (NYIT), where a team of computer scientists, including Ed Catmull, contributed to the emerging field of computer graphics. In 1979 Catmull was hired by Lucasfilm Ltd., the California-based production company of filmmaker George Lucas, to lead its nascent computer division, and several of his NYIT colleagues followed him there. Aiming to improve graphics technology, the division developed the Pixar Image Computer, which, in its ability to render high-resolution three-dimensional colour images, offered applications beyond the film industry. (The name “Pixar” was conceived as a faux-Spanish word meaning “to make pictures.”) By 1984 Lucasfilm had hired John Lasseter, who had worked as an animator at Disney, and he took advantage of the company’s technological strides to create short computer-animated films.
With Lucas seeking to streamline his company, the computer division in 1986 was spun off as an independent business, the controlling interest of which was acquired by Apple cofounder Steve Jobs, then the head of the computer firm NeXT Inc. Catmull became president and CEO of the new company, called Pixar, and Jobs was installed as chairman of the board. Initially, Jobs steered the company’s efforts toward marketing the Pixar Image Computer and developing high-tech graphics software. Pixar was slow to turn a profit, however, and in 1990 it sold its hardware operations. Also that year it moved from San Rafael, California, to nearby Point Richmond.
Meanwhile, Lasseter’s short films, produced with the company’s own cutting-edge software, won some acclaim, including an Academy Award for Tin Toy (1988). In 1989 Pixar began making computer-animated television commercials, and two years later it entered into an agreement with Disney to jointly develop, produce, and distribute three feature-length animated motion pictures. Reorganizing to accommodate its new creative focus, Pixar spent much of the next several years working on Toy Story, which opened in theatres in 1995 as the first entirely computer-animated feature film. The family-friendly movie, which humorously imagined the private lives of toys, was a critical and commercial hit, and it earned Lasseter, its director, an Academy Award for special achievement.
By 1995 Jobs had taken a more active role in the company as its CEO. (Catmull remained an upper-level executive.) One week after Toy Story’s release, Pixar launched its initial public stock offering. In 1997, having amassed substantial revenues from the film and its merchandising, the studio negotiated to extend its partnership with Disney. While expanding its operations (it moved to its Emeryville headquarters in 2000), Pixar enjoyed continued success with such crowd-pleasing movies as A Bug’s Life (1998), Toy Story 2 (1999), Finding Nemo (2003), and The Incredibles (2004).
In 2006, as the Disney contract neared its end, Jobs sold Pixar to the larger company. Catmull was named president of both Walt Disney Animation Studios and Pixar Animation Studios, while Lasseter became the studios’ chief creative officer. He left his position in 2018 amid allegations of sexual misconduct. Subsequent Pixar productions included WALL∙E (2008); Brave (2012); Monsters University (2013), a sequel to the studio’s Monsters, Inc. (2001); Inside Out (2015); Finding Dory (2016), a sequel to Finding Nemo; Coco (2017); Incredibles 2 (2018); and Toy Story 4 (2019). During the first decade in which the Academy Award for best animated feature film was bestowed (beginning in 2002), Pixar productions dominated the category, capturing eight nominations and six wins. Up (2009) and Toy Story 3 (2010) also received Oscar nominations for best picture—a rare honour for animated fare.
