Polaroid Corporation, also called Primary PDC, Inc.,  American manufacturer of cameras, film, and optical equipment founded by Edwin Herbert Land (1909–91), who invented instant photography.
The company originated in 1932 as the Land-Wheelwright Laboratories, which Land founded with George Wheelwright to produce Land’s first invention, an inexpensive plastic-sheet light polarizer. By 1936 Land began to use polarized material in sunglasses and other optical devices, and in 1937 the company was incorporated under the Polaroid name.
During the 1930s and ’40s Polaroid introduced a three-dimensional motion-picture process and polarized optical devices for military use. After World War II, Land began to research an instantaneous developing film, and in 1947 the company brought out the Polaroid Land camera, which delivered a finished sepia-toned print 60 seconds after exposure. In the 1950s the cameras were refined to produce black-and-white prints in 15 seconds; in the 1960s a colour-developing process and film cartridges were introduced. The company introduced the compact Polaroid SX-70 in 1972. In addition to further technical refinements, the SX-70 combined both negative and positive prints in a single sheet. Instant motion pictures were introduced in 1977.
After Land retired as chief executive officer in 1980, Polaroid continued to develop new products for professional, technical, and consumer markets. These included cameras, high-speed film, floppy disks, medical equipment, colour-transparency films, transparent cameras, and identity verification equipment for security systems. In 1986 Polaroid won a $925-million judgment from the Eastman Kodak Company for patent infringement. In the 1990s Polaroid delivered more firsts to the industry, including cameras with picture-storage compartments, and introduced several products that were worldwide best sellers, such as the redesigned Polaroid OneStep camera. In 1996 the corporation released its first digital camera.
In 2001 Polaroid filed for bankruptcy protection, the result of what many believed was the failure of the company to fully embrace digital technology. In less than a year, most of the corporation’s assets and those of its subsidiaries had been sold to OEP Imaging Corporation, creating a new company, Primary PDC, Inc., which continued to operate as Polaroid Corporation; OEP Imaging Corporation subsequently became Polaroid Holding Company (PHC). In 2005 PHC was purchased by Petters Group Worldwide. Polaroid remained under bankruptcy protection until 2006. Although it had no employees or business operations during that time, the brand name continued to be used to license and market various foreign-made electronics. By 2007, however, the company had stopped making cameras altogether. In 2008 Polaroid announced that it would permanently cease production of instant film by early 2009. Later in 2008, Polaroid’s parent company, Petters Group, filed for bankruptcy protection, though Polaroid continued to manufacture and market new products.
