Southern Pacific Railroad,  one of the great American railroad systems, established in 1861 by the “big four” of western railroad building—Collis P. Huntington, Leland Stanford, Mark Hopkins, and Charles Crocker. After completing the Central Pacific from California to Utah in 1869, they started the Southern Pacific as a branch line into southern California. It reached the Arizona border in 1877, and in 1883 it was joined to other railroads built west from New Orleans, Louisiana, across Texas and New Mexico. These lines were collectively known as the Central Pacific system. In 1884 the Southern Pacific Company was incorporated, and the railroads making up the Central Pacific system were leased to it a year later. The Central Pacific thus became the nucleus from which the Southern Pacific system developed.
The Southern Pacific served 15 states in the West and Southwest, including the Pacific and Gulf coasts, with the network dipping south from northwestern Oregon to swing in a wide arc up into Illinois. The railroad served 35 international points of entry. About half the railroad’s freight revenues came from food products, lumber, chemicals, and motor vehicles.
In 1971, along with many other railroads, the Southern Pacific gave up operating intercity passenger trains, although it continued to operate several long-distance trains for the federally sponsored National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak). It also continued a commuter service between San Francisco and San Jose, California.
The Southern Pacific Transportation Company, a holding company for the railroad, was incorporated in 1969. In 1983 the Southern Pacific Transportation Company agreed to merge with Santa Fe Industries (see historical coverage in Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway), but in 1987 the Interstate Commerce Commission rejected the proposed merger, and the Southern Pacific was sold to Rio Grande Industries, owner and operator of the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad system, in 1988. The Southern Pacific was acquired by the Union Pacific Corporation in 1996. The merged firm represented the largest railroad company in the United States and controlled most of the rail-based shipping in the western two-thirds of the country.
