Spam,  unsolicited commercial electronic messages. Although e-mail is the most common means of transmitting spam, blogs, social networking sites, newsgroups, and cellular telephones are also targeted. Viewed with widespread disdain, spam nonetheless remains a popular marketing tool because the distribution cost is virtually free and accountability levels for spamming are typically very low. Experts estimate that spam constitutes roughly 50 percent of the e-mail circulating on the Internet.
The origin of spam dates to 1978, when Gary Thuerk, a marketing manager for the now defunct computer company Digital Equipment Corporation, sent out an unsolicited mass e-mail promoting his firm’s computer products. Sent to hundreds of computers over ARPANET (a precursor to the Internet; see DARPA), Thuerk’s message immediately provoked ire among the recipients and a reprimand from the network’s administrators. Thuerk’s e-mail is now widely credited as the first example of spam, although the term was not used to refer to unsolicited mass e-mails until many years later. (The inspiration for using the term is believed to be a 1970s Monty Python’s Flying Circus television sketch in which a group of Vikings sing a chorus about Spam, a processed meat product, that drowns out all other conversation at a restaurant.)
The commercial potential of spam grew along with the popularity of the Internet. In 1994 American lawyers Laurence Canter and Martha Siegel flooded Usenet’s discussion groups with a message offering legal services to immigrants who were applying for U.S. green cards. The mass posting provoked outrage, but the tactic brought in more than $100,000 in revenue, and the modern spam industry was born.
Unlike traditional “junk mail,” which has a postage cost associated with it, spam is nearly free for perpetrators—it typically costs the same to send 10 messages as it does to send 10 million. Initially, most spam featured unsolicited offers from businesses that made no attempt to hide their identity. Eventually, spammers (those who send spam) went underground and began to hide their identity and location, and the content of spam became more nefarious, often advertising pornography or promoting various scams. In addition to offensive content, spam may contain viruses and malicious software (malware) that can invade a recipient’s computer, allowing spammers to gain remote access to the computer. Compromised computers (called zombies) can be linked together to form a network of computers (called a botnet) that is surreptitiously controlled by the spammer and used to distribute spam or to commit a variety of cybercrimes.
Some jurisdictions have taken legal action against spammers. However, lack of consistent international legal standards and the desire to protect free speech make legislative solutions difficult. Filtering software is used to block much of the spam that is sent, although spammers have become adept at coming up with new techniques to bypass security filters, making it necessary for filtering software to constantly evolve.
