Starbucks,  American company that is the largest coffeehouse chain in the world. Its headquarters are in Seattle, Washington.
Starbucks was founded by Jerry Baldwin, Gordon Bowker, and Zev Siegl, opening its first store in 1971 near the historic Pike Place Market in Seattle. The three Starbucks founders had two things in common: they were all coming from academia, and they all loved coffee and tea. They invested and borrowed some money to open the first store in Seattle and named it “Starbucks” after the first mate, Starbuck, in Herman Melville’s classic novel Moby Dick.
Alfred Peet, a coffee-roasting entrepreneur, was a major inspiration to the founders of Starbucks. Peet was a Dutch immigrant who had begun importing fine arabica coffees into the United States during the 1950s. In 1966 he opened a small store, Peet’s Coffee and Tea, in Berkeley, California, that specialized in importing first-rate coffees and teas. Peet’s success encouraged the Starbucks founders to base their business model on selling high-quality coffee beans and equipment, and Peet’s became the initial supplier of green coffee beans to Starbucks. The partners then purchased a used roaster from Holland, and Baldwin and Bowker experimented with Alfred Peet’s roasting techniques to create their own blends and flavours.
By the early 1980s Starbucks had opened four stores in Seattle that stood out from the competitors with their top-quality fresh-roasted coffees. In 1980 Siegl decided to pursue other interests and left the two remaining partners, with Baldwin assuming the role of company president.
In 1981 Howard Schultz, a sales representative for Hammarplast, a Swedish company that made kitchen equipment and housewares from which Starbucks bought drip-coffee makers, noticed how large the company’s orders were, which prompted him to pay it a visit. Schultz was so impressed that he decided to pursue a career at Starbucks, and he was hired as the head of marketing in 1982. Schultz noticed that first-time customers sometimes felt uneasy in the stores because of their lack of knowledge about fine coffees, so he worked with store employees on developing customer-friendly sales skills and produced brochures that made it easy for customers to learn about the company’s products.
Schultz’s biggest idea for the future of Starbucks came during the spring of 1983 when the company sent him to Milan to attend an international housewares show. While in Italy, he was impressed with the country’s cafés and discovered that Milan alone boasted 1,500 coffeehouses. Inspired, he thought of doing something similar in Starbucks and envisioned turning a tiny regional operation into a national coffeehouse chain via rapid store expansion. However, Baldwin and Bowker were not enthusiastic about Schultz’s idea, as they did not want Starbucks to deviate much from its traditional model of business. They wanted Starbucks to remain strictly a coffee and equipment seller and not turn into a café that served espressos and cappuccinos.
Seeing that he would not be able to persuade Baldwin and Bowker to embrace the café idea, Schultz left Starbucks in 1985 and started his own coffee chain, called Il Giornale, which was an immediate success, quickly expanding into multiple cities.
In March 1987 Baldwin and Bowker decided to sell Starbucks, and Schultz was quick to use Il Giornale to purchase the company with investor backing. He combined all his operations under the Starbucks brand and committed to the café concept for the business, with additional sales of beans, equipment, and other items in Starbucks stores. Under Schultz’s guidance, in four years the coffeehouse chain grew from fewer than 20 stores to more than 100. Starbucks entered into a meteoric period of expansion that continued after the company went public in 1992. In 1996 it began opening stores outside North America, and Starbucks soon became the largest coffeehouse chain in the world. By the end of the decade, Starbucks had some 2,500 locations in about a dozen countries.
Schultz announced in 2000 that he was stepping down as CEO but would remain as chairman. By 2007 the chain boasted more than 15,000 locations worldwide but was foundering, and in January 2008 Schultz returned as CEO. He oversaw the closure of 900 stores and implemented an ambitious strategy to secure new avenues of growth, which included acquisitions of a bakery chain and the makers of a coffee-brewing system as well as the introduction of an instant-coffee brand. He also oversaw changes to menu offerings at Starbucks stores; Starbucks had begun selling food in its cafés in 2003. These moves were largely successful, and by 2012 Starbucks had rebounded financially. Schultz again stepped down as CEO and was replaced as CEO by Kevin Johnson in 2017. Schultz continued to be active in the company, serving as executive chairman until 2018, when he was replaced by Myron Ullman. The world’s largest Starbucks, a Starbucks Reserve Roastery, opened in Chicago in 2019. In 2021 Starbucks had a presence in dozens of countries around the globe and operated over 32,000 stores.
Starbucks seeks to support the farming communities it works with through a number of nongovernmental organizations with programs designed to strengthen economic and social development. The company also offers farmer loans, and in 2019 it made relief payments to its farmers in Guatemala, Nicaragua, El Salvador, and Mexico when coffee prices hit record lows. In addition, by 2021 the company had 10 farmer support centres that shared “open-source” agronomy practices with growers in coffee-producing countries around the world. The program has trained more than 200,000 farmers since the first centre opened in Costa Rica in 2004.
Starbucks is often cited as an industry leader in paying above-market rates for its coffee beans, though these higher rates are usually paid to a broker and may or may not translate to higher profits for the farmers themselves. The company states that more than 99 percent of its beans are ethically sourced and has a commitment to reach 100 percent; it also aims to have 100 percent of its tea and cocoa ethically sourced. To this end, it employs its own set of economic and agricultural standards known as Coffee and Farmer Equity (C.A.F.E.) practices and acts in partnership with Conservation International to foster environmental sustainability. The company is also one of the largest purchasers of Fair Trade-certified coffee in the world, and a number of its blends are certified organic.
Despite its apparent commitment to buying ethically sourced coffee, Starbucks has faced allegations of purchasing from farms and plantations that use child labour and slave labour or that house workers in unsanitary conditions. In 2018 and 2019 two Starbucks C.A.F.E. plantations in Brazil were found to have “slavery-like” conditions, and an investigation in 2020 found children under the age of 13 were working on five Guatemalan farms that supply Starbucks. Critics of the C.A.F.E. practices claim that the required farm inspections are too infrequent to protect farmworkers, as inspections can happen as infrequently as every two to three years, depending on factors such as the farm’s previous inspection scores. In addition, unlike for Fair Trade-certified coffee, Starbucks C.A.F.E. practices do not have a minimum guaranteed price for farmers, farms are not required to be small-scale, and community development is not democratically administered by the farmers themselves. These facts have been used to argue that the C.A.F.E. practices are more to satisfy consumer consciences than to actually benefit coffee producers and alleviate poverty.
