Stock option,   contractual agreement enabling the holder to buy or sell a security at a designated price for a specified period of time, unaffected by movements in its market price during the period. Put and call options, purchased both for speculative and hedging reasons, are made by persons anticipating changes in stock prices. A put gives its holder an option to sell, or put, shares to the other party at a fixed put price even though the market price declines; a call, on the other hand, gives the holder an option to buy, or call for, shares at a fixed call price notwithstanding a market rise.
Another form of option, a stock purchase warrant, entitles its owner to buy shares of a common stock at a specified price (the exercise price of the warrant). Warrants are often issued with senior securities (preferred stocks and bonds) as “sweeteners” to increase their salability. They may also be issued directly as part of the compensation for underwriters of new issues and other promoters in the establishment of a new business.
The stock rights option gives a stockholder the choice of (1) buying additional stock at a price below the current market price for a specified period of time, usually briefer than the life span of stock purchase warrants, or (2) selling the rights on the market. They are the customary way of implementing the stockholder’s preemptive right to subscribe to whatever additional stock is issued in order to maintain his proportionate equity in the corporation and its control.
American corporations frequently issue employee stock options as a form of incentive compensation for their executives. The underlying theory is that an option constitutes an incentive to do what will improve the company’s fortunes and thus raise the value of its stock. The employee stock option was widely used as a means of supplementing the compensation of high-salaried employees after 1950, when federal income-tax provisions permitted the “spread” between high market price and the lower option price to be treated, upon sale of the stock, as capital gain, taxable at a 25 percent ceiling rather than the higher personal income-tax rates. In 1976, however, such profit was designated as ordinary income. 
