Tariff, also called customs duty,  tax levied upon goods as they cross national boundaries, usually by the government of the importing country. The words tariff, duty, and customs can be used interchangeably.
Tariffs may be levied either to raise revenue or to protect domestic industries, but a tariff designed primarily to raise revenue also may exercise a strong protective influence, while a tariff levied primarily for protection may yield revenue. Gottfried von Haberler in The Theory of International Trade (1937) suggested that the best way to distinguish between revenue duties and protective duties (disregarding the motives of the legislators) is to compare their effects on domestic versus foreign producers. (See protectionism.)
If domestically produced goods bear the same taxation as similar imported goods, or if the foreign goods subject to duty are not produced domestically, and if there are no domestically produced substitutes toward which demand is diverted because of the tariff, then the duty is not protective. A purely protective duty tends to shift production away from the export industries and into the protected domestic industries or other industries producing substitutes for which demand is increased. On the other hand, a purely revenue duty will not cause resources to be invested in industries producing the taxed goods or close substitutes for such goods, but it will divert resources toward the production of those goods and services upon which the additional government receipts are spent.
From the standpoint of revenue alone, a country can levy an equivalent tax on domestic production (to avoid protecting it) or select a relatively small number of imported articles of general consumption and subject them to low duties so that there will be no tendency to shift resources into industries producing such taxed goods (or substitutes for them). If, on the other hand, a country wishes to protect its home industries, its list of protected commodities will be long and the tariff rates high. Political goals often motivate the imposition or removal of tariffs. Tariffs may be further classified into three groups—transit duties, export duties, and import duties.
This type of duty is levied on commodities that originate in one country, cross another, and are consigned to a third. As the name implies, transit duties are levied by the country through which the goods pass. Such duties are no longer important instruments of commercial policy, but, during the mercantilist period (16th–18th century) and even up to the middle of the 19th century in some countries, they played a role in directing trade and controlling certain of its routes. The development of the German Zollverein (a customs union) in the first half of the 19th century resulted in part from Prussia’s exercise of its power to levy transit duties. The most direct and immediate effect of transit duties is a reduction in the amount of commodities traded internationally and an increase in the cost of those products to the importing country.
Export duties are no longer used to a great extent, except to tax certain mineral, petroleum, and agricultural products. Several resource-rich countries depend upon export duties for much of their revenue. Export duties were common in the past, however, and were significant elements of mercantilist trade policies. Their main function was to safeguard domestic supplies rather than to raise revenue. Export duties were first introduced in England by a statute in 1275 that imposed them on hides and wool. By the middle of the 17th century, the list of commodities subject to export duties had increased to include more than 200 articles. With the growth of free trade in the 19th century, export duties became less appealing; they were abolished in England (1842), in France (1857), and in Prussia (1865). At the beginning of the 20th century, only a few countries levied export duties. For example, Spain still levied them on coke, Bolivia and Malaysia on tin, Italy on objects of art, and Romania on forest products. The neo-mercantilist revival in the 1920s and ’30s brought about a limited reappearance of export duties. In the United States export duties were prohibited by the Constitution, mainly because of pressure from the South, which wanted no restriction on its freedom to export agricultural products.
Export duties are now generally levied by raw-material-producing countries rather than by advanced industrial countries. Differential exchange rates are sometimes used to extract revenues from export sectors. Commonly taxed exports include coffee, rubber, palm oil, and various mineral products. The state-controlled pricing policies of international cartels such as the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries have some of the characteristics of export duties.
Export duties act as an effective means of protection for domestic industries. For example, Norwegian and Swedish duties on exports of forest products were levied chiefly to encourage milling, woodworking, and paper manufacturing at home. Similarly, duties on the export from India of untanned hides after World War I were levied to stimulate the Indian tanning industry. In a number of cases, however, duties levied on exports from colonies were designed to protect the industries of the mother country and not those of the colony.
If the country imposing the export duty supplies only a small share of the world’s exports and if competitive conditions prevail, the burden of an export duty will likely be borne by the domestic producer, who will receive the world price minus the duty and other charges. But if the country produces a significant portion of the world output and if domestic supply is sensitive to lower net prices, then output will fall; world prices would then tend to rise, and, as a consequence, both domestic producers and foreign consumers would bear the export tax. How far a country can employ export duties to exploit its monopoly position in supplying certain raw materials depends upon the success other countries have in discovering substitutes or new sources of supply.
