Trust company,   corporation legally authorized to serve as executor or administrator of decedents’ estates, as guardian of the property of incompetents, and as trustee under deeds of trust, trust agreements, and wills, as well as to act in many circumstances as an agent. Trust companies may have commercial banking departments, and commercial banks may have trust departments. In some countries, trust companies and commercial banks, though separate institutions, are often affiliated. Because the United States pioneered in the development of incorporated trust institutions, legislation and practices of other countries often have been modeled upon American patterns. State laws in the United States generally prescribe minimum capital and surplus requirements for trust operations and require the segregation of trust assets from banking-department assets, the segregation of and separate accounting for the assets of each trust estate, and the specific allocation of managerial responsibility for trust operations.
Trust companies serve as trustees for individuals, business corporations, nonprofit institutions, and governmental bodies. They distinguish between personal trusts and corporate trusts, often having separate departments for the two classes. In serving as trustee, the company usually takes legal title to property conveyed to it and manages it according to the instructions of the creator of the trust, the prescriptions of state law, or the directions of a court having jurisdiction, depending upon the circumstances by which the trust originates. When trust companies accept various managerial duties on an agency basis, they do not take title to property.
Trust services for individuals tend to centre on the administration of estates. Other personal trust work of trust companies is concerned chiefly with living trusts and testamentary trusts. Any person during his lifetime may convey property in trust to a trust company with instructions as to the disposal of the income from the property and eventually of the property itself. Such living trusts are used especially by the wealthy who seek to reduce the burden of estate taxes. Testamentary trusts, which originate in wills, arise when a person stipulates that his estate is not to be distributed but is to be held in trust for a certain period of time.
Their principal service to business corporations is to serve as trustees under corporate bond indentures. In this capacity, a trust company takes title to or a lien upon any property put up as security and verifies the performance of requirements imposed by the loan contract. This function is a matter of rather rigid verification and involves little discretionary action. A service involving more discretion on the part of the trust company is the management of corporate pension funds. Companies seeking higher returns on such funds than can be offered by group insurance plans may transfer these funds to a trust company for management. Trust companies may also serve as transfer agents (keeping records of a corporation’s stockholders or bond owners), as corporate stock registrars (responsible for the proper issuance of new stock certificates when additional stock is sold or outstanding stock is transferred), and as paying agents for the distribution of dividends. 
