Twitter,  online microblogging service for distributing short messages among groups of recipients via personal computer or mobile telephone. Twitter incorporates aspects of social networking Web sites, such as Myspace and Facebook, with instant messaging technologies to create networks of users who can communicate throughout the day with brief messages, or “tweets.” A user types a tweet via mobile phone keypad or computer and sends it to Twitter’s server, which relays it to a list of other users (known as followers) who have signed up to receive the sender’s tweets by either text message to their mobile phones or by instant message to their personal computers. In addition, users can elect to track specific topics, creating a dialogue of sorts and pushing the number of followers in a given Twitter feed into the millions. Tweets may be on any subject, ranging from jokes to news to dinner plans, but they cannot exceed 140 characters.
Twitter was built using Ruby on Rails, a specialized Web-application framework for the Ruby computer programming language. Its interface allows open adaptation and integration with other online services. The service was designed in 2006 by Evan Williams and Biz Stone, each of whom worked at Google before leaving to launch the podcasting venture Odeo. Williams, who had previously created the popular Web authoring tool Blogger, began experimenting with one of Odeo’s side projects—a short message service (SMS) then called Twttr. Seeing a future for the product, Williams bought out Odeo and started Obvious Corp. to further develop it. Engineer Jack Dorsey joined the management team, and the completed version of Twitter debuted at the South by Southwest music conference in Austin, Texas, in March 2007. The following month Twitter, Inc., was created as a corporate entity, thanks to an infusion of venture capital.
From its inception Twitter was primarily a free SMS with a social networking element. As such, it lacked the clear revenue stream that one could find on sites that derived income from banner advertising or membership fees. With the number of unique visitors increasing some 1,300 percent in 2009, it was obvious that Twitter was more than a niche curiosity. However, in a year that saw the social networking juggernaut Facebook turn a profit for only the first time, it was not clear whether Twitter could achieve financial independence from its venture capital investors. In April 2010 Twitter unveiled “Promoted Tweets”—advertisements that would appear in search results—as its intended primary revenue source.
Twitter’s social networking roots were obvious in April 2009, when actor Ashton Kutcher emerged as the victor in a race with CNN to become the first Twitterer to collect more than a million followers. While celebrity “e-watching” remained a significant draw to the service, businesses soon began sending tweets about promotions and events, and political campaigns discovered the value of Twitter as a communication tool. In the 2008 U.S. presidential election, Barack Obama dominated his opponent, John McCain, in the social media sphere, amassing almost four times as many Myspace friends and more than 20 times as many Twitter followers. This development virtually ensured that future candidates would include a social networking presence as part of their media strategies.
Perhaps the most noteworthy step in the evolution of Twitter, though, was its increased use as a tool for amateur journalists. Twitter transformed from something that was regarded as an idle hobby for an increasingly wired world into an up-to-the-second news source that transcended political borders. On January 15, 2009, a tweet by commuter ferry passenger Janis Krums broke the story of the successful water landing of US Airways Flight 1549 on the Hudson River in New York City. A hastily snapped camera phone image of passengers disembarking the half-submerged aircraft was uploaded to Twitpic.com, a photo-hosting service for Twitter users; the site promptly crashed as thousands of Twitterers attempted to view it at once.
Twitter truly established itself as an emerging outlet for the dissemination of information during the events surrounding the Iranian presidential election in June 2009. As state media sources reported that Pres. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad had secured an easy victory, supporters of opposition candidate Mir Hossein Mousavi took to the streets in a series of demonstrations that eventually provoked a crackdown by the government, in which some demonstrators were injured or killed. The topic #IranElection became one of the most followed on Twitter, as Mousavi supporters coordinated protests and posted live updates of events throughout the Iranian capital. On June 15, three days after the election, Twitter delayed a 90-minute maintenance period at the request of the U.S. State Department, rescheduling it for 1:30 am Tehrān time so as not to interfere with the flow of information within and from Iran. The following day, foreign journalists were banned from covering opposition rallies, and Twitter, along with other social networking sites, filled the void left by the traditional media. Government security officers tried to stanch the flow of information by blocking individual Twitterers, while opposition supporters urged #IranElection followers to change their profile settings to the Tehrān time zone in an attempt to overwhelm government filters. Although the protests did not result in a change in the election results or a new election, the tweets of de facto journalists showed the potential of nontraditional media to circumvent government censorship.
Having demonstrated its versatility as a high-tech newswire, Twitter drew the attention of those who would prefer to see certain information suppressed. In August 2009 a Georgian economics professor whose tweets recounted the days leading up to the 2008 military conflict between Russia and Georgia was the target of a massive denial-of-service attack that knocked out the entire site for hours. Millions of users attempted to log into Twitter only to be greeted by the service’s iconic “fail whale”—the image of a cartoon whale being hoisted into the air by a flock of birds, signaling a site outage.
Following the earthquake that struck Haiti in January 2010, Twitter reaffirmed its role as a powerful tool for the dissemination of information. Additionally, it became an effective fund-raising platform, when the Red Cross launched a mobile giving campaign that surpassed all expectations. High-profile users tweeted about the drive to help victims of the earthquake, and many of their followers tweeted and re-tweeted the message, helping the Red Cross raise more than $8 million through text messaging within 48 hours of the quake.
In September 2013 Twitter filed to become a public company. (It announced the news to the public in a tweet.) Its initial public offering (IPO) in November raised $1.8 billion, giving it a market value of $31 billion.
