United Automobile Workers (UAW),  in full International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America, also called (1941–62) United Automobile, Aircraft and Agricultural Implement Workers of America and (1935–41) United Automobile Workers of America,  North American industrial union of automotive and other vehicular workers, headquartered in Detroit, Mich., and representing workers in the United States, Canada, and Puerto Rico.
The creation of the United Automobile Workers resulted from attempts made by the Committee for Industrial Organization (CIO) to organize automotive workers. Until the passage of the National Labor Relations Act (Wagner Act) in 1935, automotive industry representatives refused to yield. The union’s rank-and-file organizers retaliated by organizing “sit-down” strikes similar to those that had been effective in France. The success of these strikes, together with President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s election in 1936 and the Supreme Court’s decision to sustain the Wagner Act the following year, prompted automobile manufacturers to change their policy. General Motors (GM) was the first company to recognize the UAW as the bargaining agent for its employees, and most of the industry soon followed. Violent conflict persisted, however, before the Ford Motor Company and the UAW finally came to terms in 1941.
Walter Reuther, an early and vigorous labour organizer, became president of the union in 1946 and held that position until his death in 1970. He was also elected president of the CIO (by this time renamed the Congress of Industrial Organizations) in 1952. Under Reuther’s leadership, the UAW signed a series of multiyear contracts with the major automotive manufacturers that set the standard for all industrial unions in the United States. The contracts guaranteed wages that would be adjusted to the cost of living, health plans, annual vacations, and unemployment benefits to supplement those provided by the government.
When the American Federation of Labor (AFL) and the CIO merged in 1955, Reuther retained important leadership positions. Only George Meany, president of the combined AFL–CIO, was more powerful. Friction between the two men caused the UAW to withdraw from the AFL–CIO in 1967, with the UAW joining the International Brotherhood of Teamsters the same year. Dissatisfaction with the corruption in the Teamsters, however, led to dissolution of the alliance in 1972.
In 1981 the UAW reaffiliated itself with the AFL–CIO. Union members subsequently had to concede some of their hard-won economic benefits to help American car manufacturers compete against foreign imports. This policy provoked the separation of Canadian autoworkers from the parent body in 1985–86. In 1996 the UAW began a new era of negotiations with the three major American automakers—GM, Ford, and Chrysler. Collective bargaining focused on job security, a lump-sum bonus, tuition assistance, and limitations on outsourcing. This new era stressed cooperation, job security, and the sharing of wealth.
