Wendy’s,  fast-food company that is the third largest hamburger chain in the United States, behind McDonald’s and Burger King. Dave Thomas founded the first Wendy’s restaurant in Columbus, Ohio, in 1969. One of fast food’s most famous logos, Wendy’s cartoon image of a smiling redheaded girl, was based on the appearance of Thomas’s daughter, who also inspired the company’s name.
Under Thomas’s leadership, Wendy’s expanded rapidly, with the chain’s 1,000th store opening within a decade of the company’s founding. Growth continued after Thomas ceased to oversee day-to-day operations in 1982, but a series of subsequent minor setbacks—including a failed attempt at breakfast service—led Thomas to become the face of the company in a successful series of commercials that began airing in 1989. His folksy avuncular demeanour proved to be popular with viewers, and the generally wholesome tone of the commercials stood in stark contrast to that of the company’s previous hit campaign, the snarky “Where’s the beef?” ads of the mid-1980s. By the time Thomas died in 2002, he had appeared in over 800 Wendy’s commercials, the most ad appearances for any company’s founder to that point in history, and the Wendy’s brand was inextricably linked to Thomas’s image for a generation of consumers. One of Thomas’s preferred charitable causes, childhood adoption, was embraced by the Wendy’s corporation, most notably with the establishment of the Dave Thomas Foundation for Adoption in 1992.
Years of complex corporate mergers, acquisitions, and sales involving Wendy’s and a number of other fast-food companies were resolved with the 2011 establishment of the corporate parent firm The Wendy’s Company and with the return of Wendy’s corporate headquarters to Dublin, Ohio, just a few miles away from the location of the original Wendy’s restaurant (which had closed in 2007).
Signature items offered by Wendy’s included square-shaped hamburger patties; the Frosty, a frozen dessert available in both chocolate and (from 2006) vanilla flavours; and atypical burger-joint side dishes such as baked potatoes and chili.
