Westinghouse Electric Corporation,   major American company that was a leading manufacturer of electrical equipment.
It was founded as the Westinghouse Electric Company in 1886 by George Westinghouse (1846–1914), the inventor of the air brake and other devices, to construct and market alternating-current electrical systems. Overcoming strong opposition from those fearful that alternating current posed a greater threat to health and safety than the direct current then used in the United States, the company prospered, branching out into all phases of electrical production and use. In 1907 the company was forced to reorganize to avoid insolvency, and George Westinghouse was subsequently relieved of his chairmanship. The company assumed its present name in 1945. It was based in Pittsburgh, Pa.
Westinghouse became a major supplier to the electric utility industry, manufacturing a complete line of machinery and products used to generate, transmit, distribute, and control electricity. It consistently lagged behind the General Electric Company in sales of home appliances, however, and basically ceased competing in that market in 1975.
In the decades after World War II, Westinghouse became a leading maker of commercial nuclear reactors and also produced reactors for U.S. Navy submarines. The company also made radar and other electronic systems used in military aircraft, submarines, and munitions until it sold its defense electronics unit to Northrop Grumman Corporation in 1996.
In the 1990s Westinghouse acquired television and radio stations throughout the United States. In an effort to focus on broadcasting, the company purchased CBS Inc., a major television network, in 1995. The following year Westinghouse purchased Infinity Broadcasting Corporation, thereby merging the nation’s two largest radio broadcasters. After these purchases, Westinghouse sold off its remaining industrial businesses in order to focus entirely on television and radio broadcasting and programming. Abandoning its own well-known corporate name, Westinghouse in 1997 renamed itself the CBS Corporation.
