Isabella Macdonald Alden, née Isabella Macdonald, pseudonym Pansy,  (born Nov. 3, 1841, Rochester, N.Y., U.S.—died Aug. 5, 1930, Palo Alto, Calif.), American children’s author whose books achieved great popularity for the wholesome interest and variety of their situations and characters and the clearly moral but not sombre lessons of their plots.
Isabella Macdonald was educated at home and at Oneida Seminary, Seneca Collegiate Institute at Ovid, and the Young Ladies Institute at Auburn, all upstate New York boarding schools. She subsequently became a teacher at Oneida Seminary. She is reputed to have published a story in her hometown newspaper at the age of 10.
Her first novel, Helen Lester, appeared in 1866 after a friend submitted it without her knowledge to a competition for a book explaining the scheme of Christian salvation to children. In that same year she married the Reverend Gustavus R. Alden, with whom she traveled to a succession of pastorates from New York to Indiana over the next several years. The success of Helen Lester led to a steady stream of books, numbering in all more than 75. Nearly all of her books were written for children, mainly on religious themes, and all were signed simply “Pansy,” a childhood nickname. Alden also contributed regularly to the Presbyterian Primary Quarterly and the Westminster Teacher, served on the staffs of Trained Motherhood and the Christian Endeavor World, and for 30 years published an annual serial in the Herald and Presbyter. From 1874 to 1896 she edited her own children’s periodical, Pansy. At the height of her popularity, Alden’s books sold more than 100,000 copies a year, and they were widely circulated by public and especially Sunday-school libraries. The Pansy Society, an outgrowth of the magazine, enrolled a great many young members, who pledged themselves to self-improvement. Alden was an active supporter of the chautauqua movement and of the Woman’s Christian Temperance Union. Her unfinished autobiography was completed by her niece, Grace Livingston Hill, and published in 1931 as Memories of Yesterdays.
