Namık Kemal, in full Mehmed Namık Kemal,  (born December 2, 1840, Tekirdağ, Ottoman Empire [now in Turkey]—died  December 2, 1888, Sakız [now Chios, Greece]), Turkish prose writer and poet who greatly influenced the Young Turk and Turkish nationalist movements and contributed to the westernization of Turkish literature.
An aristocrat by birth, he was educated privately, learning Persian, Arabic, and French, which resulted in his working for the Ottoman government translation bureaus in 1857–58. Kemal became acquainted with the leading poets of the day and began to write poetry in the classical Ottoman style. Later he was influenced by the writer and editor of the newspaper Tasvir-i Efkâr (“Description of Ideas”), İbrahim Şinasi, who had spent much time in Europe and was greatly enamoured of Western ways and ideas. Kemal became editor of the Tasvir-i Efkâr in 1865, when Şinasi fled to France. By 1867, however, the highly political nature of the publication caused trouble with the Ottoman government, and he, together with other Young Ottomans, as this group of reforming young writers came to be known, fled to London, and then to Paris and Vienna. Kemal spent his time studying and translating into Turkish selected works of such great French authors as Victor Hugo, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and Charles-Louis Montesquieu. He also published the newspaper Hürriyet (“Freedom”). When the Young Ottomans returned to Constantinople (now Istanbul) in 1871, Kemal continued his revolutionary writings as editor of the newspaper İbret (“Warning”) and also wrote his most famous play, Vatan yahut Silistre (“Fatherland; or, Silistria”), a drama evolving around the siege of Silistria in 1854, in which he expounded on the ideas of patriotism and liberalism. The play was denounced by the Ottoman government and led to his imprisonment on Cyprus (1873–76). After his release and another period of virtual exile, he became governor of Sakız (Chios) in 1888.
As a social reformer, Namık Kemal is best known as the propagator of two basic ideas: vatan (“fatherland”) and hürriyet (“freedom”), ideas modeled after European concepts that he virtually introduced into the Turkish language. Although a liberal thinker, Kemal never rejected Islam in his plan of reform. He believed that the religion was compatible with a thoroughly modernized Turkey having a constitutional government modeled after that of the English. His best-known novels include İntibah yahut Ali Beyin sergüzeşiti (1874; “Awakening; or, Ali Bey’s Experiences”) and Cezmi (1887/88), a historical novel based on the life of a 16th-century khan of the Crimean Tatars. A widely read social work is Rüya (“The Dream”), expressing his desire for a Turkey free from oppression.
