Anaheim Ducks,  American professional ice hockey team based in Anaheim, California, that plays in the Western Conference of the National Hockey League (NHL). The Ducks have won one Stanley Cup championship (2007).
Founded in 1993, the franchise was originally owned by the Disney Company and was known as the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim after the then-recent Disney movie about a children’s ice hockey team, The Mighty Ducks (1992). After starting with three consecutive losing seasons, the Mighty Ducks were led to their first play-off berth in 1996–97 by high-scoring forwards Teemu Selanne and Paul Kariya. Anaheim then returned to mediocrity, with three last-place divisional finishes between 1997–98 and 2001–02. In 2002–03 the team made a startling postseason run when the seventh-seeded (out of eight Western Conference clubs) Mighty Ducks were propelled into the Stanley Cup finals by the fantastic goaltending of Jean-Sébastien Giguère. Anaheim eventually lost that series to the New Jersey Devils, but Giguère won the Conn Smythe Trophy as the postseason’s most valuable player.
In 2006 the franchise, which had been sold by Disney the previous year, adopted as its name the Anaheim Ducks. The Ducks then won their first division championship—in 2006–07, with a team led by Selanne and featuring budding stars Corey Perry and Ryan Getzlaf. In the following postseason the Ducks lost just five total games and defeated the Ottawa Senators to capture the Stanley Cup championship. Anaheim posted winning records in the four seasons after capturing that title but failed to advance further than the second round of the play-offs in those years. After a last-place finish in 2011–12, the Ducks won the second division title in team history in 2012–13 but were upset in their opening postseason series.
In 2013–14 the Ducks set a franchise record with 54 wins to capture a division title and finish with the best record in the Western Conference. However, the team was upset by the rival Los Angeles Kings in the conference semifinals. Anaheim tied for the best conference record in 2014–15 and subsequently advanced to the conference finals, where the Ducks lost a seven-game series to the Chicago Blackhawks. In 2015–16 the team won a fourth consecutive division title but lost in the first round of the postseason, which featured Anaheim’s fourth straight play-off elimination in a game seven on home ice.
After capturing another division title in 2016–17, the Ducks faced another home-ice game seven in the second round of the play-offs but managed to break their ignoble streak with a win over the Edmonton Oilers before ultimately being eliminated in the conference finals. The Ducks returned to the postseason in 2017–18 but were swept in the opening round.
