Arizona Coyotes,  American professional ice hockey team based in Glendale, Arizona, that plays in the Western Conference of the National Hockey League (NHL). As the Winnipeg Jets, the franchise won three World Hockey Association (WHA) titles (1976, 1978, and 1979).
The franchise, a founding member of the WHA, was originally based in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada, and began play in 1972 as the Jets. In its inaugural season the team made headlines before it played a single game, when it signed superstar Bobby Hull away from the NHL’s Chicago Black Hawks. The landmark acquisition gave instant credibility to the fledgling league and subsequently led to larger salaries for all professional hockey players as the NHL teams were forced to increase their pay to avoid having their players poached by WHA franchises. With Hull the Jets proved to be one of the WHA’s best teams, appearing in the Avco Cup (league championship) finals in five of the seven WHA seasons and winning three titles (1976, 1978, and 1979). The financially floundering WHA was forced to merge with the NHL before the 1979–80 season, and the Jets were one of four WHA franchises to move to the NHL.
The Jets’ dominance did not extend to their new league, as the team failed to post a winning record in any of its first five NHL seasons. Centre Dale Hawerchuk led the team to winning seasons and first-round play-off victories (and second-round losses to the eventual champion Edmonton Oilers) in both 1984–85 and 1986–87, but the Jets failed to advance any farther in the postseason during the remainder of their time in Winnipeg. As player salaries and other expenses continued to grow through the 1980s and ’90s, the small-market Jets struggled financially, and the team was sold to a group of Phoenix-area investors in 1995. The franchise relocated to Arizona before the 1996–97 season and became known as the Phoenix Coyotes.
Led by the play of left wing Keith Tkachuk, right wing Shane Doan, and defenseman Teppo Numminen, the renamed Coyotes qualified for the postseason in each of their first four seasons in Phoenix, losing in the first round on each occasion. Hockey legend Wayne Gretzky became a minority owner of the team in 2000 and became the Coyotes’ head coach in 2005. Phoenix failed to finish any higher than second-to-last in its division during Gretzky’s tenure, and he stepped down in September 2009 soon after the Coyotes—who continued to lose money after their move to Phoenix—filed for bankruptcy protection. Two months later the bankrupt team was purchased by the NHL. Despite this turmoil the Coyotes won 50 games during the 2009–10 season (the team’s highest win total since joining the NHL 30 years earlier) to end a six-year play-off drought. In 2011–12 the Coyotes won the first division title in franchise history. The team followed that feat by beating the Blackhawks in a thrilling first-round play-off series wherein five of the six games were decided in overtime to claim the franchise’s first postseason series victory since its relocation from Winnipeg. The Coyotes won another play-off series before ultimately being eliminated by the Los Angeles Kings in the Western Conference finals.
In 2013 the NHL sold the team to an ownership group that vowed to keep the Coyotes in Arizona. To reflect the fact that it is based outside of Phoenix and in an effort to further appeal to hockey fans across the state, the franchise changed its name to the Arizona Coyotes in 2014.
