Carolina Hurricanes,  American professional ice hockey team based in Raleigh, North Carolina. The Hurricanes play in the Eastern Conference of the National Hockey League (NHL) and won the Stanley Cup in 2006.
Founded in 1972 as the New England Whalers and based in Hartford, Connecticut, the franchise was first a member of the upstart World Hockey Association (WHA). The Whalers’ most notable moment in those early years was the signing of 49-year-old hockey legend Gordie Howe in 1977 to play alongside his two sons for three seasons until his retirement in 1980. When the WHA’s financial struggles forced it to merge with the NHL in 1979, the Whalers were one of four teams that were absorbed into the older league. As the Hartford Whalers, the team qualified for the playoffs—though with a losing regular-season record—in its first year in the NHL. The Whalers did not make the playoffs again until the 1985–86 season, and they finished last in their division in four of the five seasons between playoff berths. One bright spot during this period of futility was the selection of Ron Francis with the fourth overall pick of the 1981 NHL draft. Francis would go on to spend nearly 16 seasons with the franchise in both Hartford and Carolina and get inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame after amassing the second most assists in NHL history.
Francis led the Whalers to seven straight appearances in the NHL playoffs between 1985–86 and 1991–92, but the team lost in the first round in every year save one. This period was followed by another long stretch of poor play during which the team returned to the lower reaches of their division. Additionally, the financial difficulties of playing in a relatively small market began to take a toll on the Whalers’ bottom line and—after an attempt to build a new arena in Hartford failed—the team was relocated to Raleigh in 1997 and renamed the Carolina Hurricanes.
While awaiting the construction of a permanent stadium in Raleigh, the Hurricanes played home games during their first two seasons in Greensboro, 75 miles (120 km) west of Raleigh. They continued the franchise’s losing ways in their first season in North Carolina, but they rebounded to win their first division title in 12 years the following season. The Hurricanes posted winning records in each of the successive three seasons and advanced to their first berth in the Stanley Cup finals in 2001–02, where they were defeated by the Detroit Red Wings in five games. Led by the stellar play of their young star Eric Staal and team captain Rod Brind’Amour, the Hurricanes posted the best record in franchise history during the 2005–06 season and capped off the year with a dramatic seven-game victory over the Edmonton Oilers in the Stanley Cup finals. The Hurricanes advanced to the conference finals in 2008–09, but then missed the playoffs for nine seasons before returning in 2018–19 (which ended in another conference finals loss).
