Columbus Blue Jackets,  American professional ice hockey team based in Columbus, Ohio, that plays in the Eastern Conference of the National Hockey League (NHL).
The Blue Jackets joined the NHL in 2000 alongside fellow expansion team the Minnesota Wild. The franchise’s nickname, the product of a name-the-team contest, pays homage to the many Ohioans who served in the Union army during the American Civil War and to the manufacture in Columbus of many of the uniforms worn by that army. The Blue Jackets’ first three seasons ended in last-place divisional finishes. A highlight of that period came in 2002 when the team drafted left wing and future All-Star Rick Nash with the first overall selection of the NHL draft. Nash’s presence helped Columbus escape the divisional cellar for the first time in 2003–04, and the team qualified for its first postseason berth (a first-round loss to the Detroit Red Wings) in the 2008–09 season. Following that playoff appearance, subsequent Blue Jacket squads returned to the lower echelons of the NHL.
As part of an NHL realignment, Columbus moved from the Western Conference to the Eastern after the 2012–13 season. In the team’s first season playing in the Eastern Conference, it qualified for the playoffs, where Columbus won the first two postseason games in franchise history before ultimately losing its opening series to the Pittsburgh Penguins. The team then went two seasons without a postseason berth before posting a franchise-best 108 points in 2016–17. However, the Blue Jackets won just a single playoff game before again being eliminated by the Penguins. In 2018–19 the Blue Jackets were the lowest seed in the Eastern Conference playoff field and had a first-round matchup against a juggernaut Tampa Bay Lightning team that had tied an NHL record for victories during the regular season. In one of the most stunning upsets in NHL history, the Blue Jackets not only won the first postseason series in franchise history but swept the Lightning in four games. Columbus could not maintain the momentum from its historic upset in the second round, when the team was defeated by the Boston Bruins.
