Joel Quenneville, in full Joel Norman Quenneville,  (born September 15, 1958, Windsor, Ontario, Canada), Canadian ice hockey player who later became a successful head coach, guiding the National Hockey League (NHL) Chicago Blackhawks to three Stanley Cups (2010, 2013, and 2015).
Quenneville began playing serious ice hockey as a teenager, first with the Ontario Hockey Association (OHA) Windsor Spitfires (1975–78) and then with the NHL-affiliated American Hockey League (AHL) New Brunswick Hawks (1978–79). He was drafted by the Toronto Maple Leafs as the 21st overall selection of the 1978 NHL draft. A capable defenseman, he played for the Maple Leafs, the Colorado Rockies–New Jersey Devils, the Hartford Whalers (now Carolina Hurricanes), and the Washington Capitals—with additional stints back in the AHL—before retiring from play in 1992.
Having spent his final season as a player-coach for the St. John’s (New Brunswick) Maple Leafs of the AHL, Quenneville thereafter dedicated himself to full-time coaching. He spent one season as the head coach of the AHL’s Springfield Indians (1993–94) before joining the Quebec Nordiques–Colorado Avalanche franchise of the NHL as an assistant coach. The Avalanche won the Stanley Cup in 1996, an accomplishment that helped Quenneville land his first NHL head-coaching position, with the St. Louis Blues, the following season.
Quenneville led the Blues to playoff berths in each of his seven full seasons with the team and won a franchise-record 307 games. However, St. Louis advanced to the conference finals just once during his tenure (a loss in 2001), and he was fired as the team struggled during the 2003–04 season. He returned to the Avalanche, this time as the head coach, and spent three seasons in Colorado before he and that franchise parted ways after the 2007–08 season. Quenneville joined the Blackhawks as a scout the following season, but he served in that capacity only for a short time before the team promoted him to head coach after having fired his predecessor just four games into the 2008–09 season.
During his first season in Chicago, “Coach Q” quickly turned around the middling Blackhawks, guiding them to the franchise’s first playoff berth in six seasons. Despite the limitations of the NHL’s salary cap, which had been put into place in 2005 to make the league more competitive, Quenneville led the Hawks to the playoffs in each of his first seven seasons with the team. In 2010 Chicago defeated the Philadelphia Flyers in the Stanley Cup finals to capture the Blackhawks’ first title in 48 seasons. Another Stanley Cup—over the Boston Bruins—followed in 2013. Two years later Chicago defeated the Tampa Bay Lightning to again win the NHL championship. On January 14, 2016, he notched his 783rd career coaching victory to become the second winningest coach in NHL history, behind Scotty Bowman. While his teams generally excelled in the postseason, Quenneville also oversaw the first sweep of a top-seeded team by an eighth-seeded team in NHL history when the Blackhawks were eliminated in four games by the Nashville Predators in the first round of the 2016–17 playoffs. Chicago’s play fell off dramatically the next season, resulting in the team finishing last in the Central Division to end the Blackhawks’ nine-year postseason streak. The team got off to another slow start in 2018–19, and Quenneville was fired after the Blackhawks opened the season with a 6–6–3 record. In 2019 he became head coach of the Florida Panthers.
