Mario Lemieux,  (born October 5, 1965, Montreal, Quebec, Canada), Canadian professional ice hockey player and owner who is considered one of the greatest players in the history of the sport.
Lemieux starred in the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League as a teenager, setting a league record by scoring 282 points in 70 games during the 1983–84 season. He was chosen by the Pittsburgh Penguins with the first overall selection in the 1984 National Hockey League (NHL) draft. Lemieux had an outstanding rookie season: he scored 100 points, was named to the All-Star team, and was awarded the Calder Memorial Trophy as the NHL’s rookie of the year. He scored more than 100 points in each of his first six years in Pittsburgh and was named NHL Most Valuable Player (MVP) for the 1987–88 season, but the Penguins only qualified for the playoffs once during that period and were eliminated in the second round.
Lemieux missed 54 games of the 1990–91 season after undergoing back surgery in the off-season, but a reconfigured Penguins team featuring future Hall of Famer Paul Coffey and rookie sensation Jaromir Jagr finished a surprising first in their division. Lemieux returned for all but one of his team’s playoff games and led the Penguins to their first Stanley Cup championship, earning playoff MVP honours in the process. The Penguins repeated as champions the next season, and Lemieux earned a second playoff MVP award.
Lemieux led the NHL in scoring during the 1992–93 season and was named league MVP despite a midseason diagnosis of Hodgkin disease that caused him to miss 20 games for radiation treatment. Fatigue from the treatment and a recurrence of his back pain forced Lemieux out of all but 22 games the following season. Lemieux skipped the 1994–95 NHL season to recover from his radiation treatment, but he returned at full strength in 1995–96, leading the league in all scoring categories on his way to a third career MVP award. He captured his sixth career scoring title the following season, but the effects of his cancer treatment and his dissatisfaction with the style of play in the NHL led Lemieux to announce his retirement in 1997 at age 31. He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame later that year.
The small-market Penguins’ long-standing financial struggles worsened in Lemieux’s absence, and the team declared bankruptcy in 1998. In 1999 Lemieux converted years of his unpaid Penguins salary to equity and led a group of investors that jointly purchased the team. He came out of retirement and returned to the Penguins during the 2000–01 season, becoming the first player-owner in NHL history. Though not as dominant as he was in his earlier stint with the Penguins, Lemieux was named to the NHL All-Star team in his first season back, and he led his team on an unexpected run to the conference finals in the playoffs.
In 2002 Lemieux captained the Canadian Olympic hockey team to a gold medal at the Salt Lake City (Utah) Games. Health problems forced Lemieux out of a large number of games during his last seasons in the NHL, and he retired for a second and final time midway through the 2005–06 season. Despite missing five full seasons for his cancer treatment, his first retirement, and the 2004–05 NHL labour lockout, Lemieux placed 9th on the NHL’s all-time goals scored list, 10th all-time in assists, and 7th all-time in total points at the time of his second retirement. The Penguins won their third Stanley Cup in 2008–09, and Lemieux became the first person to win the cup as both a player and an owner. The team captured another cup in 2015–16 and repeated as champions the following season.
