San Jose Sharks,  American professional ice hockey team that plays in the Western Conference of the National Hockey League (NHL). The Sharks are based in San Jose, California, and have won one Western Conference title (2016).
The San Francisco Bay Area was previously home to an NHL team, known first as the Seals and then as the Golden Seals, from 1967 to 1976. When two of that franchise’s owners, Gordon and George Gund, were awarded an expansion club by the league to begin play in 1991, they chose to base it in San Jose, which had never previously been home to a major North American sports franchise. The Sharks finished at the bottom of their division in both of their first two seasons, but in 1993–94 they improved their win total by 22 and qualified for the play-offs. In the postseason the Sharks shocked the top-seeded Detroit Red Wings, winning their first-round play-off series in seven games in one of the biggest upsets in NHL play-off history. San Jose again earned a play-off berth the next season and once more defeated a higher-seeded team, the Calgary Flames, before being eliminated in the Western Conference semifinals.
The Sharks’ success was short-lived, however, as the team finished in last place in its division in each of the following two seasons. In 1997–98 the team began a streak of five consecutive postseason appearances, which was capped by a Sharks squad—starring goaltender Yevgeny Nabokov, forward Owen Nolan, and centre Patrick Marleau—that won San Jose’s first division title and appeared in the 2001–02 Western Conference semifinals, which it lost to the Colorado Avalanche in a seven-game series. Two seasons later the Sharks advanced to the Western Conference finals, in which the Flames denied them a berth in the Stanley Cup finals. For the next three seasons the Sharks made conference semifinal appearances that resulted in losses. In 2008–09 San Jose, behind the standout play of centre Joe Thornton, had the best record in the NHL, earning the top seed in the Western Conference play-offs. However, in a twist on the franchise’s early play-off history, the Sharks were upset in the first round of the postseason by the Anaheim Ducks. The team again earned the number one seed in the Western Conference play-offs in 2009–10 but was swept in the conference finals by the Chicago Blackhawks. San Jose returned to the conference finals the following postseason, losing to the Vancouver Canucks in five games. In 2011–12 the team’s streak of four consecutive division titles came to an end, and the Sharks lost their opening-round play-off series.
The Sharks’ history of play-off disappointment reached a nadir in the 2013–14 season, when San Jose became the fourth team in NHL history to lose a postseason series after holding a 3–0 advantage by dropping four consecutive games against the rival Los Angeles Kings in the first round of the postseason. After missing out on postseason qualification the next season, the Sharks again advanced to the play-offs in 2015–16. Despite having just the fifth best regular-season record of the eight Western Conference play-off teams, San Jose finally broke through its postseason funk and captured the team’s first-ever conference title. The Sharks then lost the Stanley Cup finals to the Pittsburgh Penguins in six games. San Jose returned to the postseason in 2016–17 but was eliminated in the opening round of the play-offs.
