Sidney Crosby,  (born August 7, 1987, Cole Harbour, Nova Scotia, Canada), Canadian ice hockey player who in 2007 became the youngest captain of a National Hockey League (NHL) team and who led the Pittsburgh Penguins to three Stanley Cup championships (2009, 2016, and 2017).
Crosby, the son of a goaltender drafted by the Montreal Canadiens, was able to skate by age three. In his sophomore year of high school in Faribault, Minnesota, he scored 72 goals and had 90 assists in 57 games. This feat gained the attention of ice hockey legend Wayne Gretzky, who speculated that his own records would one day be surpassed by Crosby. In 2003 Rimouski Océanic, a Quebec Major Junior Hockey League team, drafted Crosby, who went on to score 120 goals and tally 183 assists in 121 regular-season games over two years. Each year he was named Canada’s top junior player. He also joined the Canadian National Junior Hockey team and became the youngest player to score a goal for the national team.
In 2005 the Penguins selected the 18-year-old Crosby as the top pick in that year’s NHL draft. Expectations were high for the young player, who drew numerous comparisons to Gretzky (Crosby was dubbed “The Next One,” a variation on Gretzky’s nickname “The Great One”). By the end of his first season (2005–06), Crosby had become the youngest NHL player to score at least 100 points (goals plus assists) in a single season.
Crosby’s second season saw him break more records. For scoring 120 points in 79 games, he won the Art Ross Trophy, becoming its youngest recipient. He was the youngest player since Gretzky (in 1980) to register a six-point game, and he became the second youngest player ever (again behind Gretzky) to receive the Hart Trophy, as the NHL’s most valuable player. Crosby was named captain of the Penguins in 2007, making him the youngest captain in NHL history. During the 2007–08 season Crosby helped lead the Penguins to the Stanley Cup finals, though the team lost to the Detroit Red Wings in six games. The following year Crosby finished third in the NHL with 103 points; the Penguins once again advanced to the finals against the Red Wings, this time winning the championship in seven games.
In 2011 his career nearly came to a premature end when he suffered a concussion after an on-ice hit in January. Crosby missed the remainder of the 2010–11 NHL season, and there was speculation that postconcussion problems might prevent him from returning to hockey. After a prolonged rehabilitation, Crosby rejoined the Penguins’ lineup in November 2011, but he played for just two weeks before he was again sidelined by a recurrence of concussion-like symptoms. He returned in March 2012. His highly publicized injury led to increased public discussion about—and agitation to improve—player safety in the NHL.
Crosby missed 12 games of the lockout-shortened 2012–13 NHL season because of a broken jaw, and he still managed to lead the league with 1.56 points per game. However, the top-seeded Penguins were swept out of the following postseason by the Boston Bruins in the conference finals, a series in which Crosby failed to score a point. He won his second career Art Ross Trophy for leading the NHL in points (104) during the 2013–14 season, a feat that also earned him a second Hart Trophy. His postseason scoring troubles continued, however, as he tallied a single goal and eight assists in 13 playoff games, while the Penguins were upset in the conference semifinals. Crosby tallied 84 points in 2014–15—the lowest total of his career in a season not shortened by injury or labour issues—but still managed to lead the NHL with 1.09 points per game. The Penguins again had a disappointing season, however, as the talent-laden team barely qualified for the playoffs and was quickly eliminated in the first round.
Crosby helped the Penguins return to the upper echelon of the NHL in 2015–16 while scoring 85 points over the course of the regular season. He then tallied 19 points in 24 postseason games while leading the Penguins to their second Stanley Cup victory of his captaincy, earning the Conn Smythe Trophy as the postseason’s most valuable player for his efforts. Crosby led the NHL in goals scored (44) during the 2016–17 season, as the Penguins posted the second best record in the league. In the following postseason he helped Pittsburgh again advance to the Stanley Cup finals, where the team faced the Nashville Predators. The Penguins defeated the Predators in six games, and Crosby—who had scored eight goals and tallied 19 assists over the course of the playoffs—won a second consecutive Conn Smythe Trophy. Crosby kept the Penguins among the top teams in the NHL during the 2017–18 season, but the franchise’s run of Stanley Cup victories ended with a loss in the second round of the playoffs. He continued his excellent individual play in 2018–19, scoring 100 points during the season, but the Penguins were swept in the first round of the playoffs.
In addition to his NHL accomplishments, Crosby was a key member of the Canadian men’s hockey team at the 2010 Olympic Winter Games in Vancouver. Canada took the gold medal as Crosby scored the game-winning overtime goal in the final against the United States. He added a second Olympic gold medal at the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi, Russia.
