St. Louis Blues,  American professional ice hockey team based in St. Louis, Missouri, that plays in the Western Conference of the National Hockey League (NHL). The Blues have appeared in four Stanley Cup finals (1968–70 and 2019) and have won one championship (2019).
The Blues (whose name is derived from musician W.C. Handy’s classic composition “St. Louis Blues”) joined the NHL during the 1967–68 season as one of the six teams added to the league when it expanded from the so-called “Original Six” franchises. Led by first-time head coach Scotty Bowman and featuring hard-nosed defenseman Barclay Plager, the Blues advanced to the Stanley Cup finals in their first season but were defeated by the Montreal Canadiens in four contests that were each decided by just one goal. The Blues won the NHL West Division—composed of the six expansion franchises—in each of the following two seasons as well, only to be swept by the winner of the Original Six-filled East Division in the Stanley Cup finals (Montreal again in 1969, the Boston Bruins in 1970). The team’s hot start was not sustainable, however, and the Blues were markedly less successful during the 1970s. Between 1970–71 and 1979–80, St. Louis posted just two winning records and advanced past its opening playoff round but once.
In 1980–81 the Blues, behind the play of left wing Brian Sutter and centre Bernie Federko, won 45 games—posting the best record in team history up to that point—and captured a division title, but their playoff struggles continued as they were eliminated in their second postseason series. The Blues finished with a losing record six times over the following eight seasons, but nevertheless qualified for the playoffs each year. During the 1987–88 season St. Louis acquired future star right wing Brett Hull. He would go on to score the most goals in franchise history over the course of his 10 full seasons with the Blues—and ultimately follow his father, Bobby Hull, into the Hall of Fame—but he led the team no farther than the second round of the playoffs during that period.
In 1999–2000 the Blues posted the best record in the NHL behind the play of right wing Pavol Demitra and defensemen Chris Pronger and Al MacInnis, but St. Louis was upset in the first round of the NHL playoffs by the Western Conference’s lowest seed, the San Jose Sharks. The Blues rebounded from that disappointment the following season by earning a berth in the conference finals, which they lost to the eventual champion Colorado Avalanche. St. Louis continued to qualify for the postseason through the 2003–04 season, which brought the team’s run of consecutive playoff berths to 25 seasons—the third longest such streak in league history at the time. Over that period, however, the Blues failed to appear in the Stanley Cup finals and only advanced past their second playoff series twice. In the six seasons following the end of the streak, the Blues primarily finished their seasons with win-loss records around .500 but earned just one postseason berth (a first-round loss in 2008–09). The struggling team brought in head coach Ken Hitchcock 14 games into the 2011–12 season, and the Blues rallied behind the new leadership, winning 49 games and capturing the franchise’s first division title in 14 years. However, postseason success continued to elude the team as the Blues lost in the second round of the playoffs that year, which was followed by first-round upset losses in the subsequent three seasons. St. Louis broke through to a degree during the 2015–16 season, advancing to its first conference final in 14 years, where the Blues were eliminated by the San Jose Sharks.
The Blues ended their Stanley Cup finals drought of nearly a half century in storybook fashion during the 2018–19 season. In early January St. Louis had the worst record in the NHL, but the team rallied behind interim head coach Craig Berube, a staunch defense, and stellar play from rookie goaltender Jordan Binnington to finish the season in second place in their division. The team then won three closely contested postseason series, none of which lasted fewer than six games, to reach the Stanley Cup finals for the first time in 49 years. There the Blues won a seven-game series against the Boston Bruins to capture the first championship in franchise history.
