Tampa Bay Lightning,  American professional ice hockey team based in Tampa, Florida, that plays in the Eastern Conference of the National Hockey League (NHL). The Lightning won the Stanley Cup in 2004, 2020, and 2021.
The Lightning entered the league alongside the Ottawa Senators in 1992. As expected for an expansion team, the Lightning initially struggled, finishing with a losing record in each of the franchise’s first three seasons. In 1995–96 Tampa Bay posted its first winning season, earning a playoff berth as the eighth (lowest) seed in the Eastern Conference. The Lightning lost its first postseason series, and the team soon returned to its losing ways, finishing each season between 1996–97 and 2001–02 below .500. One bright spot during that period came in 1998 when Tampa Bay drafted centre Vincent Lecavalier, who would go on to set almost every major team scoring record.
In 2003 the Lightning returned to the postseason and notched its first playoff series win. In 2003–04 Tampa Bay—behind the stellar play of the league’s leading scorer, Martin St. Louis—had the best record in the Eastern Conference and advanced to the Stanley Cup finals. There the team defeated the Calgary Flames in a thrilling seven-game series that ended with four  games that were decided by one goal, two of them overtime contests. The Lightning returned to the playoffs after each of the two seasons following its championship but failed to advance past the opening round.
The team finished with a losing record in each season from 2007–08 to 2009–10, prompting a front office change; in 2010 it hired Hall of Famer Steve Yzerman as its general manager. The change paid immediate dividends: in 2011 the Lightning returned to the postseason and advanced to the conference finals. The turnaround was short-lived, however, as the Lightning missed the playoffs the following two years. The team traded away franchise icon St. Louis during the 2013–14 season but still placed second in its division at the end of that campaign and qualified for the postseason. In 2014–15 Tampa Bay won a franchise-record 50 games, and in the postseason a young Lightning team led by centre Steven Stamkos survived two seven-game series and one six-game series during the Eastern Conference playoffs to advance to the Stanley Cup finals, where the team played another close series before eventually losing to the Chicago Blackhawks. The Lightning made another deep playoff run in 2015–16 before ultimately being eliminated by the eventual champion Pittsburgh Penguins in a close seven-game conference finals series. However, the team missed out on a playoff appearance by a single point during the following season. Tampa Bay came roaring back in 2017–18, posting the best record in the Eastern Conference that season and advancing to the conference finals, in which the team again lost in a seven-game series.
The Lightning had a historic 2018–19 regular season, winning 62 games, which tied an NHL record for most wins in a season. Heavily favoured to win the Stanley Cup, Tampa Bay instead fell victim to one of the biggest upsets in North American sports history, getting swept in the first round of the playoffs by the Columbus Blue Jackets, a franchise that had never won an NHL postseason series in its 18 years of existence. Tampa Bay rebounded from that postseason disappointment the following season, losing just six total games across four playoff series to capture the second Stanley Cup title in franchise history. The team returned to the postseason following the 2020–21 season, which—because of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic—was played with four temporary divisions whose teams only played each other during the regular season and the first two rounds of the playoffs. Tampa Bay advanced from the divisional playoffs and then defeated the New York Islanders in a close seven-game series to play in the Stanley Cup finals. There the Lightning easily dispatched the Montreal Canadiens to capture their second straight Stanley Cup.
