Vancouver Canucks,  Canadian professional ice hockey team based in Vancouver that plays in the Western Conference of the National Hockey League (NHL). The Canucks have appeared in the Stanley Cup finals three times (1982, 1994, and 2011), losing on each occasion. Their name comes from a nickname for Canadians that is probably of 19th-century American origin and that at first may have been pejorative but ultimately was embraced with pride by Canadians.
Like many expansion teams (the Canucks joined the NHL in 1970), Vancouver struggled initially, and the team finished at or near the bottom of its division in its first four seasons in the league. In the 1974–75 season the Canucks rebounded from a second-to-last finish the previous season to capture their first division title. The Canucks were eliminated by the Montreal Canadiens in their opening-round play-off series. Vancouver then entered a period that featured four postseason berths—and four preliminary-round eliminations—in the six seasons between 1975–76 and 1980–81. In 1981–82 the Canucks finished the regular season with a losing record, but in the Western Conference play-offs they faced—and defeated—three other losing teams to advance to the Stanley Cup finals. There they faced the two-time defending Cup champion New York Islanders, who, despite the standout play of Vancouver’s Stan Smyl and Thomas Gradin, promptly swept the Canucks in four games.
Vancouver failed to build on this surprising run, and the team made just four play-off appearances (all first-round losses) through the remainder of the 1980s. The Canucks won two consecutive division titles in the 1991–92 and 1992–93 seasons, and in 1993–94 the team went on another unexpected postseason series winning streak. Led by star forwards Trevor Linden and Pavel Bure, Vancouver upset three higher-seeded Western Conference teams in the 1993–94 postseason en route to a conference championship. In the 1994 Stanley Cup finals, the Canucks forced the heavily favoured New York Rangers to a seventh game but ultimately fell to the Rangers by a score of 3–2 in the deciding game. Vancouver earned play-off berths in the following two seasons but failed to advance farther than the conference semifinals, and the team then entered into a postseason drought that lasted until the end of the decade.
The Canucks were much more successful in the first decade of the new millennium, as the team won four division titles and made seven total postseason appearances between 2000–01 and 2009–10. However, despite the notable contributions (over various seasons) of left wing Markus Naslund, goaltender Roberto Luongo, and identical-twin forwards Daniel and Henrik Sedin, the Canucks failed to advance beyond the second round of the play-offs over that span. In 2010–11 Vancouver captured the Presidents’ Trophy for posting the NHL’s best regular-season record that season, which the team followed by advancing to the Stanley Cup finals for the first time in 17 years, in which they lost to the Boston Bruins in seven games. The team won a second Presidents’ Trophy in 2011–12 but again tasted postseason disappointment as it was upset in the first round of the play-offs by the Los Angeles Kings. The Canucks were again upset in their opening postseason matchup in 2012–13. The team’s repeated postseason disappointments led to an off-season coaching change, but the move instead contributed to the 2013–14 Canucks’ missing the play-offs entirely for the first time in five seasons. Vancouver returned to the postseason the following season but was upset in its opening play-off round. The team thereafter began an extended streak of seasons outside of postseason contention.
