Willie O’Ree, byname of William O’Ree,  (born October 15, 1935, Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada), the first Black hockey player to play in a National Hockey League (NHL) game. He debuted with the Boston Bruins against the Montreal Canadiens at the Montreal Forum on January 18, 1958.
William O’Ree was raised in a large family in Fredericton, New Brunswick. He was the youngest of 13 children of parents Rosebud and Harry. O’Ree’s grandparents came to Canada from the United States through the Underground Railroad to escape slavery. While O’Ree was growing up, only two Black families lived in Fredericton. O’Ree’s father, Harry, was a civil engineer who worked in the city’s road maintenance industry.
O’Ree started playing hockey at age three and organized hockey at age five. He instantly had a passion for the game. O’Ree played regularly on the backyard rink of the family home and skated to school when weather permitted. In The Autobiography of Willie O’Ree: Hockey’s Black Pioneer, O’Ree wrote that colour was never an issue on those early rinks:
When O’Ree was 14 years old, he played organized hockey with his brother Richard, who was in his 20s and taught Willie how to body check. By the time O’Ree was 15, he was playing for the Fredericton Falcons in the New Brunswick Amateur Hockey Association.
Over the next three years, O’Ree progressed through the Fredericton hockey system. In 1951–52 he played with the Fredericton Merchants of the York County Hockey League and three games with the Fredericton Capitals of the New Brunswick Senior Hockey League. After a season with the Junior Capitals, O’Ree made a step up to the senior ranks for a full season in 1953–54. While with the Fredericton Capitals, O’Ree played in the Allan Cup tournament, where he scored seven goals in seven games.
At age 19 O’Ree moved to Québec and played the 1954–55 season with the Quebec Frontenacs of the Quebec Junior Hockey League, where he had 27 goals and 17 assists for 44 points in 43 games.
During the 1955–56 season, while O’Ree was playing for the Kitchener Canucks of the Ontario Hockey Association, O’Ree lost about 95 percent of the vision in his right eye after he was hit by a puck that also broke his nose and cheekbone. He was advised by a doctor to stop playing hockey, but he was back on the ice within two months. However, O’Ree could not tell anyone about the injury. According to NHL bylaws, he would not be eligible to play, as the league forbade players blind in one eye from competing, and O’Ree was determined to make the NHL. To compensate for his blindness while playing left wing, O’Ree had to turn his head far over his right shoulder.
O’Ree returned to playing hockey in Québec after one year in Ontario and was eighth in team scoring with the Quebec Aces in the 1956–57 season (22 goals and 12 assists for 34 points). O’Ree would go on to play two more seasons with the Aces in 1957–58 and 1958–59.
As an organization, the Aces had a history of integration. From 1949 to 1953 Herb Carnegie, a Black hockey player from Toronto, starred for the Aces in the Quebec Senior Hockey League. Carnegie, who played one season with Jean Béliveau, had 77 goals and 121 assists for 198 points in four seasons with Quebec. A member of Canada’s Sports Hall of Fame, Carnegie was one of the best players in hockey history to have never played professionally.
While playing with the Quebec Aces, O’Ree played on the same line with Stan Maxwell, another Black Canadian. Like O’Ree, Maxwell played for the Aces from 1956 to 1959.
For the 1957–58 season, the Aces formed a working relationship with the NHL’s Boston Bruins. The relationship meant that Aces players could be called up to the Bruins at any time. O’Ree was, and he made history on January 18, 1958, when he became the first Black hockey player to play a game in the National Hockey League. (The Bruins beat the Montreal Canadiens that night, 3–0.) After playing only two games for the Bruins in the 1957–58 season, O’Ree returned to the team in the 1960–61 season and scored 4 goals and 10 assists for 14 points in 43 regular-season games. On January 1, 1961, O’Ree also became the first Black player to score a goal in the NHL, in a 3–2 win over the Canadiens.
The fact that O’Ree was the first Black player to play in the NHL received little interest at the time. His debut wasn’t mentioned in either The Boston Globe or The New York Times, and a Canadian sportswriter at the time wrote that O’Ree “was greeted with no emotion, no applause and, above all, no animosity.” O’Ree’s NHL debut may have caused little reaction in Montreal because local sports fans were already familiar with O’Ree, who had played occasionally in Montreal as a member of the Quebec Aces.
After his short time in Boston, O’Ree went on to play 14 more years of hockey with the Hull-Ottawa Canadiens of the Eastern Professional Hockey League, the Los Angeles Blades and San Diego Gulls of the Western Hockey League, the New Haven Nighthawks of the American Hockey League, and the San Diego Mariners of the Pacific Coast League. One major reason why O’Ree was able to prolong his career was because he moved from left wing to right wing in 1964–65 at the age of 29. The Los Angeles Blades were weak at right wing, and head coach Alf Pike had O’Ree change positions. O’Ree delivered instant results, recording 38 goals that season, a personal best.
O’Ree did, however, experience racial taunts from opposing players and fans. One night while playing in Virginia in the 1972–73 AHL season, fans tossed cotton balls and a black cat onto the ice. While playing with the Bruins in the 1960–61 season, O’Ree was the victim of racial taunts from a Chicago Black Hawks player. The player also butt-ended O’Ree with his stick and knocked out some of his teeth. O’Ree retaliated by breaking his stick over the player’s head, and a brawl broke out. According to O’Ree, throughout his time playing hockey he was treated worse in the United States than in Canada.
In 1998 O’Ree became the NHL’s Director of Youth Development and an ambassador for the NHL Diversity program. He traveled throughout North America to promote grassroots hockey programs, with a focus on serving economically disadvantaged children. In 2003 O’Ree was named the Lester Patrick Trophy winner for his outstanding service to hockey in the United States. In 2010 O’Ree received the Order of Canada for his outstanding service to youth development and promoting hockey within North America. O’Ree also received the Order of New Brunswick (2005) and was named an honoured member of the New Brunswick Sports Hall of Fame, where he was inducted in 1984. In 2018 he was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame.
The original version of this entry was published by  The Canadian Encyclopedia .
