Winnipeg Jets,  Canadian professional ice hockey team based in Winnipeg, Manitoba, that plays in the Western Conference of the National Hockey League (NHL).
The franchise was founded in 1999 in Atlanta as the Thrashers and had losing seasons in each of its first five years of existence. Improvement came with the development of young star Ilya Kovalchuk, the first overall selection of the 2001 NHL draft, and the Thrashers posted their first winning record during the 2005–06 season. In 2006–07 the team captured a division title but was swept by the New York Rangers in its lone playoff appearance while located in Atlanta.
After their division title-winning season, the Thrashers returned to the ranks of teams that did not reach the playoffs, posting winning percentages of about .500 over the following four seasons. The team’s extended mediocrity—combined with a relatively uninterested ownership group that largely failed to engage Atlanta-area hockey fans—led to poor attendance at Thrashers’ home games and dwindling returns on the team’s financial investments. In 2011 the franchise was sold to a Winnipeg-based company that moved the team to Canada. The team’s name was changed to the Jets in honour of the professional hockey team of that name that played in Winnipeg from 1972 to 1996 before becoming the Phoenix Coyotes. As part of an NHL realignment, the Jets moved from the Eastern Conference to the Western after the 2012–13 season.
During the 2014–15 season, Winnipeg won 43 games and accumulated 99 points (a franchise record at the time) but finished in just fifth place in a highly competitive Central Division. The Jets nevertheless qualified for the postseason for the first time since their relocation, but the team was swept in its opening playoff series. Winnipeg’s return to the playoffs was short-lived, as the team returned to the bottom of the divisional standings the following year. In 2017–18 the Jets had the second best record in the NHL during the regular season (114 points) and advanced to the franchise’s first conference-finals series, where the team lost to the Vegas Golden Knights. Winnipeg returned to the playoffs following the 2018–19 season but lost in the opening round.
