Vera Charlotte Scott Cushman, née Vera Charlotte Scott,  (born Sept. 19, 1876, Ottawa, Ill., U.S.—died Feb. 1, 1946, Savannah, Ga.),  American social worker, an active and influential figure in the early 20th-century growth and war work of the Young Women’s Christian Association (YWCA).
Vera Scott was the daughter of a Scots Irish immigrant merchant whose business eventually became part of the great mercantile firm of Carson Pirie Scott & Company of Chicago. She was educated at Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts, graduating in 1898. She retained through life the religious inclination of her family and in college became active in the work of the YWCA. She maintained her interest in the YWCA after graduation and after her marriage in 1901 to James S. Cushman, a New York City businessman.
In 1905 Vera Cushman became a member of Grace H. Dodge’s committee to unify the national YWCA movement, and from its formation in 1906 she was a member of the unified National Board. Between then and her resignation from the board in 1936, she also served several terms as vice president. She was also a leader of YWCA work in New York City. She helped facilitate the merger of YWCA activities in New York in 1912 and was elected first president of the unified organization. In 1913 she was vice-chairman of the "whirlwind campaign" that raised $4 million in 14 days for the city and national YWCAs.
In May 1917 the YWCA established the War Work Council under Cushman’s chairmanship to direct the contribution of the association to the war effort. Under her leadership $170 million was raised to finance the establishment and staffing of 140 Hostess Houses near army and navy camps and bases, military hospitals, and ports of embarkation and debarkation. The houses provided lodging and recreation for nurses, Signal Corps workers, and other women engaged in war work. During World War I the YWCA operated hostess houses and other service centres in nine countries. In 1919 Cushman was one of six women to receive the Distinguished Service Medal for her work. From 1924 to 1938 she was a vice president of the World Council of the YWCA.
