Black Sea, Russian and Bulgarian Chernoye More, Ukrainian Chorne More, Turkish Karadenız, Romanian Marea Neagră,  large inland sea situated at the southeastern extremity of Europe. It is bordered by Ukraine to the north, Russia to the northeast, Georgia to the east, Turkey to the south, and Bulgaria and Romania to the west.
The roughly oval-shaped Black Sea occupies a large basin strategically situated at the southeastern extremity of Europe but connected to the distant waters of the Atlantic Ocean by the Bosporus (which emerges from the sea’s southwestern corner), the Sea of Marmara, the Dardanelles, the Aegean Sea, and the Mediterranean Sea. The Crimean Peninsula thrusts into the Black Sea from the north, and just to its east the narrow Kerch Strait links the sea to the smaller Sea of Azov. The Black Sea coastline is otherwise fairly regular. The maximum east-west extent of the sea is about 730 miles (1,175 km), and the shortest distance between the tip of Crimea and Cape Kerempe to the south is about 160 miles (260 km). The surface area, excluding the Sea of Marmara but including the Sea of Azov, is about 178,000 square miles (461,000 square km); the Black Sea proper occupies about 163,000 square miles (422,000 square km). A maximum depth of more than 7,250 feet (2,210 metres) is reached in the south-central sector of the sea.
In ancient Greek myths, the sea—then on the fringe of the Mediterranean world—was named Pontus Axeinus, meaning “Inhospitable Sea.” Later explorations made the region more familiar, and, as colonies were established along the shores of a sea the Greeks came to know as more hospitable and friendly, its name was changed to Pontus Euxinus, the opposite of the earlier designation. It was across its waters that, according to legend, Jason and the Argonauts set out to find the Golden Fleece in the land of Colchis, a kingdom at the sea’s eastern tip (now Georgia). The Turks, when they came to control the lands beyond the sea’s southern shores, encountered only the sudden storms whipped up on its waters and reverted to a designation reflecting the inhospitable aspect of what they now termed the Karadenız, or Black Sea.
To scientists, the Black Sea is a remarkable feature because its lower levels are, to all intents and purposes, almost biologically dead—not because of pollution but because of continued weak ventilation of the deep layers. To the countries of the region, the Black Sea has been of immense strategic importance over the centuries; the advent of more-settled conditions has brought its economic importance to the fore.
The coastline of the Black Sea is only mildly indented, except for the northwestern and northern shores, which are low and furrowed by numerous ravines, valleys, and rivers, the mouths of which are often impeded by sandy spits. The mountains of southern Crimea form the only precipitous cliff areas. In the east and south, the coasts are steep and mountainous. Spurs of the Greater and Lesser Caucasus ranges, separated by the Kolkhida lowland, confine the Black Sea in the east, while the Pontic Mountains run along the southern coast. Near the Bosporus outlet, the shoreline relief is moderate though still steep. Farther north, in the Burgaski Bay area, low mountains emerge where the Balkan Mountains of Bulgaria extend eastward. Continuing northward along the western shore, a flatter plateau region gives way to the great Danube River delta, which thrusts its mass out into the sea.
The Black Sea contains only a few small islands, the largest being Zmiyinyy (Fidonisi) of Ukraine, east of the Danube delta, and Berezan at the mouth of the Dniester River estuary. The submarine relief may be visualized as a series of concentric and occasionally asymmetrical rings. Beyond the shoreline a shallow shelf zone occupies about one-fourth of the entire area. It is broadest in the west and at the head of Kerch Strait but elsewhere forms a rim about 6 to 7 miles (10 to 11 km) wide, and the depth of the edge is usually less than 360 feet (110 metres). The shelf gives way at its edge to a slope, which is broken by submarine valleys and is steep in its upper parts. Between the port cities of Sinop and Samsun (Turkey), the coastline is paralleled by a rugged range of underwater mountains extending for nearly 100 miles (160 km). The hollow forming the basin’s core covers about a third of the total area and is a completely featureless flat plain, with depths increasing evenly toward the centre to a little more than 7,200 feet (2,200 metres), with the axis of maximum depth displaced toward the Turkish coast.
Underlying rocks reflect a regional diversity of both type and age. The ancient Precambrian rocks of the southern tip of the structural block known as the Russian (or East European) Platform, dating from at least 540 million years ago, appear in the northwest. A second, related platform has a deep cover of sedimentary rocks that were laid later. The deepwater depression, generally considered to be a vast structural downwarp, is an unusual and significant feature of the Earth’s crust. The centre of the depression consists of a sedimentary and a basaltic crustal layer,  with a granite layer thrust between them at the periphery. Seafloor deposits generally change from coarse pebbles and gravel at the periphery to fine silts at the centre of the basin.
The geologic history of the Black Sea is not fully known, but it seems to be a residual basin of the ancient Tethys Sea, dating roughly from 250 to 50 million years ago. The present form of the sea probably emerged at the end of the Paleocene Epoch (about 55 million years ago), when structural upheavals in Anatolia split off the Caspian basin from the Mediterranean. The newly created Black Sea basin became gradually isolated from the ocean, and its salinity was reduced; at that time the Crimean Peninsula and the Caucasus probably were islands.
Early in the Miocene Epoch (about 20 million years ago), the Black Sea flowed into a chain of sea lakes but gradually became separated from the Caspian region. As mountains—the Pontic, Caucasus, Crimean, and Carpathians—rose around it, outwashed sediments filled the basin. Further earth movements and changes in sea level associated with Pleistocene glaciers then occurred and led to intermittent connections with the Mediterranean. During the last of the great glaciations, the Black Sea became a large freshwater lake. The present connection to the Mediterranean Sea—and to salt water—is believed to have emerged some 6,500 to 7,500 years ago. Strong earthquakes—such as the Crimean earthquake of 1927—remain associated with the area.
