The Book of Negroes,  novel by Lawrence Hill, published in 2007 (under the title Someone Knows My Name in the United States, Australia, and New Zealand). Hill’s third novel, it is a work of historical fiction inspired by the document called the “Book of Negroes,” a list of Black Loyalists who fled New York for Canada during the American Revolutionary War. The Book of Negroes tells the story of Aminata Diallo, who makes this same journey after she is captured by slave traders in Africa and brought to America. Aminata’s story illustrates the physical, sexual, emotional, psychological, religious, and economic violations of the transatlantic slave trade. The novel was translated and sold more than 800,000 copies worldwide.
Readers follow protagonist Aminata Diallo’s first-person “slave narrative” from her abduction as a child to her imminent death as an elderly woman. The story begins in 1745 in West Africa, where Aminata is captured in her hometown of Bayo at age 11 and marched to the coast in a coffle—or a shackled string—of slaves. There, she and thousands of other African slaves are boarded onto ships bound for the Americas. Aminata’s months-long crossing details the horrific conditions aboard slave ships.
In America, Aminata is sold into slavery and is taken to an indigo plantation in South Carolina. While enslaved, she becomes known for her midwifery skills, learned in childhood from her mother. In secret, Aminata learns to read from a fellow slave and her literacy skills later prove instrumental to her emancipation. After her baby is sold and Aminata refuses to work, she is sold to a Jewish couple, the Lindos, who teach her arithmetic.
In return for her loyalty to the British crown during the American Revolutionary War, Aminata is granted freedom and enlisted to enter the names of other former slaves into the naval ledger, the “Book of Negroes,” before their journey by ship from New York to Canada. While free, Aminata faces discrimination and hardship in Nova Scotia, where she helps to settle the Black community of Birchtown.
When settlement in Sierra Leone is offered to “free Blacks,” Aminata fulfills her dream of returning home in a back-to-Africa odyssey alongside 1,200 other former slaves. There, she searches for her hometown and helps to found the new colony of Freetown. But a desire to help free her fellow Africans brings Aminata to England where her story—the narrative of her life, which she writes in her final years at the turn of the 19th century—becomes a galvanizing document for the white-led abolitionist movement.
The title, The Book of Negroes, references one of many migratory experiences in the novel. It is this theme of migration—both voluntary and involuntary—that dominates the text and unifies its plot. As Aminata says repeatedly, Black people are a “travelling people,” and the novel traces her journey from inland Africa to South Carolina, New York, Nova Scotia, Sierra Leone, and finally England.
Aminata must constantly adapt to changes in her geographical, cultural, familial, and intellectual conditions. She witnesses repeatedly the profound inhumanity of slavery but, in particular, explores the moral and spiritual degradation of the slave trade itself with regard to those enslaved, those who would trade in slaves, and those who witness any part of the trade.
Throughout her life, Aminata recognizes the hypocrisies involved in slavery and sees how such hypocrisy diminishes all people’s ability to live ethical lives. Again and again, Aminata encounters promises and proclamations that appear to be well-intentioned, but in each case she watches as those pledges are abandoned, reversed, or simply fail because the economic, political, and material temptations of slavery consistently overpower ethical intentions.
To a great degree, Hill’s novel is written in the tradition of slave narratives, using the language and tropes of the genre. For instance, as in historical slave narratives, the narrator tells her own story after achieving literacy and freedom and her story is put to use for the abolitionist cause. As a work of historical fiction, The Book of Negroes incorporates actual events and figures of the time along with its fictional plot and characters. As a reflection of the genres of the slave narrative and historical fiction, Aminata’s story is told for the sake of being told and to explore the historical record in a literary way; that is, her intention is to provide meaning and purpose to her life and to give voice to the voiceless many who lived alongside her but who were unable to record their own stories. As the author, Hill is also producing a public literary document which depicts and brings attention to a particular aspect of history that has gone unnoticed or been silenced in the historical record and contemporary culture.
