AMA Plaza, formerly (1972–2013) IBM Building and One IBM Plaza, byname of 330 North Wabash,  a 52-story skyscraper in downtown Chicago, Illinois, U.S., designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and completed in 1972. It is a towering example of both the International Style and the elegant pin-striped steel-and-glass buildings Mies crafted in the postwar era. Rising on a narrow site along the Chicago River, the prominent black slab is located between two other Chicago landmarks, the 1967 Marina City and the glittery massiveness of the Trump Tower (completed 2009).
Mies, the final director of the famed Bauhaus school of design, fled Nazi Germany in 1937 and moved to Chicago, where he directed the School of Architecture at the Armour Institute (later the Illinois Institute of Technology) for 20 years. His residential high-rises at 860–880 North Lake Shore Drive brought to prominence the black steel-and-glass aesthetic featured in what was then known as the IBM Building, and he designed numerous corporate and government high-rises in this style, including the Federal Center in Chicago’s Loop and the Seagram Building on Park Avenue in New York. The IBM Building was Mies’s swan song; he completed the drawings only weeks before his death in August 1969. The building was renamed in 2013 when the American Medical Association moved its headquarters there.
Mies was already in failing health when he was taken to see the 1.6-acre (0.65-hectare) trapezoidal lot for the IBM Building—where railroad tracks traced the Chicago River just north of the Loop and west of North Michigan Avenue—and he famously asked, “Where’s the site?” He compensated for the small, irregularly shaped site with a pronounced vertical slab whose narrow end faces the river, rising on a highly elevated plaza that grants the composition a commanding presence. The building is set back to allow views of Marina City while still garnering lakefront vistas from inside and provides a pivot point as the river jogs to the north. The soaring 26-foot- (7.9-metre-) high lobby features marble, granite, and travertine in a spare aesthetic that emphasizes its height and transparency. (The lobby also contains a bust of Mies by Italian sculptor Marino Marini.) Designed for the computer company in an era of room-sized computers that required massive cooling units, the classic building nonetheless retains the timeless “universal” quality embodied in Mies’s quip that “we don’t invent a new architecture every Monday morning.”
