Blue Ridge Parkway,  scenic motor route, extending 469 miles (755 km) primarily through the Blue Ridge segment of the Appalachian Mountains in the western portions of Virginia and North Carolina, U.S. It links Shenandoah National Park (northeast) with Great Smoky Mountains National Park (southwest) and passes through George Washington and Jefferson (Virginia) and Pisgah and Nantahala (North Carolina) national forests. The parkway, established in 1936, encompasses a total area of 149 square miles (386 square km) and is administered by the U.S. National Park Service (NPS). Headquarters are in Asheville, North Carolina, near the parkway’s southern terminus.
A proposal to build a private toll road that followed the crest of the Blue Ridge was first put forth in the early 20th century by Joseph Hyde Pratt, a North Carolina geologist. Construction of a segment in North Carolina began in 1912 but ceased after the start of World War I (a short stretch of the present-day parkway follows that route near Linville Falls). Federal interest in a highway to link the two national parks was kindled early in the first administration of Pres. Franklin D. Roosevelt, which looked on it as a public works project during the Great Depression of the 1930s. After extensive surveying and intense lobbying efforts by interested parties (who recognized the enormous potential for tourism that such a highway represented), the final route was approved by Congress.
The start of work on the project is officially given as September 11, 1935, although actual construction seems to have started several days later on a section near the boundary between the two states. In June 1936 Congress formally designated the road as the Blue Ridge Parkway under the jurisdiction of the NPS. Construction of the parkway was undertaken for the most part in noncontiguous segments along its route, largely by private contractors. Until 1941, however, much of the ancillary work (e.g., landscaping and stonework) also was done by members of the Works Progress Administration (WPA), Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), and other New Deal agencies, with some of that activity being continued by conscientious objectors during World War II. Work on the road itself slowed dramatically with the U.S. entry into the war. By then, roughly one-third of the total eventual length of the route was open and in use, and about another third was partly built.
Construction was slow to resume after the war until the mid-1950s, when, as part of Mission 66 (a comprehensive NPS program to improve its properties systemwide), nearly all of the remaining segments of the route were completed over the next 10 years. Also added during that period were a number of amenities, such as visitors’ centres, dining and lodging facilities, and campgrounds. One of the final and most challenging links of the parkway to be built was a stretch around Grandfather Mountain in North Carolina, which was constructed in 1979–82. A segment of the roadbed there (the Linn Cove Viaduct) was elevated and built on piers, utilizing a cantilever technique from above to put into place prefabricated support beams and roadbed sections that thus minimized damage to the area’s fragile ecosystem. The fully completed parkway was officially dedicated on September 11, 1987, exactly 52 years after work had begun.
The parkway’s northern terminus is in northwest-central Virginia, just east of Waynesboro, where it adjoins the southern end of Skyline Drive (the roadway that traverses Shenandoah National Park). It travels generally southwestward for almost 220 miles (355 km) through Virginia, passing near Lexington and Roanoke, before entering North Carolina west-northwest of Mount Airy. The highway continues southwestward to the east of Boone, skirting the eastern edge of Asheville, and, about 35 miles (55 km) beyond Asheville, makes a sharp bend to the northwest. The road then turns west after entering the Cherokee Indian Reservation, which it traverses before terminating at the southern entrance to Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
The parkway runs through varied and picturesque mountain scenery, with elevations ranging from some 650 to 6,000 feet (200 to 1,800 metres). The roadway passes through 26 tunnels (all but one of them in North Carolina) and over dozens of bridges and viaducts along the route. The parkway’s highest point, Richland Balsam Overlook in North Carolina, reaches 6,047 feet (1,843 metres) south of Waynesville, near the southern terminus. Dozens of scenic overlooks allow motorists to pull off the roadway and enjoy the magnificent vistas, such as Mount Mitchell, which, at a height of 6,684 feet (2,037 metres), is the tallest point in North Carolina and in the United States east of the Mississippi River. The climate is highly variable along the route, affected by both latitude and elevation. Generally, it is wet temperate, with warm summers and cool winters. Precipitation is abundant, and large accumulations of snow can occur in winter, especially at higher elevations.
A variety of forest types are found along the parkway. The lower elevations are dominated by oaks, the middle elevations are covered with northern hardwoods, and higher elevations support spruce and fir. Flowering trees and shrubs—such as serviceberries, tulip trees, dogwoods, mountain ashes, flame azaleas, mountain laurels, and catawba rhododendrons—add colour to the landscape, as do the myriads of wildflowers that bloom from spring through fall on hillsides and in meadows along the route. Equally spectacular are the vistas of brilliant fall foliage that draw large numbers of visitors to the parkway each year.
Wildlife is abundant and varied. Among mammals are white-tailed deer, black bears, beavers, river otters, several species of bats and shrews, and small rodents such as voles, jumping mice, and flying squirrels. Some 250 species of birds either live in, nest seasonally in, or migrate through the parkway lands, including many—such as the Canada warbler (Wilsonia canadensis)—that are usually found much farther north. The region, with its moist climate, is known for its large and varied amphibian population, particularly salamanders. In addition, there are some three dozen species of reptiles, including venomous copperheads and timber rattlesnakes and the endangered bog turtle (Glyptemys muhlenbergi).
The parkway route is open year-round, although severe weather conditions may force park officials to close portions of it at times in winter. In addition to the scenic overlooks, there are numerous facilities for outdoor recreation (e.g., camping, hiking, and picnicking). The National Park Service maintains six visitors’ centres in Virginia and eight in North Carolina, some of these being managed jointly with other organizations; most are open only from early to mid-spring until late October. Two inns within parkway property—one northeast of Roanoke and the other south of Asheville—are privately operated and are open seasonally. In addition, rustic cabins, built by the CCC during parkway construction in the 1930s, can be rented at Rocky Knob in southern Virginia near Woolwine.
The Appalachian National Scenic Trail winds southward for some 100 miles (160 km) around the parkway from the road’s northern terminus until just north of Roanoke, where the trail turns westward. In addition, the Overmountain Victory National Historic Trail—which traces the route taken by colonial soldiers in 1780 to defeat the British at the Battle of Kings Mountain—crosses the highway in North Carolina east of Spruce Pine. Mabry Mill, a restored early-20th-century gristmill at Rocky Knob, and the Blue Ridge Music Center near the North Carolina state line are popular tourist stops in Virginia. North Carolina sites include the Museum of North Carolina Minerals south of Spruce Pine and the Folk Art Center just north of Asheville, both of which are also visitors’ centres and are open year-round.
Use of the parkway increased steadily in the 1950s and ’60 as automobile travel rose nationwide, and it grew again in the mid-1980s with the road’s completion as a through route. Total annual visits first exceeded 10 million in 1968 and first topped 20 million two decades later. The number of visitors each year has fluctuated somewhat since the late 1980s, but the figure has remained high enough for the parkway to almost always be ranked as the most heavily visited unit of the U.S. national park system.
