Brooklyn Bridge,  suspension bridge spanning the East River from Brooklyn to Manhattan in New York City. A brilliant feat of 19th-century engineering, the Brooklyn Bridge was the first bridge to use steel for cable wire, and during its construction explosives were used inside a pneumatic caisson for the first time. Since its construction, the bridge has become an essential landmark of New York City—an outstanding architectural accomplishment that is still revered across the world. Accordingly, it has been designated a National Historic Landmark by the U.S. National Park Service.
The masterwork of John Augustus Roebling, the Brooklyn Bridge was built (1869–83) in the face of immense difficulties. Roebling, an engineer, had developed his own method for weaving wire cables, which became one of the leading constructional components of his bridge designs. He built a series of suspension bridges, including the Cincinnati–Covington Bridge, later renamed the John A. Roebling Bridge. He died at the beginning of the Brooklyn Bridge’s construction as a result of an accident on site, and his son, Washington Roebling, suffered a crippling attack of decompression sickness (caisson disease) after taking over as chief engineer. Confined to his apartment in Columbia Heights (Brooklyn), Roebling continued to direct operations with the help of his wife, Emily Warren Roebling, observing with field glasses and sending messages to the site with her assistance. A compressed-air blast that wrecked a pneumatic caisson slowed the work, as did a severe fire that smoldered for weeks in another caisson, a cable that parted from its anchorage on the Manhattan side and crashed into the river, and the fraud perpetrated by a steel-wire contractor that necessitated the replacement of tons of cable. At least 20 workers were killed during construction, and many more suffered decompression sickness.
The Brooklyn Bridge’s 486-metre (1,595-foot) main span was the longest in the world until the completion of the Firth of Forth cantilever bridge in Scotland in 1890. The towers are built of limestone, granite, and cement. Its deck, supported by four cables, carries both automobile and pedestrian traffic. A distinctive feature is the broad promenade above the roadway, which John Roebling accurately predicted “in a crowded commercial city will be of incalculable value.”
Upon its completion, Emily rode the first carriage across from the Brooklyn side, carrying a rooster as a symbol of victory. The bridge’s opening day, May 24, 1883, was marked by much celebration and was attended by U.S. Pres. Chester A. Arthur. The building of it came to represent a landmark in technological achievement for a generation. Its strength and grace inspired poets, notably Walt Whitman, Hart Crane, and Marianne Moore, and a legion of photographers and painters, including Joseph Stella, John Marin, Berenice Abbott, and Alfred Eisenstaedt.
