Burial mound,  artificial hill of earth and stones built over the remains of the dead. In England the equivalent term is barrow; in Scotland, cairn; and in Europe and elsewhere, tumulus.
In western Europe and the British Isles, burial cairns and barrows date primarily from the Neolithic Period (New Stone Age) and Early Bronze Age (4000 bce–600 ce). The burial chambers in Britain, unlike those of similar structures in the Mediterranean region, were seldom excavated in the soil beneath the barrow but were enclosed within the structure itself.
Burial mounds are also found in various parts of East Asia. The Qin tomb (3rd century bce), near the city of Xi’an in Shaanxi, China, is a vast mortuary compound at the centre of which lies the mound of the first emperor of the Qin dynasty, Shihuangdi. In 1974 thousands of life-size terra-cotta figures representing the emperor’s army were unearthed within the compound, about three-fourths of a mile (one-half kilometre) from the tomb proper; the area was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1987. Burial mounds were a peculiarly prominent feature of the protohistoric period in Japan (3rd–6th century ce), which is known as the Tumulus period. The mounds, some of which are spectacularly large and impressive, consist of earthen keyhole-shaped mounds surrounded by moats. They were used to bury royalty and prominent members of the aristocracy. One of the largest, the burial site of the 4th-century emperor Nintoku, on the outskirts of the city of Sakai, near Osaka, measures 1,594 feet (486 metres) in length and is 115 feet (35 metres) high.
Burial mounds were characteristic of the Indian cultures of east-central North America from about 1000 bce to 700 ce. The most numerous and grandly conceived ones, found in the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys, were large conical or elliptical mounds surrounded by extensive earthworks. Their builders were once thought to be a distinctive group of peoples (the so-called Mound Builders) that were more culturally advanced than historic Indian tribes, but the mounds are now assigned to the Hopewell and Adena cultures. Along the upper Mississippi River and the Great Lakes, some of the later Indian mounds are effigy mounds, built in the shape of animals and other forms.
