Carbon sequestration,  the long-term storage of carbon in plants, soils, geologic formations, and the ocean. Carbon sequestration occurs both naturally and as a result of anthropogenic activities and typically refers to the storage of carbon that has the immediate potential to become carbon dioxide gas. In response to growing concerns about climate change resulting from increased carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere, considerable interest has been drawn to the possibility of increasing the rate of carbon sequestration through changes in land use and forestry and also through geoengineering techniques such as carbon capture and storage.
Anthropogenic activities such as the burning of fossil fuels have released carbon from its long-term geologic storage as coal, petroleum, and natural gas and have delivered it to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide gas. Carbon dioxide is also released naturally, through the decomposition of plants and animals. The amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has increased since the beginning of the industrial age, and this increase has been caused mainly by the burning of fossil fuels. Carbon dioxide is a very effective greenhouse gas—that is, a gas that absorbs infrared radiation emitted from Earth’s surface. As carbon dioxide concentrations rise in the atmosphere, more infrared radiation is retained, and the average temperature of Earth’s lower atmosphere rises. This process is referred to as global warming.
Reservoirs that retain carbon and keep it from entering Earth’s atmosphere are known as carbon sinks. For example, deforestation is a source of carbon emission into the atmosphere, but forest regrowth is a form of carbon sequestration, with the forests themselves serving as carbon sinks. Carbon is transferred naturally from the atmosphere to terrestrial carbon sinks through photosynthesis; it may be stored in aboveground biomass as well as in soils. Beyond the natural growth of plants, other terrestrial processes that sequester carbon include growth of replacement vegetation on cleared land, land-management practices that absorb carbon (see below Carbon sequestration and climate change mitigation), and increased growth due to elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide levels and enhanced nitrogen deposition. It is important to note that carbon sequestered in soils and aboveground vegetation could be released again to the atmosphere through land-use or climatic changes. For example, combustion (which is caused by fires) or decomposition (which results from microbe activity) can cause the release of carbon stored in forests to the atmosphere. Both processes join oxygen in the air with carbon stored in plant tissues to produce carbon dioxide gas.
If the terrestrial sink becomes a significant carbon source through increased combustion and decomposition, it has the potential to add large amounts of carbon to the atmosphere and oceans. Globally, the total amount of carbon in vegetation, soil, and detritus is roughly 2,200 gigatons (1 gigaton = 1 billion tons), and it is estimated that the amount of carbon sequestered annually by terrestrial ecosystems is approximately 2.6 gigatons. The oceans themselves also accumulate carbon, and the amount found just under the surface is roughly 920 gigatons. The amount of carbon stored in the oceanic sink exceeds the amount in the atmosphere (about 760 gigatons). Of the carbon emitted to the atmosphere by human activities, only 45 percent remains in the atmosphere; about 30 percent is taken up by the oceans, and the remainder is incorporated into terrestrial ecosystems.
The Kyoto Protocol under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change allows countries to receive credits for their carbon-sequestration activities in the area of land use, land-use change, and forestry as part of their obligations under the protocol. Such activities could include afforestation (conversion of nonforested land to forest), reforestation (conversion of previously forested land to forest), improved forestry or agricultural practices, and revegetation. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), improved agricultural practices and forest-related mitigation activities can make a significant contribution to the removal of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere at relatively low cost. These activities could include improved crop and grazing land management—for instance, more efficient fertilizer use to prevent the leaching of unused nitrates, tillage practices that minimize soil erosion, the restoration of organic soils, and the restoration of degraded lands. In addition, the preservation of existing forests, especially the rainforests of the Amazon and elsewhere, is important for the continued sequestration of carbon in those key terrestrial sinks.
Some policy makers, engineers, and scientists seeking to mitigate global warming have proposed new technologies of carbon sequestration. These technologies include a geoengineering proposal called carbon capture and storage (CCS). In CCS processes, carbon dioxide is first separated from other gases contained in industrial emissions. It is then compressed and transported to a location that is isolated from the atmosphere for long-term storage. Suitable storage locations might include geologic formations such as deep saline formations (sedimentary rocks whose pore spaces are saturated with water containing high concentrations of dissolved salts), depleted oil and gas reservoirs, or the deep ocean. Although CCS typically refers to the capture of carbon dioxide directly at the source of emission before it can be released into the atmosphere, it may also include techniques such as the use of scrubbing towers and “artificial trees” to remove carbon dioxide from the surrounding air.
There are many economic and technical challenges to implementing carbon capture and storage on a large scale. The IPCC has estimated that carbon capture and storage would increase the cost of electricity generation by about one to five cents per kilowatt-hour, depending on the fuel, technology, and location. Leakage of carbon from reservoirs is also a concern, but it is estimated that properly managed geological storage is very likely (that is, 66–90 percent probability) to retain 99 percent of its sequestered carbon dioxide for over 1,000 years.
