Covered bridge,  timber-truss bridge carrying a roadway over a river or other obstacle, popular in folklore and art but also of major significance in engineering history. The function of the roof and siding, which in most covered bridges create an almost complete enclosure, is to protect the wooden structural members from the weather. A truss is a basic form in which the members are arranged in a triangle or series of triangles.
There is no evidence of timber-truss bridges, with or without covering, in the ancient world, but the 13th-century sketchbook of the French architect Villard de Honnecourt depicts a species of truss bridge, and the Italian Andrea Palladio’s “Treatise on Architecture” (1570) describes four designs. Several notable covered bridges were constructed in Switzerland. The Kappel Bridge (1333) of Luzern has been decorated since 1599 with 112 paintings in the triangular spaces between roof and crossbeams, depicting the history of the town and the lives of its two patron saints. In the 18th century the Grubenmann brothers of Switzerland built covered timber bridges of considerable length, notably an arch-truss bridge over the Limmat River in Baden with a clear span of 60 metres (200 feet).
In North America the covered bridge underwent further evolution. From simple king-post trusses, in which the roadway was supported by a pair of heavy timber triangles, New England carpenters in the 18th century developed bridges combining simplicity of construction with their other economic advantages. The first long covered bridge in America, with a 55-metre (180-foot) centre span, was built by Timothy Palmer, a Massachusetts millwright, over the Schuylkill River at Philadelphia in 1806. Covered timber-truss bridges soon spanned rivers from Maine to Florida and rapidly spread westward. A New Haven architect named Ithiel Town patented the Town lattice, in which a number of relatively light pieces, diagonally crisscrossed, took the place of the heavy timbers of Palmer’s design and of the arch; it could be “built by the mile and cut off by the yard,” in its inventor’s phrase. Another highly successful type was designed by Theodore Burr, of Torrington, Connecticut, combining a Palladio truss with an arch. Numerous Town and Burr designs remained standing throughout North America into the late 20th century, some dating back to the early 19th century.
To carry the heavy loadings of the railroad, iron was adopted for covered bridges, at first for only part of the truss, in either vertical or diagonal members, and later for the whole truss. Iron was soon replaced by steel, and a principal form of the modern railroad bridge rapidly evolved. The metal truss did not require protection from the weather and consequently was not covered. The building of covered timber bridges, however, continued even in the second half of the 20th century.
