Cyrus Stevens Avery,  (born August 31, 1871, Stevensville, Pennsylvania—died July 2, 1963, California), American visionary and public servant known as the “Father of Route 66.” Avery held a variety of diverse jobs throughout his career, including farmer, teacher, real-estate broker, oil investor, and politician. He was a leader of the Good Roads Movement of the early 1900s, which championed better roads across America. Later, as Oklahoma highway commissioner, he laid out and numbered U.S. Highway 66, which would become an icon in American popular culture.
Avery was born into a family of farmers. After his family lost everything in the economic panic of 1873, they moved to a farm in Indian Territory, where Avery grew up. He later attended normal school in southwestern Missouri and taught elementary school in the state’s Southwest City. He attended William Jewell College in Liberty, Missouri, graduating in 1897. He married and then worked as an insurance agent in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, until 1904, when he took his wife and young son to Vinita and became involved in farm loans and oil leases. In 1907 the Avery family, now expanded to include two sons, relocated to Tulsa. There his daughter was born and Avery pursued a career as a real-estate developer and was a member of the millionaire-heavy Commercial Club (later the Chamber of Commerce). Although he was an oilman and possibly a millionaire before the Great Depression in 1929, Avery was never one of Tulsa’s famed “oil barons” like William Skelly or Harry Sinclair.
From the early 1900s Avery was a member of the grassroots Good Roads Movement. Following his election in 1913 as presiding commissioner of Tulsa county, he set to work on road development. During his term as commissioner he oversaw the development of the 11th Street bridge across the Arkansas River in Tulsa. Avery became a supporter of the Ozark Trails Association and eventually served as vice president of the group. Later he organized the Albert Pike Highway Association and the Associated Highways of America.
In 1924 Gov. Martin Trapp appointed Avery Oklahoma state highway commissioner. In that role he began the serious work of upgrading and numbering Oklahoma’s roads. The following year U.S. Secretary of Agriculture Howard Gore named him to a joint board of state and federal highway officials charged with developing a national highway system. The idea was to highlight and link important existing roads so automobile travelers could cross the country without becoming lost or encountering a dead end. Soon thereafter Avery served on a small, five-man committee, along with officials from Missouri and Illinois, to assign numbers to the newly mapped system. Originally, he and his colleagues assigned U.S. 60 to the great curved highway that ran between Los Angeles and Chicago, but, following a monumental fight with Kentucky Gov. William Fields over that state’s need for a zero-ending highway number, the road became U.S. 66.
In 1927 Avery and Missourian John Woodruff founded the U.S. 66 Highway Association to bring pavement and travelers to the highway. One of their more-enterprising ventures was persuading national sports promoter C.C. Pyle to stage a footrace along U.S. 66. Known popularly as the Bunion Derby, the 1928 race captured worldwide attention as nearly 200 runners left Los Angeles and followed Route 66 to Chicago and then ran east to New York City.
As a longtime Tulsa booster, Avery was a key player in developing Tulsa’s municipal airport, in creating Mohawk Park, and in building a much-needed public water system, which included securing rights-of-way for a 55-mile (89-km) pipeline from Spavinaw Creek in northeastern Oklahoma to Tulsa. He was also a gentleman farmer (a person who farms for pleasure rather than for profit) who gave talks on various agricultural techniques and practiced what is known today as sustainable farming.
A staunch Baptist and lifelong Democrat, Avery was instrumental in providing shelter and food to African Americans whose neighbourhoods were destroyed and burned by white mobs during the Tulsa Race Riot of 1921. Avery ran unsuccessfully for governor in 1933 and also unsuccessfully for Tulsa county commissioner in 1935. The city of Tulsa is home to a street, a bridge, a plaza, and a sculpture named in his honour, and an annual preservation award given by the National Historic Route 66 Federation also bears Avery’s name.
