Electrostatic precipitator, also called electrostatic air cleaner,  a device that uses an electric charge to remove certain impurities—either solid particles or liquid droplets—from air or other gases in smokestacks and other flues. The precipitator functions by applying energy only to the particulate matter being collected, without significantly impeding the flow of gases. Originally designed for recovery of valuable industrial-process materials, electrostatic precipitators are used for air pollution control, particularly for removing harmful particulate matter from waste gases at industrial facilities and power-generating stations. If released into the atmosphere, such particulates reduce visibility, can contribute to climate change, and lead to serious health problems in humans, including lung damage and bronchitis. Electrostatic precipitators can capture fine particles (i.e., those that are smaller than 2.5 microns [0.0001 inch] in diameter), which are especially dangerous if released because they can be drawn deep into the lungs and can trigger inflammatory reactions.
In 1824 M. Hohlfeld, a mathematics teacher in Leipzig, first described the precipitation of smoke particles by electricity. The first commercially successful process was patented in 1908 following experiments by American chemist Frederick Gardner Cottrell at the University of California, Berkeley. Early units were used to remove sulfuric acid mist and lead oxide fumes emitted from acid-making and smelting activities. The devices helped protect vineyards in northern California from lead emissions.
Precipitators function by electrostatically charging particles in the gas stream. The charged particles are attracted to and deposited on plates or other collection devices. The treated air then passes out of the precipitator and through a stack to the atmosphere. When enough particles have accumulated on the collection devices, they are shaken off the collectors by mechanical rappers. The particulates, which can be either wet or dry, fall into a hopper at the bottom of the unit, and a conveyor system transports them away for disposal or recycling. Precipitators are often deployed with denitrification units that remove nitrogen oxides and scrubbers or other devices that remove sulfur dioxide.
The most basic precipitator design consists of a row of thin vertical wires and a stack of large flat vertical metal plates. The plates are spaced from less than 1.3 cm (0.5 inch) to about 17.8 cm (7 inches) apart, depending on the application. The gas stream flows horizontally between the wires and through the stack of plates. A negative charge of several thousand volts is applied between the wires and plates to remove impurities from the gas stream.
Plate precipitators are often marketed to the public as air purifiers or as a permanent replacement for furnace filters. Unlike some other air purification technologies, they typically do not become breeding grounds for harmful forms of bacteria. Yet, the plates can be difficult to clean and can also produce ozone and nitrogen oxides. Some consumer precipitation filters are sold with special soak-off cleaners that allow the entire plate array to be removed and soaked for several hours, which loosens the particulates.
Electrostatic precipitators are important tools in the process of cleaning up flue gases. They are highly effective at reducing particle pollution, including those particles whose sizes approximate 1 micron (0.00004 inch) in diameter, and some precipitators can remove particles of 0.01 micron in diameter. In addition, they can handle large volumes of gas at various temperatures and flow rates, removing either solid particles or liquid droplets.
Electrostatic precipitators are available in many different sizes and types, designed for various dust and water droplet characteristics and gas volume flows. Some types are designed to work with a gas streams with particular temperature and moisture characteristics. Dry electrostatic precipitators operate above the dew point of the gas stream to remove impurities from smoke and dust. Wet electrostatic precipitators, in contrast, operate with saturated airstreams that have 100 percent relative humidity. Wet precipitators are commonly used to remove liquid droplets, including oil, resin, tar, and sulfuric acid mist, from gas streams in industrial settings. They are applied where the gases are laden with humidity, contain combustible particulates, or have particles that can be sticky.
Very large power plants may have multiple precipitators for each unit, whereas residences may have a single precipitator, which is often only slightly larger than a household vacuum cleaner. Some precipitators can collect 99.9 percent or more of the dust (which can contain arsenic, acids, and other chemicals) from the gas exhaust, depending on the temperature and flow rate of the gas, the size and chemical composition of the particles, and the precipitator design and voltage it applies to the gas. They have been used in the following industrial and household applications:
