Expressway, also called throughway, thruway, parkway, freeway, superhighway, or motorway,  major arterial divided highway that features two or more traffic lanes in each direction, with opposing traffic separated by a median strip; elimination of grade crossings; controlled entries and exits; and advanced designs eliminating steep grades, sharp curves, and other hazards and inconveniences to driving. Frequently expressways have been constructed over completely new routes, passing near but not through large centres of population, on more or less direct lines between desired termini. Their advantages include high speed, greater safety, comfort and convenience for drivers and passengers, and lower vehicle operating costs. Many of these new express highways, especially in the United States, are toll roads, but that is an incidental, not an essential, feature.
In 1924 Italy began the construction of toll motor highways, or autostrade, that soon totaled 320 miles (515 km) in length. Although these did not attain the standards of later express highways, they did incorporate the features of limited access and elimination of grade crossings. They were built and owned by private companies and paid for by tolls and advertising. The first true express highways, the autobahns, were built in Germany. Although the idea originated and plans were formulated between 1930 and 1932, a national network, the Reichsautobahnen, totaling 1,310 miles (2,110 km) by 1942, was built by the Nazi regime for both economic and military purposes. The only other European country to undertake construction of express highways before World War II was the Netherlands. In the United States the Pennsylvania Turnpike and the Merritt Parkway in Connecticut were completed shortly before the nation’s entrance into the war in 1941.
After the war the express highway movement gained momentum, slowly at first because of financial difficulties and the urgency of postwar reconstruction, then more rapidly. By 1950 eight U.S. states had toll roads that met express highway standards and totaled more than 750 miles (1,210 km). After that date virtually every state constructed some express highway mileage on either a toll or a toll-free basis. In Great Britain the Special Roads Act of 1949 provided a network of about 700 miles (1,130 km) of new “motorways,” a total subsequently extended to more than 1,000 miles (1,600 km). France built several short express highways, or autoroutes, in the 1950s to facilitate egress from its major cities but, with governmental policy favouring rail travel, did not undertake major programs of new construction until the 1960s and ’70s. West Germany resumed construction of the autobahns in 1957, with three four-year plans for federal highways. By 1970 it had about one-fourth of the European total. In 1964 Italy completed the Autostrada del Sole, stretching almost 500 miles (800 km) from Milan to Naples, to which numerous branches, spurs, and extensions were added. Other European countries and Japan also built express highways. Even some developing countries in Africa and Latin America built short stretches in the vicinity of their capital cities.
The most ambitious of all express highway systems was the national system of interstate highways of the United States. Recognizing the military value of highways as well as the need for a vast program of highway improvement, Congress authorized the project in 1944 but did not appropriate special funds for it until several years later. Originally limited to 40,000 miles (64,400 km), the system incorporated existing express highways built to its specifications, whether toll or free, but by far the largest part resulted from new highway construction financed mainly by the federal government. In 1956 Congress authorized $25 billion of federal funds, approximately 90 percent of the total estimated cost, to be expended over a 12-year period. In fact, however, unit costs more than doubled, and the construction program fell behind schedule. The Highway Act of 1968 extended the total mileage to 44,000 miles (70,800 km) and the building program to 1974. Thereafter the building of expressways in the United States continued but at a slower rate.
