Harbours and sea works, harbour also spelled harbor,  any part of a body of water and the manmade structures surrounding it that sufficiently shelters a vessel from wind, waves, and currents, enabling safe anchorage or the discharge and loading of cargo and passengers.
The construction of harbours and sea works offers some of the most unusual problems and challenges in civil engineering. The continuous and immediate presence of the sea provides the engineer with an adversary certain to discover any weakness in the structure built to resist it.
The principal objectives of such works fall broadly into two classifications: improvement of transportation, and reclamation and conservancy of land. Under the first fall works directed at providing facilities for the safe and economical transfer of cargo and passengers between land vehicles and ships; fishing ports for the landing and distribution of the harvest of the sea; harbours of refuge for ships and small craft; and marinas for the mooring or laying up of small private craft. Under the heading of reclamation and conservancy come works directed to the protection of the land area from encroachment by the sea, to the recovery and conversion to land use of areas occupied by the sea, and to the maintenance of river estuaries as efficient means for the discharge of inland runoff. In many places, without continuous attention to such maintenance, the coincidence of high tides with heavy rainfall would lead to frequent disastrous flooding of inhabited areas.
The civil engineering techniques used for either of these objectives are broadly similar, and indeed the realization of both objectives at the same time will frequently be a feature of the same project. An operation of maintaining a river estuary at a depth sufficient for navigation, for example, may at the same time greatly improve its capacity for the drainage of upland floodwaters.
The planning of maritime civil engineering works, whether for transportation, reclamation, or conservancy, has been facilitated by the development of the technique of model studies. Once regarded as scientific toys, such studies are now considered an essential preliminary step to any large-scale redevelopment of a port or coastal area and are useful even for minor modifications or additions.
Scale models of the area, harbour, or estuary are made so that water can be caused to flow in such a way as to reproduce the various tidal and other streams in the same direction and with velocities equivalent to those occurring on the site. A variety of devices, usually electronically controlled, have been developed to produce both wave and tidal effects.
The value of these experiments derives from the reduction in the time scale, which has been found to correspond to the reduction in the dimensional scales of the model. Thus, the large model of the Clyde estuary of Scotland works on a tidal cycle of about 14 minutes, or about 50 times the actual frequency. The effect of three years of tides following any modification of the profile of the harbour can thus be studied on the model in a matter of three weeks, and any tendency to otherwise unanticipated scour (clearing by powerful current) or siltation can probably be detected. The relative values of alternative positions of breakwaters in affording shelter can be similarly studied using the wave-generating devices available; and the development of secondary, or reflected, waves with undesirable disturbances within the sheltered area may be anticipated and, if possible, forestalled.
In certain favoured points on the world’s coastlines, nature has provided harbours waiting only to be used, such as New York Bay, which the explorer Giovanni da Verrazano described as “a very agreeable location” for sheltering a ship. Such inlets, bays, and estuaries may require improvement by dredging and must be supplied with port structures, but basically they remain as nature made them, and their existence accounts for many of the world’s great cities. Because such natural harbours are not always at hand where port facilities are needed, engineers must create artificial harbours. The basic structure involved in the creation of an artificial harbour is a breakwater, sometimes called a jetty, or mole, the function of which is to provide calm water inshore. Locations for artificial harbours are of course chosen with an eye to the existing potential of the coast; an indentation, however slight, is favoured. Yet it has often been found justifiable on economic or strategic grounds to construct a complete harbour on a relatively unsheltered coastline by enclosing an area with breakwaters built from the shore, with openings of minimum width for entry and exit of ships.
