Hejaz Railway, Turkish Hicaz Demiryolu,  railroad between Damascus, Syria, and Medina (now in Saudi Arabia), one of the principal railroads of the Ottoman Turkish Empire.
Its main line was constructed in 1900–08, ostensibly to facilitate pilgrimages to the Muslims’ holy places in Arabia but in fact also to strengthen Ottoman control over the most distant provinces of the empire. The main line, built by a multiracial labour force mainly under the supervision of a German engineer, traversed 820 miles (1,320 km) of difficult country and was completed in only eight years. It ran from Damascus southward to Darʿā (Deraa) and thence over Transjordan via Az-Zarqāʾ, Al-Qaṭrānah, and Maʿān into northwestern Arabia, and inland via Dhāt al-Ḥajj and Al-ʿUlā to Medina. The major branch line, 100 miles (160 km) long, from Darʿā to Haifa on the Mediterranean coast of Palestine, was completed in 1905.
Even before World War I (1914–18) the Bedouins of the adjacent desert areas attacked the railway, which challenged their control over the pilgrims’ route to the holy places from the north. When the Arabs of the Hejaz revolted against Turkish rule in 1916, the track between Maʿān and Medina was put out of operation by Arab raids, largely inspired by the British military strategist T.E. Lawrence (Lawrence of Arabia). After the war the operative sections of the track were taken over by the Syrian, Palestinian, and Transjordanian governments. The section of the railway running from Maʿān, Jordan, to Medina was heavily damaged and was abandoned after 1917; plans to restore the line in the 1960s were not fulfilled.
In the late 20th century the northern portion of the Hejaz Railway (also called the Hejaz-Jordan Railway) between Amman, Jordan, and Damascus was in use and carried mostly freight. To the south, between Amman and Wādī al-Abyaḍ, the rail line was only partly in operational condition and was not being used. From Wādī al-Abyaḍ via Maʿān to Batṇ al-Ghūl the southern continuation of the Hejaz Railway was also in use, as was the relatively new rail line (owned by the Aqaba Railway Corporation) between Batṇ al-Ghūl and Al-ʿAqabah, which opened in 1975. Phosphates from the mines at Wādī al-Abyaḍ and nearby Al Ḥasā were transported by rail to the port of Al-ʿAqabah on the Red Sea.
