Honda Kenichi,  (born August 23, 1924, Tokyo, Japan—died 2011), Japanese engineer whose discovery (with Fujishima Akira) of the photocatalytic properties of titanium dioxide led to an expansion in the field of photoelectrochemistry.
After receiving a bachelor’s degree in engineering from the University of Tokyo in 1949, Honda studied at the University of Paris, where he received a doctorate in science (1957) and at the University of Tokyo, where he received a doctorate in engineering (1961). He accepted a position as lecturer (1965) at the University of Tokyo and went on to earn full professorship by 1975. From 1983 to 1989 Honda served as professor at Kyoto University. He then joined the faculty of Tokyo Polytechnic University, where he was eventually named dean of the faculty of arts in 1994 and later served as president of the university (1996–2004). He also edited the second volume of Functionality of Molecular Systems (1999).
In the late 1960s and early ’70s, Honda collaborated with Fujishima Akira, then a student whose doctoral course work he was supervising. The two found that a relatively inexpensive and widely available material, titanium dioxide, acts as a photocatalyst—a substance that facilitates a chemical reaction when it is exposed to sunlight. In their experiments titanium dioxide exposed to light caused water to decompose, producing hydrogen and oxygen. This discovery, which gained worldwide attention as the “Honda-Fujishima effect” after it was reported in a 1972 issue of the journal Nature, opened up new and diverse paths of research. By the early 21st century, photocatalyst technology was being developed for a variety of products, including self-cleaning coatings for tile, streetlight covers, and automobile mirrors. There was also hope that photocatalysts could be used to break down pollutants such as harmful fossil fuel by-products and remove them from the environment.
Honda was an honorary member of several scientific societies, including the Chemical Society of Japan and the Japanese Photochemistry Association. In 1997 he received one of Japan’s highest honours, the designation as a “Person of Cultural Merit.”  Honda, along with Fujishima, was named winner of the 2004 Japan Prize, an international award given annually to individuals who have made outstanding contributions to science and technology. The award cited Fujishima and Honda’s research on photochemical catalysis and its applications.
