Ilya Aleksandrovich Golosov,  (born July 19 [July 31, New Style], 1883, Moscow, Russia—died Jan. 29, 1945, Moscow), Russian architect who worked in various styles but attained his highest distinction for the application to architecture of the artistic principles of Constructivism, a movement inspired by geometries of volume and of plane.
Golosov studied at the Central Stroganov Industrial Art Institute (1898–1907) and afterward graduated from the Institute of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture (1912), both in Moscow. As an independent architect, he initially worked in a Neoclassical style. He studied with Ivan Zholtovsky from 1918 to 1921, and in the early 1920s he created an original concept of architectural form. According to this theory, the unification of separate architectural elements (Golosov differentiated between “form” and “mass”) in the general composition was accomplished with the help of “lines of gravitation.” This theory helped Golosov vitally enrich the architectural language of Constructivism, a style he began working in during the mid-1920s. Golosov also used concepts of the artistic avant-garde in his Constructivist architecture, creating a dynamic expression of volume and spiraling forms, the result of which were the competition projects the Zuyev Club in Moscow (1927–29) and the pavilion of the newspaper Leningradskaya Pravda at the Exposition Internationale des Arts Décoratifs et Industriels Modernes held in Paris in 1925. Golosov’s most famous construction, the Zuyev Club, shows a skillful combination of Suprematist principles with the architectural principles of Constructivism. His buildings of the 1930s, such as an apartment building on Yauzsky Boulevard in Moscow (1934–36), are examples of a Postconstructivist modernization of architectural Classicism. Golosov was a master of large-scale forms and managed to retain his individuality in all aspects of his practice.
Ilya’s brother and fellow architect, Panteleymon Aleksandrovich Golosov, was more traditional in his projects (he participated in many architectural contests in the 1920s) and in his buildings, of which the Pravda complex in Moscow (1929–35) is the most famous. In the 1930s Panteleymon focused on the problems of town planning within the parameters of the Stalinist reconstruction of Moscow and also taught architecture for three decades at the Moscow VKhUTEMAS (acronym for the Russian for “Higher Artistic and Technical Workshops”) and VKhUTEIN (acronym for the reorganized “Higher Artistic and Technical Institute”), the Free Art Workshops, and the Moscow Institute of Architecture (1919–45).
