James B. Eads, in full James Buchanan Eads,  (born May 23, 1820, Lawrenceburg, Ind., U.S.—died  March 8, 1887, Nassau, Bahamas), American engineer best known for his triple-arch steel bridge over the Mississippi River at St. Louis, Mo. (1874). Another project provided a year-round navigation channel for New Orleans by means of jetties (1879).
Eads was named for his mother’s cousin James Buchanan, a Pennsylvania congressman who later became president of the United States. The boy spent a migrant youth with little formal education, for his father’s never very successful business ventures took the family to Cincinnati, Ohio, then Louisville, Ky., and finally St. Louis. James Eads educated himself by reading the library of his first employer, a St. Louis dry-goods merchant. At 18 he became purser on a Mississippi riverboat. Not long after, he began to consider means to recover by salvage the heavy losses from the frequent riverboat disasters. When he was 22, he invented a salvage boat, which he called a submarine; actually it was a surface vessel from which he could descend in a diving bell he had also designed and walk the river bottom. He recovered lead and iron pigs and other valuable freight; on one occasion he retrieved a cargo that included a large crock of butter in a good state of preservation. So successful was his equipment that in 12 years of operations on the Mississippi and its tributaries he made his fortune.
Retiring from the river to marry and settle down, Eads set himself up briefly as a glass manufacturer, but the promising enterprise, the first glass factory in the West, was ruined by the Mexican War; by 1848 he was back in the salvage business. He built three new submarines, the third of which was capable of pumping out and raising a sunken hull from the bottom. Within a few years he had 10 boats in his fleet.
As the Civil War threatened, Eads foresaw the struggle that would take place for control of the Mississippi system, and he advanced a radical idea. He proposed that ironclad steam-powered warships of shallow draft be built to operate on the rivers. The U.S. government was slow to take up his offer to build such a flotilla; when it did, he built the ships in record time, working 4,000 men on day and night shifts seven days a week. The novel craft he set afloat spearheaded Grant’s offensive against Forts Henry and Donelson, the first important Union victories of the war. They continued to play a conspicuous role under Andrew Foote and David Farragut at Memphis, Island No. 10, Vicksburg, and Mobile Bay. The vessels were the first ironclads to fight in North America and the first in the world to engage enemy warships. (The Monitor and Merrimack, both ironclads that battled in the American Civil War, were the first such vessels to close against each other in combat.) Immediately after the war, Eads was chosen to direct a construction project of extraordinary difficulty, the bridging of the Mississippi at St. Louis.
From his knowledge of the river and of the fabrication of iron and steel, he secured, against opposition, some of it unscrupulous, a contract for a steel triple-arch bridge over the river at St. Louis, which he began on Aug. 20, 1867. Its three spans, 502, 520, and 502 feet (152, 158, and 152 m), respectively, consisted of triangularly braced 18-inch (46-centimetre) hollow steel tubes linked in units and set in piers based on bedrock. Since the rock lay some 100 feet (30 m) below the river surface, reaching it posed major problems. The work of digging through the mud bottom had to be carried on under compressed air, and some of the men developed decompression sickness (the bends). After two workers died on March 19, 1870, Eads established a floating hospital, provided nourishing food for his workers, insisted on slow decompression on emerging from the caissons, and installed a lift.
The steel used in construction of the bridge was subject to similar rigorous standards; it was inspected at the works and on the site. Indeed, its supplier, the famed industrialist Andrew Carnegie, was forced to take back some batches for rerolling three times, and some were still rejected as not conforming to the specified strength of 60,000 pounds (27,000 kg) per square inch. Many other problems arose. To construct his first steel arches without disturbing navigation on the river, Eads used timber cantilevers to support them, with the halves of each arch held back by cables passing over the top of towers built on the piers. To join the two halves of the middle arch, Eads’s deputy, Colonel Henry Flad, had planned to hump the middle arch slightly to bring the two halves together; then, with the cantilevering removed, the arch would assume its normal shape. Eads, on the other hand, had prepared a wrought-iron plug fitted with threads; the last two arch ribs could be shortened by five inches each and cut with screw threads to receive the plug, which would close the distance between the ribs. Because of an unusual mid-September warm spell, which warped the bridge arches toward the north, Flad could not close the arches by the method he had chosen and, after trying to cool the steel tubes with ice packs, fell back on Eads’s screw-plug connection. The first arch was closed on Sept. 17, 1873.
The Eads, or St. Louis, Bridge, the largest bridge of any type built up to that time, was recognized throughout the world as a landmark engineering achievement, with its pioneering use of structural steel, its foundations planted at record depths, and its cantilevering technique used for raising the arches. The bridge was officially opened on July 4, 1874.
Soon after, Eads’s rare understanding of the Mississippi was enlisted at New Orleans to provide a year-round navigation channel for the city. Despite widespread skepticism, he successfully altered the sedimental behaviour of the river by building a series of jetties, and within five years, by 1879, he had created a practical channel for shipping. In this important work he employed a technique of carrying out the project at his own expense, simply on the basis of guarantees if successful. On the same conditions he sought to promote a ship-carrying railway across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, in Mexico, as a more economic and viable alternative to a canal across the Isthmus of Panama. Two bills to promote the railway, however, failed in Congress.
James Buchanan Eads was the first U.S. engineer to be honoured with the Albert Medal of the Royal Society of Arts in London. He had been a consultant for Liverpool docks, as well as for installations in Toronto and in Veracruz and Tampico, Mex. Twice married, he had two daughters and three stepdaughters.
