Jamsetji Tata, in full Jamsetji Nusserwanji Tata,  (born March 3, 1839, Navsari, Gujarat, India—died May 19, 1904, Bad Nauheim, Germany), Indian philanthropist and entrepreneur who founded the Tata Group. His ambitious endeavours helped catapult India into the league of industrialized countries.
Born into a Parsi family, Jamsetji was the first child and only son of Nusserwanji Tata. After graduating from Elphinstone College, Bombay (now Mumbai), in 1858, he joined his father’s export-trading firm and helped establish its branches in Japan, China, Europe, and the United States. In 1868 Jamsetji founded a trading company that later evolved into the Tata Group. In 1872 he focused on cotton manufacturing and subsequently founded mills at Nagpur, Bombay, and Coorla. His enterprises were noted for efficiency, for improved labour-protection policies, and for the introduction of finer grades of fibre. He also planned for the Bombay-area hydroelectric power plants that became the Tata Power company in 1906.
In 1901 Jamsetji began organizing India’s first large-scale ironworks, and six years later these were incorporated as the Tata Iron and Steel Company (now Tata Steel). Under the direction of his sons, Sir Dorabji Jamsetji Tata (1859–1932) and Sir Ratanji Tata (1871–1932), the Tata Iron and Steel Company became the largest privately owned steelmaker in India and the nucleus of a group of companies producing not only textiles, steel, and hydroelectric power but also chemicals, agricultural equipment, trucks, locomotives, and cement. Jamsetji’s other commercial ventures included the Taj Mahal Palace, the first luxury hotel in India. After Jamsetji’s death in 1904, his family retained control of the Tata Group and built it into a global conglomerate that by the early 21st century included more than 100 companies.
A noted philanthropist, Jamsetji established the J.N. Tata Endowment in 1892, which encouraged Indian students to pursue higher education. In 1898 he donated land for a research institute in Bangalore (Bengaluru), and his sons ultimately established (1911) the Indian Institute of Science there. The Tata family went on to become perhaps the most important private funder of technical education and scientific research in India.
