Jin Mao Tower,  mixed-use skyscraper in Shanghai, China. Designed by the American architectural firm of Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, of Chicago, Illinois, it has 88 stories and reaches a height of 1,380 feet (420.5 metres). At the time of its official opening in January 1999, it was one of the tallest buildings in the world—exceeded in height only by the Petronas Twin Towers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, and the Sears (now Willis) Tower in Chicago—but it subsequently was surpassed by a number of taller buildings, including the Shanghai World Financial Center, its neighbour in the Pudong district of Shanghai. The Chinese term jin mao, used for the building’s name, means “golden prosperity” or “golden luxuriance.”
Construction of the Jin Mao Tower got under way in 1994; the structural framework was topped out in mid-1997; and work was completed the following year. The design of the building is similar to that of the two Petronas structures in its use of the number eight (that being an auspicious number in both countries) as a motif, while it also evokes elements of traditional Chinese architecture. Beginning with a square base of 16 floors, the building’s 88 occupied floors rise in a series of 16 tiers. Each of the first 11 of these tiers above the base  has progressively fewer floors than the one below and flares outward slightly at its top in the manner of a pagoda-style roof. These tiers also begin to taper inward from the exterior corners of the building, forming setbacks, and the exterior wall gradually takes on an eight-lobed pattern near the top of the building. The final four tiers, containing mechanical equipment, step back more dramatically in a four-sided pyramidical pattern, from which rises an elaborate spire structure.
The building’s foundation consists of a concrete slab 13 feet (4 metres) thick atop hundreds of steel pilings sunk some 260 feet (80 metres) into the ground below. Support for the building includes 16 large exterior columns, composed of a combination of 8 steel and 8 steel and reinforced-concrete columns, and an octagonal-shaped inner reinforced-concrete core, the two structures connected through a series of radiating beams, forming trusslike structures. The exterior is sheathed in a glass curtain wall, over which is a lattice of metal pipes. The building is designed to withstand both earthquakes and the high winds of typhoons (tropical cyclones).
The lower stories up to the 50th floor are devoted to office space, and above that a hotel occupies 35 more floors. There is an observation deck on the 88th floor. An adjacent six-story structure called the Podium Building houses shops, restaurants, an art exhibition space, and a 395-seat concert hall.
