John Bloomfield Jervis,  (born Dec. 14, 1795, Huntington, N.Y., U.S.—died Jan. 12, 1885, Rome, N.Y.), American civil engineer who made outstanding contributions in the construction of U.S. canals, railroads, and water-supply systems.
Jervis worked as an axman on the survey for the Erie Canal and earned rapid promotion on that project thereafter, serving as chief engineer from 1821 to 1825. In 1827 he became chief engineer for the Delaware and Hudson Canal project, which was designed to carry coal from Pennsylvania to New York City via the Hudson River. This project consisted of building and linking together a 174-km (108-mile) canal and a 26-km (16-mile) railway, which involved the construction of numerous bridges and inclines in the mountains. Jervis planned and designed every facet of the railway, and he drew up the specifications for its locomotive, the Stourbridge Lion, which was the first functioning locomotive in the United States.
Jervis next became chief engineer of the Mohawk & Hudson Railway, New York state’s first railroad. In this post he designed the Experiment (1832), the first locomotive to have four of its six wheels mounted on a swiveling truck. This radical innovation enabled the Experiment to reach speeds of up to 96 km (60 miles) per hour, making it the fastest locomotive in the world.
From 1833 to 1836, Jervis was chief engineer of the Chenango Canal in New York, which was the first canal to use artificial reservoirs as part of its water supply. In 1836 he took charge of construction of the Croton Aqueduct, New York City’s first water-supply system, and he directed the construction of the Croton Dam and Reservoir as well as the Aqueduct Bridge, which was built on 15 stone arches and crossed the Harlem River. In 1846 Jervis served as the consulting engineer for the Boston water-supply system.
Jervis returned to railroads in 1847, and over the next 14 years he worked as a consulting or chief engineer for several railroad companies, including the Hudson River Railroad and the Michigan Southern and Northern Indiana Railroad. In 1854 he became president of the Chicago and Rock Island Railway and in 1861 general superintendent of the Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne and Chicago Railway.
