Low-income housing, also called affordable housing,  housing for individuals or families with low incomes. Although housing has been recognized as a human right under a number of international conventions, access to housing for low-income people is often problematic. Various state, private, and nonprofit-sector initiatives have helped low-income people obtain housing, and many small-scale actions have attempted to address the problem individually or locally.
Whether done formally through organized civil disobedience or informally through squatting and reclaiming abandoned land and buildings, efforts to immediately address the need for low-income housing have been made throughout history. From Gerrard Winstanley and the Diggers’ efforts to reclaim St. George’s Hill during the English Civil Wars to the construction of simple shelters under overpasses in major cities, the use of marginal or unused resources has been a way to obtain shelter. While such efforts are often short-term, many urban centres have shantytowns on their edges that have become permanent housing. In some cases, such as in Durban, South Africa, those communities have been able to successfully obtain basic municipal services.
Faith-based and community groups have a long history of providing emergency and ongoing housing for those who are homeless or at risk of homelessness due to the cost of housing. Some initiatives are very basic. In the Out of the Cold program in Toronto, for example, churches open up their sanctuaries and meeting spaces for overnight shelter but often can offer no more than a mat on the floor. The Catholic Worker Movement provides houses of hospitality where movement members live in the community with the homeless. More institutional expressions include nonprofit housing initiatives and homes for those with particular needs, such as the elderly or abused women, or hospices for those with HIV/AIDS. The affordable home ownership model of Habitat for Humanity is one of those initiatives.
The need for affordable housing has led to various models of resident-controlled housing. Many nonprofit housing cooperatives, communes, intentional communities, and collectives permit low-income individuals to share the resources necessary to obtain housing. Whereas some such efforts require individual equity, others have developed with government support or support from labour, church, and cooperative organizations. Ensuring the long-term accessibility of such projects is difficult and often requires government legislation or binding agreements with project sponsors and funders. Some models have a tradition of frequent failure, particularly communes and collectives, though housing cooperatives and some intentional communities have proved to be stable long-term alternatives.
Governments have often played a key role in the development, management, and funding of housing for low-income people. Council housing in England, tax credits for developing new affordable housing in Japan, and personal subsidies in the United States are various ways that governments have promoted access to housing for low-income individuals. Direct provision of government housing tends to be an urban Western strategy that grew dramatically after World War II but has since been abandoned for creating pockets of poverty.
As an alternative, many governments have subsidized the private sector’s development of affordable housing. Granting tax credits for development, waiving development levies and taxes, and providing rent-geared-to-income assistance—either through a housing initiative or directly to individuals—have been tried as ways to encourage for-profit developers to construct housing or to continue to provide it for those with low incomes.
Other initiatives for affordable housing have included land trusts and land banks, which separate the cost of building from the cost of acquiring land. A nonprofit land trust, a municipality, or some other body holds title to the land, but the building is developed separately so that the cost of the housing is limited to erecting the structure and operating it.
A number of jurisdictions have tried zoning restrictions and other legislative means of preserving and maintaining affordable housing with mixed results. Such efforts work best when they are part of more-extensive urban renewal and infrastructure development.
