Marina City,  mid-century modern multibuilding development located at 300–350 North State Street and 315–339 North Dearborn Street along the Chicago River in downtown Chicago. Completed in 1968, it was designed by Bertrand Goldberg as an urban experiment to draw middle-class Chicagoans back to the city after more than a decade of suburban migration, and its success spawned a renewed interest nationwide in urban residential development. The twin corncoblike residential towers, each with 64 floors, are icons of Chicago architecture.
Designed in 1959, Marina City offered Goldberg’s vision of a new way of urban living. His complex would be a “city within a city,” featuring residential high-rises with some 900 apartments (with roof decks and on-site facilities including a gym, a swimming pool, an ice rink, a bowling alley, and a health club), a 16-floor office building (later a hotel), a 4-story saddle-shaped auditorium (in the early 21st century operated by the House of Blues), parking for both cars and boats (giving the complex its name), and plenty of retail space for stores and restaurants. In fact, Marina City was the first mixed-use development in the United States to offer both residential and commercial space on such a large scale. When the complex opened, 2 percent of residents worked within Marina City itself, and 80 percent could walk to work downtown.
Goldberg was a student of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, and his work reflects the influence of Mies’s Modernist principles. Goldberg’s own ideas of modular prefabricated curved forms are also highlighted in Marina City. Goldberg believed that since no right angles exist in nature, none should exist in architecture, a belief that spawned Marina City’s cylindrical residential towers. Goldberg compared the bays on Marina Towers to the petals of a sunflower. They radiate from the building’s strong central core and provide stunning balcony views for each wedge-shaped residential unit. Curvilinear reinforced-concrete forms became a trademark of Goldberg’s architectural style, and they can also be seen in his River City II (1983–86), a mid-rise housing complex located on the south branch of the Chicago River.
