Othmar Herman Ammann,  (born March 26, 1879, Schaffhausen, Switz.—died Sept. 22, 1965, Rye, N.Y., U.S.), engineer and designer of numerous long suspension bridges, including the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge over New York harbour, at its completion (1965) the longest single span in the world.
In 1904 Ammann immigrated to the United States, where he helped design railroad bridges. Joining the Pennsylvania Steel Company the following year, he worked on the Queensboro Bridge, New York City. During his term (1912–23) as chief assistant to the noted bridge engineer Gustav Lindenthal, he helped design and build the Hell Gate (steel arch) Bridge, New York City, and the Ohio River Bridge, Sciotoville, Ohio.
In 1923 Ammann set up his own engineering firm in New York City, and the following year the Port of New York Authority agreed to finance his proposed bridge across the Hudson River between New Jersey and upper Manhattan. When finished in 1931, the George Washington Bridge was the longest in the world, almost double the length of the previous record holder.
Ammann was chief engineer of the Port of New York Authority from 1930 to 1937 and director of engineering from 1937 to 1939. As chief engineer, he was in charge of building the Bayonne Bridge over the Kill van Kull, N.J., the Outerbridge Crossing and Goethals Bridge across Arthur Kill, and the Lincoln Tunnel under the Hudson River. As director of engineering, he directed the building of the Bronx-Whitestone Bridge and the Triborough Bridge (later renamed the Robert F. Kennedy Bridge), New York City. He also sat on the Board of Engineers in charge of San Francisco’s Golden Gate Bridge, which opened in 1937.
In 1939 Ammann returned to private practice, designing bridges and highways in New Jersey and New York. He served on the three-man board that investigated the Tacoma Narrows Bridge aerodynamic failure in 1941. In partnership with Charles S. Whitney from 1946, Ammann designed the Throgs Neck Bridge, New York City, the Dulles International Airport, outside Washington, D.C., and three buildings for New York City’s Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts.
