Philippe-Jean Bunau-Varilla,  (born July 26, 1859, Paris, France—died May 18, 1940, Paris), French engineer and a key figure in the decision to construct the Panama Canal.
Born out of wedlock, Bunau-Varilla attended two prestigious French engineering schools, the École Polytechnique and the École des Ponts et Chaussées, on scholarship. He was hired by the Compagnie Universelle du Canal Interocéanique (French Panama Canal Company) and in 1884 was sent to Panama, where he rose rapidly to the post of chief engineer. After the French project failed in 1889, he wrote two books on the canal and dabbled briefly in a variety of projects, including the purchase of the Parisian newspaper Le Matin with his brother Maurice. The brothers helped to exonerate the military engineer Alfred Dreyfus by publishing proof that evidence of his supposed treason had been forged. In 1894 Bunau-Varilla’s attention returned to Panama when he became a major investor in the Compagnie Nouvelle du Canal de Panama, which took over the concession and other assets of the failed Compagnie Universelle.
In 1902 the U.S. Senate was considering whether to choose a Panamanian or a Nicaraguan route for a transoceanic canal, and Bunau-Varilla helped turn the vote toward Panama by sending each senator a Nicaraguan postage stamp depicting a smoking volcano. When Colombia (of which Panama was then a part) refused to ratify a treaty granting the United States rights to build a canal, Bunau-Varilla promptly encouraged Panamanians to revolt and declare independence, even going so far as to design and propose a flag for the new republic. Though he was a French citizen, Panama’s provisional government named him minister plenipotentiary to the United States. On November 18, 1903, hours before a Panamanian delegation arrived at Washington, D.C., he signed the Hay–Bunau-Varilla Treaty with U.S. Secretary of State John Hay, assuring the construction of a canal under U.S. control and providing millions for shareholders in the Compagnie Nouvelle. When the Panamanians balked at ratifying the treaty, objecting to provisions that gave the United States rights directly impinging on Panama’s sovereignty, Bunau-Varilla threatened them with the return of Colombian forces.
In subsequent years Bunau-Varilla was vilified in Panamanian publications. In 1914 he was prevented from attending the grand opening of the canal by the commencement of World War I. He returned to France and lost a leg at the Verdun battlefield while supervising engineering works. He spent the remainder of his life in France, defending his actions in further writings and even declaring that his actions in Panama had contributed to Germany’s defeat in the war.
