Plaster,  a pasty composition (as of lime or gypsum, water, and sand) that hardens on drying and is used for coating walls, ceilings, and partitions.
Plastering is one of the most ancient building techniques. Evidence indicates that primitive peoples plastered their reed or sapling shelters with mud, thus developing more durable structures and more effective screens against vermin and inclement weather. More lasting and sightly materials in time replaced mud. Some of the earliest plastering extant is of a quality comparable to that used in modern times. The pyramids of Egypt contain plasterwork executed at least 4,000 years ago that is still hard and durable. The principal tools of the plasterer of that time were in design and purpose like those used today. For their finest work the Egyptians used a plaster made from calcined gypsum that is identical to plaster of paris.
Very early in the history of Greek architecture (e.g., at Mycenae), plaster of a fine white lime stucco was used. Greek artisans had achieved high quality earlier than the 5th century bce. Plaster was frequently used to cover the exteriors of temples, a technique commonly known as stucco, in addition to covering the interiors, in some cases even when the building was made of marble.
The ornamental plaster ceilings of England during the reigns of Henry VIII, Elizabeth I, and James I are still admired. Earlier extant specimens of the plasterers’ skill in England are the pargeted and ornamented fronts of half-timbered houses.
Plaster as a medium of artistic expression waned by the 19th century, when imitation and mechanical reproduction displaced this creative art. However, as a surface material for interior walls and ceilings and to a lesser degree for exterior walls, plaster remains in common use. It facilitates cleanliness and sanitation in building and is a retardant to the spread of fire.
Interior plasterwork is designed according to the type of lathing to which it is applied and the number of applications that are necessary. Ornamental plaster for ceilings and cornices is usually applied with a metal molding tool that has the reverse of the desired profile. Some elements may be formed by hand, while others are precast and stuck in place with plaster of paris. Stucco may be applied directly to concrete, brick, tile, or a supporting metal lath base. Various types of finish, including colours and textures, may be incorporated in the finish coat. Splatter dash and pebble dash are textured surfaces resulting from throwing mortar or pebble with some force on the finish coat while it is still soft.
