Pollution control,  in environmental engineering, any of a variety of means employed to limit damage done to the environment by the discharge of harmful substances and energies. Specific means of pollution control might include refuse disposal systems such as sanitary landfills, emission control systems for automobiles, sedimentation tanks in sewerage systems, the electrostatic precipitation of impurities from industrial gas, or the practice of recycling. For full treatment of major areas of pollution control, see air pollution control, wastewater treatment, solid-waste management, and hazardous-waste management.
Next to the conservation of species from the loss of biological diversity, the control of pollution is the conservation problem of greatest magnitude; it might even be argued that pollution control is more urgent and important. Ultimately, the control of pollution involves a number of social decisions: 1) not to allow the escape into the environment of substances or forms of energy that are harmful to life, 2) to contain and recycle those substances that could be harmful if released into the environment in excessive quantities, and 3) not to release into the environment substances that persist and are toxic to living things. The knowledge and technology needed to put these decisions to work are now available. Pollution control does not mean an abandonment of existing productive human activities but their reordering so as to guarantee that their side effects do not outweigh their advantages.
However, for economic reasons, none of these measures is applied universally, and political and social pressures have not yet forced their application. Developing countries have expressed fear that excessive concern over pollution could impede their economic development—and indeed some of these countries have become sanctuaries for industries that find it less expensive to operate there than in areas with more rigorous standards. It is apparent that pollution control, regardless of the advanced state of its technology, will become a reality only when people demand it and only when nations are willing to agree on appropriate international standards.
