Rainwater harvesting system, also called rainwater collection system or rainwater catchment system,  technology that collects and stores rainwater for human use. Rainwater harvesting systems range from simple rain barrels to more elaborate structures with pumps, tanks, and purification systems. The nonpotable water can be used to irrigate landscaping, flush toilets, wash cars, or launder clothes, and it can even be purified for human consumption. With water scarcity a pressing problem for many densely populated regions, rainwater harvesting systems can supply households and businesses with water for use in dry seasons and lessen the demand on municipal systems.
Given that rainfall is sporadic and that only a small proportion of global precipitation is easily available for human use, rainwater harvesting can be an efficient means of capturing that precious resource. In cities, much of the rain that falls on buildings, roofs, roads, and other hard landscaping does not percolate into the soil and is instead directed into storm sewers for disposal. Impermeable surfaces cause urban flooding in many areas and generate contaminated unusable water that is directed away from potable water resources. During dry months, local groundwater can be depleted, and many localities struggle to consistently provide enough potable water to meet demand. Rainwater harvesting for nonpotable functions, such as gardening and washing clothes, significantly reduces both the demanded amount of the total fresh water and the strain on stormwater infrastructure. That saving in the demand and supply of potable fresh water is significant in large cities. Although many localities encourage and even subsidize rain barrels and other rainwater harvesting systems, some areas, particularly those in the southwestern United States, view rainwater harvesting as a water rights issue and place restrictions on such collections.
The simplest rainwater harvesting systems are nonpressurized systems, such as rain barrels, where the pipes run from rain gutters into a tank. Known as “dry systems,” those structures do not hold any water in the pipes after it stops raining and do not create breeding grounds for mosquitoes and other insects. “Wet systems” are necessary when the pipes cannot be configured to run directly into the tanks. In places where the tanks are located some distance away from the collection surfaces or where there are a series of tanks to serve a number of buildings, pipes from the gutter go underground and then up through a riser into the tank. Such systems are often pressurized so that the long runs of pipes do not retain stagnant water.
Well-designed rainwater harvesting systems ensure that the pipes and all other openings are insect-proof, especially in wet systems. Additionally, wire mesh screen covers on all tank inlets can help prevent debris from entering the tank. Collection surfaces (mainly roofs) should be made of nontoxic materials, particularly avoiding lead-based paints and membranes, and tanks should be made of nontoxic and noncorrosive material. Care should be taken to ensure that the tank outlet taps or draw-off pipes are at least 10 cm (4 inches) above the tank floor to avoid drawing out any sludge that may have collected in the water supply. Although some systems have a sump pump and washout pipe to remove sludge, regular cleaning of the inside surfaces of the tank is recommended for all systems.
Additionally, catchments should be kept clean of accumulations of dirt, moss, lichens, and other debris. Trees branches that overhang those catchment surfaces should be cut back. Regular cleaning of gutters, tank inlets, and screens and annual tank inspection are necessary for proper functioning. Ideally, the water should be tested periodically to monitor its quality.
Rainwater mixes with both soluble and insoluble materials from the surfaces on which it lands and collects dust and pollutants as it flows down through the atmosphere. Contaminants may be plants, fungi, and other organic materials, as well as inorganic substances such as dissolved minerals, metals, chemicals, or water-soluble paints. Although collected rainwater does not need a high degree of purity for garden or agricultural applications, rainwater collected from unclean surface runoffs is not suitable for drinking or cooking. Separation of the first flush of rainwater from the roof, gutters, and other collection surfaces can improve water quality in the rainwater storage tank.
If collected rainwater is intended for household uses, it must first be purified. Flocculation, settlement, and biofilm skimming can be used to remove bacteria, organic material, and chemicals that form films on surfaces or settle to the bottom of the tanks as sludge. A liquid alum solution can also be added to the incoming raw water to bind fine suspended particles to form larger particles that can be removed by settling and filtration. That removes objectionable colour, turbidity (cloudiness), and aluminum from the drinking water. Prefiltered water may then undergo solar water disinfection or be treated with chlorine or other chemicals to kill infectious agents if the supply is intended for potable uses. Other chemicals used for water purification are potassium permanganate, calcium hydroxide, and fluoride.
