Robert M. La Follette, in full Robert Marion La Follette, byname Fighting Bob,  (born June 14, 1855, Primrose, Wisconsin, U.S.—died June 18, 1925, Washington, D.C.), American leader of the Progressive movement who, as governor of Wisconsin (1901–06) and U.S. senator (1906–25), was noted for his support of reform legislation. He was the unsuccessful presidential candidate of the League for Progressive Political Action (i.e., the Progressive Party) in 1924, winning almost five million votes, about one-sixth of the total votes cast.
As a boy growing up in moderately prosperous rural areas, as a student at the University of Wisconsin (1875–79), as a county district attorney (1880–84), and as a congressman from southwestern Wisconsin, La Follette developed the personality and style that made him a popular leader. He combined an unusually outgoing personality with an extraordinary flair for zealous oratory. As an eloquent spokesman for popular causes, La Follette exalted his constituents’ wishes—even when those wishes ran counter to the desires of party leaders. His principal concerns in his three terms as congressman were economical government and protection for his district’s farmers. He married his college sweetheart, Belle Case, on December 31, 1881, after his first year as district attorney.
Defeated for reelection to Congress in a Democratic landslide of 1890, La Follette returned to Madison to practice law and develop the political organization that within 10 years would elect him governor and allow him to dominate Wisconsin politics until his death. His reputation as an enemy of political bosses began in 1891 when he announced that the state Republican boss, U.S. Sen. Philetus Sawyer, had offered him a bribe. For the next six years La Follette built a competing Republican faction on the support of other party members (Scandinavians, dairy farmers, young men, disgruntled politicians) with grievances against the dominant “stalwart” faction. His oratorical talents, combined with his natural charm, organizational skill, and driving ambition to become governor, made him the leader of his new group of Republicans.
In 1897 La Follette began to advocate programs that local-level progressives had popularized during the legislative session a few months earlier. Following their lead, he demanded tax reform, corporation regulation, and political democracy. In particular, he promoted steeper railroad taxes and a direct primary. Elected governor on this platform in 1900, he was reelected in 1902 and 1904.
As Wisconsin’s governor La Follette developed new political techniques, which he later took to the U.S. Senate. The first, which received national attention as the “Wisconsin Idea,” was the use of professors from the University of Wisconsin—57 at one point—to draft bills and administer the state regulatory apparatus created by the new laws. The second innovation was his public reading of the “roll call” in districts in which legislators had opposed his reform proposals.
With these new methods he secured the passage of several progressive laws. Believing that the railroads were the principal subverters of the political process, he persuaded the legislature to tax them on the basis of their property (1903) and to regulate them by commission (1905). The legislature enacted the direct primary in 1903 and state civil-service reform in 1905. His appointees to the Tax Commission, given new power by the legislature, equalized tax assessments. Wisconsin’s leadership in these areas gave La Follette his reputation as a pioneering progressive.
Having resigned as governor in 1906, he was elected to the Senate at a time when that institution was widely believed to be a refuge for millionaires. La Follette acquired instant fame as a new type of senator, one who was not controlled by “the interests,” and in his first three years there La Follette achieved the passage of laws aimed against the freight rates, labour policies, and financing practices of the railroads.
These laws reflected an emerging ideology that dominated La Follette’s Senate activities thereafter. Politics, he believed, was a never-ending struggle between “the people,” all men and women in their common roles as consumers and taxpayers, and the “selfish interests” for control of government; law-given privileges allowed “selfish interests” to dominate all facets of American life. He supported labour legislation because unions were battling the same enemies that menaced consumers and because consumers benefited directly from improvements in working conditions. He believed, for example, that his most famous achievement, the La Follette Seaman’s Act of 1915, would increase the safety of passengers while it also improved working conditions for sailors. Beginning in 1908, with elaborate documentation during debate on the Aldrich-Vreeland Currency Act, La Follette argued that the nation’s entire economy was dominated by fewer than 100 men who were, in turn, controlled by the J.P. Morgan and Standard Oil investment banking groups. Thereafter, he shifted his concern from the power of railroads to the power of their “owners,” namely the large banks.
In 1909 La Follette founded La Follette’s Weekly, later a monthly, and much later called The Progressive. The high point of his national popularity came in 1909–11 when he emerged as the leader of newly elected and newly converted progressives in Congress. Having led Republican opposition to the tariff, conservation, and railroad policies of Pres. William Howard Taft, La Follette was widely promoted for the presidency in 1912. Most progressives backed La Follette because their first choice, Theodore Roosevelt, had refused to run; later, when Roosevelt entered the race early in 1912, they deserted La Follette. The bitterness of La Follette’s attacks on Roosevelt cost him his reputation as a leader and left him an independent figure in the Senate. Although he had backed Woodrow Wilson in 1912 for the presidency, he was disgusted that the new president ignored the ideas of progressive Republicans and shaped most legislation in the Democratic caucus. While applauding the social justice laws, he believed that most of Wilson’s regulatory acts—particularly the Federal Reserve Board—constituted government sponsorship of big business.
