Sheng Xuanhuai, Wade-Giles romanization Sheng Hsüan-huai,  (born Nov. 4, 1844, Wujin, Changzhou, Jiangsu province, China—died  April 27, 1916, Shanghai), Chinese government official and entrepreneur in the last years of the Qing dynasty (1644–1911/12), responsible for much of China’s early industrialization. His efforts to nationalize the railroad lines in 1911 touched off the crisis that eventually overthrew the dynasty.
In 1870 Sheng joined the staff of the Chinese statesman and general Li Hongzhang (1823–1901) and soon became his chief economic deputy.
By 1893 Sheng had taken over control of the important China Merchants’ Steam Navigation Company; established the Imperial Telegraph Administration, which laid over 14,000 miles (22,500 km) of line and connected all the major cities and strategic centres of China; and reorganized under his own direction the Huasheng Spinning and Weaving Company, making it the first successful cotton mill in China. In 1896 Sheng added the famous Hanyang ironworks and its associated mines to his empire, and he also gained control of the newly formed imperial railway administration.
In recognition of his services to the government, especially in acting as an intermediary between China and the Western powers, he was given high rank in the imperial cabinet. In 1911 Sheng was appointed head of the Board of Posts and Communications, and he then attempted to bring the railway system under national control by consolidating and expanding local railroad projects that had been initiated by gentry and merchant groups in the provinces.
The provincial interests, however, felt that this move represented a conspiracy on the part of high government officials to sell out China to foreign imperialist powers. Thus, shortly thereafter, rioting began in the western province of Sichuan and spread throughout the country. Finally, on Oct. 10, 1911, a revolt in the central Chinese city of Wuhan set in motion the events that brought down Sheng’s plan and the dynasty and ended 2,000 years of imperial rule.
