Solar-powered desalination unit,  device that transforms salt water into drinking water by converting the Sun’s energy to heat, directly or indirectly, to drive the desalination process. Solar desalination mimics Earth’s natural water cycle (the process that generates rainfall) and has been practiced by humans as a rudimentary water-treatment process since the time of the ancient Greeks.
The design of a direct, or passive, unit, generically called a solar still, can be quite simple and inexpensive. The salt water in the desalination unit is heated by the Sun, converting the liquid to water vapour (a gas). As it is heated, the water vapour rises to the top of the unit, collects on the inside lid, and condenses back to liquid as fresh water in a separate collection container. The salt cannot change to a gas and, therefore, remains in the original unit. Direct solar desalination works well for purification but, because of the low operating temperature of the unit, does not produce a lot of water per day. The amount of drinking water produced in a direct desalination unit is proportional to the surface area of the device. The daily freshwater output per square metre of area is typically 2 to 3 litres (about 0.5 to 0.8 gallon), depending on the solar still design. The typically easy-to-operate design, however, makes it ideal for small-scale needs of families in remote areas, since the average person needs about two litres of water per day to survive. The process is driven solely by solar energy, so weather conditions and variable solar intensity (due to the shifting position of the Sun throughout the day) can negatively impact efficiency.
The output from a direct solar desalination unit is too low to be employed in a commercial operation. Therefore, indirect solar desalination methods must be utilized to increase freshwater production. Indirect solar desalination combines two different technologies: solar energy collection (through the use of photovoltaic panels) is coupled with a proven desalination method such as multistage flash (MSF) distillation, multiple effect evaporation (MEE), or reverse osmosis (RO). Employing renewable solar energy as a supplemental heat source can help to eliminate energy consumption of fossil fuels, significantly reducing operating costs and making commercial desalination plants viable.
A small fraction of the fresh water produced globally through desalination uses solar energy. As the demand for fresh water increases and advancements in solar technology (such as high-concentrated photovoltaic and thermal energy storage systems) become commercially feasible, solar desalination plants are likely to become more widespread.
