Solar water heater,  device that uses solar heat energy to produce hot water. A typical solar water heater consists of a solar collector mounted on the roof of a building and connected to a water-storage tank. Depending on the system, unheated water either can be circulated from the tank through the collector to be heated directly or can be heated by a high-capacity heat-exchange fluid that was warmed in the collector and transfers its heat through tubes in the water in the tank. While heat transfer from the solar collector to the unheated water can be facilitated passively without mechanical means, “active” solar hot water systems use electricity to circulate the heat-exchange fluid and to operate mechanical pumps and controllers.
Although the practice of using the sun for heating water for domestic use can be traced back to several ancient cultures, it was not until 1891 that the first patented solar hot water system was sold commercially. Invented by Clarence Kemp in Baltimore, Maryland, the system was called the “Climax” and was popular in California and other warm American states. Given the comparatively high cost and inconvenience of using conventional fuels to heat water, many households were eager to invest in these solar hot water heaters. However, the Climax system was limited in that the heating element doubled as the storage tank, thus restricting the amount of hot water available. In 1909 William J. Bailey patented a system that separated the water-storage tank from the solar heating element, forming the basis of the design of solar hot water heaters used today.
Active solar hot water systems use mechanical pumps and differential controllers to regulate and direct the flow of the heat-transfer fluid or water from the solar collector to the tank. The controllers sense the temperature difference between the water in the tank and the temperature in the solar collector and switch the pump on when the water in the tank cools below the temperature of the collector. Some pumps run on mains electricity (line electricity), and others operate on electricity generated by a solar photovoltaic panel. While some solar-powered systems circulate the fluid only when the sun is shining and store the heated water in well-insulated tanks for nighttime space heating, others use mains electricity as a backup for nighttime and overcast days. In active solar hot water systems, the water-storage tanks can be located inside the roof space or in any other location that will minimize heat loss to the cold air, as the flow of water does not depend exclusively on gravity. These tanks can therefore be combined with the hot water cylinders in domestic space heating systems, and the solar hot water system can be used to preheat water in the cylinder in winter for space heating.
Passive systems, which rely on gravity rather than electricity, are most efficient in hot climates where night or wintertime freezing is not present. Some passive systems use a thermosiphon configuration that uses gravity and convective heat flows. Cold water from a height flows down by gravity to the solar collector, and, as the water passes through the collector and heats up, it rises through convection to reach the storage tank again. Another type of passive system is the integrated collector storage system, in which the collector forms the top of the water-storage tank and heats the water directly in the tank.
The output of a solar hot water system generally depends on the efficiency of the collector and the effectiveness of the whole system design. Designing an efficient solar hot water system requires an appropriate sizing of the collector and storage tank according to the use requirements for hot water. Individual collectors and whole systems are rated separately for their efficiencies because the collector efficiency depends on the performance of one component (the solar absorber) while the whole system efficiency depends on many factors (water and ambient temperatures, system configurations, insulation, water volume, the type of collector, heat-exchange mechanism efficiencies, the location and local weather at the installation, the amount of sunlight received by the collector, etc.).
Additionally, temperature limitation and overheating mitigation measures need to be built into all solar water heaters, especially when installed in hot climates.
