Solar heating,  the use of sunlight to heat water or air in buildings. There are two types of solar heating, passive and active.
Passive heating relies on architectural design to heat buildings. The building’s site, structure, and materials can all be utilized to maximize the heating (and lighting) effect of the sunlight falling on it, thereby lowering or even eliminating its fuel requirement. A well-insulated building with a large glass window facing south, for instance, can effectively trap heat on sunny days and reduce reliance on gas or oil (for heating) or electricity (for lighting). Entering sunlight warms the air and the solid surfaces in those rooms exposed to it, and this warmth is carried to other rooms in the building by natural convection. Interior finishes such as brick or tile are often incorporated into buildings to absorb the sunlight and reradiate the heat at night.
In active heating, mechanical means are used to store, collect, and distribute solar energy in buildings in order to provide hot water or space heating. The sunlight falling on a building’s collector array is converted to heat, which is transferred to a carrier fluid (usually a liquid, less commonly air) that is then pumped to a conversion, storage, and distribution system. In liquid-based systems, water (or less commonly glycol) is pumped through tubes that are in contact with a flat-plate collector. The latter is a blackened metal plate that absorbs sunlight and is insulated on the front with layers of glass and air; the glass allows visible light to fall on the plate but traps the resulting heat, which is then transferred to the carrier fluid. Alternatively, the fluid may be pumped through an evacuated glass tube or a volume of space onto which a large volume of sunlight has been focused (and hence concentrated) by reflecting mirrors.
After picking up heat from the collector, the carrier fluid is pumped down to an insulated storage tank, where it can be used immediately or stored for later use. The system can supply a home with hot water drawn from the storage tank, or, with the warmed water flowing through tubes in floors and ceilings, it can provide space heating. The storage tank allows water heated during sunny periods to be used at night or during cloudy days. If the carrier fluid contains antifreeze to keep it from freezing during cold weather, a heat exchanger is used to transfer the carrier fluid’s heat to water that can be used for domestic purposes. Residential heating systems using flat-plate collectors typically heat carrier fluids to temperatures between 66° and 93° C (150° and 200° F).
