Subei Canal, Chinese (Pinyin) Subei Guangai Zong Qu or (Wade-Giles romanization) Su-pei-kuan-kai-tsung Ch’ü, English Northern Jiangsu Main Irrigation Canal,  canal in Jiangsu province, eastern China, designed to provide a direct outlet to the sea for the waters of the Huai River, which discharged near the mouth of the Guan River. Together with part of the Grand Canal and various other channels, it forms an extensive irrigation network in the region and is also used for hydroelectric power generation.
In the late 12th century ce the Huang He (Yellow River) changed its course to discharge south of the Shandong Peninsula, thus taking over the lower course of the Huai, which thereafter discharged into Hongze Lake and thence southward through a string of lakes and waterways into the Yangtze River (Chang Jiang) near Yangzhou (Jiangsu). The Huang He remained in that course until the 1850s, when it again shifted to its present course north of the Shandong Peninsula. In the early 20th century the drainage of the Huai area had become a perennial problem. A canal linking Hongze Lake with the sea was constructed in 1934–37, designed not only as a channel for the discharge of floodwaters but also as the main artery of an extensive network of drainage and irrigation channels. However, the destruction of levees in 1938 during the Sino-Japanese War again temporarily shifted the Huang He into the Huai, in the process inundating a vast region and causing massive damage. After 1950 the main Subei Canal linking the Huai River with the sea was largely rebuilt and was incorporated into a waterway system covering the coastal belt of Jiangsu north of the Yangtze, which was designated as the Subei Irrigation District.
The new canal, 168 km (104 miles) in length, leaves Hongze Lake through a large lock at Hongze (Gaoliangjian) to cross the Grand Canal at Huai’an. There, large locks and sluices control entry to both the northern and southern sections of the Grand Canal, while another lock provides access to the Yunyan (“Salt Transport”) Canal, also called Yan (“Salt”) Canal, running northwestward to Lianyungang. The main canal flows into the sea at Liuduo to the east of Binhai, its mouth being protected by a tidal sluice. Several trunk canals have also been built as main arteries of the irrigation and transport system to the south of the main canal. North of the main Subei Canal, there have been extensive repairs and improvements to the Yunyan Canal, including a series of new locks and sluices, and the courses of several other rivers in the area have been canalized as well. They now form the main arteries to which a great number of smaller local irrigation and drainage projects have been connected.
