Suger,  (born 1081,  near Paris—died  Jan. 13, 1151), French abbot and adviser to kings Louis VI and VII whose supervision of the rebuilding of the abbey church of Saint-Denis was instrumental in the development of the Gothic style of architecture.
Suger was born of peasant parents. As a child he showed unusual intelligence, and in 1091 he was brought to the nearby abbey of Saint-Denis (the patron saint of France) to be educated by the monks. His closest friend and schoolmate at the abbey was Louis Capet, a boy his age. This boy became King Louis VI in 1108. Suger became secretary to the abbot Adam of Saint-Denis and a close adviser to the king.
As secretary to Abbot Adam, Suger made various diplomatic missions to Henry Beauclerc of Normandy, who was also King Henry I of England and the son of William the Conqueror. Suger was greatly impressed by the strong, orderly administration of the Norman ruler, which contrasted with the chaotic feudalism in France.
Saint-Denis, shrine of the saint who had supposedly brought Christianity to Gaul, was an object of great veneration. Suger saw its destiny and that of the French crown as permanently related. He believed that by stressing and enlarging the king’s role as vassal of Saint-Denis he could unite the king and his nobles under an idea they could mutually believe in. Suger also saw that the king could and should be protector of the peasants and the middle class.
In 1122 Suger was elected abbot of Saint-Denis. He had a chance shortly thereafter to test his theory of the cementing power of the symbolic theory of Saint-Denis. In 1124 Holy Roman Emperor Henry V invaded lands ruled by King Louis VI. Louis rode into battle carrying the Oriflamme, the banner of Saint-Denis, which normally rested in the church along with the relics of the saint. As a result of his (and Suger’s) appeal to the nobility’s veneration for the saint, he was followed by a larger army of nobles than had ever previously pledged their allegiance to him or to his father. The army of Louis and the Oriflamme were so formidable that Henry V retreated without battle.
Although Suger was not an ascetic but a reasonable and humane man in a time of violent extremes, he guided the monks of Saint-Denis back into a life of greater piety and religious observation than they had known under Abbot Adam. In Adam’s administration the monks had gained notoriety for behaving in an excessively secular fashion. Suger corrected this situation at the urging of Bernard, abbot of Clairvaux. Suger cooperated in this and many other matters with Bernard, who was a close adviser to the pope and the greatest spiritual leader in Europe at the time. He could be a powerful enemy or ally, and Suger chose to be his ally.
After King Louis’s death in 1137, his successor, Louis VII, rejected Suger’s role as principal adviser, and Suger concentrated all of his efforts for the next five years on completing the rebuilding of the church of Saint-Denis, which had fallen into decay. It is believed that he was the inspiration behind many of the architectural innovations employed in the project, which, as one of the earliest Gothic buildings, included an original use of the pointed (rather than round) arch and the ribbed vault and extensive use of stained glass, including a rose window in the facade. His writings on this work demonstrate his belief in the spiritual quality of light in the writings of John the Scott and of “Dionysius,” later known as the pseudo-Areopagite.
In 1142 Louis seized lands belonging to his most powerful vassal, Thibaut, count of Champagne. Civil war resulted. The support of the powerful Thibaut had always been vital to the French monarchy, and the young king was making war ferociously and irrationally. Suger stepped in as an active adviser to Louis VII, as he had always done with his father, and negotiated a peace treaty between Thibaut and Louis. The treaty was signed at the dedication ceremony of the church of Saint-Denis, an architectural marvel.
As penance for the many lives that he had taken during the war with Thibaut, Louis VII was urged by Bernard of Clairvaux to lead a crusade to free the Holy Land from the Muslims. Suger was strongly opposed to this and tried unsuccessfully to change the king’s mind. For the first time Suger stood in opposition to the wishes of the weak, young king as well as those of Bernard and the pope.
On June 11, 1147, Louis and Queen Eleanor departed on the Second Crusade. Louis left his crown with Abbot Suger, who was appointed regent in his absence. The Crusade was a disastrous loss, but at home Suger governed well, despite the great financial drain on the funds at his disposal. He devised new and fairer means of taxation, passed laws preventing deforestation, and suppressed a revolt by a group of nobles who planned to make Robert, count of Dreux and brother of Louis VII, king in his absence. When in 1149 Louis returned from the Crusade, many believed that Suger would not return the crown, but they were proved wrong.
In 1150 Suger himself, with Bernard, made plans for another crusade. But in 1150, before it was begun, Suger fell ill with malaria. He died in January 1151.
