Triumphal arch,  a monumental structure pierced by at least one arched passageway and erected to honour an important person or to commemorate a significant event. It was sometimes architecturally isolated but usually was built to span either a street or a roadway, preferably one used for triumphal processions.
Although associated with ancient Roman architecture, the origins and significance of the triumphal arch are still not fully understood. It was a separate structure, having no connection with city gates or city walls, and should not be confused with the Porta Triumphalis, through which the victorious Roman army had to pass before entering the sacred city territory (pomerium) of Rome. Its basic form consisted of two piers connected by an arch and crowned by a superstructure, or attica, that served as a base for statues and bore commemorative inscriptions. In early arches the attic statuary usually represented the victor in his triumphal chariot; in later ones only the emperor was depicted. The function of the arch, therefore, seems to have been that of an honorary monument of unusual importance; it was so interpreted by the only ancient author who discussed it, Pliny the Elder (ad 23–79).
Few triumphal arches are known from the time of the republic. In Rome three were erected: the first, in 196 bc, by Lucius Stertinius; the second, in 190 bc, by Scipio Africanus the Elder on the Capitoline Hill; and the third, in 121 bc, the first in the Forum area, by Quintus Fabius Allobrogicus. All carried statuary, but little is known of their architectural form, and there are no remains.
Most of the triumphal arches were built during the empire period (27 bc to ad 476). Early in the 4th century ad, for example, there were 36 such monuments in Rome. The imperial-style structure was sometimes expanded to three arches with the central arch reaching a greater height than the two side arches. The triumphal arch of the empire was articulated by a facade of marble columns; ornamental cornices were added to the piers and attics, and the archway and sides were adorned with relief sculpture depicting the emperor’s victories and achievements.
In Rome three triumphal arches have survived: the Arch of Titus (ad 81), with relief sculpture of his triumph over Jerusalem; the Arch of Septimius Severus (203–205), commemorating his victory over the Parthians; and the Arch of Constantine (312), a composite product, decorated with reused material from the times of Domitian, Trajan, and Hadrian. Outside Rome, notable ancient examples include the arches of Augustus in Susa, Aosta, Rimini, and Pola; the arches of Trajan in Ancona and Benevento; the arch of Marcus Aurelius in Tripoli; and that of Septimius Severus in Leptis Magna, in North Africa.
Its forms have reappeared, imaginatively transposed, in the facades and interiors of churches, such as that of San Andrea in Mantua, Italy (begun 1472), by Leon Battista Alberti, and even in fountain design, as at the Trevi Fountain in Rome (begun 1732), by Niccolò Salvi.
Among the triumphal arches built since the Renaissance, noteworthy examples include the triumphal arch of Alfonso I (1453–70) in Naples; the 17th-century Porte Saint-Denis and Porte Saint-Martin and Jean Chalgrin’s Arc de Triomphe (1836), all in Paris; London’s Marble Arch, by John Nash, and the Hyde Park Corner Arch, both designed in 1828; and Stanford White’s Washington Square Arch (completed 1895) in New York City.
