Tunneling shield,   machine for driving tunnels in soft ground, especially under rivers or in water-bearing strata. The problem of tunneling under a river had defied the engineering imagination for centuries because of the difficulty of preventing mud and water from seeping in and collapsing the tunnel heading. In 1818 Marc Isambard Brunel, an émigré French naval officer in England, observed the action of a tiny marine borer, the shipworm, whose shell plates permitted it to bore through timber and push the sawdust out behind it. Brunel built a giant iron casing, or shield, that could be pushed forward through soft ground by means of screw jacks, while miners dug through shutter openings in the face.
Brunel’s shield, rectangular in plan, was successfully employed in driving the world’s first underwater tunnel, under the Thames at London, 1825–42. In 1865 Peter Barlow of London patented a much simpler shield of circular cross section, 8 feet (2.5 m) in diameter, with which James Henry Greathead drove a small-bore tunnel under the Thames in less than a year at modest cost. Simultaneously, Alfred Ely Beach of New York City devised a shield, also circular in cross section, which he used to drive a short experimental subway under Broadway. In the 1880s Greathead successfully used compressed air behind his shield in a London subway tunnel to prevent flooding while the lining was being installed. The combination of shield and compressed air made tunneling possible under the largest rivers.
Modern tunneling shields are essentially the same as the Greathead design; that is, powerful steel cylinders shoved forward by hydraulic jacks. A diaphragm, or curtain, in the front has a door that may be opened to permit men to work in front of the shield, or it may be closed when the shield is shoved through very soft ground. In front of the diaphragm the cylinder is prolonged by a circular cutting edge that projects farther at the top, forming a protective hood for those working in front of the shield. Behind the diaphragm an erector arm, an adjunct of the shield, constructs the tunnel lining by successively setting segments of steel rings in place. The steel is later covered over with masonry. Hydraulic jacks to advance the shield are braced against the end of the completed lining.
