Vaiont Dam, also spelled Vajont Dam,  disused concrete arch dam across the Vaiont River near Monte Toc in Italy. With a height of 262 metres (859 feet) and crest length of 190 metres (623 feet), it is one of the tallest dams in the world. Originally intended to help industrialize northern Italy, use of the dam was discontinued after a massive landslide into the reservoir in 1963 claimed the lives of about 2,000 people.
The dam was designed by Italian engineer Carlo Semenza in the 1920s; however, given the political and social turmoil during Mussolini’s dictatorship, the project was not approved until 1943. Even then, construction did not begin until 1957 when the Adriatic Energy Corporation (Italian: Società Adriatica di Elettricità [SADE]) undertook the project. The deep gorge of the Vaiont River was known to be geologically unstable and had a history of landslides; indeed, numerous fractures and shifts in the road to the dam appeared during its construction. Of special concern was the possibility that filling the reservoir could undermine the integrity of the mountainside, and several geologists and engineers issued strong warnings about the risks of filling it too quickly and the potential for a single disastrous landslide. Despite these concerns, which were considered to be worst-case scenarios, SADE completed the dam and began filling the reservoir in 1960. The dam was nationalized in 1962–1963 and became part of the Italian Ministry of Public Works.
On October 9, 1963, an estimated 260 million cubic metres (more than 9 billion cubic feet) of rock broke free from Monte Toc and fell into the water-filled reservoir of the dam. The landslide instantly created a massive wave that reached 150–200 metres (492–656 feet) above the dam before breaching the crest and flooding the narrow valley below. The town of Longarone, almost directly below the dam, was nearly completely destroyed; around 80 percent of its inhabitants were drowned. The nearby villages of Faè, Pirago, Rivalta, and Villanova also suffered casualties and significant damage; many of the bodies were never recovered. The dam itself was largely unaffected by the landslide and resulting wave. Although the government and SADE were quick to state that it was a natural disaster, several employees were eventually sentenced for negligence and manslaughter. The dam still stands, though the reservoir has never been refilled.
