Villa,  country estate, complete with house, grounds, and subsidiary buildings. The term villa particularly applies to the suburban summer residences of the ancient Romans and their later Italian imitators. In Great Britain the word has come to mean a small detached or semidetached suburban home. In the United States it generally refers to a sumptuous suburban or country residence.
Many villas existed throughout the Roman Empire, and references to them are common in the works of Roman writers, especially Cicero, who had seven villas, and Pliny the Younger, who described at great length in his letters his villas in Tuscany and near Laurentum. The Italian countryside is dotted with ruins of innumerable villas. The most famous of these is Hadrian’s Villa at Tivoli (c. ad 120–130), which was a sumptuous imperial residence with parks and gardens on a grand scale. The uneven terrain made necessary large flights of steps and terraces. The buildings, which covered an area about 2 miles (3 km) in length, were echoes of celebrated structures the emperor had seen in his travels.
Roman villas frequently were asymmetrical in plan and were built with elaborate terracing on hillsides; they had long colonnades, towers, fine water gardens with reflecting pools and fountains, and extensive reservoirs for water supply. According to Pliny there were two kinds of villas, the villa urbana, which was a country seat with city comforts, and the villa rustica, the farmhouse in which the principal room was the kitchen, with the bakery and stables beyond, and room for winepresses, oil presses, hand mills, and so on.
During the Middle Ages villas were abandoned, and in some places castles and monasteries were built in and on top of them. The great Renaissance villas were also occasionally built on their ruins and frequently used some of the better-preserved remains as models. This influence is evident in the Villa Madama (c. 1520) just outside Rome, designed by Raphael, and in Pirro Ligorio’s Casino of Pius IV (c. 1558–62) in the Vatican gardens. Renaissance villas sought, however, greater symmetry than those of antiquity, and the houses were less rambling (frequently being remodeled castles, especially in Tuscany), though the gardens were often even more elaborate. In fact, the garden often became the principal element in the 16th- and 17th-century villa, as in the Villa d’Este in Tivoli (1550), also designed by Ligorio. Other important examples include the Villa di Papa Giulio (1550) in Rome and the Villa Farnese (1559–73) at Caprarola, both by Giacomo da Vignola; the Villa Aldobrandini (1598–1603) at Frascati; the Villa Barberini at Castel Gandolfo (on the site of a villa of the emperor Domitian); the Boboli Gardens (begun 1550) in Florence; the Villa Barbaro (1555–59) at Maser in the Veneto and the Villa Rotonda (1550–51) by Andrea Palladio; and the villas Borghese (1613–16), Medici (c. 1540), and Doria Pamphili (1650) in Rome. By the 18th and 19th centuries, villas in Italy were less extensive, though fine ones continued to be built, especially in the Piedmont, Lombardy, the Venetia, and around Rome and Naples.
In the mid-19th century eclectic Romantic architects often adopted a modified Italian villa style as a model for country and town houses in Germany, England, and the United States. These were usually characterized by flat roofs, broadly projecting eaves supported on brackets, square towers, and arcaded or colonnaded piazzas.
