Andrew Z. Fire,  (born April 27, 1959, Stanford, Calif., U.S.), American scientist, who was a corecipient, with Craig C. Mello, of the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 2006 for discovering a mechanism for controlling the flow of genetic information.
Fire received a bachelor’s degree in mathematics (1978) from the University of California, Berkeley. He was subsequently accepted into the graduate biology program at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where he worked with American molecular biologist Philip A. Sharp, who was awarded the 1993 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for his independent discovery of introns—long sections of DNA that do not encode proteins but are located within genes. Fire received a Ph.D. in biology from MIT in 1983 and then went to Cambridge, Eng., joining the Medical Research Council (MRC) Laboratory of Molecular Biology. At Cambridge, Fire worked with South African-born biologist Sydney Brenner and studied the genetic mechanisms that influence the early development of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.
In 1986 Fire joined the staff at the Carnegie Institution in Baltimore, Md., where he conducted his prizewinning research. Working with Mello, Fire helped discover RNA interference (RNAi), a mechanism in which genes are silenced by double-stranded RNA. Naturally occurring in plants, animals, and humans, RNAi regulates gene activity and helps defend against viral infection. The two men published their findings in 1998. Possible applications of RNAi include developing treatments for such diseases as AIDS, cancer, and hepatitis.
In 2003 Fire joined the faculty at Stanford University, taking professorships in pathology and genetics. His later research was concerned with understanding the mechanisms that enable cells to distinguish foreign DNA and RNA from the cells’ own genetic material. This work was aimed in part at elucidating the role of RNAi in silencing the activity of foreign genetic material introduced into cells by infectious agents. Fire also investigated the role of RNAi and other genetic mechanisms in enabling cells to adapt to changes that occur throughout an organism’s development.
In addition to the Nobel Prize, Fire received several other major awards during his career, including the Meyenburg Prize (2002) from the German Cancer Research Center, the Wiley Prize (2003), and the National Academy of Sciences Award in Molecular Biology (2003).
