Joseph L. Goldstein, in full Joseph Leonard Goldstein,  (born April 18, 1940, Sumter, S.C., U.S.), American molecular geneticist who, along with Michael S. Brown, was awarded the 1985 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for their elucidation of the process of cholesterol metabolism in the human body.
Goldstein received his B.S. degree from Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Va., in 1962 and obtained his medical degree from the Southwestern Medical School of the University of Texas at Dallas in 1966. Goldstein became friends with Brown when they were both working as interns at Massachusetts General Hospital from 1966 to 1968. Goldstein then conducted research under the auspices of the National Institutes of Health from 1968 to 1972, studying genetically predisposing factors that caused the accumulation of blood cholesterol in people prone to heart attacks. He returned to teach at the Southwestern Medical School in Dallas in 1972 and was there reunited with his colleague Brown.
The two men then began a concerted study of the processes affecting the accumulation of cholesterol in the bloodstream. In the course of their research they discovered that low-density lipoproteins (LDL), which are primary cholesterol-carrying particles, are withdrawn from the bloodstream into the body’s cells by receptors on the cells’ surface. The genetic absence of these LDL receptors was found to be the cause of familial hypercholesterolemia, a disorder in which the body’s tissues are incapable of removing cholesterol from the bloodstream. The new understanding of cells receptors’ role in the regulation of cholesterol levels in the bloodstream spurred the successful use of drugs and the manipulation of diet in lowering blood cholesterol levels.
From 1976 Goldstein was professor of medicine and from 1977 chairman of the department of molecular genetics at the University of Texas Health Science Center in Dallas; he was named regental professor of the University of Texas in 1985. In addition to the Nobel Prize, Goldstein and Brown have received numerous awards for their research on cholesterol and lipoproteins, including the Louisa Gross Horowitz Prize for Biology or Biochemistry (1984), the Albert Lasker Basic Medical Research Award (1985), and the National Medal of Science (1988).
In the 1990s the two scientists made another groundbreaking advance in cholesterol research when they discovered a new family of transcription factors called sterol regulatory element binding proteins (SREBPs). Goldstein and Brown found that SREBPs controlled the synthesis of cholesterol and fatty acids, and in subsequent studies they elucidated the mechanism of activation that enables SREBPs to regulate lipid metabolism. In 2003 Goldstein and Brown were honoured with an Albany Medical Center Prize for their work on SREBPs.
