Aegean Sea, Greek Aigaíon Pélagos, Turkish Ege Deniz,  an arm of the Mediterranean Sea, located between the Greek peninsula on the west and Asia Minor on the east. About 380 miles (612 km) long and 186 miles (299 km) wide, it has a total area of some 83,000 square miles (215,000 square km). The Aegean is connected through the straits of the Dardanelles, the Sea of Marmara, and the Bosporus to the Black Sea, while the island of Crete can be taken as marking its boundary on the south. The cradle of two of the great early civilizations, those of Crete and Greece, from which much of modern Western culture is derived, the Aegean Sea is also an important natural feature of the Mediterranean region, possessing several unique characteristics that make it of considerable scientific interest.
The Aegean has an intricate configuration and could well be considered as a bay within the eastern Mediterranean basin, to which it is connected by the straits to the west and east of Crete. It also has a good connection to the Ionian Sea to the west, through the strait lying between the Peloponnese peninsula of Greece and Crete. Virtually throughout the Aegean area, numerous islands large and small emerge from the clear blue waters. These are the mountain peaks of Aegeis, the name given to a now-submerged landmass. At the dawn of European history, these islands facilitated contacts between the people of the area and of three continents. Throughout the entire Aegean shoreline—that is, both the continental shores surrounding the Aegean Sea and those of the islands—bays, ports, and shelter creeks are also abundant. These also facilitated the task of seamen traveling in the Aegean Sea, making longer voyages possible at a time when shipbuilding was in its infancy. For its size, no other maritime area of the Mediterranean has comparable shoreline development.
The maximum depth of the Aegean is to be found east of Crete, where it reaches 11,627 feet (3,544 metres). The rocks making up the floor of the Aegean are mainly limestone, though often greatly altered by volcanic activity that has convulsed the region in relatively recent geologic times. The richly coloured sediments in the region of the islands of Thera (Santoríni, or Thíra) and Melos (Mílos), in the south Aegean, are particularly interesting. During the 1970s, Thera in particular became a topic of major international scientific importance, analysis of its surrounding sediments having been linked with a possible explanation of the ancient legend of the lost island of Atlantis.
North winds prevail in the Aegean Sea, although from the end of September to the end of May, during the mild winter season, these winds alternate with southwesterlies. The tides of the Aegean basin seem to follow the movements of those in the eastern Mediterranean generally. The tide of Euripus (Evrípos)—a strait lying between continental Greece and the island of Euboea (Évvoia) in the Aegean—is, however, extremely important, because it displays a tidal phenomenon of international significance, to which it has, in fact, lent its name. The euripus phenomenon—characterized by violent and uncertain currents—has been studied since the time of Aristotle, who first provided an interpretation of the term. Aegean currents generally are not smooth, whether considered from the viewpoint of either speed or direction. They are chiefly influenced by blowing winds. Water temperatures in the Aegean are influenced by the cold-water masses of low temperature that flow in from the Black Sea to the northeast. The sea surface temperature in the Aegean ranges from about 60 to 77 °F (16 to 25 °C), varying with location and time of year.
The Aegean Sea, like the Mediterranean in general, is the most impoverished large body of water known to science. The nutrient content, as indicated by the amount of phosphates and nitrates in the water, is on the whole poor. The less saline waters coming from the Black Sea have a distinct ameliorative influence, but the role of their fertility in the Mediterranean in general has been little studied. Generally, marine life in the Aegean Sea is very similar to that of the northern area of the western basin of the Mediterranean. In view of its limpidity and as a result of its hot waters, it is not surprising that the Aegean Sea accommodates large quantities of fish at the time of their procreating maturity. Such fish enter the Aegean from other areas, notably from the Black Sea.
Geographically, the multitude of Greek islands in the Aegean can be arranged into seven principal groups, from north to south: (1) the Thracian Sea group, including Thásos, Samothrace (Samothráki), and Lemnos; (2) the east Aegean group, including Lesbos (Lésvos), Chios, Ikaría, and Sámos; (3) the Northern Sporades, including Skyros, a group lying off Thessaly; (4) the Cyclades, including Melos, Páros, Náxos, Thera, and Ándros (Euboea, although technically an island, is considered a part of the Greek mainland and is connected to Boeotia by a bridge at Chalcís); (5) the Saronic Islands west of the Cyclades, lying 5 to 50 miles (8 to 80 km) from Piraeus and including Salamís, Aegina (Aíyina), Póros, Hydra (Ídhra), and Spétsai; (6) the Dodecanese, a group of 13 islands transferred to Greece by Italy after World War II, the principal island and capital of which is Rhodes; and (7) Crete and associated small islands. Geographically, Crete, Kárpathos, and Rhodes form an arc of giant stepping-stones from Greece to the Turkish coast of Asia Minor. Together with Ikaría, Foúrnoi, and Sámos, the Dodecanese are also known as the Southern Sporades. The Greek dhiamerisma (region) of the Aegean Islands encompasses the nomoí (departments) of Cyclados, Dodecanese, Khíos, Lésvos, and Sámos.
So numerous are the islands of the Aegean that the name Archipelago was formerly applied to the sea. Structurally the Aegean islands are subject to frequent earthquakes. Although a number of the larger islands, such as Lesbos, Chios, Rhodes, and Crete, have fertile, well-cultivated plains, most of them are rocky and quite barren, with terraces to conserve the sparse soil. Characteristic of this landscape is the Cyclades group, the southernmost island of which, Thera, has a volcano that was last active in 1925. The northern islands are generally more wooded than are the southern, except Rhodes.
The chief products of the islands are wheat, wine, oil, mastic, figs, raisins, honey, vegetables, marble, and minerals; fishing is also important. Tourism generates increasing income, with visitors attracted to the villages of whitewashed houses and their handicrafts, as well as to the impressive monuments of the great prehistoric civilization that flourished here. 
