Arabian Sea,  northwestern part of the Indian Ocean, covering a total area of about 1,491,000 square miles (3,862,000 square km) and forming part of the principal sea route between Europe and India. It is bounded to the west by the Horn of Africa and the Arabian Peninsula, to the north by Iran and Pakistan, to the east by India, and to the south by the remainder of the Indian Ocean. To the north the Gulf of Oman connects the sea with the Persian Gulf via the Strait of Hormuz. To the west the Gulf of Aden connects it with the Red Sea via the Bab el-Mandeb (Bāb al-Mandab) Strait. It has a mean depth of 8,970 feet (2,734 metres). In Roman times its name was Mare Erythraeum (Erythraean Sea).
Political units bordering the sea—in addition to India, Iran, and Pakistan—are Oman, Yemen, and Somalia. Islands in the sea include Socotra (a part of Yemen) off the Horn of Africa, the Khuriyyā Muriyyā (Kuria Muria) Islands off the coast of Oman, and Lakshadweep (a union territory of India consisting of the Laccadive, Minicoy, and Amindivi islands; the latter constitute a group of coral atolls lying between 100 and 250 miles [160 and 400 km]) off the southwestern coast of India. The Indus and the Narmada rivers are the principal waterways draining into the sea.
Most of the Arabian Sea has depths that exceed 9,800 feet (2,990 metres), and there are no islands in the middle. Deep water reaches close to the bordering lands except in the northeast, off Pakistan and India. To the southeast the Lakshadweep atolls form part of the submarine Maldive Ridge, which extends farther south into the Indian Ocean where it rises above the surface to form the atolls of the Maldives. On the western side of the sea, the plateau island of Socotra, about 70 miles (110 km) long and with an area of about 1,400 square miles (3,625 square km), is an insular extension of the Horn of Africa, lying 160 miles (260 km) east of Cape Gwardafuy (Guardafui).
The Arabian Sea was formed within the past roughly 50 million years as the Indian subcontinent collided with Asia. Stretching southeastward from Socotra is the submarine Carlsberg Ridge, which coincides with the belt of seismic activity in the Indian Ocean that divides the Arabian Sea into two major basins—the Arabian Basin to the east and the Somali Basin to the west. The maximum depth of the sea, 19,038 feet (5,803 metres), occurs at Wheatley Deep. The Carlsberg Ridge is longitudinally split by a central valley that reaches depths of about 11,800 feet (3,600 metres) below the sea’s surface. The coastal escarpments of the Gulf of Aden are formed by rift faults that converge toward the southwest to continue into Africa as the boundary scarps of the Eastern, or Great, Rift Valley, which forms part of the East African Rift System. The Arabian Basin is separated from the Gulf of Oman Basin by the Murray Ridge, a narrow, seismically active submarine ridge that extends northeast to southwest to meet the Carlsberg Ridge. West of Murray Ridge is the Malian subduction zone, an area where the ocean floor sinks below the adjacent continental crust.
A deep submarine canyon has been cut by the Indus River, which also has deposited an abyssal (i.e., deep-sea) cone of thick sediments some 535 miles (860 km) wide and 930 miles (1,500 km) long. This cone and an associated abyssal plain in the Arabian Basin occupy much of the northeastern floor of the Arabian Sea. To the east of the Somali coast, the Somali Basin forms another large abyssal plain.
The continental shelf is narrow along the coast of the Arabian Peninsula and is even narrower along the Somali coast. No true coral reefs are found along the Arabian coast. Sediments near Cape al-Ḥadd (the easternmost headland of the Arabian Peninsula), where upwelling of deep water occurs in summer, consist of fine greenish mud with a high organic content containing hydrogen sulfide. The region, which contains many fish remains, is known as a fish cemetery. Terrigenous (i.e., land-derived) deposits cover the major part of the continental slope to a depth of about 9,000 feet (2,700 metres). Below this, deposits consist of the calcareous tests (shells) of Globigerina (a genus of protozoans belonging to the Foraminifera order), while basins below 13,000 feet (4,000 metres) are covered by red clay. Authigenic (i.e., formed in place) ferromanganese nodules have been discovered in the Somali and Arabian basins, and polymetallic sulfides have been found along the Carlsberg Ridge. Sediment thickness decreases from 8,200 feet (2,500 metres) in the north to about 1,600 feet (500 metres) in the south of the Arabian Basin.
The Arabian Sea has a monsoon climate. Minimum air temperatures of about 75 to 77 °F (24 to 25 °C) at the sea’s surface occur in the central Arabian Sea in January and February, while temperatures higher than 82 °F (28 °C) occur in both June and November. During the rainy season, which occurs when the southwest monsoon winds blow (April to November), salinities of less than 35 parts per thousand have been recorded in the upper 150 feet (45 metres) of the sea, while during the dry season (November to March), when the northeast monsoon winds blow, salinities of more than 36 parts per thousand have been recorded at the surface over the entire Arabian Sea north of latitude 5° N, except off the Somali coast. Because evaporation exceeds the combined precipitation and riverine input, the sea exhibits a net water loss annually.
The complex Somali Current, which attains speeds of about 7 knots (8 miles [13 km] per hour) off the coast of Socotra, becomes part of a clockwise circulation system that in summer continues to the northeast along the coast of Arabia and thence south along the coast of India to 10° N. At that point it merges with the Southwestern Monsoon Current, flowing east between 5° and 10° N. Pronounced upwelling of deeper waters occurs along the Somali and Arabian coasts in summer. The Somali Current weakens and reverses direction during the northeast (winter) monsoon. Of the five water masses that have been distinguished in the upper 3,000 feet (900 metres) of the northern Indian Ocean, three have been identified as originating in the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, and the Arabian Sea, respectively. The paths of flow of these water masses are to the south and east.
