Barents Sea, Norwegian Barentshavet, Russian Barentsevo More,  outlying portion of the Arctic Ocean 800 miles (1,300 km) long and 650 miles (1,050 km) wide and covering 542,000 square miles (1,405,000 square km). Its average depth is 750 feet (229 m), plunging to a maximum of 2,000 feet (600 m) in the major Bear Island Trench. It is bounded by the archipelagoes of Svalbard and Franz Josef Land (north), the Norwegian and Russian mainland (south), the Novaya Zemlya archipelago (east), and by the conventional border with the Greenland Sea (west), which runs from Spitsbergen to Norway’s northernmost tip, North Cape, via Bear Island (Bjørnøya).
The sea was known to Vikings and medieval Russians as the Murmean Sea. It first appeared under its modern name in a chart published in 1853, honouring a 16th-century Dutch seeker of a northeast passage to Asia, Willem Barents.
The Barents Sea covers a relatively shallow continental shelf fringing the Eurasian landmass. The floor—covered by sands, silts, and a sandy-silt mixture—is cut from east to west by the major Bear Island Trench and the smaller South Cape, Northern, and Northeastern trenches. The Central and Perseus elevations provide shallower relief in the north, and there are fishing banks and shallows to the southeast. Also in the southeast is Kolguyev Island. The western mainland coast is abruptly elevated and pierced by fjords, while east of the Kanin Peninsula the coast is low-lying, with a number of shallow bays and inlets. The coasts of the northern archipelagoes are steep and high, with glaciers plunging down to the sea and accumulations of glacier-carried debris in the hollows.
The climate is subarctic, with winter air temperatures averaging -13° F (-25° C) in the north and 23° F (-5° C) in the southwest; summer averages in the same regions are, respectively, 32° F (0° C) and 50° F (10° C). Annual precipitation is 20 inches (500 mm) in the south but only half that in the north.
The North Cape and Spitsbergen branches of the Norway Current bring warm currents into the sea, but heat is lost in mixing with colder waters. Despite the high salinity (34 parts per 1,000), ice forms in winter, but fields are thin and icebergs do not linger long. In summer, the edge of the ice retreats far to the north. The tidal amplitude and current direction varies greatly. Ice-free ports are Murmansk and Teribyorka (Russia) and Vardø (Norway).
Fishing flourishes. Microscopic forms of phytoplankton feed deep-sea invertebrates, small, shrimplike crustaceans, bivalves, and sponges, which in turn support such fish as cod, herring, salmon, plaice, and catfish. There are also sea mammals (seals and whales), land mammals (polar bears and Arctic foxes), sea gulls, and, in warm weather, ducks and geese. Underwater flora is very rich in the shallow southern regions; and brown, red, and green algae are widespread. Most of the coastline is rock and stone, but about 20 to 40 percent contains shrubs, mosses, and lichens. Grasses are rare.
