Dardanelles, formerly Hellespont, Turkish Çanakkale Boğazı,  narrow strait in northwestern Turkey, 38 miles (61 km) long and 0.75 to 4 miles (1.2 to 6.5 km) wide, linking the Aegean Sea with the Sea of Marmara. The city of Dardanus in the Troad (territory around ancient Troy), where Mithradates VI (king of Pontus) and Sulla (the Roman general) signed a treaty in 85 bce, gave the strait its name.
The Dardanelles lies between the peninsula of Gallipoli in Europe (northwest) and the mainland of Asia Minor (southeast). It has an average depth of 180 feet (55 metres) and reaches a maximum depth of 300 feet (90 metres) in the narrowest central section. There is a rapid surface current from the Sea of Marmara to the Aegean and a compensatory undercurrent returning more saline water. Important ports along the shores of the Dardanelles are Gallipoli, Eceabat, and Çanakkale. Many famous castles stand along its banks. The waters are rich in various kinds of fish that migrate between the Black and Aegean seas via the Bosporus strait, the Sea of Marmara, and the Dardanelles.
The Dardanelles holds a significant place in history. As the Hellespont, it was the scene of the Greek legend of the two lovers Hero and Leander. The ancient city of Troy defended the strait from its strategic position at the southwest end (Asian side). In 480 bce the Persian army of Xerxes I crossed the strait by a bridge of boats. Alexander the Great did the same in 334 bce on his expedition against Persia. The strait has always been of great strategic and economic importance as the gateway to Istanbul and the Black Sea from the Mediterranean. The strait was forced by a British fleet under Adm. Sir John T. Duckworth in 1807. During World War I the Allies failed to capture it, although a British submarine penetrated the minefields and sank a Turkish battleship off the Golden Horn, an inlet on the Bosporus. The location of the Dardanelles has given it international political importance (see Straits Question).
