Drake Passage,  deep waterway, 600 miles (1,000 km) wide, connecting the Atlantic and Pacific oceans between Cape Horn (the southernmost point of South America) and the South Shetland Islands, situated about 100 miles (160 km) north of the Antarctic Peninsula. The Drake Passage defines the zone of climatic transition separating the cool, humid, subpolar conditions of Tierra del Fuego and the frigid, polar regions of Antarctica. Though bearing the name of the famous English seaman and global circumnavigator Sir Francis Drake,  the passage was first traversed in 1616 by a Flemish expedition led by Willem Schouten.
The Drake Passage played an important part in the trade of the 19th and early 20th centuries before the opening of the Panama Canal in 1914. The stormy seas and icy conditions made the rounding of Cape Horn through the Drake Passage a rigorous test for ships and crews alike, especially for the sailing vessels of the day.
The passage has an average depth of about 11,000 feet (3,400 metres) with deeper regions of up to 15,600 feet (4,800 metres) near the northern and southern boundaries. The sediments on the seafloor vary from sandy to clayey silts immediately south of Tierra del Fuego, with an increasing predominance of ice-rafted materials (dropped by icebergs) near Antarctica. The origin of the sediments on the floor of the passage therefore reflect a provenance from both South America and Antarctica, with an additional component represented by planktonic materials sedimented from out of the water column.
The winds over the Drake Passage are predominantly from the west and are most intense to the north around Cape Horn. Cyclones (atmospheric low pressure systems) formed in the Pacific sweep west to east across the southern edge of the passage. The mean annual air temperature ranges from 41 °F (5 °C) in the north to 27 °F (−3 °C) in the south. Surface water temperatures vary from 43 °F (6 °C) in the north to 30 °F (−1 °C) in the south, with the temperatures altering sharply around latitude 60° S—the zone of the Antarctic Convergence. 
The sea ice cover extending northward from Antarctica varies seasonally. In the late summer (February) the passage is ice-free. In September the maximum ice cover occurs; 25 percent to full cover extends to 60° S, with occasional ice floes reaching Cape Horn.
Water within the Drake Passage flows predominantly from west to east and forms part of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, the most voluminous current in the world, with an estimated rate of flow between 3,400 and 5,300 million cubic feet (95 and 150 million cubic metres) per second. Accelerated by the physical constriction of the passage, the Antarctic Circumpolar Current increases rapidly in velocity, especially at 60° S. Exiting the passage, most water continues to flow east or northeast, but a branch known as the Falklands Current turns north into the South Atlantic. 
The waters of the Drake Passage are rich in plankton, particularly the shrimplike crustaceans called krill. Such organisms define the essential food source for blue and fin whales, squid, emperor penguins, and crabeater seals.  Antarctic cods are the most common fish. Some of these fish and all of the cold-water Chaenichthyidae (icefish) are “bloodless”—they have no detectable hemoglobin in their blood.
