Everglades,  subtropical saw-grass marsh region, a “river of grass” up to 50 miles (80 km) wide but generally less than 1 foot (0.3 metre) deep, covering more than 4,300 square miles (11,100 square km) of southern Florida, U.S. Through it, water moves slowly southward to mangrove swamps bordering the Gulf of Mexico to the southwest and Florida Bay to the south. To the east the marsh reaches near the narrow, sandy belt that includes the Miami metropolitan area, and to the west it merges into Big Cypress Swamp. The name Everglades is a term unique to Florida. Glade has been used to refer to an open, grassy area in the forest or a moist, swampy area; ever may have referred to the marsh’s seemingly interminable expanse.
The Everglades occupies a shallow limestone-floored basin that slopes imperceptibly southward at about 2.4 inches per mile (about 4 cm per km). Much of it is covered with saw grass (a sedge, the edges of which are covered with minute sharp teeth), which grows to a height of 4 to 10 feet (1.2 to 3 metres). Open water is sometimes found. Slight changes in the elevation of the land and the water’s salt content create different habitats. The Florida Bay estuary is covered with sea grass and serves as a nursery for fish. Mangroves also serve as nurseries and as feeding grounds for wading birds in tidal areas where fresh and salt water combine. Coastal prairie regions support salt-tolerant succulents and cordgrass. Hardwood hammocks consist of thick stands of tropical (mahogany, cocoplum, and strangler fig) and temperate (saw palmetto, live oak, and red maple) trees growing on slight hills, creating islands in the saw-grass marsh and sloughs; domes of cypress or willow can also be found. Pinelands, dominated by slash pine, occupy dry ridges.
The organic soils, formed from the decay of lush vegetation, range from discontinuous shallow patches to accumulations of peat and muck 8 to 10 feet (2.4 to 3 metres) thick near Lake Okeechobee. The best soils are deep mucks found in a narrow zone along the lakeshore, where a dense tangle of custard apple, or pond apple, once grew.
The climate of the Everglades is tropical to subtropical and is influenced strongly by the southeast trade winds. Monthly mean temperatures range from 63 °F (17 °C) to 82 °F (28 °C), though winter frosts occur on rare occasions. Rainfall averages 40 to 65 inches (1,000 to 1,650 mm) annually, with most coming between May and October. During that period the land is nearly covered with a sheet of water. In the dry season (December–April), however, water levels drop and leave it dotted with small pools.
The marsh provides habitat for more than 350 bird species. There are wading birds such as egrets, herons, roseate spoonbills, and ibis; shore and water birds such as terns, plovers, rails, and sandpipers; birds of prey including owls, hawks, and osprey; and a wide variety of songbirds. Several game fish species make their homes there. The Everglades is known for its population of alligators; bobcats, white-tailed deer, river otters, gray foxes, and many types of snakes, lizards, and turtles also live there. The area provides habitat for endangered species such as the manatee, Florida panther, wood stork, American crocodile, and several species of sea turtle. The population of wading birds in the Everglades has fallen drastically since the mid-20th century.
To the Native Americans of the region, the Everglades was known as Pa-Hay-Okee (“Grassy Water”). Its vast areas of open saw grass were used as passage for dugout canoes and as hunting and fishing territory. Although there was little settlement within the Everglades, mounds remain to indicate occupancy. The nearby coastal regions were inhabited by Calusa and Tequesta Indians when European explorers first arrived in the 16th century. Contact with Europeans was marked by warfare, disease, and other depredations, and both these groups were largely gone from the region by the late 1700s. Creek peoples then began to move into the area and became known as Seminoles.
The Seminoles found sanctuary in the swamps and marshes because the white settlers did not covet the glades at the time. They developed the “chickee,” a dwelling without walls, made of a log framework with a thatched roof over a raised platform, that assured maximum ventilation. They planted corn (maize), beans, melons, and squash on patches of higher ground and gathered nuts, roots, and palmetto berries. The bulbous roots of the coontie plant were the source of a starchy flour, and hunting and fishing provided much of their sustenance. Most were forced out during the Second Seminole War (1835–42). The Miccosukee tribe (formerly part of the Seminole tribe) continued to make their home in the Everglades into the 21st century.
