Gulf of Mexico, Spanish Golfo de México,  partially landlocked body of water on the southeastern periphery of the North American continent. It is connected to the Atlantic Ocean by the Straits of Florida, running between the peninsula of Florida and the island of Cuba, and to the Caribbean Sea by the Yucatán Channel, which runs between the Yucatán Peninsula and Cuba. Both of these channels are about 100 miles (160 km) wide. The gulf’s greatest east-west and north-south extents are approximately 1,100 and 800 miles (1,800 and 1,300 km), respectively, and it covers an area of some 600,000 square miles (1,550,000 square km). To the northwest, north, and northeast it is bounded by the southern coast of the United States, while to the west, south, and southeast it is bounded by the east coast of Mexico.
The Gulf of Mexico consists of several ecological and geologic provinces, chief of which are the coastal zone, the continental shelf, the continental slope, and the abyssal plain. The coastal zone consists of tidal marshes, sandy beaches, mangrove-covered areas, and many bays, estuaries, and lagoons. The continental shelf forms an almost continuous terrace around the margin of the gulf; its width varies from a maximum of more than 200 miles (320 km) to a minimum of about 25 miles (40 km). Off the west coast of Florida as well as off the Yucatán Peninsula, the continental shelf consists of a broad area composed primarily of carbonate material. The remainder of the shelf consists of sand, silt, and clay sediments. On the shelf and on the slope that dips downward to the abyssal plain, buried salt domes occur at various depths; economically important deposits of oil and natural gas are associated with them. The abyssal plain, which forms the floor of the gulf, consists of a large triangular area near the centre, bounded by abrupt fault scarps toward Florida and the Yucatán Peninsula and by more gentle slopes to the north and west. The basin is unusually flat, having a gradient of only about 1 foot (0.3 metre) in every 8,000 feet (2,440 metres). The deepest point is in the Mexico Basin (Sigsbee Deep), which is 17,070 feet (5,203 metres) below sea level. From the floor of the basin rise the Sigsbee Knolls, some of which attain heights of 1,300 feet (400 metres); these are surface expressions of the buried salt domes.
The southeastern portion of the gulf is traversed by a riverlike current that becomes the main source of the North Atlantic Gulf Stream; this is the principal current moving oceanic waters through the gulf. Water from the Caribbean enters through the Yucatán Channel, the floor of which forms a sill (submarine ridge between basins) at about 1 mile (1.6 km) beneath the surface, and flows out in a clockwise direction via the Straits of Florida. Meandering masses of water, called loop currents, break off from the main stream and also move clockwise into the northeastern part of the gulf. Both seasonal and annual variations occur in these loop currents. A less well-defined pattern exists in the western gulf. There the currents are relatively weak, varying appreciably in intensity with season and location. There is extreme variability in both current direction and speed on the continental shelf and in the coastal waters of the gulf, where currents are subjected to seasonal and annual variations caused not only by major circulation patterns but also by changes in the prevailing wind direction.
The various rivers flowing into the Gulf of Mexico drain a land area roughly double that of the gulf, and the salinity of the gulf is subject to wide variations. In the open gulf the salinity is comparable to that of the North Atlantic, about 36 parts per thousand. This proportion, however, varies markedly during the year in coastal waters, particularly near the outflow of the broad delta region of the Mississippi River. During periods when the volume of the Mississippi’s flow is greatest, salinities as low as 14 to 20 parts per thousand occur as far as some 20 to 30 miles (30 to 50 km) offshore.
Sea surface temperatures in February vary between 64 °F (18 °C) in the northern gulf and 76 °F (24 °C) off the Yucatán coast. In the summer, surface temperatures of about 90 °F (32 °C) have been measured, but the usual variation is nearly the same as that experienced in February. Bottom-water temperatures of about 43 °F (6 °C) have been recorded near the northern part of the Yucatán Channel. The thickness of the isothermal layer (a surface layer of water of constant temperature) varies from about 3 to more than 500 feet (1 to more than 150 metres), depending on seasonal and local conditions as well as on location. The tidal range is small, averaging less than two feet in most places; in general, only diurnal tides occur—i.e., one period of high water and one of low water during each tidal day (24 hours and 50 minutes).
The climate of the gulf region varies from tropical to subtropical. Of particular note are the often-devastating hurricanes (tropical cyclones) that strike the region nearly every year. The hurricane season officially runs from June 1 to November 30, during which time meteorologic and oceanographic conditions are conducive for hurricanes to develop anywhere in the gulf. Particularly damaging hurricanes included one in Galveston, Texas, in 1900 and another in and around New Orleans in 2005. Hurricanes spawned in the North Atlantic may also move through the gulf at that time, often picking up strength.
