Hai River system, Chinese (Pinyin) Hai He shuixi or (Wade-Giles romanization) Hai Ho shui-hsi,  extensive system of tributary streams in northern China that discharge into the sea through the Hai River. The name Hai properly belongs only to the short river that flows from Tianjin into the Bo Hai (Gulf of Chihli) at Tanggu, a distance of some 43 miles (70 km). The system has a drainage area of about 80,500 square miles (208,500 square km), including almost the whole of Hebei province, the eastern slopes of the Taihang Mountains in Shanxi province, and the northeastern corner of Henan province.
The principal tributaries are the Chao River, rising in the mountains north and northeast of Beijing; the Yongding River, flowing southeastward from the Guanting Reservoir through Beijing to Tianjin; the Daqing River, flowing eastward from the Taihang Mountains to join the Hai at Tianjin; and the Ziya River, flowing northeastward from southwestern Hebei toward Tianjin, along with its important tributary, the Hutuo River, rising in the Taihang Mountains west of Shijiazhuang in western Hebei. The most important of the Hai’s tributaries is the Yongding. Issuing from the Guanting Reservoir—which is itself fed by the Sanggan River—the Yongding flows into the North China Plain in the Beijing area and continues to Tianjin, where it flows into the Hai and hence into the Bo Hai. The Grand Canal joins the Yongding just north of Tianjin and continues south of the city from its confluence with the Ziya.
The Hebei plain, drained by the lower reaches of the Hai system, is flat. The rivers have low gradients and are often built up above the level of the surrounding land by the silt they have carried down from the Taihang uplands. The depth of the rivers is variable because the region is one of seasonal variations in precipitation, with dry winters (during which many of the streams dry up to a trickle) and heavy summer and autumn rainfall; rains in the Taihang Mountains in particular produce serious flooding in the lower plains. The Hai River is incapable of carrying the amount of floodwater discharged. In recent centuries floods have been almost an annual occurrence. In 1939 Tianjin itself was submerged for a month. These floods not only have caused loss of life, crops, and property but have also raised the alkaline content of the soils of frequently inundated regions in much of Hebei, thereby greatly reducing their productivity.
The Yongding was originally known colloquially as the Wuding He (“River with No Fixed Course”) because it was constantly flooding and changing its channel. It was given the name Yongding He (“River with a Permanently Fixed Course”) toward the end of the 17th century, when extensive flood-control works were undertaken. Further flood-control measures were undertaken in 1698, 1726, 1751, and during the 19th century. The river has always carried an enormous silt load, which has clogged the channel as fast as it could be cleared. In the early 1950s the river was dammed in the mountains northwest of Beijing by the Guanting Dam, a hydroelectric, irrigation, and flood-control project.
Subsequently, a comprehensive water-control and conservancy project has been carried out in the Hai basin. On the upper courses of the tributary streams, some 1,400 retention dams were constructed, several of them (such as the Guanting Dam) of considerable size and designed for both irrigation and hydroelectric generation. These works have been coordinated with afforestation, soil conservation, and field-terracing programs in the uplands. In the plain itself, local labour has been mobilized on a massive scale to build up the embankments of the major rivers to give protection against flooding, clear their channels to turn them into canals, and construct various waterways. As a result, many of the Hai River’s principal tributaries have become canals or directed into new channels and given separate outlets. The Hai thus no longer has to carry the entire flow of all these rivers in flood. These major projects have been integrated with a large-scale construction program of subsidiary drainage and irrigation works that is designed to reduce flooding and ameliorate the consequences of drought. To improve irrigation facilities still further, a huge number of wells have been dug and pumping stations constructed to supplement the irrigation system with subterranean water.
