Hudson Bay,  inland sea indenting east-central Canada. With an area of 316,000 square miles (819,000 square km), it is bounded by Nunavut territory (north and west), Manitoba and Ontario (south), and Quebec (east). It is connected with the Atlantic Ocean via the Hudson Strait (northeast) and with the Arctic Ocean via the Foxe Channel (north).
The bay is named for Henry Hudson, who in 1610, on board the aptly named Discovery, was seeking a Northwest Passage to Asia. The east coast of Hudson Bay proper was mapped two years later; the south coast was traced in 1631, and the explorer Luke Foxe lent his name to Foxe Channel in the same year. The west coast was not mapped until the early 1820s, and the first bathymetric measurements of the area were made by Canadians during 1929–31. Air reconnaissance superseded naval researches from the second half of the 20th century.
Hudson Bay has a shallow and quite smooth floor, averaging 330 feet (100 metres) in depth, with a maximum around 900 feet (270 metres). The coast, situated in a region of permanently frozen earth layers, or permafrost, is a marsh-ridden lowland fed by lake waters and turbulent rivers. In the east and northeast the shores are high and sheer, but elsewhere they are low. Coniferous woods border the southerly James Bay, the shallowest part, but most of the shore is covered with dwarf birch, willow, aspen, and bushes, growing among moss, lichen, and grass.
The eastern coast is bordered, at a distance of some 200 miles (300 km), with a set of islands and has cliffs formed of geologically ancient Precambrian (more than 540 million years old) crystalline and sedimentary rocks. The only other islands are a small cluster at the bay exit.
Hudson Bay has a severe continental climate. January temperatures average −20 °F (−29 °C), while July temperatures average only 47 °F (8 °C). Annual averages are 9.3 °F (−12.6 °C), but extremes range from −60 °F (−51 °C) in the winter to 80 °F (27 °C) in the summer. Spring is mild and cloudy, whereas summer is clear, though the bay itself is often coated with fog. Autumn starts cool, with frequent fogs, clearing later; early winter is very cold, clear, and calm, but this pattern is interrupted, after December, by strong winds and snowstorms. The spring thaw begins in late April.
The bay is filled by the numerous peripheral rivers and also by currents from Foxe Basin in the north, creating a counterclockwise general movement. Outflow occurs along the eastern Hudson Strait coast, rounding Chidley Cape (the northernmost tip of the Quebec-Newfoundland border), and passing into the Labrador Current. Flow is highest in July. Currents in the bay also respond to the fierce tidal flow off the Labrador coast.
Hudson Bay has much ice of local origin, and there is some influx of pack ice from Foxe Basin. Southern and central areas have solid, floating ice fields only during February and March. Salinity increases with depth: below 80 feet it is 31 parts per thousand (ppt); the layer above registers 23 ppt; and the upper 6 feet (2 metres) registers only 2 ppt when the current is strong and ice is melting. Water temperatures can be as low as 29 °F (−2 °C) at depth in August, although surface temperatures may reach 49 °F (9 °C) in September.
Hudson Bay contains a great quantity of dissolved nutrient salts, because unicellular algae grow fast in the illuminated upper layers. Small, shrimplike crustaceans occupy the open waters and form a food source for mollusks, sea urchins, starfish, and worms, together with many other invertebrates living on the bottom.
Fish include numerous polar plaice, cod, halibut, salmon migrating to the lakes and rivers to spawn, and also freshwater species. Ringed, bearded, and Greenland seals inhabit the areas around openings in the ice. Walrus, dolphins, and killer whales live in the northern sector, and polar bears come down from the north to hunt seals on the ice. About 200 species of birds gather on the coasts and islands; they include ducks, gulls, eiders, loons, snow geese, swans, sandpipers, snow owls, and crows. There are also such herbivorous mammals as caribou, musk oxen, and rodents, as well as fur-bearing animals.
Fishing and the hunting of sea mammals for their pelts are the main local occupations. Settlements along the rim of the bay include Coral Harbour (Salliq; on Southampton Island), Chesterfield Inlet (Igluligaarjuk; west of Southampton Island), Rankin Inlet (Kangiqtinq), Whale Cove (Tikirarjuaq), Arviat, Churchill (on the Manitoba coast), Fort Severn (Ontario), Fort Albany (on the western coast of James Bay), and Sanikiluaq (on the Belcher Islands). Inuit and Cree Indians are the largest resident groups. Population density is very low. For conservation purposes, the Canadian government has designated the whole Hudson Bay Basin a “mare clausum” (closed sea).
