Mid-Atlantic Ridge,  submarine ridge lying along the north-south axis of the Atlantic Ocean; it occupies the central part of the basin between a series of flat abyssal plains that continue to the margins of the continental coasts. The Mid-Atlantic Ridge is in effect an immensely long mountain chain extending for about 10,000 miles (16,000 km) in a curving path from the Arctic Ocean to near the southern tip of Africa. The ridge is equidistant between the continents on either side of it. The mountains forming the ridge reach a width of 1,000 miles. These mountains sometimes reach above sea level, thus forming the islands or island groups of the Azores, Ascension, St. Helena, and Tristan da Cunha, among others.
The Mid-Atlantic Ridge is located at the juncture of crustal plates that form the floor of the Atlantic Ocean; it is considered a "slow-spreading" ridge by earth scientists. Running along the crest of the ridge is a long valley that is about 50 to 75 miles (80 to 120 km) wide. This rift contains the zone of seafloor spreading, in which molten magma from beneath Earth’s crust continuously wells up, cools, and is progressively pushed away from the ridge’s flanks. This phenomenon is evinced by the fact that the crustal material on either side of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge is notably younger than that farther away from the ridge. Because of seafloor spreading and the movement of the ocean floor and of the continents outward from the ridge, the Atlantic Basin is widening at an estimated rate of 1 to 10 cm (0.5 to 4 inches) a year. Apart from seafloor spreading, the Mid-Atlantic Ridge is also the site of volcanic activity and earthquakes along some portions of its length. Scientific research on the ridge and its geological and biological characteristics, although at an early stage, has revealed a number of active hydrothermal fields that tend to be larger than active sites at other mid-ocean ridges and appear to exhibit periodic hydrothermal activity (release of vent fluids).
