Scotia Sea,   marine region, part of the South Atlantic Ocean, about 350,000 square miles (more than 900,000 square km) in area. It lies within a complex and tectonically active marine basin enclosed on the north, east, and south by the island-dotted Scotia Ridge. The ridge forms a west-opening submarine loop about 2,700 miles (4,350 km) long, connecting Tierra del Fuego of South America with northern Palmer Land of the Antarctic Peninsula. The western limit of the sea is formed by a discontinuous northwest-trending rise that separates the basin from the Drake Passage. The Scotia Ridge, with an active volcanic arc-trench system at its eastern end, compares in form and geologic record to the similar Northern Antilles volcanic chain in the eastern Caribbean Sea. The Scotia Ridge region was thus given the name Southern Antilles by the early geologists Eduard Suess and Otto Nordenskjöld.
Named after the Scottish National Antarctic Expedition (1902–1904) vessel Scotia, under the command of William S. Bruce, the Scotia Sea has a lengthy record of exploration dating back to the 17th century. Through the 18th and 19th centuries, exploration was encouraged by a relentless search for new and ever-richer whaling and sealing grounds. Semipermanent and permanent settlements were established, particularly on South Georgia and the Falkland Islands. By the mid-20th century, sealing and whaling declined, and further exploration was largely scientific. During and since the International Geophysical Year (1957–59), the Scotia Sea region has been extensively explored, mainly by Chilean, Argentine, British, and American scientific teams.
The Scotia Sea is separated into two smaller basins, West Scotia Basin (the larger) and East Scotia Basin, by a slight rise connecting South Georgia with the South Orkney Islands. Water depths in the Scotia Sea generally range between 10,000 and 13,000 feet (3,000 to 4,000 m), but to the east, across the volcanic arc of the South Sandwich Islands, depths exceed 26,000 feet (7,900 m) in Meteor Deep of the South Sandwich Trench. Water of the southern seas in its unimpeded clockwise race around the Antarctic continent is funneled through the 600-mile- (965-kilometre-) wide Drake Passage and the Scotia Sea, pouring through several main passes of the Scotia Ridge.
The northern arm of the Scotia Ridge, including South Georgia, lies in the sub-Antarctic climatic zone, and the southern arm, south of the Antarctic Convergence, lies in the cold Antarctic zone. The biota varies accordingly. South Georgia supports a rich tundralike flora with at least 50 species of vascular plants, whereas islands in the Antarctic zone, including the South Orkneys and South Shetlands, can maintain only primitive communities of mainly seedless plants, such as lichens, mosses, and algae. Many species of birds, mostly sea and a few shore birds and land birds, including petrels, penguins, gulls, terns, skuas, and sheathbills, inhabit these regions. Other sea life south of the Convergence includes nearly 100 species of fish and several species of whales and seals. Human predation has seriously reduced the sea mammal population, some species being almost at the point of extinction. The accidental introduction of cats, dogs, mice, and rats threatens bird nesting grounds on some islands in the Scotia Sea.
