All India Dravidian Progressive Federation, Tamil All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK),  Regional political party of India, principally in Tamil Nadu state. It was formed in 1972 by veteran movie-actor-turned-politician Maruthur Gopala Ramachandran (popularly known as MGR), who broke away from the Dravidian Progressive Federation (Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam; DMK). The AIADMK espouses no particular ideology except the protection of the interests of the Tamil population in India and in Sri Lanka.
The AIADMK’s strength and success in its initial years were built on the enormous popularity of MGR. Within the first two months of its founding, the party had recruited almost a million supporters. Electoral success came quickly to the party. In 1973, less than a year after the AIADMK was founded, one of its members won a seat in a by-election for the Tamil Nadu legislative assembly.
In 1975, in a bid to counter the DMK, MGR opted to side with the Indian National Congress (Congress Party), and, as part of that alliance, the AIADMK was among a handful of political parties that supported the imposition of emergency rule that year by then prime minister Indira Gandhi. The AIADMK won a majority of seats (130 out of a total 234) in the Tamil Nadu assembly elections in 1977, and MGR became the state’s chief minister (head of government). The party also won outright majorities of 129 and 132 seats in the 1980 and 1984 state assembly elections, respectively, and each time MGR returned as chief minister.
The party underwent turmoil after MGR died in late 1987. Both Jayalalitha Jayaram, who for several years had been mentored by MGR, and MGR’s wife, Janaki Ramachandran, laid claim to MGR’s mantle. As a result, the party split into two factions, and Ramachandran briefly served as chief minister in early 1988. In less than two years, however, Ramachandran had left politics, her group had merged back into the party, and Jayaram had emerged as its leader.
Tamil Nadu was a highly polarized state politically, and the AIADMK and rival DMK frequently formed and then broke alliances with Congress and non-Congress parties during different elections. The AIADMK’s initial alliance with Congress had ended by the time of the 1980 state elections but was restored and continued during 1984–89 and also from 1990 until the mid-1990s. In the 1991 assembly elections, the alliance amassed 224 seats (the AIADMK winning 164 of the 168 seats it contested), and Jayalalitha Jayaram began her first term as chief minister. The party was routed in the 1996 polls, however, able to secure only four seats. A renewed AIADMK-Congress alliance returned to state governance in 2001 by recapturing a majority in state assembly elections, with AIADMK winning a total of 132 seats.
At the national level, the AIADMK displayed a similar willingness to switch alliances with the major national parties. The party generally maintained a modest presence in the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament), and for most of the 1980s and ’90s, it usually was associated with the Congress Party. In 1998, however, the AIADMK joined the Bharatiya Janata Party-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA) national government, only to withdraw its support a year later and switch back to Congress (then in opposition). The AIADMK again sided with the NDA during the 2004 Lok Sabha elections but lost all the races that it contested for that chamber. The party rebounded in the 2009 general elections, allying itself with the United National Progressive Alliance (UNPA) led by the leftist parties, and won nine seats. In the 2014 Lok Sabha polls, the AIADMK had its best outing yet, garnering 37 seats and becoming the third largest party in the chamber.
The Lok Sabha debacle in 2004 compelled the AIADMK to seek an alliance with smaller Tamil Nadu-based parties for the 2006 assembly elections. The party could win only 61 seats, however, and it was ousted from power by a coalition headed by the DMK and Congress. Nonetheless, the AIADMK’s 2009 affiliation with the UNPA proved to be highly valuable in the 2011 state assembly elections. The party won 150 seats to form the government under Jayalalitha Jayaram, who began her third term as chief minister. Charges of corruption against Jayalalitha, dating to the mid-1990s, continued to dog her, however, and in September 2014 she was sentenced to four years in prison. She stepped down from office and was succeeded by O. Panneerselvam (or Paneerselvam).
