Ancient constitutionalism,  a related set of medieval and especially early modern political ideas that were generally opposed to royal absolutism, state centralization, and the doctrine of reason of state in favour of a traditional fundamental law. Ancient constitutionalism appealed to a “previous” or “old” medieval law or constitution rather than to an ancient Greek or Roman one. Indeed, ancient constitutionalists often referred to the fundamental law as the “Gothic constitution,” Gothic being a term often used during the European Renaissance to refer to the feudal Germanic societies that preceded it.
Ancient constitutions, as imagined or constructed by ancient constitutionalists, were not unified written documents with clear status as fundamental law, such as those now associated with the word constitution. What in fact existed, and what the ancient constitutionalists appealed to, were complex mixtures of written charters and codes of public law (Magna Carta, for example), customs, evolved institutions, feudal oaths, and political compromises newly described as fundamental law. The key intellectual move of ancient constitutionalist arguments was usually to identify some exercise of central or royal power as novel, innovative, and disruptive of some long-established rule, custom, law, or practice and as therefore illegal or illegitimate. Thus, appeals to ancient constitutions were not always coherent or compatible with one another, much less historically accurate. For example, defenses of aristocratic privileges and defenses of urban liberties could sit uncomfortably with each other, because during the Middle Ages urban liberties were asserted against local feudal lords at least as much as against distant kings.
Ancient constitutionalism probably exerted its greatest influence in England during the 17th and early 18th centuries. The idea that a Saxon (that is, Germanic) common law had governed England since before the time of the absolutist Norman Conquest (1066), that Magna Carta had restated what were already old rules and rights at English law, and that Parliament as an institution had for centuries held the authority to grant or withhold consent to taxation and legislation provided a baseline against which the Stuart kings could be said to be illegally innovating. Ancient constitutionalism thus formed part of the foundation of Parliamentarian and Whig ideologies. The execution of Charles I (1649) and the chasing from the throne of James II (1688) were both characterized as restoring a good and old legal-political order.
In the 17th century Thomas Hobbes was an important opponent of all aspects of ancient constitutionalist thinking. He held that customs did not become law with age, that neither Parliament nor common-law judges could have any more authority than what a sovereign king granted them, and that the privileges of provinces, cities, and aristocrats alike were discretionary grants, not enforceable rights. In the 18th century David Hume, especially in his widely read multivolume work The History of England (1754–62), subjected ancient constitutionalist history to devastating criticism. Although Hume thought that the constitutional monarchy that had emerged from the Glorious Revolution was a good one, he also firmly believed that it was a new regime, not a restoration of what he took to be feudal barbarism. Nonetheless, ancient constitutionalist ideas retained a grip on the English historical imagination.
The ancient constitutionalist style of argument was in evidence on the western European continent throughout the early modern period. As central state authority grew, struggles between the centre and provinces, cities, or regional aristocrats were common. So, too, were struggles between kings and parliaments or estates representing the aristocracy, the clergy, and the cities or common people. Political rhetoric, and sometimes developed political theory, often criticized absolutism in the name of the old order and institutions.
Those disputes became famous in France, where the 16th-century Calvinist monarchomachs theorized in an ancient constitutionalist style, as did the 18th-century parlementaires, whose resistance to royal power, protection of aristocratic immunity from taxation, and insistence on summoning the long-defunct Estates-General precipitated the French Revolution. Montesquieu’s Spirit of the Laws, published in 1748, offered an ancient and Gothic constitutionalist reconstruction of French constitutional history and argued that a respect for the traditional rights and privileges of intermediate bodies protected the rule of law within a monarchy and differentiated it from despotism.
Although ancient constitutionalism was in a sense logically tied to the customs of particular places, there was considerable cross-fertilization. Monarchomach tracts were translated and published in English to bolster Whig arguments. Montesquieu drew on English experience, and Edmund Burke wrote that England had preserved the ancient constitution of Europe and, therefore, that France could have rebuilt its constitutional foundations using English institutions as a model, thus avoiding revolution.
From the French Revolution through the early 20th century, almost every European state broke with its legal and political past in a radical way. Moreover, the development of written, enacted constitutionalism, although drawn on Montesquieu and other ancient constitutionalist sources, apparently offered the possibility of limiting and binding the state to the rule of law in a more determinate and more democratic way, not dependent on either conflicting customs or on aristocratic privilege.
