Biju Janata Dal (BJD), English Biju People’s Party,  regional political party in Odisha (Orissa) state, eastern India. Although the party’s focus has been primarily in the state, it also has had a small but significant presence on the national political scene in New Delhi.
The BJD does not profess any particular ideology, except for a strong belief in secularism and in advancing the welfare of those who are more vulnerable or less fortunate. It has long espoused a desire to further the development of Odisha, a poor state along the Bay of Bengal. The party maintained a consistent opposition to the Indian National Congress (Congress Party), which was long the ruling party in Odisha, and for many years was allied with the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and its National Democratic Alliance (NDA). The two groups parted ways in 2009, however, with the BJD joining the so-called “Third Front” of leftist parties against both the Congress Party and the BJP.
The BJD was formed in December 1997 by Naveen Patnaik, the son of prominent Odisha politician Bijayananda (Biju) Patnaik in the Janata Dal (JD; People’s Party), who had twice served as chief minister (head of government) of the state. Biju Patnaik had died earlier that year, and his son (also a member of the JD) had won a by-election to take over his father’s seat in the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament). Naveen, however, objected to the JD’s reluctance to support the coalition that was being assembled by the BJP (it was named the NDA in 1999). With the help of the BJD, the BJP was able to form a government following the 1998 Lok Sabha elections.
The BJD, riding on the popularity of Biju Patnaik, was highly successful in the 2000 Odisha state assembly elections, winning 68 seats. Alliance partner BJP won an additional 38 seats, for a combined total of 106 in the 147-seat chamber, and the long-serving Congress Party government was dislodged. Patnaik was named chief minister of a coalition government. The two allied parties had another strong showing in the 2004 assembly elections, winning a combined total of 93 seats, and Patnaik returned as chief minister.
The BJD severed ties with the BJP prior to the 2009 state assembly elections. That action was taken in part because the BJP was thought to have had ties with organizations and individuals involved in deadly riots in 2007 and 2008 against the Christian minority living in central Odisha and also because the two parties could not come to an agreement on how seats were to be allocated in the elections. The BJD, contesting the 2009 polls independently, won 103 seats. It increased its representation to 117 in the 2014 elections and retained its strong hold with 112 seats in the 2019 elections. In 2019 Patnaik began his fifth consecutive term as chief minister. Good administration and an incorruptible image of leader Patnaik were cited as key reasons for the BJD’s repeated electoral successes in Odisha. Organizational disruptions within the BJP, Congress, and other opposing parties in the state also helped keep the BJD’s popular support base intact, even as the BJP enjoyed a wave of victories elsewhere in India in 2014 and 2019.
The BJD also had strong performances in the elections to the Lok Sabha, its seat total rising in each of the five polls in which it fielded candidates between 1998 and 2014. The 14 seats it won in the 2009 contest represented two-thirds of Odisha’s total of 21, and the 20 it garnered in 2014 constituted all but one of the state’s parliamentary members. The BJD’s policy of distancing itself from the Congress Party and, more recently, the BJP, however, has reduced its standing and influence at the national level. One of the consequences has been difficulty in securing additional developmental grants and other forms of economic assistance for the state from the central government, as such aid normally has been reserved for states ruled by the country’s governing party. For several years the BJD has demanded that Odisha be granted “special status,” a category that would enable the state to receive extra developmental funding from New Delhi. In the 2019 elections the BJD lost several seats in the Lok Sabha to the BJP because of the expectation that the BJP—the country’s ruling party—would provide Odisha with opportunities for funding and resources. The BJD, nonetheless, retained a majority of the state’s representation with 12 seats.
