Bloc Québécois, English Quebec Bloc,  regional political party in Canada, supporting the independence of predominantly French-speaking Quebec. The Bloc Québécois has informal ties with the Parti Québécois, which has controlled Quebec’s provincial assembly for much of the period since the mid-1970s, and it represents the interests of French-speaking Quebecers at the federal level.
Lucien Bouchard, a Progressive Conservative minister and Canada’s former ambassador to France, organized the Bloc Québécois to contest federal elections in 1990, soon after the defeat of the Meech Lake Accord, which would have formally recognized Quebec as a distinct society and would have given it veto power over most constitutional changes. Although the party did not run candidates outside Quebec, it won 54 seats in the federal House of Commons in 1993, which enabled it to become the official opposition to the Liberal Party of Canada. In 1995 Quebec held a referendum on separatism, and, though the measure narrowly failed, Bouchard was credited with leading the campaign for its approval.
The party’s support in federal elections subsequently began to decline after Bouchard left federal politics to become premier of Quebec and the intensity of support for separatism waned. In March 1997 Gilles Duceppe took over as leader of the party, and in that year’s federal election the party relinquished its status as the official opposition, winning only 44 seats in the House of Commons; its federal representation dropped again in 2000, to 38 seats. In 2004 and 2006 the party’s support rebounded, however, with the Bloc Québécois winning more than 50 seats in the House of Commons at each election. In the minority Conservative government of Stephen Harper, the Bloc was courted as a coalition partner, most notably with the 2006 motion that recognized the people of Quebec as a nation “within a united Canada.”
After capturing 49 seats in the 2008 election, the party struggled at the next federal election, in 2011, as many of its supporters turned to the surging New Democratic Party (NDP), whose sweeping win was dubbed the “Orange Crush.” The Bloc won only 4 seats and was stripped of its official party status. Duceppe subsequently resigned as party leader but returned to lead the Bloc into the 2015 federal election. Despite rebounding to capture 10 seats, the Bloc still fell two seats short of reattaining official party status in the Canadian Parliament. That situation was dramatically reversed by the results of the 2019 federal election, in which the Bloc, under the leadership of Yves-François Blanchet, returned as a force to be reckoned with by capturing more than 30 seats and supplanting the NDP as the second opposition party nationally. The Bloc maintained that status in the 2021 snap federal election by winning 30 seats.
