Bulgarian Agrarian National Union, also called Peasant Party, Bulgarian Bŭlgarski Zemedelski Naroden Sŭyuz (BZNS),  Bulgarian political party founded under the name Bulgarian Agrarian Union in 1899. The party controlled the government between 1919 and 1923 and introduced extensive land reforms. Originally a professional organization, it became a peasants’ political party by 1901. Its popularity increased after World War I; in the parliamentary elections of August 1919, it received 31 percent of the vote. Its leader, Aleksandŭr Stamboliyski, became premier (Oct. 6, 1919) and introduced a reform program, which included the redistribution of land to poor peasants, revision of the tax structure and the judicial system, the establishment of a compulsory labour service, and a readjustment of the state’s foreign policy. The party’s policies, though overtly dictatorial, had widespread popular support (it won 52 percent of the vote in the elections of 1923), but they alienated other political groups and military leaders. In June 1923 the Agrarian government was overthrown in a coup d’état, and Stamboliyski and other Agrarian leaders were murdered.
After the coup, the party was split between an extremist left wing that rejected parliamentary democracy, joining the communists in terrorist activities, and a moderate wing that took part in the political process and in the Popular Bloc government from 1931 until the Zveno Group’s coup in 1934. After World War II the Agrarian Union provided the core of the opposition to communization. After the execution of its leader, Nikola Petkov, in 1947, this struggle was lost; the left wing, pro-communist agrarians declared themselves the only legitimate heirs of  the “party of Stamboliyski” and converted into an obedient satellite of the communists. This arrangement allowed the Agrarian Union to retain an institutional existence and the Communist Party to claim that it had taken a partner in the governing of the country.
After the collapse of communism in 1989, the Agrarian Union attempted to reestablish itself as an independent party. Its program called for safeguarding private farmers during Bulgaria’s shift to a market economy.
