Carpetbagger,  in the United States, a derogatory term for an individual from the North who relocated to the South during the Reconstruction period (1865–77), following the American Civil War. The term was applied to Northern politicians and financial adventurers whom Southerners accused of coming to the South to use the newly enfranchised freedmen as a means of obtaining office or profit. Literally describing an unwelcome stranger with no more property than  could be carried in a satchel (carpetbag), the epithet later came to refer to anyone perceived as an interloper who came to a region to exploit it against the wishes of the inhabitants.
After the Civil War, the South was badly in need of investment capital, and a large influx of Northerners sought economic opportunity there. For them the South was a kind of new frontier and a land of opportunity. Most of them were ex-soldiers, but others had not served in the military. Many were drawn by the promise of quick fortunes it was said could be made raising cotton. Some bought land, and some leased it. Others invested in businesses or banks. Initially, these Northern migrants were well received. Later, however, as Reconstruction governments began to alter the reality of Southern political life, the newcomers were characterized by white Southerners as the dregs of Northern society preying upon the misfortune of the defeated South.
In fact, most of the Northern migrants came from middle-class backgrounds. It is likely that the actions of most of them were motivated by a combination of the pursuit of personal advancement and a desire to participate in the process of transforming the South from a slavery-based society to a more egalitarian one. To that end, they became natural allies of the freedmen. Engagement in Republican politics was an outgrowth of that pursuit. One year of residence in a state in the Reconstruction South brought the right to vote and hold office, and many transplanted Northerners then ran for and held political office, especially representing largely black constituencies. As the Reconstruction era progressed, antipathy for these “carpetbaggers” swelled and intensified among white Southerners, who increasingly saw them as interlopers who failed to understand the relationship between blacks and whites in the region.
Republican-led racially integrated Reconstruction state legislatures were long and widely portrayed as corrupt and incompetent, but, though corruption was present in these legislatures, it was likely no more prevalent than in other 19th-century state governments. That Reconstruction state governments got into financial trouble was more likely due to their overspending—resulting from efforts to revive the economies under bankrupt postwar governments and to fund educational and other public institutions—than to an abnormal level of attempts at personal enrichment through corruption.
