Centre Party, German Zentrumspartei,  in Germany, political party active in the Second Reich from the time of Otto von Bismarck in the 1870s to 1933. It was the first party of imperial Germany to cut across class and state lines, but because it represented the Roman Catholics, who were concentrated in southern and western Germany, it was unable to win a parliamentary majority.
Throughout the 1870s the Centre Party was estranged from Bismarck in the Kulturkampf, which was the struggle between the chancellor and the Roman Catholic church. From 1877, however, the Centre Party began supporting Bismarck in return for peace with the church and protective tariffs that benefited the individual states. By 1887 the two factions were reconciled. The Centre returned to opposition against Leo, Graf (count) von Caprivi, Bismarck’s successor, when it was denied control of religious education.
By 1900 the party had been mollified in this respect and voted for establishing a powerful German navy, even though much of its support came from peasants unconnected with the sea. Other periods in which the party supported the government in exchange for concessions to confessional interests followed until World War I. In 1916 the Centre Party was instrumental in underscoring the German chancellor’s subservience to the military, but in 1917 the party urged peace negotiations with the Allies. The Centre joined the Weimar coalition, which framed a constitution after the Second Reich’s collapse, and until 1928 the party frequently participated in coalition governments. During the years of the Weimar Republic, five Centre Party politicians—Konstantin Fehrenbach, Joseph Wirth, Wilhelm Marx, Heinrich Brüning, and Franz von Papen—served as chancellors. Although the Centre Party remained relatively moderate in its stance during the polarization of German politics in the early 1930s, the party’s deputies voted in favour of the Enabling Act of March 1933, which allowed Chancellor Adolf Hitler to assume dictatorial powers in Germany. The Centre Party was dissolved by the Nazi-dominated government in July 1933.
