Christian Democratic People’s Party, German Christlichdemokratische Volkspartei der Schweiz (CVP), French Parti Démocrate-Chrétien Suisse (PDC), Italian Partito Democratico-Cristiano Popolare Svizzero (PPD),  Swiss centre-right political party that endorses Christian democratic principles. With FDP. The Liberals, the Social Democratic Party, and the Swiss People’s Party, the Christian Democratic People’s Party (CVP) has governed Switzerland as part of a grand coalition since 1959. Its strongest support is found in the Roman Catholic areas of Switzerland.
Founded in 1912 as the Swiss Conservative Party, the Christian Democratic People’s Party was created to represent the interests of Switzerland’s Roman Catholics. Since its founding, it also has included representatives of Christian trade unions. In 1957 the party was renamed the Conservative–Social Christian Party of Switzerland, and it took its present name in 1970. The CVP traditionally has been opposed to the centralization of power at the federal level and to federal taxation, favouring instead the raising of revenues by such means as taxes on tobacco and alcohol. The party supports the use of religious institutions and the application of religious values to the solving of social problems and has endorsed policy aimed at strengthening the family unit. The CVP has also encouraged greater participation by Switzerland in international relations, including support for aid to developing countries and entry into the United Nations (which the country joined in 2002) and the European Union.
From 1959 to 2003 the party held two of the seven seats on the Federal Council, the executive branch of the Swiss government. Since the 1960s the party’s level of support has fluctuated; from 1975 to 1983 it was the largest party, but from the mid-1980s through the 1990s it suffered a drop in support to parties on its right, particularly to the Swiss People’s Party. At the beginning of the 21st century, it was the weakest of the four coalition partners that formed the government, and in 2003 its representation on the Federal Council was reduced to one seat. In the October 2011 general election, the fortunes of the entire ruling coalition soured as each of the four parties saw its support decline. The CVP remained the weakest member of the coalition, but gains made by minor parties led to questions about the ultimate allocation of seats on the Federal Council.
