Cosmopolitanism,  in international relations, school of thought in which the essence of international society is defined in terms of social bonds that link people, communities, and societies. The term cosmopolitanism is derived from the Greek cosmopolis. It refers to a cluster of ideas and schools of thought that sees a natural order in the universe (the cosmos) reflected in human society, particularly in the polis, or city-state. More broadly, it presents a political-moral philosophy that posits people as citizens of the world rather than of a particular nation-state. In this regard, cosmopolitanism represents a spirited challenge to more traditional views that focus on age-old attachments of people to a place, customs, and culture. Cosmopolitan emphasis on social bonds rather than nation-states lays the foundation for its view of society ultimately evolving toward harmony and away from conflict. This relatively benign outlook stands in stark contrast to the analytic framework used by the dominant schools of thought in world politics: realism and liberalism.
For both realists and liberals, nation-states are the dominant actors in world politics. Both see states as internally sovereign over their own territory, possessing a legal monopoly on violence. To exercise internal sovereignty, states need to be free from externally imposed constraints. For liberals and realists alike, this implies that the international system—a society of states—is structurally anarchic, meaning that there exists no authority above states to arbitrate their actions and disputes. This framework clearly delineates domestic and international politics. Domestic politics is law and administration; world politics is defined by power, struggle, and accommodation. States are two-sided, looking inward toward domestic society and outward at the anarchy of world politics.
For both realists and liberals, the state is the organizing unit of the international system. They agree that state behaviour is rational and comprehensible. Realists go on further to argue that states are unitary actors that seek power both as a means and as an end. For realists, the “high” politics of security dominates the “low” politics of social welfare. States are autonomous and self-reliant. Cooperation among states is rare because there is little reason for it. International institutions, lacking independent authority, are powerless to shape state behaviour.
Liberals share the realist assumption that the international system is state-centric and structurally anarchic, but liberals find room for cooperation. For them, world politics is not a zero-sum game: the benefit of one is not necessarily the loss of another. Trade and commerce, they argue, are mutually beneficial activities that create an incentive for cooperation and coexistence. While realists see conflict as the norm, liberals view conflict as atypical, a result of misunderstanding or miscalculation. They stress the need for institution building.
Cosmopolitanism differs from realism and liberalism in its resistance to the idea of the semiautonomous sovereign state, with an exclusive right of self-government. In the realist view, states (in pursuit of their own interests) are locked in a struggle for survival. Conflict is inevitable because states have differing interests and there is no external sovereign to constrain behaviour or mediate disputes.
Not only do cosmopolitan theorists reject the conception of world politics as necessarily rooted in interstate conflict, they do not draw a distinct line between domestic and international politics. They argue that states are bound by rules, norms, and the imperatives of law. Relations between people are not always and everywhere subsumed by interstate conflict.
Cosmopolitanism and liberalism both accept power as an important aspect of human existence but reject the idea that it is all-encompassing. Many factors influence interstate relations: economic, cultural, technological, and military. Not only do many factors influence state behaviour; their relative importance varies with circumstance, in part because of easy mobility of people and capital, which constrains the power of the state, whose power is limited by geographic borders.
At the nexus of power and geography, liberals and cosmopolitans begin to part company. Liberalism (unlike cosmopolitanism) accepts the primacy of the territorial state in both  domestic and world politics. Although liberals see the territorial state as the fundamental organizing unit of politics, they believe conflict between states can be mediated by international institutions. International policy regimes can soften differences and coordinate policy where states have joint, but not identical, interests.
Cosmopolitanism moves beyond liberalism. Like liberalism, it sees international institutions and policy regimes as useful. But for cosmopolitans, international institutions are steps down the evolutionary road toward vesting full sovereignty in people rather than in states. Over time, the society of states will evolve into societies of people. States are not the law; they are bound by it. Politics and law are thus denationalized.
