Democratic Unionist Party (DUP),  unionist political party in Northern Ireland. The DUP was cofounded by Ian Paisley, who led it from 1971 to 2008. The party traditionally competes for votes among Northern Ireland’s unionist Protestant community with the Ulster Unionist Party (UUP).
Founded in 1971 by a hard-line faction of the UUP, the DUP contested its first election in 1973, winning approximately 4 percent of the vote in local council elections and 11 percent in elections for the new Northern Ireland Assembly. The party strongly condemned the proposal to form a power-sharing executive body, the Northern Ireland Executive, from members of the Assembly. It also opposed the 1973 Sunningdale Agreement, which proposed the creation of a cross-border “Council of Ireland” to oversee a limited range of economic and cultural affairs in Northern Ireland and the Irish republic. The agreement led to a crippling general strike by Protestant trade unionists in 1974—which the DUP supported—and eventually to the resignation of the executive government and the return of direct rule by Britain.
In 1975 the DUP contested elections as part of the United Ulster Unionist Council (UUUC) alliance, which rejected the notion of sharing power with the nationalist (and largely Roman Catholic) Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP). The UUUC dissolved over controversy surrounding an abortive general strike in 1977, and the DUP operated independently until 1986, when it began cooperating with the UUP to oppose the Anglo-Irish Agreement of the previous year. Paisley worked closely with UUP leader James Molyneaux in talks held in 1991–92 between Northern Ireland’s major parties and the British and Irish governments. The UUP and DUP took increasingly divergent stances in multiparty talks in the mid-1990s, and the DUP boycotted the talks when Sinn Féin was admitted in 1997. The product of the talks, the 1998 Good Friday Agreement (Belfast Agreement) on steps leading to a new power-sharing government in Northern Ireland, was rejected by the DUP, which denounced the new Northern Ireland Assembly as a dilution of British sovereignty and objected to the inclusion of Sinn Féin in the Assembly and the new executive body (the Northern Ireland Executive Committee) and to the release of paramilitary prisoners. Nevertheless, the DUP did contest elections for the Assembly held in June 1998, winning 20 seats (18.5 percent of the vote). As the Assembly’s third largest party, the DUP was given two ministerial seats on the Executive and directed 2 of 10 government departments, though it declined to participate fully in Executive affairs and failed to attend cabinet meetings of the Executive.
The DUP received its largest share of the vote (nearly 34 percent) in 1984, when Paisley was reelected as a member of the European Parliament. At the local level, the party’s support gradually declined from its high point of nearly 27 percent in local council elections in 1981. In 1997 the party won about 14 percent of the vote in parliamentary elections and 16 percent in local elections.
As opposition to the Good Friday Agreement among Protestants increased at the end of the 1990s, the DUP challenged the UUP for dominance among Northern Ireland’s unionist voters, winning more than 22 percent of the vote in Northern Ireland in elections to the House of Commons in 2001. In the Northern Ireland Assembly elections in 2003 the DUP eclipsed the UUP as Northern Ireland’s largest unionist party and in the British general election in 2005 won nine seats to the UUP’s one. Its success continued in the 2007 Northern Ireland Assembly elections, when it won 30 percent of the vote and twice as many seats (36 to 18) as the UUP; Sinn Féin finished second overall with 28 seats. The DUP and Sinn Féin agreed to form a power-sharing government, with Paisley and Sinn Féin’s Martin McGuinness serving as first minister and deputy first minister, respectively.
Paisley stepped down as first minister and as DUP leader in June 2008, when he turned over power to his longtime deputy, Peter Robinson. Robinson stepped down briefly in January 2010 in response to revelations regarding his wife’s improper use of a loan, and in the British general election of May 2010 he lost his seat in Parliament, though he continued to hold his seat in the Northern Ireland Assembly. Despite Robinson’s loss, the DUP captured eight seats in the election, one fewer than in 2005. Robinson’s hold on the first ministership and leadership of the party remained secure following the 2011 election for the Assembly, in which the DUP increased its representation to 38 seats. In the 2015 British general election, the DUP reclaimed the East Belfast seat lost by Robinson in 2010 but ceded the South Antrim constituency to a resurgent UUP, leaving it with eight seats in the House of Commons. In January 2016 Robinson stepped down as party leader and first minister. His replacement, Arlene Foster, led the party to another victory in the May 2016 election for the Assembly, in which the DUP held on to all 38 of its seats. Foster remained first minister in another power-sharing government with Sinn Féin.
Less than a year later, however, Foster became embroiled in a scandal related to the alleged mismanagement of a government program to promote the use of renewable heat sources. When she refused to step down as first minister during an investigation of the scandal, deputy first minister Martin McGuinness of Sinn Féin resigned, forcing a snap election in March 2017. Once again the DUP won the most seats in the Assembly. However, this time Sinn Féin closed the gap between it and its power-sharing partner, taking only a single seat fewer than the DUP.
In the snap election for the British House of Commons that Conservative Prime Minister Theresa May called for June 2017, the DUP added two seats to bring its representation in Westminster to 10 seats. Much more than that, though, the party suddenly found itself in the role of kingmaker. May had called for the election with the anticipation that the Conservatives would extend their legislative majority. Instead, they lost it, falling to some 318 seats. May then courted the support of the DUP so that she could form a minority government relying on the DUP’s 10 votes on crucial issues to push her party over the 326-vote threshold for a majority. After securing the promise of £1 billion in extra funding for Northern Ireland over the next two years, on June 26, 2017, the DUP agreed to provide “confidence and supply” support for May’s government. In the December 2019 snap election called by May’s successor, Prime Minister Boris Johnson, both the DUP’s presence in Westminster (falling from 10 seats to 8) and its influence shrank in the wake of the Conservatives securing a commanding majority.
The DUP describes itself as “right wing in the sense of being strong on the constitution” but “to the left on social policies,” though it has regularly adopted conservative positions on most social issues. Its constituency spans rural communities in Northern Ireland and inner-city working-class areas and includes some deeply religious groups, a fact that reflects the fundamentalism and anti-Catholicism of the party’s leader. The DUP staunchly supports union with Britain. Citing the territorial claims in the Irish constitution, which the party viewed as illegal and a threat to the security and religious freedom of Protestants in Northern Ireland, the DUP traditionally avoided all contact with the Irish government. In the early 21st century, however, the party moderated its stance on a number of issues, most notably its longtime opposition to Sinn Féin’s participation in any power-sharing institution.
The DUP is organized at local, constituency, and province-wide levels. The Executive Committee—which contains five members from each British parliamentary constituency as well as party leaders and delegates from the party’s university and youth organizations—runs the day-to-day business of the party and chooses party officers. Party policy is drawn up by party officers and ratified by the Executive.
