Dravidian Progressive Federation, Tamil Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK),  regional political party principally in the state of Tamil Nadu, southeastern India.
The party traces its origins to the pro-Tamil activities of E.V. Ramaswami Naicker and others in the first half of the 20th century. The DMK itself was founded in 1949 in Madras (now Chennai) under the leadership of C.N. Annadurai following a split in the Dravidian Federation (Dravida Kazhagam) party. In its early years the DMK espoused the secession of Madras state (since 1968 Tamil Nadu) from the Indian union and the establishment of an independent country for the region’s Dravidian population. Following India’s 1962 border war with China, however, the party transformed itself into a nationalistic movement advocating the betterment of the Dravidian population in Tamil Nadu as well as in Sri Lanka. The DMK also voiced strenuous opposition to the imposition of Hindi, India’s predominant national language, on the Tamil-speaking population of southern India, and it participated in anti-Hindi movements in Tamil Nadu.
Political success was slow to come for the DMK. Future party leader Muthuvel Karunanidhi ran as an independent and won a seat in the Madras state legislative assembly in 1957. However, the party did not officially offer a slate of candidates for assembly elections until 1962, when it won 50 of the chamber’s 206 seats and came in second behind the ruling Indian National Congress (Congress Party). The anti-Hindi campaign in the mid-1960s took the DMK to greater prominence, and it triumphed over Congress in the 1967 state assembly elections, garnering 137 of the 234 seats. Party president Annadurai became chief minister (head of government) and oversaw the renaming of the state. Following Annadurai’s death in 1969, his protégé Karunanidhi became both the DMK president and Tamil Nadu’s chief minister. He led the DMK to its second successive victory in the 1971 assembly elections.
In 1972 the DMK split in two when one of its most-prominent members, Maruthur Gopala Ramachandran (popularly known as MGR), formed his own party, the All India Dravidian Progressive Federation (All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam; AIADMK). The schism not only eroded the popularity of the DMK but also initiated a prolonged phase of bitter enmity between the two parties. The rancour only worsened after MGR died in 1987, and the AIADMK’s leadership passed into the hands of Jayalalitha Jayaram.
The DMK has had mixed electoral fortunes in the state assembly elections since 1972, winning assembly elections and control of the state government in 1989, 1996, and 2006 and losing power to the AIADMK in the 1991, 2001, and 2011 elections. In addition, the party’s popularity was damaged by allegations of corruption leveled against a number of DMK leaders, notably Karunanidhi’s daughter in 2010. A 2006 DMK election promise to distribute television sets to each household in the state apparently was not enough to overcome the taint of corruption during the 2011 assembly elections, as the DMK won only 31 seats.
At the national level the DMK also began competing in elections to the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament) in 1962, when it won seven seats from Madras state. Its performance in subsequent elections to the chamber rose and fell, but by the 1999 contest the number of seats won was relatively stable. The party has shifted its alliances, generally between the Congress Party and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), which has allowed the DMK to control a large share of Tamil Nadu’s members in the Lok Sabha. In the 1999 parliamentary elections, DMK allied with the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance coalition and won 26 of 39 seats. The party did even better in the 2004 elections after it allied itself with Congress and other smaller parties to garner all 39 seats. That victory enabled the DMK to have seven ministers in the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government. The DMK-Congress alliance continued with the 2009 polls and resulted in a combined 27 Lok Sabha seats (18 of them from the DMK) and a total of five DMK ministers in the UPA government.
The DMK has used its position in New Delhi to secure its interests in Tamil Nadu. It was able to persuade the UPA government in 2004 to declare Tamil the country’s first classical language. Likewise, in March 2013 the DMK withdrew its support of the UPA government (including the resignation of its five ministers) after the government decided not to bring a resolution in the parliament condemning alleged atrocities committed by Sri Lankan forces against Tamils during that country’s long civil war. The party was thoroughly trounced in the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, as it failed to win a single seat in the chamber.
