Economic regionalism,  institutional arrangements designed to facilitate the free flow of goods and services and to coordinate foreign economic policies between countries in the same geographic region. Economic regionalism can be viewed as a conscious attempt to manage the opportunities and constraints created by the dramatic increase in international economic ties since the end of World War II. Examples of economic regionalism include free-trade areas, customs unions, common markets, and economic unions.
Several schemes for regional economic integration were established in Europe in the decades following World War II, including the European Coal and Steel Community (1952)—which eventually developed into the European Community (1957) and the European Union (EU; 1993)—and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA; 1960). After the Cold War the number of these arrangements increased dramatically throughout the world. The success of organizations and agreements such as the EU, the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and the ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations) Free Trade Area (AFTA) depended not only on geographic proximity but also on increasing economic interdependence, relatively homogenous political structures (e.g., democracy), and shared cultural and political traditions.
Forms of economic regionalism can be distinguished by the level of integration they involve. The most basic form is a free-trade area, such as EFTA, which eliminates or greatly reduces customs duties between its members. A customs union creates a greater degree of integration through a common tariff on nonmembers, and a common market adds to these arrangements by allowing the free movement of capital and labour. An economic and currency union, which requires a high degree of political consensus between member states, aims at full economic integration through a common economic policy, a common currency, and the elimination of all tariff and nontariff barriers.
One way of classifying forms of economic regionalism is by the level of institutional integration they display. So-called “tight” regionalism is characterized by a high level of institutional integration through shared norms, principles, rules, and decision-making procedures that limit the autonomy of individual members. The EU is an example of tight regionalism, having evolved from a limited free-trade area to a customs union, a common market, and finally an economic and currency union. Integration within the EU has produced spillover effects in the political and social arenas, spurring, for example, the creation of the European Parliament and the European Science Council. In contrast, “loose” regionalism is characterized by the lack of formal and binding institutional arrangements and a reliance on informal consultative mechanisms and consensus-building measures. The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), which was established as a mechanism to foster the creation of a free-trade area, is a good example of loose regionalism, and NAFTA, as a full-fledged free-trade area that falls short of being an economic union, exemplifies a category intermediate between tight and loose regionalism.
Another method of classifying forms of economic regionalism is by their treatment of nonmembers. In “open” forms there are no elements of exclusion or discrimination against nonmembers. Trade liberalization and unconditional most-favoured-nation status, in compliance with Article XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), are characteristic features of open regionalism. The EU, NAFTA, and APEC contain many institutional arrangements that foster open regionalism. In contrast, “closed” forms of regionalism impose protectionist measures to limit nonmembers’ access to the markets of member states. The international trading system of the period between World Wars I and II, in which competing economic blocs tried to enhance their power by pursuing aggressive mercantilist policies, is a classic example of closed regionalism.
Supporters of economic regionalism have tried to promote the development of open and tight regionalism and to minimize closed and loose regionalism. Whereas open regionalism promotes global trade liberalization, closed regionalism often has led to economic warfare and sometimes to military conflict. Open regionalism, however, faces the problem of harmonizing the different economic policies of many countries.
In addition to APEC, EFTA, the EU, and NAFTA, there are nearly 30 active or inactive regional trading arrangements, including the African Economic Community, the Andean Community (CAN), the Arab Maghreb Union, ASEAN, the Caribbean Community and Common Market (Caricom), the Central American Common Market (CACM), the Central European Free Trade Area, the Common Market of the South (Mercosur), the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, and the Gulf Cooperation Council. The growth of economic regionalism in the 1990s prompted renewed interest in and debate about the advantages and disadvantages of these arrangements.
As with other economic policy choices, economic regionalism can produce winners and losers. Opponents of regionalism tend to worry about its negative consequences, such as the loss of autonomy and the threat it poses to vested domestic interests. Overall, however, the trend of the last decades of the 20th century was toward the further development of institutions that fostered open and tight economic regionalism.
