Economic statecraft,  the use of economic means to pursue foreign policy goals. Foreign aid, trade, and policies governing the international flow of capital can be used as foreign policy tools and are considered the most common forms of economic statecraft. In principle, policies governing the international movement of labour could also be considered instances of economic statecraft if they are intended to promote foreign policy goals, but such measures are not usually included under the rubric of economic statecraft and are not considered here. This article discusses the forms of economic statecraft, the uses of such instruments, and the approaches to the study of economic statecraft.
Economic techniques of statecraft are distinguished from other foreign policy tools such as the following: military statecraft, which concerns the use or threat of military force; diplomacy, which concerns negotiation; and propaganda, which concerns manipulating verbal or visual symbols. Most foreign policies consist of some combination of those techniques.
Economic statecraft takes many different forms, including both positive and negative sanctions. Negative sanctions are actual or threatened punishments, whereas positive sanctions are actual or promised rewards. Examples of negative sanctions include the following: refusing to export (embargoes), refusing to import (boycotts), covert refusals to trade (blacklists), purchases intended to keep goods out of the hands of target countries (preclusive buying), deprivation of ownership (expropriation), punitive taxation, aid suspensions, and asset freezes. Examples of positive sanctions include preferential tariffs, subsidies, foreign aid, investment guarantees, and preferential taxation of foreign investment.
Neither the study nor the practice of economic statecraft is of recent origin. Although the Athenian use of the Megarian Decree may be the most famous example from ancient times, it was surely not the first. Examples of various types of economic statecraft can be found throughout recorded history. The use of economic means to pursue foreign policy goals has been discussed by a number of thinkers through the ages, including Plato, Aristotle, John Locke, Francis Bacon, Montesquieu, David Hume, Adam Smith, Immanuel Kant, Alexander Hamilton, Friedrich List, John Stuart Mill, Woodrow Wilson, and John Maynard Keynes.
Tools of economic statecraft have been used to pursue a wide variety of foreign policy goals. Those include preparing for war, preventing war, fighting a war, promoting democracy, punishing human rights violators, promoting communism, opposing communism, promoting economic development, discouraging economic development, preventing regime change, encouraging regime change, and many other goals. Pericles, Theodore Roosevelt, Franklin Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson, Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, Winston Churchill, and the United Nations (UN) have used various forms of economic statecraft to pursue goals that were sometimes noble and sometimes nefarious. Like other techniques of statecraft, economic tools can be used wisely or unwisely, justly or unjustly, depending on the situation.
In the first part of the 20th century, the League of Nations generated hopes that warfare could, to some extent, be prevented or replaced by economic sanctions. The League of Nations imposed sanctions on Italy in response to its invasion of Ethiopia in 1935, partly to punish Italy but also to warn Hitler of its members’ determination to resist aggression. The failure of the sanctions with respect to both goals generated a widespread belief that such measures do not work. Much of the last half of the 20th century was dominated by the acceptance of that belief as conventional wisdom.
Answering the question of whether economic sanctions “work,” however, is more complicated than it seems. There is not even a consensus on what “work” means in this context. Does it mean complete achievement of the primary goal? Of all goals? At what cost? And in comparison with which alternative techniques? These are just some of the questions begged by the misleading question, “Do economic sanctions work?”
The first—and most important—step in evaluating the utility of any technique of statecraft, including economic sanctions, is identifying what goals were being pursued with respect to which targets. In the case of the League of Nations sanctions against Italy, for example, impressing Hitler was probably more important than stopping Italian aggression. In addition, there was a desire not to impose such hardship on Italy that it might undermine the fascist regime and bring the communists to power.
Human beings in general—and nation-states in particular—rarely, if ever, pursue only one goal at a time with respect to only one other individual or group. When a country imposes economic sanctions on another country, it is usually pursuing multiple goals of varying degrees of importance with respect to a multiplicity of other actors in the international arena. Although no assessment of the overall success of an influence attempt based on economic means could be expected to consider all goals and targets, it is reasonable to expect such assessments to consider the most important goals and targets. Most attempts to assess the success of economic sanctions, however, consider only one goal with respect to one target.
An additional complication is that success is almost always a matter of degree. In statecraft, as in everyday life, complete success in goal attainment occurs rarely—if ever. The potential number of degrees of success (or failure) is, of course, infinite. Thus, any attempt to measure degrees of success must involve simplification. Whether a 3-point scale or a 16-point scale is more appropriate is a matter for reasonable dispute, but a dichotomous conception, which fails to allow for any degree of success, is difficult to justify. Most influence attempts are likely to result in some degree of success with respect to at least some goals and some targets.
In addition to estimating goal attainment, determining the success of economic sanctions involves estimating the costs of the undertaking. Measuring the costs of economic sanctions is usually easier than measuring the noneconomic costs. Political costs are likely to be both important and difficult to measure. That does not mean that reasonable estimates are impossible.
Perhaps the most difficult step in assessing the utility of economic techniques of statecraft is setting such assessments in the context of the logic of choice. Without comparable evaluations of the costs and benefits of alternative techniques of statecraft, estimates of the likely costs and benefits of economic sanctions are of little or no interest. For policymakers, it is the relative utility of a policy option that matters. That is especially important when the alternative to economic sanctions is military force. In such cases, economic sanctions often provide a policy alternative with modest expectations of goal attainment at relatively low cost, while military force involves a higher probability of goal attainment accompanied by much higher costs.
If the goal is to choose the policy alternative with the most utility, the rational choice may be one that accomplishes fewer goals at much lower cost. The U.S.-led invasion of Iraq in 2003 provides an example. The economic sanctions against Iraq were not providing the United States with the desired degree of assurance that Iraq was not building weapons of mass destruction, and sanctions were not bringing about regime change even though several of the goals specified by the UN had been accomplished. Advocates of war argued that the costs of maintaining the sanctions could go on for years, whereas the costs of war would be limited in both time and magnitude. As is often the case, the costs of war were significantly underestimated. Thus, to make a policy-relevant assessment of the utility of economic sanctions, it is necessary not only to estimate the costs and benefits of sanctions but also the costs and benefits of alternative courses of action, such as war.
The critics of economic sanctions often dismiss them as “merely symbolic,” implying that they are empty gestures aimed at giving domestic audiences the false impression that “something is being done.” Although some economic sanctions may well fit that description, not all do. As scholarly work in foreign policy and international politics came to recognize the importance of signaling, the symbolic uses of economic sanctions received serious scholarly attention. Economic sanctions can serve as costly signals that increase the credibility of foreign policy stances. Thus, the symbolic use of economic sanctions can be an important way to influence the actions and attitudes of other countries. Game theoretical models have been especially useful in the study of that aspect of economic statecraft.
In sum, economic statecraft is the use of economic means in pursuit of foreign policy goals. As with other foreign policy tools, economic statecraft can be used to make either threats or promises and to either punish or reward. And as with other foreign policy tools, success is often difficult to evaluate.
