European Commission (EC),  an institution of the European Union (EU) and its constituent entities that makes up the organization’s executive arm.
The EC also has legislative functions, such as proposing new laws for the European Parliament, and judicial functions, such as finding legal solutions to business and trade issues between countries within the EU. The body’s primary tasks, however, include:
The EC is composed of members called commissioners, who are citizens of and are nominated by the respective governments of each member state. However, the EC is charged with representing the EU or community interest, not the interests of the member states, and the commissioners are called to act independently in that interest. They are expressly forbidden to take instructions from their member state. Because of its responsibility to represent the European interest and enforce the treaties and legislation that provide the legal foundation for the EU and communities, the EC is known as the guardian of the treaties.
The EC is made up of one member from each of the EU’s 27 member states. The Lisbon Treaty, which reformed the governance of the EU, went into effect on December 1, 2009. One of the treaty’s key provisions was to reduce the number of commissioners to two-thirds of that number by 2014 so that thereafter member states would provide the EC with commissioners on a rotating basis.
A new EC is appointed every five years, within six months of the elections to the European Parliament, which occur in June. The procedure is that the governments of the member states jointly select a commission president, who is then approved by Parliament. The president of the EC is chosen by the European Council, a body made up the heads of state of each of the countries in the EU, for a term lasting two and one-half years. The commission president-designate, in discussion with the member state governments, chooses the other members of the EC. The new Parliament then interviews each member and gives its opinion on the new EC as a body. After approval the EC officially begins its work. Its term of office runs until October 31 of the fifth year.
The EC is politically accountable to Parliament, which has the power to dismiss the whole EC by adopting a motion of censure. Individual members of the EC must resign if asked to do so by the president, provided that the other commissioners approve. The EC attends sessions of Parliament and is responsible for formulating regulations governing political parties at the European Parliament level and providing for public funding for the party campaigns for Parliament.
