French Communist Party, French Parti Communiste Français (PCF),  French political party that espouses a communist ideology and has joined coalition governments with the French Socialist Party.
Founded in 1920 by the left wing of the French Socialist Party and affiliated with the Soviet-run Communist International, the PCF did not gain significant votes until 1936, when it affiliated with Léon Blum’s leftist Popular Front coalition government.
In 1945 the PCF won some 25 percent of the vote in France’s first post-World War II election, and in 1946 it took part in the Fourth Republic’s first government. After May 1947, when the communists were dismissed from the cabinet as a result of hardening political attitudes, the PCF did not participate in any Fourth Republic administration, though it won an average of more than 22 percent of the vote in the six general elections from June 1951 to June 1968 and won a large number of seats in the National Assembly.
When General Charles de Gaulle became president of the Fifth Republic in 1958, the PCF lost a good deal of ground in a surge of right-wing and nationalist feeling. In September 1965 the party lent its support to other left-wing parties to form the Federation of the Democratic and Socialist Left (Fédération de la Gauche Démocrate et Socialiste). The alliance succeeded in keeping de Gaulle from an absolute majority in the first round of the 1965 election. In the first round of the June 1969 presidential election, the PCF candidate came in third, with 21 percent of the vote. By the mid-1970s, however, serious strains developed in the alliance of the left; and in 1978 the PCF temporarily abandoned the alliance. In 1981 its candidate for the presidency, Georges Marchais, won 15 percent in the first round of voting, and the party subsequently backed the successful candidacy of Socialist François Mitterrand in the second round. In legislative elections that year, the PCF was again allied with the Socialist Party. Though its own representation fell dramatically in the National Assembly, it received four cabinet posts in the new socialist government. In 1984, in a change of ministries, it lost these posts.
In 1986, under a proportional election system, the party won 35 seats, though its vote share dropped under 10 percent. In 1993 it dropped to 23 seats in the National Assembly in the rout by the rightist parties before winning 38 seats and returning as a coalition partner with the Socialists in 1997. When the coalition lost power in 2002, however, support for the party fell, and it won only 5 percent of the vote and 21 seats in the National Assembly.
The PCF was a highly disciplined and centralized party with a largely working-class base. It controlled the largest trade-union organization in France, the General Confederation of Labour (Confédération Générale du Travail), and published the daily newspaper L’Humanité. The PCF was generally pro-Soviet, and it reestablished party relations with the Chinese Communist Party in 1982. By the late 20th century, however, the PCF had lost many of its traditional working-class supporters, and following the collapse of the Soviet Union the party reevaluated its support for orthodox Marxism, though it continued to declare itself a communist party. In 1994 Marchais, who had led the PCF from 1972, was replaced as party leader by Robert Hue. The party subsequently abandoned its policy of democratic centralism in internal decision making.
