Industrial espionage,   acquisition of trade secrets from business competitors. A by-product of the technological revolution, industrial espionage is a reaction to the efforts of many businessmen to keep secret their designs, formulas, manufacturing processes, research, and future plans in order to protect or expand their shares of the market.
A considerable amount of data on what the competition is doing comes from routine and undramatic sources. Some large retail chains, for example, employ corps of agents to check on prices and products of competitors by comparative shopping. Equally fruitful are regular lines of communication, such as salesmen’s reports, trade magazines, newsletters, business conventions, trade fairs and exhibits, and contacts with suppliers. Analysis of competitor products is yet another source of important commercial intelligence.
Actual trade secrets may find their way into the open market through several channels. The disloyal employee may furtively seek out competitors and peddle confidential data to the highest bidder. A more common technique is the group conspiracy: several employees, usually technicians and others of high managerial calibre, leave a company and set up a competitive firm capitalizing on confidences they gained while on the payroll of their former employer. A variation of this practice occurs when a competitor lures away a valuable employee with offers of more money and benefits, in the hope that the pirated worker will make his store of secrets available to his new employer.
An employer who discovers that his trade secrets have been adopted by a competitor usually takes legal steps to prevent further invasions of his commercial privacy. The penalties against companies found guilty of usurping trade secrets may be an injunction against further use of the knowledge, an accounting and payment of all profits made from the utilization of pilfered information, or additional punitive damages if a violation of the company’s rights has been flagrant.
