Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP),  cultural movement and political party in South Africa that derives its main support from the Zulu people. Inkatha was founded in 1975 in the black homeland of KwaZulu by Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, chief of the Zulu people and chief minister of the homeland. Its purpose was to work against apartheid (the official South African policy of racial segregation) and to encourage the political and cultural aspirations of South African blacks. Under Buthelezi’s leadership, Inkatha advocated an evolutionary struggle against apartheid and declared its willingness to accept special power-sharing arrangements that would fall short of majority rule in a postapartheid South Africa.
By the early 21st century Inkatha claimed to have more than 1.5 million members. Inkatha did not expand beyond its Zulu base, however, and the organization was criticized as being collaborationist and ethnically divisive by members of the African National Congress (ANC) and other more radical black antiapartheid organizations. In the late 1980s and ’90s followers of the two movements were regularly involved in bloody clashes that had strong ethnic (i.e., Zulu versus non-Zulu) overtones. In 1991 the South African government admitted that it had secretly subsidized Inkatha in the latter’s deepening rivalry with the ANC.
In South Africa’s first postapartheid elections (1994), the Inkatha Freedom Party won a decisive victory in KwaZulu-Natal, taking almost half the vote in the province; nationally, the party won 10.5 percent of the vote and 43 seats in the National Assembly. Buthelezi was subsequently appointed home affairs minister by Pres. Nelson Mandela. Over the next decade, however, Inkatha’s power waned, and it was outpolled by the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal in the 2004 and 2009 elections. A faction led by Zanele Magwaza-Msibi split from Inkatha in 2011, forming the National Freedom Party, which further diluted Inkatha’s support. In the 2014 national and provincial elections, Inkatha won little more than 2 percent of the national vote, netting 10 seats in the National Assembly, and came in third in KwaZulu-Natal. The party saw a slight improvement in the 2019 elections, taking more than 3 percent of the national vote, netting 14 seats. It also recovered some of its support in KwaZulu-Natal, where it placed second behind the ANC.
