One spring afternoon in 1997, the telephone at the New York Times bureau in Istanbul rang. I was then serving as bureau chief, and the caller was my boss, the Times foreign editor. An election was soon to be held in Iran, he said, and he had chosen me to cover it. “Get yourself a visa,” he told me, “buy a plane ticket, go to Iran, and then tell us what’s really happening there.”
Trying to find out what is really happening in Iran has been a challenge to outsiders for centuries. This is a country whose history stretches back over millennia, one that has known both the heights of world power and the depths of poverty and isolation. In its modern incarnation it puzzles outsiders as much as ever. Its people seem to embrace tradition while they thirst for modernity. Their society appears both terribly repressive and vibrantly democratic. Iranian leaders have done much to stabilize and pacify the Middle East, but they have done at least as much to destabilize it and to try to dominate it. These contradictions, along with Iran’s enormous potential to influence the course of world events, make it one of the world’s most fascinating countries.
In the weeks leading up to the 1997 election, I traveled across Iran and spoke to hundreds of people, ranging from government ministers to illiterate peasants. Like almost everyone who visits there, I stopped at places that evoke the country’s rich history, from the haunting ruins of Persepolis, the former royal capital that Alexander the Great sacked in 330 bce, to the spectacular mosques and palaces of Eṣfahān. Everywhere I found Iranians torn between hope and fear, wanting to believe that their country could once again rise to greatness but deeply uncertain that it could.
The election campaign perfectly reflected these competing impulses. One candidate was a colourless bureaucrat who had been handpicked by the ruling elite. One of his opponents, Mohammad Khatami, a former minister of culture who had lived abroad and liked to quote Western philosophers, was all but unknown and seemed for most of the campaign to be nothing more than a sacrificial lamb offered up for electoral slaughter. Then, less than two weeks before the vote, something happened that no one had expected. Khatami caught the imagination of his people. He told them Iran needed to change, open its society, and launch a “dialogue of civilizations” with the rest of the world. In the last days of his campaign, as defenders of the old order watched in dismay, he took on rock-star popularity, thronged wherever he went by admirers who chanted his name. He won the presidency in a landslide victory, taking 69 percent of the vote.
The day after the election, I wandered the streets of Tehrān and found people giddy with joy and disbelief. All knew that they had scored a great triumph over the dour regime many of them detested, but few dared to guess what their defiance might mean. In a small antiques store, I found the proprietor engaged in an animated argument with his nephew, who was also his shop assistant.
“This was a referendum about freedom,” the older man insisted. “The voters were saying that we’re tired of people snooping into our private lives. What we do at home is our own business. With Khatami in power, the government is going to stop telling us what we can read, what we can watch, and what we can do. We voted for change, and the government will have to give it to us.”
From behind the counter his nephew smiled and shook his head in gentle disagreement. “Khatami is not the boss and never will be,” he said. “In this country the president does not decide. Maybe Khatami has certain ideas, but he won’t have real power.”
The debate in that shop crystallized the conflict that shapes modern Iran as well as the outside world’s uncertainty about what Iran is and what it can become. Iran is a large and very proud country, acutely conscious of its rich heritage and unwilling to accept dictates from any outside power. It is also insecure and confused, its people deeply divided over what kind of society they want at home and what role they should play in the world. Iran may emerge from this conundrum as an outlaw nation, one that thumbs its nose at the world and pushes toward dangerous confrontations with other powerful states and groups of states. It also, however, can become an example of democracy and stability in a region that has known precious little of either. It is this dichotomy, this contradiction, this remarkable potential to shape the Middle East and the wider world for better or worse, that makes Iran as important as it is fascinating.
