Italian Popular Party, Italian Partito Popolare Italiano (PPI), formerly (1943–93) Christian Democratic Party or Italian Partito della Democrazia Cristiana (DC),  former centrist Italian political party whose several factions were united by their Roman Catholicism and anticommunism. They advocated programs ranging from social reform to the defense of free enterprise. The DC usually dominated Italian politics from World War II until the mid-1990s.
In January 1919 a Sicilian priest, Luigi Sturzo, founded the original Italian Popular Party. Its tight organization and discipline won it quick success. In 1919 the party won 101 of 508 seats in the Chamber of Deputies, and PPI ministers were included in various governments over the next several years. In 1926, however, the Fascists banned all political parties, and the leaders of the PPI were forced out of politics or into exile.
After Italy’s surrender in World War II (1943), old PPI leaders with the support of many Roman Catholic organizations founded the Christian Democratic Party. In December 1945 its leader, Alcide De Gasperi, became premier, holding office for eight years. Italian politics took a decisive turn in May 1947, when De Gasperi excluded the socialist and communist parties from his government. Until the early 1960s, the Christian Democrats either governed on the basis of four-party “centre” coalitions with centre and right-centre parties or, in time of stress, formed single-party “caretaker” governments.
In the 1950s the Christian Democratic premiers encountered increasing difficulty in forming centre governments as their party’s left wing gained strength and the centre-right parties became more conservative. Many Christian Democrats looked for an “opening to the left”—an alliance with the Italian Socialist Party (Partito Socialista Italiano; PSI)—and in 1963, after years of careful political groundwork, Aldo Moro of the Christian Democrats succeeded in forming a government that included the PSI. DC and PSI cabinets dominated most of the 1960s and much of the ’70s. The DC weakened somewhat owing to scandal involving alleged secret government influence of a Masonic lodge, and in 1981 the DC temporarily surrendered the premiership and presidency to its coalition partners. The party remained strong, however, and was the dominant partner in a series of coalition governments until the early 1990s. By then the Cold War had ended, along with the political climate that had enabled the DC, the PSI, and their smaller centrist allies to form coalition governments that excluded the communists but tolerated political corruption. In 1992–93 the DC was rocked by the implication of some of its leading members in financial scandals and political corruption.
In January 1994 the struggling DC reverted to its original name, the PPI, but in parliamentary elections later that year it fell from power and was reduced to a fairly minor party. It subsequently joined the centre-left Olive Tree coalition, and from 1996 to 2001 it participated as a junior member of Italy’s coalition government. In 2002 the PPI merged with the centrist Daisy (Margherita) party, which in 2007 was folded into the new centre-left Democratic Party (Partito Democratico).
