Janata Dal (United), JD(U) English People’s Party (United),  regional political party in Bihar and Jharkhand states, eastern India. It also has had a presence in national politics and in the central government in New Delhi.
The party’s origin can be traced to the founding of the Janata (People’s) Party in 1977, a coalition of several smaller parties that combined forces to oppose the Indian National Congress (Congress Party) and its leader, Indira Gandhi, then prime minister of India. In 1988 V.P. Singh was a principal founder of the Janata Dal (JD) through the merger of the Janata Party and two smaller parties as part of the United Front (UF), a renewed opposition to the Congress Party. By 1994 two prominent party members, the socialist leaders George Fernandes and Nitish Kumar, had split from the JD and formed the Samata (Equality) Party. Another division of the JD occurred in 1997 when Lalu Prasad Yadav pulled out his followers and formed the Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD; National People’s Party), which then became a powerful force in Bihar state politics. Prior to that split, however, the JD’s H.D. Deve Gowda was able to form a short-lived (June 1996–April 1997) UF coalition government, with himself as prime minister.
In 1999 the JD decided to support the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA) coalition government in New Delhi. The faction led by Deve Gowda, however, opposed associating with the NDA and established a rival party that took the name Janata Dal (Secular), or JD(S). What remained of the JD was designated Janata Dal (United) and, headed by Sharad Yadav, joined the NDA government. Four years later, in October 2003, the JD(U) merged with the Samata and other smaller parties as a reconstituted JD(U). Fernandes became the first president of the new party, and Yadav headed up its parliamentary board.
The 2003 re-formation of the JD(U) was largely a move to counter the RJD’s several years of dominance in Bihar. While espousing the ideology of socialism, secularism, and democracy, the JD(U) succeeded in its broad objective of winning over lower-caste Hindus and the minority Muslim population, who had been strong supporters of the RJD. Being a part of the BJP-led NDA government at that time, the JD(U) opposed the policies of both the Congress Party and a so-called “Third Front,” consisting of leftist and other regional parties.
The JD(U) first slated candidates for office for the February 2005 Bihar state legislative assembly elections, in which it won the second largest number of seats, behind the RJD. The RJD could not form a government, however, and in a second poll, held in October 2005, the JD(U) scored a decisive victory, gaining 88 out of 243 seats. It had established an alliance with the BJP for both contests in 2005, and the two parties formed a coalition government in the state, with Kumar as the chief minister (head of government). The Kumar government quickly put in place policies aimed at turning around the economically underdeveloped state.
The administration’s strong and largely corruption-free performance in its first term was among the reasons why the JD(U) had an even better showing in the 2010 assembly elections, in which it won 115 seats. Again teaming with partner BJP (91 seats), it formed another coalition government, with Kumar returning as chief minister. The party also performed well in the 2009 elections to the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament), in which 20 of its candidates won seats..
Bihar remained the JD(U)’s stronghold, although the party also had some electoral success in neighbouring Jharkhand (which had been carved out of Bihar in 2000). In the 2005 Jharkhand assembly elections, the party won six seats in the 81-member lower chamber, but it could garner only two seats in the 2010 polls. The party carefully nurtured a secular image in Bihar, and it remained apprehensive about its association with the pro-Hindu, anti-Muslim BJP and what fallout that might have for the JD(U) among the state’s Muslim voters. Before the 2010 assembly elections, it opposed a BJP proposal to allow Narendra Modi, the BJP’s controversial leader and chief minister of the western Indian state of Gujarat, to campaign in Bihar. The party also opposed the selection of Modi by the BJP to be the NDA’s candidate for prime minister for the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, and in June 2013 the JD(U) left the NDA. The result was a devastating defeat for the JD(U) in the 2014 polling, with the party able to win only two seats. Kumar, taking responsibility for the poor showing, resigned as chief minister in mid-May and was succeeded by fellow party member Jitan Ram Manjhi.
