Moderate Party, Swedish in full Moderata Samlingspartiet, byname Moderaterna,  centre-right Swedish political party. The Moderate Party was founded in 1904 as the Conservative Party but took its current name in 1969. From its inception the party has promoted a market economy, lower taxes, and a smaller role for the government in the economy. For much of its history the Moderate Party played only a relatively minor part within the opposition. Beginning in the 1980s, however, particularly as Sweden’s economy suffered, the Moderate Party gained strength in the Riksdag (parliament), where it became the second largest party.
After nearly 45 years of rule by the Swedish Social Democratic Workers’ Party, a nonsocialist coalition came to power in 1976, and for part of this government’s tenure (1979–81) the Moderate Party joined the coalition. The socialists returned to power in 1982, but, following the elections of 1991, the Moderate Party formed a four-party coalition government, and its leader, Carl Bildt, became prime minister. In office the Moderate Party promoted deregulation, reductions in government spending, privatization of public services, and programs designed to reduce inflation and budget deficits. Although it met with some success, the Moderate Party was voted out of office in 1994.
In 2006 the Moderate Party and its allies narrowly defeated the Social Democrats, and the leader of the Moderate Party, Fredrik Reinfeldt, became prime minister. The alliance led by Reinfeldt returned to power in the 2010 parliamentary election—the first time a nonsocialist government had been reelected—though it came up three seats short of a majority and faced the prospect of either gaining support from other parties or ruling as a minority government. Reinfeldt’s tenure as prime minister, the longest by any conservative in Swedish history, came to an end with the 2014 parliamentary election, which was won by the Social Democrats. In the 2018 election the Moderates and their partners in the centre-right Alliance coalition finished in a virtual dead heat with the Red-Green coalition, led by the Social Democrats, as each of the coalitions captured about 40 percent of the vote.
