Mollen Commission, formally Commission to Investigate Allegations of Police Corruption and the Anti-Corruption Procedures of the Police Department,  commission created by New York City Mayor David Dinkins in 1994 to assess the extent of corruption in the New York City Police Department (NYPD). Informally named for its chairman, Milton Mollen, the city’s former deputy mayor for public safety, the commission uncovered blatant corruption in connection with the trade in illegal drugs, including numerous cases in which police officers abetted or committed drug-related offenses and other crimes.
The commission was formed one month after Michael Dowd and five other NYPD officers assigned to two Brooklyn precincts were arrested by suburban Suffolk county police on charges of conspiracy to sell narcotics. Shortly after his arrest, various media outlets reported that Dowd had been the subject of 15 internal corruption complaints alleging that he had taken bribes, robbed drug dealers, and sold cocaine. None of the complaints were officially substantiated, despite ample evidence of Dowd’s misconduct.
The commission found that drug-related corruption and brutality within the NYPD were serious problems, especially in high-crime and drug-infested precincts. Some officers in Brooklyn and Manhattan not only stole and sold drugs but sometimes shot the dealers they robbed. The commission also reported a “willful blindness” to corruption throughout the ranks of the NYPD. It further suggested that at least 40 corruption cases involving senior officers had been “buried” by the Internal Affairs Bureau and that several previous police commissioners had been more interested in containing corruption scandals than containing corruption.
The commission recommended, among other measures, increased internal controls and the creation of a permanent independent police commission to perform continuous assessments of the department’s systems for preventing, detecting, and investigating corruption and to conduct, whenever necessary, its own corruption investigations. The Commission to Combat Police Corruption (CCPC) was accordingly created by Dinkins in 1995.
