Movement of the Fifth Republic (MVR), Spanish Movimiento de la Quinta República, formerly Bolivarian Revolutionary Movement 200 (Movimiento Bolivariano Revolucionario–200; MBR-200),  nationalist Venezuelan political party established to support the presidential candidacy of Hugo Chávez in 1998.
MBR-200 was secretly established within the Venezuelan military in the 1980s by Chávez and his fellow military officers. The movement rejected democracy, endorsed policies based on Chávez’s interpretation of the philosophy of Simón Bolívar (who led the revolutions of independence against Spain in South America in the 19th century), and sometimes advocated violence to overthrow the existing political order.
In 1992 the Bolivarian Movement 200, led by Chávez, who was then a lieutenant colonel, attempted to engineer a coup, justifying its intervention on the basis of charges of governmental corruption and various economic grievances. Chávez was subsequently imprisoned, but he won sympathy from large segments of the Venezuelan population. In 1994 Chávez was released from prison in a goodwill gesture by Venezuela’s newly elected president, Rafael Caldera Rodríguez.
Although the movement had previously called on its supporters to abstain from voting, in 1998 Chávez established the MVR to serve as a vehicle for his successful bid for the presidency. The MVR’s criticisms of social inequalities won it broad support among the country’s impoverished. In the 1998 legislative elections, the party became the second largest in the National Assembly. In 2002 opponents of Chávez engineered his brief ouster from the presidency, but protests and threats of violence from his supporters resulted in his return to power less than three days later. In the 2005 legislative elections, Chávez’s MVR won the majority of seats in the National Assembly (and other pro-Chávez parties gained the remainder) after several opposition parties boycotted the elections to protest what they saw as corruption in the Chávez-dominated National Election Council, the institution that oversees elections.
The MVR was dissolved in 2007 to become part of Chávez’s new political party, the United Socialist Party of Venezuela (Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela; PSUV), which was created by a merger of some of his coalition partners. The PSUV held its inaugural congress in January 2008.
