National Weather Service (NWS),  official weather bureau of the United States, founded on February 9, 1870, and charged with providing weather, hydrologic, and climate forecasts and warnings for the United States, its possessions, and its marine and freshwater approaches. Such weather forecasts and warnings are produced to help safeguard the lives and property of American citizens from the dangers of severe weather, as well as to protect the national economy from weather-related disruptions. The NWS, which is a branch of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), is considered the official source of the United States with respect to life-threatening weather, complementing local and regional reports made by television and radio broadcasting stations and Internet sources.
The NWS maintains an integrated network of more than 100 regional and field offices across the United States and its possessions. Forecasts are derived from weather and climate data collected from a multitude of sources, including satellites, aircraft, weather balloons, and ground-level remote sensing equipment (such as Doppler weather radar). Traditional instrumentation (such as thermometers, barometers, and rain gauges), however, is also used to collect weather data in the vicinity of each office.
The NWS began with the Signal Service Corps of the U.S. Army. In 1870 U.S. Pres. Ulysses S. Grant signed a resolution allowing the secretary of war to set up a national weather warning service. The original purpose of the service was to facilitate the collection of weather data from military installations located across the country and warn locations along the Great Lakes and marine coasts of the approach of storms. In the early days of the service, weather information was relayed by telegraph to Washington, D.C. This office later sent forecast information out to local Signal Service offices, which were subsequently distributed to rural post offices, railroad stations, and newspaper offices for dissemination to the general public.
As part of the Organic Act of 1890, which was passed by the U.S. Congress and signed by Pres. Benjamin Harrison, the weather service was renamed the United States Weather Bureau (USWB) and was placed under civilian control within the Department of Agriculture. The responsibilities of weather forecasting, warning, and observation were officially transferred from the Signal Service Corps to the USWB on July 1, 1891. The USWB was made part of the Department of Commerce in 1940, and it became part of the Environmental Science Services Administration (ESSA) within the Department of Commerce in 1965. ESSA and a number of other offices were restructured into the newly created NOAA on October 3, 1970, and the USWB became the National Weather Service on October 9.
