National Endowment for the Arts (NEA),  an independent agency of the U.S. government that supports the creation, dissemination, and performance of the arts. It was created by the U.S. Congress in the National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities Act of 1965. The agency funds a variety of projects in literature, music, theatre, film, dance, fine arts, sculpture, and crafts. It also manages the awarding of the National Medal of Arts. This medal is presented by the president of the United States to any living citizen or group of citizens or organization that is “deserving of special recognition by reason of their outstanding contributions to the excellence, growth, support and availability of the arts in the United States.” For a list of National Medal of Arts winners, see below.
The majority of NEA grants go directly to institutions such as art museums, not-for-profit theatres, and symphony orchestras; to arts programs in schools; and to organizers of events such as folk-art festivals. Typically, recipients are required to match their NEA grants with funding from other sources. Grants are also awarded to individual artists for specific projects—for example, to an author for writing a novel or to a jazz musician for composing an extended work. The endowment has especially encouraged culturally diverse American arts, providing National Heritage Fellowship Awards to folk and blues musicians, instrument makers, weavers, metalworkers, woodcarvers, and others who embody Native American, Latin American, Asian, and other ethnic arts traditions in American communities.
Grants are often awarded by the NEA in cooperation with state and local arts agencies. When the NEA began, the United States had five state arts agencies; after the NEA’s third decade, all states had arts agencies. In that period the number of arts organizations in the United States increased dramatically, including twice as many large symphony orchestras, an 8-fold increase in theatres, and a 10-fold increase in dance companies. Subsequent opposition to the NEA in the U.S. Congress, however, resulted in a decrease in funding from a high of nearly $176 million in 1992 to less than $100 million in 1996.
The winners of the National Medal of Arts are provided in the table.
