National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),  U.S. governmental agency established in 1970 within the Department of Commerce to study Earth’s oceans, atmosphere, and coastal areas insofar as they affect the land surface and coastal regions of the United States.
The organization is composed of six offices:
NOAA is headquartered in Washington, D.C., and manages seven research laboratories—including the National Severe Storms Laboratory in Norman, Oklahoma, the Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory in Seattle, Washington, and Newport, Oregon, and the Earth System Research Laboratory in Boulder, Colorado—and several dozen offices throughout the United States and its territories and possessions. In addition, NOAA supports approximately 20 Cooperative Institutes (CIs) affiliated with over 40 institutions, including the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.
Before its creation on October 3, 1970, the administration’s scientific activities were split between the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey (established in 1807 to survey the coast of the United States), the United States Weather Bureau (established in 1870—and later known as the National Weather Service—to collect various weather data from around the country and predict future conditions), and the United States Commission of Fish and Fisheries (established in 1871 to protect the country’s food fisheries). These organizations were brought together out of the need to produce more-effective warnings of severe weather and to satisfy the emerging interest in investigating Earth’s physical environment from the perspective of a consolidated multidisciplinary whole rather than through several distinct disciplines. The Environmental Data Service, the National Oceanographic Data Center, and the National Satellite Center were also brought into NOAA upon its establishment.
NOAA’s staff and equipment have been used extensively to predict and track tropical cyclones and other weather-related phenomena, such as tornado outbreaks and snowstorms, to monitor periodic shifts in major atmospheric patterns, such as El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO), and to research the phenomenon of global warming and climate change.
 For fisheries management and ocean research, NOAA operates and maintains several research surface ships and submersibles. For Earth observation and weather forecasting, NOAA operates and manages a fleet of satellites in concert with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). Such satellites include those of the Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) and Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) programs and the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP). For assessing the strength and monitoring the development of tropical cyclones, NOAA possesses a small fleet of “hurricane hunter” aircraft made up of propeller-driven and jet airplanes.
