Neotraditionalism,  in politics, the deliberate revival and revamping of old cultures, practices, and institutions for use in new political contexts and strategies.
Neotraditionalism entails a degree of contestation over culture and memory. It can serve as a strategy of political legitimation, and it is deployed in different ways by both elites and ordinary people. Neotraditionalism can be especially prominent in contexts of rapid social change or when people question the nature or benefits of that which is presented as “developmental” or “modern.” Neotraditionalism suggests that the form a regime takes, the nature of law, the means by which the arbitrariness of rulers can be blocked, and other forms of interaction between state and society should take into account or resonate with local definitions of authentic culture and historical memory.
As a concept, neotraditionalism breaks with notions of deeply rooted cultural essences or characterizations of static antimodern tradition. An approach focusing on neotraditionalism treats seemingly historical institutions, practices, and values as moldable resources, subject to ongoing social and political contestation. In that sense, one cannot speak of politically unproblematic “traditions” of, for example, democratic participation (e.g., panchayat village councils in India and Pancasila democracy in Indonesia) but rather of specific efforts to identify and promulgate particular and always modified versions of remembered culture and institutions as neotraditions.
Neotraditions serve political goals and are the subject of political contestation over the definitions of historical memory and “authentic” culture. They can be especially useful tools for the consolidation of group identity in circumstances of rapid and confusing social change. Thus, the British historian Eric Hobsbawm described the invention and deployment of neotraditions surrounding the mythic hero Ossian, bagpipes, and kilts in constructing a new Scottish national identity in the 18th century at a time of rapid class transformation, urbanization, and the decline of feudal forms of social solidarity. Likewise, in southern Africa, historians have shown how the massive migration of men to mines and factories around the turn of the 20th century precipitated new understandings of “traditional” culture, emphasizing women’s subordination, powerful elder male chieftaincy, and rigid customary land laws. Those neotraditional customs and institutions enabled absent men to retain control over key resources (especially their wives and their farms). Neotraditionalism has also been used as a powerful tool of political legitimation in postcolonial settings, whereby authoritarian elites, from Mobutu Sese Seko in Zaire to Suharto in Indonesia, sought to justify single-party authoritarian regimes as “democratic” because one-party rule supposedly revived and updated precolonial traditions of village-level inclusive consensus decision making.
Neotraditional analysis does not suggest that the story of Ossian, powerful elder male chieftaincy, or village democracy are fabrications and simple instrumentalist manipulations of an entirely plastic and moldable culture. Rather, it accepts that some forms of those stories, practices, and informal institutions represent ethnographic and historical realities, and it recognizes that there is a political process in which actors filter and select particular elements of remembered culture as the central and salient definitions of “tradition” in any given moment.
Although often monopolized by state-level postcolonial elites as legitimating cultural patina, neotraditionalism by definition need not serve authoritarianism nor operate only in the hands of dominant groups. Thus, the much-celebrated Grameen Bank and other systems of revolving credit can be understood as neotraditional redeployments of historically rooted practices of intergroup solidarity and trust (which compel borrowers to repay loans so that kin or neighbours can receive their credit) in new, more modern circumstances. Likewise, small and medium-size specialty manufacturers in Jutland, Denmark, and Emilia-Romagna, Italy, redeployed and revamped old practices of cooperation, some rooted in agrarian practices, to achieve economies of scale and international competitiveness in the later 20th century. In those cases, social actors at various levels, not state elites, reformulated tradition for new purposes, crafting new institutional solutions that enjoyed the benefit of social familiarity and apparent embeddedness in a local culture. Thus, analysis of neotraditionalism demands an understanding not simply of how culture and memory are recrafted but of who does that recrafting, with the application of what degree of power, and in pursuit of what interests.
In an era of rapid globalization of trade and communication, as well as the standardization of liberal democratic politics and free-market economics, neotraditionalism represents an important mode of localist response or resistance to perceived external domination or cultural homogenization. Thus, xenophobic nationalists and religious fundamentalists redeploy visions, values, practices, and modes of social organization of a purportedly more-authentic uncorrupted past as a means to critique the alienation and “mongrelization” associated with the dominant liberal democratic capitalist order. Likewise, some communitarian activists, proponents of indigenous rights, and environmentalists evoke historical patterns of holism and harmony with nature as neotraditional alternatives to the perceived irresponsibility, materialism, imperialism, and unsustainability of the same liberal democratic capitalist order. Neotraditionalism provides a language and a basis for political mobilization for many forms of critique of modernity.
