New Democratic Party (NDP), French Nouveau Parti Démocratique,  Canadian democratic socialist political party favouring a mixed public-private economy, broadened social benefits, and an internationalist foreign policy.
The New Democratic Party (NDP) grew out of the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (CCF), which was founded in 1933 as Canada’s first political party representing workers and small farmers. The CCF secured power in Saskatchewan in 1944, by which time it had developed a national organization, run candidates in all sections of the country, and polled an appreciable popular vote. However, it was never large enough to become the official opposition, nor did it hold the balance of power between the country’s two major parties, the Liberal Party of Canada and the Progressive Conservative Party.
In 1956 most of Canada’s labour groups united in the Canadian Labour Congress, which in August 1961 formed the New Democratic Party, incorporating the CCF but welding a stronger working arrangement with organized labour. (The provincial party in Saskatchewan retained the CCF name until 1967.) The NDP was able to form governments in Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and British Columbia intermittently from the 1940s to the 1990s, in Yukon from the 1980s, and in Ontario, Canada’s largest and wealthiest province, in the 1990s. At the national level, however, it enjoyed only scattered success, its support peaking in the 1988 election, when it won 43 seats in the House of Commons. The NDP suffered a dramatic decline in the following election, winning only nine seats, and, though it rebounded somewhat in subsequent elections, it generally polled little more than 10 percent of the vote. In the elections of 2004 and 2006, however, with support for the Liberals dropping, the NDP fared better, winning 19 and 29 seats, respectively, in the House of Commons. This upward trend continued in the 2008 election, in which another 8 seats were added, bringing the NDP total to 37.
The NDP’s longtime base has been among the farmers of Manitoba and Saskatchewan and the urban workers of British Columbia and Ontario. With the rise of the Reform Party (later the Canadian Alliance and the Conservative Party of Canada) in the late 1980s, support for the NDP in the west declined somewhat. During the mid-1990s and early 21st century the NDP gained in popularity in the Atlantic provinces, particularly Nova Scotia, where it polled 30 percent in the 2006 federal election.
Benefiting from a dramatic rise in the personal popularity of its charismatic leader, Jack Layton, the NDP vaulted past the Liberals in the 2011 election to become the official opposition party as it won more than 30 percent of the popular vote and captured 103 seats in the House of Commons, more than double its previous highest total. The party’s breakthrough in the election came primarily from its astounding success in Quebec, where it captured 59 seats, breaking the Bloc Québécois’s traditional dominance of electoral politics in the province. In July 2011 Layton stepped down as NDP leader to battle the cancer that would take his life. Onetime union leader Nycole Turmel, his handpicked successor, served as interim leader until March 2012, when she was replaced by Thomas Mulcair, an MP from Quebec.
Mulcair led the party into the 2015 federal election. Although the NDP was the early front-runner, support for it faded: the party finished third with 44 seats, behind the Conservatives with 99 seats, and the Liberals formed a majority government with 184 seats. In October 2017 Mulcair was replaced by Jagmeet Singh, who became the first member of a visible minority to serve as the leader of one of Canada’s major federal political parties. The NDP did not fare well in the 2019 federal election, dropping 20 seats and losing its status as the second opposition party to the Bloc Québécois, which trounced it in the vote in Quebec. In the 2021 snap federal election, the NDP added a seat to increase its presence in the House of Commons to 25 members, but it still lagged behind the Bloc Québécois.
