Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), formerly Pan American Sanitary Bureau (PASB) and Pan American Sanitary Organization (PASO),  organization founded in December 1902 to improve health conditions in North and South America. The organization, which is headquartered in Washington, D.C., is the oldest international health agency in the world and was the first international organization to promote health research and education.
The Pan American Sanitary Bureau was organized in response to a yellow fever outbreak that had spread from Latin America to the United States. In 1947 the bureau was renamed the Pan American Sanitary Organization; the name Pan American Sanitary Bureau was retained for PASO’s executive committee. In 1949 PASO was integrated into the United Nations system as the regional office for the World Health Organization. The organization’s name was changed again in 1958 to Pan American Health Organization.
PAHO works in cooperation with both governmental and nongovernmental organizations to coordinate international health activities in the Western Hemisphere. It has been credited with eradicating smallpox and polio from the Americas, achieving progress in the fight against measles, improving life expectancy and infant mortality rates, reducing health gaps between the rich and poor, developing a protocol to protect blood supplies, and improving water safety. PAHO emphasizes equity and improved living standards for impoverished communities.
The organization is led by a four-person executive management team and establishes policies through its governing bodies, the Pan American Sanitary Conference, the Directing Council, and the Executive Committee. Scientific experts are stationed in the group’s offices throughout the hemisphere. The organization’s members include the 35 countries of the Americas, along with Puerto Rico, which is an associate member.  France, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom are participating states, and Portugal and Spain are observer states.
