Scottish National Party (SNP),  nationalist political party that has sought to make Scotland an independent state within the European Union (EU).
The SNP was formed in 1934 from a union of the National Party of Scotland (founded in 1928) and the Scottish Party (1932). From the beginning, disagreements arose within the SNP over whether to focus on electoral politics or wider cultural aims. There were also deep divisions over its relations with other political parties, primarily the Labour Party. World War II created further controversy concerning the British government’s right to declare war on behalf of the Scottish people. After 1945 the SNP helped to circulate petitions demanding a Scottish Parliament, but until the 1960s the movement for Scottish independence achieved little success and was sustained only by symbolic and insubstantial victories, such as the theft of the Stone of Scone—the ancient stone upon which Scottish kings were crowned—from Westminster Abbey in 1950. In the meantime, the SNP became more pragmatic and disciplined, though the party was still plagued by internal divisions and inexperienced leadership.
In the 1950s and ’60s the SNP’s popularity increased with the spread of criticism of British control of Scottish affairs. During the 1970s and ’80s the party’s nationalist stance was brought more sharply into focus by the production of North Sea oil in Scottish waters, which raised the possibility of Scottish economic autonomy, and by the rule in London of the British Conservative Party (1979–97), which enjoyed the support of only a minority of voters in Scotland.
The SNP’s greatest success came in the general election of October 1974. Managing for once to mobilize a sense of economic grievance and cultural resentment that cut across the traditional class divisions of Scottish politics, the party won more than 30 percent of the Scottish vote and took 11 of the 71 Scottish seats in the British Parliament. In later years the party was supported consistently in opinion polls by 20 to 25 percent of Scottish voters, making it the second most popular party in Scotland after Labour.
In the late 1990s the SNP ventured into the mainstream of Scottish politics by attempting to attract support from groups such as businesses and trade unions. In addition, the SNP made explicit attempts to modernize its party structure and its public relations strategies. Despite the Labour Party’s continued popularity in Scotland, the SNP managed to remain a significant presence. After Labour won a landslide victory in the general elections of May 1997—in which the SNP took six seats in Parliament, its best performance in nearly 25 years—the SNP joined Labour and the Liberal Democratic Party to campaign vigorously for a second referendum proposing the creation of a Scottish Parliament (a previous referendum in 1979 was unsuccessful). The referendum passed with more than 74 percent of voters in favour; 64 percent also approved giving the body the power to change tax rates.
Despite the opposition of the Conservative Party and the House of Lords, the government adopted a proportional representation system for elections to the new parliament, which made it possible for the SNP to extend its influence. At the first elections to the Scottish Parliament in May 1999, the SNP established itself as the main opposition to the Labour Party and its governing coalition with the Liberal Democrats, securing 29 percent of the votes and winning 35 of 129 seats. After a decade as the SNP’s “national convener,” the party leader, Alex Salmond, resigned in July 2000 in a dispute over party finances. He was replaced by 36-year-old John Swinney, the party’s deputy leader and a member of the British and Scottish parliaments. In the Scottish elections of 2003, the SNP’s vote share dropped to 21 percent and its seats to 27. Swinney stepped down the following year, and Salmond was once again elected the party’s leader.
The party remained an important political force in Scotland as the main opposition party, and in the 2007 elections the SNP staged a historic upset, winning the most seats in the Scottish Parliament to end some 50 years of Labour Party dominance in Scotland. The SNP, which captured 47 seats to Labour’s 46, subsequently formed a minority administration, and Salmond was elected first minister of Scotland; he became the first Nationalist to hold the post. The SNP’s performance in 2011 was even more impressive, securing the first majority government in the history of the Scottish Parliament. Having secured that majority, Salmond pledged to hold a referendum on independence within five years. In 2012 he signed an agreement with British Prime Minister David Cameron to hold the referendum, which was ultimately scheduled for September 2014, and to pose a single simple question: “Should Scotland be an independent country?”
Vigorous campaigns were mounted on both sides of the question, and, although opinion polls in 2013 indicated clear sustained opposition to independence by margins ranging between three to two and two to one, the “yes” side gained tremendous momentum in the immediate run-up to voting, bringing the outcome very much into doubt. In the event, the measure was convincingly defeated—with about 55 percent voting “no” and about 45 percent voting “yes”—but only after Cameron, Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg of the Liberal Democrats, and Labour Party leader Ed Miliband jointly had published an 11th-hour “vow” in the Scottish newspaper Daily Record in which they pledged to provide more powers to Scotland if the referendum failed. Salmond resigned as first minister and party leader following the referendum and was replaced by Nicola Sturgeon, who proved herself to be a dynamic campaigner as she led the SNP to an unprecedented showing in the May 2015 U.K. general election, in which the party jumped from representing 6 Scottish constituencies to representing 56, obliterating Labour’s longtime dominance of Scottish representation in Westminster.
In May 2016 Sturgeon led the SNP to its third straight victory in elections for the Scottish Parliament, though the party lost its outright majority, slipping from 69 seats to 63. Sturgeon eschewed forming a coalition. Instead, she insisted that the results still mandated solo rule by the SNP, albeit as a minority government.
On June 23, 2016, the majority of Scots who voted in the national referendum on British withdrawal from the European Union (“Brexit”) opted to remain within the EU. The U.K.-wide vote, however, was for Brexit, prompting Sturgeon to advocate for another referendum on Scottish independence to be held before the United Kingdom’s formal withdrawal from the EU in 2019. When the SNP lost 21 seats (falling to 35 seats) in the snap election for the U.K. House of Commons in June 2017, that devastating result was widely seen as a rebuke of Sturgeon’s call for another vote on independence. However, the party bounced back in the early parliamentary elections that were held in December 2019, gaining 13 seats, to secure 48 seats in the House of Commons. In the May 2021 elections for the Scottish Parliament, the SNP bettered its result in the 2016 elections by one seat to reach a total of 64 seats, just one seat shy of an outright majority.
The SNP accepts devolution—that is, the legal decentralization of power to the British regions—as one stage on the road to independence for Scotland. Overall, the party describes itself as moderate and left of centre. It tends to be staunchly anti-Conservative in its party politics and interventionist in its economic policies, and it is committed to a non-nuclear defense. These tendencies sometimes made it difficult for the SNP to distinguish itself clearly from the Labour Party. A key change in SNP policy came in 1998, when it reversed its original opposition to membership of an independent Scotland within the EU.
The basic unit of organization is the local branch. Above this level the most important bodies are constituency associations, which propose candidates on the basis of a nationally approved list. At the national level, the annual conference of the party is formally the supreme decision-making authority, though in practice the National Executive Committee (led by the national convener) is the most powerful body. A National Council makes policy decisions between annual conferences.
Although the party does not disclose membership figures, estimates in the late 1990s put the number of members at between 8,000 and 16,000. Party members are heavily involved in fund-raising activities.
