Sinn Féin, (Irish: “We Ourselves” or “Ourselves Alone”)  political party that long was widely regarded as the political wing of the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA), though from at least the 1990s both organizations emphasized their separateness. Organized in Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, Sinn Féin strives for an end to the political partition of the island of Ireland, embodying an ideology that is variously characterized as nationalism and Republicanism. Sinn Féin advocates democratic socialism, but some observers question the accuracy of its frequent portrayal as a party of the radical left. The party was led by Gerry Adams from 1983 to 2018.
The early history of Sinn Féin is closely associated with Arthur Griffith, leader of Cumann na nGaedheal (“Party of the Irish”). At a meeting in Dublin in October 1902, Cumann na nGaedheal formally adopted Griffith’s policy of “Sinn Féin,” which included passive resistance to the British, withholding of taxes, and the establishment of an Irish ruling council and independent local courts. By 1905 the name Sinn Féin had been transferred from the policy to its adherents.
Sinn Féin was of little importance until the Easter Rising in Dublin (1916), after which it became the rallying point for extreme nationalist sentiment, referred to as Republicanism. The unequivocal demand by Sinn Féin’s leader, Eamon de Valera, for a united and independent Ireland won the party 73 of the 105 Irish seats in the British Parliament in 1918. Sinn Féin members of Parliament met in Dublin in January 1919 and declared themselves the parliament of an Irish republic, setting up a provisional government to rival Ireland’s British administration.
The ensuing Anglo-Irish War (Irish War of Independence, 1919–21) between the IRA and the British army was ended by the Anglo-Irish Treaty (1921), which was negotiated by representatives of Sinn Féin—most notably Michael Collins—and British officials, including Prime Minister David Lloyd George. The treaty did not grant Ireland full independence, however. Twenty-six of the 32 counties of Ireland became the Irish Free State, which held dominion status within the British Empire until its withdrawal from the Commonwealth in 1949; the remaining six counties, sometimes referred to as the province of Ulster, continued to be part of the United Kingdom. The treaty split Sinn Féin into two factions, one supporting the treaty under the leadership of Collins and the other opposing the treaty under Eamon de Valera. The two sides fought against each other in the Irish civil war (1922–23), which ended in the defeat of the anti-treaty forces.
In 1926, after a dispute concerning the conditions under which Sinn Féin would take part in elections for the Dáil, de Valera resigned as Sinn Féin leader and founded the Fianna Fáil party, which absorbed most of Sinn Féin’s original membership. In the election of 1927, Sinn Féin earned only 2.7 percent of the seats in the Dáil and did not campaign again until 1957, when it won 2.6 percent of the seats—which it refused to take—in the Dáil of the Republic of Ireland.
Reacting to sectarian violence in Northern Ireland beginning in the late 1960s, local units of the IRA were organized to defend Catholic communities in the province. Following a party conference in Dublin in 1969, Sinn Féin split again over the question of whether to support the IRA’s use of violence to protect Catholics in Northern Ireland and end British control there. Whereas the “Official” wing of the party, which was later renamed the Workers’ Party, emphasized political and parliamentary tactics and rejected violence after 1972, the “Provisional” wing, or Provos, believed that violence—particularly terrorism—was necessary and justified. This split was paralleled in the IRA, which also divided into official and provisional factions.
Although a registered party in Ireland, Sinn Féin was banned in the United Kingdom until 1974. Because many of its leaders were thought to be members of the IRA, the party was subject to expulsion orders and broadcasting bans in both the United Kingdom and Ireland. In the early 1980s Sinn Féin began to emphasize political and parliamentary tactics, adopting a strategy later known as “the ballot and the Armalite” (rifle). In 1981 the party decided to take the seats it had won in local councils in Northern Ireland. In the same year a series of dramatic hunger strikes by Republican prisoners in which 10 men died (7 of whom were IRA members) generated sympathy for the Republican cause and helped to increase Sinn Féin’s popularity among Catholics in Northern Ireland. The election of IRA hunger striker Bobby Sands to the British Parliament demonstrated the popularity of Republicanism. In elections for the Northern Ireland Assembly in 1982, Sinn Féin won 10 percent of the vote, a level of support it largely retained until it won 16 percent in the 1997 general elections. In 1983 party leader Gerry Adams, a principal architect of the ballot-and-Armalite strategy, was elected president of Sinn Féin.
In 1986 Sinn Féin chose to take the seats it had won in the Dáil, though it continued to abstain from participation in the British Parliament. Two years later the party began sometimes secret negotiations with John Hume, leader of the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP), Sinn Féin’s chief rival as the voice of Irish nationalism, and in 1993 Adams and Hume issued a joint statement of principles for a peaceful settlement of the conflict in Northern Ireland. The statement presented Sinn Féin in a new light, though the party continued to be associated with high-profile acts of paramilitary violence. In 1994 Adams was granted a visa by U.S. Pres. Bill Clinton, a decision that encouraged the IRA to declare a cease-fire later that year, according to Adams. Eventually, Sinn Féin was permitted to establish a branch in the United States, Friends of Sinn Féin, and to raise money there on the basis of its professed commitment to democracy and nonviolence. In 1997, after the IRA reinstated a cease-fire it had declared in 1994, Sinn Féin was permitted to join multiparty peace talks.
The talks resulted in the Good Friday Agreement (Belfast Agreement) of April 1998 on steps leading to a new power-sharing government in Northern Ireland. The IRA made some critical concessions, including its agreement that the Republic of Ireland should change its constitution to remove a territorial claim to Northern Ireland and that Northern Ireland should remain part of the United Kingdom for as long as the majority of its population so desired. Sinn Féin endorsed the agreement and campaigned aggressively for its acceptance in referenda that were passed in Northern Ireland and the republic in May. In elections to the new Northern Ireland Assembly, Sinn Féin won nearly 18 percent of the vote and took 18 seats. The party’s participation in the Northern Ireland Executive Committee, the new executive body of the province, was impeded by conflicts over the timing and extent of IRA decommissioning (disarmament), which had been a key provision of the Good Friday accords. In May 2000 the IRA agreed to permit international inspection of its arms dumps, thereby clearing the way for Sinn Féin’s full inclusion in the Executive when it was granted authority by the British government in June. As the fourth largest party in the Assembly, Sinn Féin held two ministerial positions in the Executive.
Sinn Féin’s participation in the political process boosted its support among Northern Ireland’s Roman Catholics, many of whom were impatient with the pace of political change. Traditionally the second largest nationalist party, Sinn Féin secured more votes than the SDLP and captured four seats in the House of Commons in 2001. Subsequently, its members of Parliament, who refused to take an oath of allegiance to the British monarch and thus could not take their seats in the House of Commons, were granted the use of parliamentary offices for the first time. In May 2002 Sinn Féin had its best showing in elections in the Republic of Ireland, winning five seats and 6.5 percent of first-preference votes. The following month Sinn Féin’s Alex Maskey was elected Belfast’s first Republican lord mayor.
In subsequent elections Sinn Féin solidified its status as the largest nationalist party. In the elections to the Northern Ireland Assembly in 2003, Sinn Féin won 24 seats to the SDLP’s 18, and in the British general election in 2005 it increased its seats in the House of Commons by one, for a total of five. In a landmark vote in January 2007, Sinn Féin members agreed to support Northern Ireland’s Protestant-dominated police force. In the subsequent elections to the Northern Ireland Assembly in March 2007, Sinn Féin easily outdistanced the SDLP, increasing its share of the vote to 26 percent (to the SDLP’s 15 percent) and winning 28 seats (to the SDLP’s 16); the Protestant Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) finished first overall with 36 seats. Sinn Féin and the DUP later reached a historic agreement to form a power-sharing government. On May 8, 2007, Ian Paisley of the DUP and Martin McGuinness of Sinn Féin were sworn in as first minister and deputy first minister, respectively. Later that month, however, Sinn Féin fared poorly in the elections to the Dáil, capturing just four seats. The party did not add to its five seats in the House of Commons in the British general election of 2010, but, for the first time in its history, it was the highest vote getter in Northern Ireland in a British general election.
In 2011 Sinn Féin capitalized on the dissatisfaction of voters with Ireland’s ruling Fianna Fáil party and ran a strong campaign in the Irish general election in February. Sinn Féin’s fortunes were further buoyed by Gerry Adams’s decision to contest a seat in the south for the first time. Adams won an easy victory in Louth and East Meath, and Sinn Féin captured 14 seats to become the fourth largest party in the Dáil. In the May 2011 election for the Northern Ireland Assembly, Sinn Féin won an additional seat (raising its total to 29) and finished a strong second to the DUP, ensuring a continuation of the power-sharing government. The party won four seats in the British general election of May 2015, down one from its 2010 performance, as a resurgent Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) reclaimed some of the ground it had lost over the previous decade. In the 2016 national election in Ireland, Sinn Féin added 9 seats to its 2011 tally to reach a total of 23 seats in the Dáil. Sinn Féin lost a seat in the 2016 election for the Northern Ireland Assembly to fall to 28 seats (10 seats fewer than the DUP). When a snap election in March 2017 resulted in response to a scandal that had engulfed the DUP, Sinn Féin won 27 seats. This time, however, that total represented a significant relative gain for Sinn Féin, which now held only one less seat than the DUP owing to a reduction in the number of seats in the Northern Ireland Assembly from 108 to 90. Before that election, in January 2017 McGuinness had resigned as deputy first minister in response to First Minister Arlene Foster’s refusal to temporarily step down from her position during the investigation of a scandal but also because he was ill (he died in March 2017). Michelle O’Neill replaced McGuinness as Sinn Féin’s leader in the Assembly. In the June 2017 snap election for the British House of Commons, Sinn Féin gained three seats to reach a total of seven seats, which it held on to in another snap election in 2019, though it continued the party’s traditional abstention from taking those seats in Parliament. The change in Sinn Féin’s leadership started by the departure of McGuinness culminated in Adams’s announcement in November that he would step down as president in 2018. He was replaced in February 2018 by Mary Lou McDonald. She led the party to a historic victory in Ireland’s 2020 national election, in which it upset Fine Gael’s and Fianna Fáil’s traditional dominance of Irish politics by finishing with the highest total of first preference votes and secured 37 seats in the Dáil.
