Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP),  nationalist political party in Northern Ireland, distinguished from the province’s other leftist and Republican groups by its commitment to political and nonviolent means of uniting Northern Ireland with the Irish republic. The party’s leader from 1979 to 2001 was John Hume, the corecipient of the Nobel Prize for Peace with Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) leader David Trimble in 1998.
The SDLP was formed in August 1970. Its cumbersome title is an indication of the hybrid nature of the party, whose founders included members of the Republican Labour Party, the Northern Ireland Labour Party, and the Nationalist Party, as well as three independent members of Parliament from Northern Ireland. The party immediately established its leftist credentials by joining the Socialist International and the Party of European Socialists (the confederation of socialist parties in the European Parliament).
Well-organized from the beginning, the SDLP enjoyed strong electoral support in the Roman Catholic community throughout the 1970s, capturing between 20 and 24 percent of the vote and winning four seats in the short-lived power-sharing executive body of 1973–74, including that of deputy chief executive. The SDLP thereby became the first nationalist party to occupy a government position in Northern Ireland.
The SDLP’s considerable electoral strength allowed it to veto any proposed constitutional change. This advantage was challenged in the 1980s, when Sinn Féin, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army (IRA), began to contest elections in Northern Ireland. Sinn Féin’s participation increased the nationalist vote, however, and the SDLP gained four seats in the British Parliament in 1987. In elections for the European Parliament in 1994, SDLP leader Hume won nearly 29 percent of the vote, just 1,200 votes behind Ian Paisley, leader of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP).
Committed to Irish unification by peaceful means, the SDLP was convinced that there could be no purely internal solution to the conflict in Northern Ireland. The party urged closer Anglo-Irish cooperation and built alliances with European partners and influential Irish Americans, including Senators Edward Kennedy and Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Governor Hugh Carey of New York. This strategy contributed to the Anglo-Irish Agreement of 1985, which gave the republic of Ireland a formal consultative role in the affairs of Northern Ireland.
Attempting to persuade Sinn Féin that armed struggle was futile, Hume engaged in sometimes secret talks with Sinn Féin president Gerry Adams beginning in 1988, and in 1993 the two leaders issued a joint statement of principles calling for a “three-stranded” approach to peace negotiations, which would address issues within Northern Ireland itself, between Northern Ireland and the Irish republic, and between the republic and Britain. The three-stranded approach was adopted in the document “Frameworks for the Future,” issued jointly by the British and Irish governments in 1995, and became the basis of multiparty talks beginning the following year.
In April 1998 the parties approved the Good Friday Agreement (Belfast Agreement) on steps aimed at restoring self-government in Northern Ireland. Critical to the interests of nationalists were the provisions calling for the creation of a cross-community coalition government in Northern Ireland and the acknowledgement that Northern Ireland would remain part of the United Kingdom for as long as a majority of the population so desired. The agreement reflected many of the SDLP’s key proposals, and the party campaigned aggressively for its acceptance in a referendum that was passed in Northern Ireland in May. (A similar referendum was passed in the Irish republic on the same day.) In elections held in June, the SDLP won 24 of the new Northern Ireland Assembly’s 108 seats. As the second largest party in the Assembly, the SDLP became a partner in a new coalition government with the UUP, the DUP, and Sinn Féin. Four SDLP members received ministerial positions, including SDLP deputy leader Seamus Mallon, who was elected to serve as deputy first minister.
At the end of the 1990s, Hume’s popularity remained undisputed, but his party continued to be challenged by Sinn Féin, which had gained political respectability through its participation in the peace process. Indeed, in elections to the House of Commons in 2001, Sinn Féin secured more votes than the SDLP for the first time. After Hume’s retirement as leader in 2001, the party selected as its leader Mark Durkan, who served in both the House of Commons and the Northern Ireland Assembly. In subsequent years Sinn Féin’s popularity increased among Northern Ireland’s nationalist voters at the expense of the SDLP. For example, following the 2005 British general election, the SDLP had only three seats, compared with Sinn Féin’s five, and in the elections to the Northern Ireland Assembly in 2007 it won only 15 percent of first-preference votes and 16 seats, compared with Sinn Féin’s 26 percent and 28 seats. The SDLP again captured fewer seats than Sinn Féin in the 2010 British general election, holding on to its three seats while Sinn Féin retained its five. Durkan stepped down as leader before the 2010 election and was replaced by Margaret Ritchie. The party’s declining fortunes at the polls continued in the 2011 elections for the Assembly, in which the SDLP’s representation dropped by two, to 14 seats. In the wake of those results, Alasdair McDonnell was chosen to replace Ritchie as party leader. Although the May 2015 British general election was characterized by strong showings by unionist parties, the SDLP was able to retain its three seats in the House of Commons. In November 2015 Colum Eastwood took over as party leader and led the SDLP into the May 2016 Assembly elections, in which it lost two seats to fall to 12. The SDLP again won 12 seats in a snap election for the Assembly in March 2017, but this time the total represented a relative gain, as representation in the Assembly had been reduced from 108 seats to 90. In the snap general election for the House of Commons in June 2017, however, the SDLP lost all three of the seats that it held, though it won two of them back in a snap election held in December 2019.
In addition to its involvement in larger sectarian issues, the SDLP promoted policies that reflected its membership in the European social democracy movement. It tended, however, to pay more attention to questions of justice and human rights than did most of its continental counterparts. On economic issues, the SDLP has favoured Britain’s adopting the euro, the European Union’s single currency. The party also has traditionally maintained close links with the British Labour Party.
The SDLP’s organization reflects its commitment to egalitarianism. The party requires that 40 percent of its Executive Committee be women, and it developed an affirmative action program to ensure that women occupied 50 percent of positions at all other levels of the party. At the party’s annual conference, delegates from local branches, trade unions, the youth section, and the Women’s Group join SDLP councillors and members of the party’s General Council to vote on broad policy motions and elect officers and delegates to executive bodies. The General Council, which meets at least five times per year, is the principal decision-making body. The Executive Committee runs the party’s day-to-day business, ratifies party candidates, and oversees electoral campaigns.
