Social Democratic Party of Switzerland, German Sozialdemokratische Partei der Schweiz (SPS), French Parti Socialiste Suisse (PSS), Italian Partito Socialista Svizzero (PSS),  Swiss political party of the centre-left that supports an extensive government role in the economy. With the Christian Democratic People’s Party, FDP. The Liberals, and the Swiss People’s Party, the Social Democratic Party has governed Switzerland as part of a grand coalition since 1959.
Founded in 1888, the Social Democratic Party is among the country’s oldest existing political parties. In the late 19th century it was one of the leading opposition groups to the then-dominant Radical Democratic Party, and, after the introduction of proportional representation for national elections in the 20th century, it exerted significant influence on Swiss political life.
The party’s policies have generally reflected those of the democratic socialist tradition in Europe; for example, it supports giving the federal government the power of direct taxation and sanctions greater government management of the economy. In the second half of the 20th century the party championed a number of other issues, including environmental protection and an expanded role for women in government. It also became a principal advocate of Swiss membership in international bodies, including the United Nations (which the country joined in 2002) and the European Union. Although the party has generally adopted moderate socialist policies, in the 1970s it flirted with more radical economic policies before confirming its traditional approach again in the early 1980s. Support for the Social Democratic Party has been strongest among blue-collar workers, teachers, and the elderly.
Since 1959 the party has held two seats on the seven-member Federal Council, the Swiss government’s executive branch. In 1984, during a period of internal dissension, the party narrowly rejected withdrawing from the Federal Council. It also threatened to leave the coalition in the 1990s when one of its appointments to the Federal Council was vetoed by its coalition partners.
Since the early 1990s the Social Democratic Party has been affiliated with the Partito Socialista, which is based in the Italian-speaking canton of Ticino. The country’s largest party for much of the post-World War II era, the Social Democratic Party averaged about one-fifth of the national vote by the 21st century. In 1999 Ruth Dreifuss, who was first elected as a Social Democratic Party representative to the Federal Council in 1993, became the country’s first woman president. In the October 2011 general election, support declined for all four members of the ruling coalition, with minor parties posting impressive gains. Such a dramatic shift led to questions about the future of the “magic formula” that determined the allocation of seats on the Federal Council.
