Swiss People’s Party, German Schweizerische Volkspartei (SVP), also known as Democratic Union of the Centre, French Union Démocratique du Centre (UDC), Italian Unione Democratica di Centro,  conservative Swiss political party. The Swiss People’s Party (SVP) was founded in 1971 by the merger of the Farmers, Artisans, and Citizens’ Party—generally known as the Agrarian Party—with the Democratic Party. It has pursued conservative social and economic policies, including lower taxes and reduced spending, as well as the protection of Swiss agriculture and industry. The party has also opposed Swiss membership in international bodies such as the United Nations (which Switzerland joined in 2002) and the European Union. Although its support was originally concentrated in rural Switzerland, it now enjoys considerable success in urban areas. It has also been strong historically with German-speaking Swiss citizens.
From 1959 to 2003 the Agrarian Party and its successor, the SVP, retained one seat on the Federal Council, Switzerland’s seven-member executive branch. In 1959 the Agrarian Party, along with the Christian Democratic People’s Party, the Radical Democratic Party (the antecedent of FDP. The Liberals), and the Social Democratic Party, established a so-called magic formula for representation on the Federal Council that gave the Agrarian Party, and the SVP as its successor, one seat on the Council while each of the other three parties retained two. Adopting a more populist agenda in the 1990s, particularly on immigration and social welfare, the party made substantial gains, and in the 1999 elections it won the largest vote share and the second greatest number of seats in the lower house of the parliament.
In 2003 the party garnered the largest vote total, as well as the most seats in the house, and it was awarded an additional seat on the Federal Council. In 2007 it significantly extended its winning margin in both categories. However, it was shaken by internecine strife when its leader, Christoph Blocher, was not reelected to the Federal Council and was replaced there by Eveline Widmer-Schlumpf, from the party’s moderate wing. In protest, the party withdrew from the country’s governing coalition. By going into opposition, the party suspended Switzerland’s consensus style of government, which had been in effect since 1959. The withdrawal was only temporary, however: in 2008 a member of the SVP regained a seat on the Federal Council. That year Widmer-Schlumpf and other moderates broke away from the SVP to form the Conservative Democratic Party (German: Bürgerlich-Demokratische Partei [BDP]). In the October 2011 general election, the SVP focused its platform on a strong anti-immigration message, but voters appeared to be more concerned with a potential economic downturn related to the European debt crisis. Although it finished with the largest share of the vote, the SVP saw its percentage of the electorate decrease for the first time in 20 years, and strong performances by minor parties, including the BDP, placed the future of the “magic formula” in jeopardy.
