 The most important development of the 20th century was the spread of democracy. The most important lesson was that the tides of freedom will always be opposed. Now and in the future, this warning should be on our minds because democracy is undergoing a new and rigorous round of tests.
The honor roll of free countries stopped growing some time ago and has begun to shrink. Doubts about the capacity of democracy to deliver on its promises have deepened as technology has enabled people everywhere to see what others have and they do not, feeding dissatisfaction and fueling anger. Gaps have widened between rich and poor, urban and rural, the well-educated and those lacking 21st-century skills. The unprecedented mobility of people and ideas has rubbed raw feelings of economic and social insecurity, threatening cultural identity and prompting a backlash against immigrants, refugees, and religious minorities.
[Read why James Baker thinks America can’t go it alone in the 21st century.]
All this has consequences. Democratically elected leaders swept into power on the promise of change find themselves unable to meet expectations and so begin losing popularity the day they take office. Globalization—a fact of life—has become for many an evil to be resisted at all costs. In a rising number of countries, citizens profess a lack of faith in parliaments, the media, police, courts, and governing and opposition parties alike.
The lack of trust is exacerbated by the sustained propaganda campaign orchestrated by Russian Pres. Vladimir Putin, who has emerged as the leading opponent of liberal democracy in our time. He has openly mourned the demise of the Soviet Union while seeking to extend his influence over Russia’s near border, to weaken NATO and the European Union, and to create a wedge between the United States and its allies.
Seventy years ago, the United States developed a containment strategy to push back against Soviet expansionism and counter the spread of communist ideology, confident that if we put up enough economic, military, and political pressure the Soviet system would ultimately collapse. Today, Russia is pursuing its own containment strategy against liberal democracy—using high-tech tools, such as computational propaganda and disinformation campaigns, to penetrate and undermine Western institutions, while destabilizing fragile democracies on their periphery, such as Georgia and Ukraine.
President Putin appears to think that if he applies enough pressure, liberal democratic institutions will collapse and the spread of democratic ideals will stop. But those who wish to tear democracy down can succeed only if democracy’s guardians are too complacent, too divided, too timid, or too stuck in the past to stop them.
[The Archbishop of Canterbury believes that reconciliation is a more urgent challenge than security.]
To secure the promise of liberty, small “d” democrats must band together in opposition to the repression of free institutions and in support for critical thinking, education, and truth. But above all, we must recognize that democracy’s unique virtue is its ability—through reason and open debate—to find remedies for its own shortcomings. In a free country the solution to setbacks can be found—not by bowing to the false gods of nationalism and tyranny but by building better, more flexible, and responsive societies. That job is within our power to do, and we had better get on with it before it is too late.
This essay was originally published in 2018 in  Encyclopædia Britannica Anniversary Edition: 250 Years of Excellence (1768–2018).
