Twenty-fifth Amendment,  amendment (1967) to the Constitution of the United States that set forth succession rules relating to vacancies and disabilities of the office of the president and  of the vice president. It was proposed by the U.S. Congress on July 6, 1965, and it was ratified on Feb. 10, 1967.
While the first section of the Twenty-fifth Amendment codified the traditionally observed process of succession in the event of the death of the president—that the vice president would succeed to the office—it also introduced a change regarding the ascent of the vice president to president should the latter resign from office. In the event of resignation, the vice president would assume the title and position of president—not acting president—effectively prohibiting the departing president from returning to office.
The second section of the amendment addresses vacancies in the office of the vice president. Traditionally, when the office of vice president was vacant, usually through the vice president’s succession to the presidency following the death of the president, the office of vice president stood vacant until the next election. Through the Twenty-fifth Amendment, the president would nominate a vice president, who would be subject to confirmation by the U.S. Congress. Only a few years after the amendment’s ratification, this section was put into effect. In 1973 Spiro Agnew resigned as Pres. Richard M. Nixon’s vice president, and Nixon subsequently selected Gerald R. Ford, who was then serving as minority leader in the House of Representatives, to serve as vice president. Despite the fact that Nixon and Ford were Republicans and the Democrats retained majorities in both the House and the Senate, Ford was easily confirmed, which indicated that the process would focus less on policy positions than a general fitness for office. Ford assumed the duties of vice president on Dec. 6, 1973, and upon Nixon’s resignation from office to avoid impeachment, Ford became the first president to accede to office according to the Twenty-fifth Amendment on Aug. 9, 1974. Had the Twenty-fifth Amendment not been in effect, Nixon would not have been able to replace Agnew, and it remains speculative whether Nixon would have resigned prior to impeachment and a trial and thus enabled the Democratic speaker of the House of Representatives to become president under the Presidential Succession Act of 1947.
The third section of the amendment set forth the formal process for determining the capacity of the president to discharge the powers and duties of office. It assumes that the president has the presence of mind and physical ability to produce a written statement formally notifying the president pro tempore of the Senate and the speaker of the House of such circumstances, which would result in the vice president’s temporarily serving as acting president. In the event that a president may be unable to declare his inability to discharge the powers and duties of office, the fourth section of the amendment requires such determinations to be made jointly by the vice president and the cabinet, with the vice president immediately assuming the position of acting president.
Prior to the passage of the amendment, nine presidents—William Henry Harrison, Zachary Taylor, Abraham Lincoln, James Garfield, William McKinley, Woodrow Wilson, Warren G. Harding, Franklin D. Roosevelt, and Dwight D. Eisenhower—experienced health crises that left them temporarily incapacitated, with death resulting in six cases (Harrison, Taylor, Lincoln, Garfield, McKinley, and Harding). After the passage of the amendment, Pres. Ronald Reagan was incapacitated for some 24 hours while undergoing surgery for a gunshot wound resulting from a failed assassination attempt, though no official designation of presidential responsibility was ever made. Indeed, this portion of the Twenty-fifth Amendment has never been invoked.
The full text of the amendment is:
