United States presidential election of 1908,  American presidential election held on November 3, 1908, in which Republican
    
      William Howard Taft
     defeated Democrat
    
      William Jennings Bryan
    .

      The biggest announcement in the run-up to the 1908 presidential election came in 1904 when, on the evening of his election, Pres. 
        Theodore Roosevelt
       announced that he would not seek a subsequent term in office. Roosevelt was extremely popular as president, and many thought he might reconsider and run as 1908 neared. However, after careful consideration of potential successors, Roosevelt threw his support behind William Howard Taft in early 1907. Taft was Roosevelt’s secretary of war and a trusted adviser, and the two had similar political ideas. Having been handpicked by the president, Taft easily won the Republican nomination on the first ballot when the Republican convention met in June 1908 in Chicago, defeating, among others, Vice Pres. 
        Charles W. Fairbanks
      , Speaker of the House 
        Joe Cannon
      , and Sen. 
        Robert La Follette
      . New York Congressman 
        James S. Sherman
       was chosen as his running mate. The following month in Denver, the Democrats overwhelmingly nominated the popular William Jennings Bryan for the third time, also on the first ballot. Future senator John Worth Kern was chosen for the vice presidential slot.
The Republican platform promised a continuation of the vein Roosevelt had started. The Democrats, galvanized by Roosevelt’s decision not to vie for the nomination, strove to unify their party against his chosen successor. The Democratic platform called for an array of reforms, including regulation of railroads and lower tariffs. Both campaigns relied heavily on local committees to get the word out to the general public rather than holding large rallies. Taft began his campaign slowly, not hitting the campaign trail personally until August, when he embarked on a tour largely in the Midwest and the South. Roosevelt also spoke out on Taft’s behalf. Bryan started strong, giving many speeches, though his campaign’s strength dwindled in the crucial last weeks before the election. During this time, Republicans thrust their most influential speakers into the spotlight. Although Bryan swept the Southern vote, his third and final run was not strong enough to win him the presidency. Taft defeated him with 321 electoral votes to 162.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1904.
       For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1912.
The results of the 1908 U.S. presidential election are provided in the table.
