United States presidential election of 1916,  American presidential election held on November 7, 1916, in which Democratic incumbent Woodrow Wilson defeated Republican Charles Evan Hughes in the electoral college 277–254.
Though his election in 1912 was largely attributable to the formation of the Bull Moose Party (officially, the Progressive Party) from the Republican Party’s more liberal elements and the subsequent split in voting, Wilson’s first term was marked by a raft of popular progressive legislation that left him well positioned to win a second term. The Underwood Tariff Act of 1913 reduced the rates set by the Payne-Aldrich Tariff Act of 1909 from 40 percent to 25 percent, greatly enlarged the list of untaxed goods, and included a modest income tax. Also in 1913 he shepherded the Federal Reserve Act through Congress, creating the Federal Reserve System in order to mobilize banking reserves and issue a flexible new currency—federal reserve notes—based on gold and commercial paper. A third victory came with passage of the Clayton Antitrust Act (1914), which strengthened existing laws against anticompetitive business actions and gave labour unions relief from court injunctions. Accompanying this act was one creating the Federal Trade Commission, intended to prevent unfair business practices.
Wilson further augmented this “New Freedom” package in 1916 with several pieces of legislation that were intended to attract defectors from the disintegrating Bull Moose Party in his upcoming reelection bid. Among them were laws to create an agency to regulate overseas shipping, to make the first government loans to farmers (a move that marked a reversal of his previous position), to prohibit child labour (later ruled unconstitutional), to raise income and inheritance taxes, and to mandate an eight-hour workday for railroad workers. Wilson was renominated without issue by the Democrats at their convention in St. Louis in June, as was his vice president, Thomas Marshall.
Meanwhile, the Republican Party attempted to realign itself. The internecine conflicts of the previous election were still in play, but the party had made gains in Congress in the 1914 midterm elections, and some members of the Bull Moose Party had drifted back to the fold. Among them was former president Theodore Roosevelt, who had himself instigated the formation of the splinter group. Indeed, despite the fatal blow to his popularity among Republicans, the charismatic Roosevelt put his name in the running for the presidential nomination. He was rejected in favour of Charles Evans Hughes, an associate Supreme Court justice and former governor of New York, at the party’s convention in June. However,  Charles Fairbanks, who had served as Roosevelt’s vice president, was selected as Hughes’s running mate. The Bull Moose Party chose Roosevelt as its candidate, and though he declined the nomination, he remained on the ballot as such. The Socialist Party, the major third-party player, selected editor and writer Allan L. Benson of New York for president and fellow writer George Kirkpatrick of New Jersey for vice president. The Prohibition Party and Socialist Labor Party also put forth candidates.
Wilson, who authored the Democratic platform himself, campaigned on the record of his previous administration, particularly stressing the fact that he had maintained a neutral foreign policy in respect to World War I, which had broken out in July 1914.  Though as an incumbent he kept with the tradition of “front porch” campaigning, a range of surrogates traveled the country on his behalf, trumpeting his accomplishments through speeches and the distribution of massive quantities of campaign literature. (“He kept us out of war” was a favoured slogan.) His attempts to court African American voters, to whom he had promised a “fair deal” in 1912 before endorsing segregation after attaining office, were nominal at best. He also refused to support a constitutional amendment guaranteeing woman suffrage.
Hughes waged a highly active campaign, but his wooden presence failed to excite the electorate. He criticized Wilson’s neutrality on the conflict in Europe despite the fact that the public sentiment was decidedly antiwar. The Republican also harped on Wilson’s failed efforts to overthrow the military dictatorship of Victoriano Huerta in Mexico and his acquiescence to Philippine autonomy as spelled out in the Jones Act of 1916. Unlike his opponent, Hughes did endorse woman suffrage. Political record aside, the Republicans did not hesitate to impugn Wilson’s moral fibre; they called attention to his swift remarriage following his first wife’s death in August 1914. Hughes’s failure to galvanize his party was not only due to his tepid personality. He did not court the progressive members of his party who had returned, notably snubbing Hiram Johnson, governor of California, when he campaigned there.
Wilson ultimately prevailed, though the election was much closer than anticipated. (It was so close, in fact, that in the event of a Republican victory, Wilson had planned to appoint Hughes secretary of state and then resign along with Marshall so that Hughes could immediately accede to the presidency.) Wilson garnered 49.4 percent of the popular vote and 277 electoral votes. Hughes trailed with 46.2 percent of the popular vote and 254 electoral votes. For all his protestations of neutrality, Wilson was unable to forestall the entry of the United States into World War I and asked Congress for a declaration of war on April 2, 1917.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1912. For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1920.
The results of the 1916 U.S. presidential election are provided in the table.
