United States Presidential Election of 2016,  American presidential election held on November 8, 2016, in which Republican Donald Trump lost the popular vote to Democrat Hillary Clinton by more than 2.8 million votes but won 30 states and the decisive electoral college with 304 electoral votes to Clinton’s 227 and thus became the 45th president of the United States.
The tumultuous, abrasive 2016 campaign defied established political norms. Clinton’s campaign featured superior organization and fund-raising—and almost every election-eve poll pointed to a comfortable victory for her—but Trump’s anti-Washington appeal to white working-class voters outside major cities in pivotal manufacturing states proved to be the key factor in what several publications called “the most stunning upset in American history.” The election of an outsider with no political job experience represented a major repudiation of business as usual by both parties in Washington, D.C.
At various times Trump blamed party establishments for costly intervention in foreign conflicts, the widening gap between the rich and the poor, stagnant real wages, excessive political correctness, and failure to enforce immigration laws. Bypassing traditional information sources by use of social media, including his personal Twitter account, Trump often set the agenda for coverage of his campaign. He frequently communicated spontaneously and instinctively—not to mention emotionally—without apparent benefit of in-depth calculation or staff advice, and he often later modified or even contradicted previous positions without being penalized by supporters.
As the political parties began their nomination process in 2015, the Republican Party (GOP) looked to be in a solid position. Many voters expressed a desire for change. Moreover, Democrats seemed likely to put forward an uninspiring candidate. Outgoing Pres. Barack Obama had presided over eight years of steady economic expansion following the 2008 worldwide financial meltdown, but many new jobs were not full-time, and the recovery was slow by historical standards. The president’s signature domestic accomplishment, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, or “Obamacare,” was failing financially. With Chinese, Russian, and Iranian influence surging, the U.S. appeared to be in retreat from its traditional foreign policy dominance. Republican prospects appeared so promising that an unprecedented 17 presidential candidates, many of them successful governors or senators, threw their hats into the ring, guaranteeing a complicated winnowing-down process.
By contrast, with her mainstream credentials burnished by four years as Obama’s secretary of state, Clinton enjoyed solid backing from the Democratic establishment. A surprising and spirited challenge emerged, however, from Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, a self-proclaimed Democratic Socialist. He campaigned on reducing economic inequality, opposing trade agreements, easing student debt, and cracking down on Wall Street interests, a significant source of Clinton support. Sanders, who energized both young and grassroots voters, stayed in the race until the convention, pushing Clinton to adopt more-progressive policies.
Trump’s initial decision to run was greeted with derision by some GOP strategists. He had never held elective office and appeared out of sync with the party’s conservative base. Trump was a onetime supporter of abortion rights who had only recently changed his views, and he openly acknowledged having made campaign contributions to Democrats to buy political influence. He ridiculed opponents in both parties—often in personal terms that were widely viewed as politically incorrect—and made inflated promises and statements whose likelihood or veracity was questioned by major media.
As the primary process began in 2015, Clinton and former Florida governor Jeb Bush each quickly raised over $100 million in campaign contributions and were strong favourites for their party’s nomination. Trump soon emerged at the top of the crowded GOP field, however, thanks to a brash antiestablishment style that proved irresistible to cable-television news outlets and magnetized middle-income voters. Even as aides and advisers urged caution, Trump was unpredictable and rarely scripted. Remarks that he made about Mexican immigrants (“They’re bringing drugs, they’re bringing crime. They’re rapists. And some, I assume, are good people”) alienated Latino voters. He repeatedly promised to build “a big, beautiful” border wall and to force Mexico to pay for it. He called for a ban on Muslim immigration. He employed unscripted humour, telling one rally, “We’re gonna win, win, win! And we’re gonna make America great again!” “Make America Great Again” became the oft-repeated slogan of Trump’s campaign.
Trump’s use of personal invective was, at times, devastating. The “laid-back” Bush had no effective comeback for Trump’s accusation that he was “low energy,” and he was among the early primary dropouts. Trump’s assaults on Sen. Marco Rubio (“Little Marco”) and Sen. Ted Cruz (“Lyin’ Ted”) were equally telling. Even when he outraged many observers by insulting rival Carly Fiorina’s physical appearance, Trump refused to apologize.
Cruz won Iowa, the first caucus state, but Trump followed up with victories in New Hampshire and across the South, including South Carolina, where evangelical Christians were numerous. Cruz won several additional states, mostly lower-turnout caucus battles. Trump won Florida, Rubio’s home state, and Cruz withdrew in early May, effectively ceding the nomination to Trump. His abrasive tactics, however, helped to build a solid core of “Never Trumpers” among the GOP establishment, including officials from the presidential administrations of both George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush and large donors to their campaigns. Additionally, Trump’s constant ridicule of national news media (whom he called “among the most dishonest people that I’ve ever met”) was met with unprecedented negative news stories and press opposition.
In Democratic primaries Sanders also rode antiestablishment sentiment, leading to grassroots victories in 23 states and 43 percent of the Democratic primary vote. Sanders’s success with progressive voters forced Clinton to adopt several new policy positions, including support for an escalated minimum wage, opposition to the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal, and advocacy of free public university tuition for middle-class students. Clinton’s ultimate success was guaranteed by Democratic Party rules that allocated some 15 percent of convention delegates to be “superdelegates” (prominent members of the party, members of the Democratic National Committee [DNC], and major elected officeholders), who were not chosen through the primary and caucus process and who overwhelmingly backed Clinton. Sanders conceded the nomination in early July, largely unifying party support behind Clinton. Later that month the DNC, officially neutral in the primary, was rocked by the release of nearly 20,000 hacked e-mails by WikiLeaks, a shadowy whistle-blowing “media organization.” The e-mails showed DNC officials tilting toward Clinton and ridiculing Sanders’s campaign. The scandal forced the resignation of the DNC chairwoman, Debbie Wasserman Schultz, and three top aides.
