United States presidential election of 1884,  American presidential election held on Nov. 4, 1884, in which Democrat Grover Cleveland defeated Republican James G. Blaine. The election was marked by bitter mudslinging and scandalous accusations that overshadowed substantive issues such as civil service reform.
The nominating conventions for both parties were held in Chicago (the Republican convention was in early June, and the Democratic convention was held a month later). In a third successive bid for the Republican presidential nomination, Blaine won on the fourth ballot, defeating the incumbent Republican president, Chester A. Arthur, who had succeeded to the presidency upon the death in 1881 of James A. Garfield. Illinois Sen. John A. Logan was chosen as his running mate uncontested. The Democratic convention turned to Grover Cleveland, the governor of New York, whose reputation contrasted sharply with that of Blaine, whose financial impropriety prompted the Republican Mugwump faction to turn away from their party. Cleveland won the Democratic nomination with ease, and the party chose as his running mate Thomas A. Hendricks, former governor of Indiana.
The candidates’ campaign tactics were decidedly different, with Blaine undertaking an extensive tour of the country and Cleveland making very few public appearances. Key to both campaigns was the issue of the tariff. Republicans, who relied on support from big businesses and were in favour of tariffs, clashed with Democrats, who believed tariff reform would threaten the welfare of farmers. The tariff issue, however, was soon preempted by vicious mudslinging from both sides. During the campaign Cleveland’s image as the clean alternative to the supposedly sullied Blaine suffered serious damage when Republicans charged that the Democratic candidate had fathered a child out of wedlock some 10 years earlier. As Republicans joyously chortled, "Ma, ma, where’s my pa?," Cleveland remained undaunted, and he instructed Democratic leaders to "tell the truth." The truth, as Cleveland admitted, was that he had had an affair with the child’s mother, Maria Halpin, and had agreed to provide financial support when she named him as the father, though he was uncertain whether the child was really his. Meanwhile, Democrats, trying to contrast Cleveland’s reputation with Blaine’s, chanted, "Blaine, Blaine, James G. Blaine, the continental liar from the state of Maine!" Late in the campaign, Blaine experienced an embarrassment of his own when a supporter at a rally in New York City described the Democrats as the party of "rum, Romanism, and rebellion"—a swipe at the city’s Irish Catholics, many of whom Blaine hoped to lure into his camp. Although Blaine was present when the fateful words were spoken, he did nothing to dissociate himself from the remark.
Cleveland eked out a narrow victory in the popular vote, and in the electoral college the contest came down to the result in New York state, which Blaine lost to Cleveland by fewer than 1,200 votes. By winning 219 electoral votes to Blaine’s 182, Cleveland became the first Democrat to win the presidency since 1856 and the first in the post-Civil War era.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1880. For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1888.
The results of the 1884 U.S. presidential election are provided in the table.
