United States presidential election of 1820,  American presidential election, held in 1820, in which the Democratic-Republican
      
        James Monroe
       won reelection in a campaign in which he effectively ran unopposed.
With few exceptions, such as the financial panic of 1819 and the ongoing dilemma over the status of slavery in new states and territories (which was temporarily resolved by the Missouri Compromise), James Monroe’s first term as president was characterized by a pronounced lack of conflict or disruption. In fact, the generally complacent and unified mood of the United States in the prosperous years following the War of 1812 became popularly known as the Era of Good Feelings. Accordingly, Monroe’s renomination in 1820 was considered so inevitable that it was not even formalized; after the congressional caucus of Democratic-Republicans failed to produce a quorum to put forward the nomination, it was simply assumed that Monroe and Vice Pres. 
          Daniel D. Tompkins
         would again constitute the party’s ticket. Meanwhile, the 
          Federalist Party
        , which had fared poorly in the previous election, continued its disintegration on the national level by declining to endorse a single presidential candidate, a development that all but assured Monroe’s reelection.
The predetermined nature of the election resulted in low voter turnout in the 15 states that chose presidential electors by popular vote. Unsurprisingly, Monroe carried all 24 states in the Union, though he was deprived of a unanimous victory in the electoral college by an elector from New Hampshire, who cast a lone dissenting vote for Secretary of State 
          John Quincy Adams
        . On the vice presidential side of the ticket, Tompkins faced greater opposition among electors but still collected 218 of the 232 electoral votes. While the Federalists managed victories in scattered local campaigns, especially in New England, their absence from the national stage hastened the party’s demise. Perhaps emblematic of the party’s anemic condition was the fact that the former Federalist president 
          John Adams
        , serving as an elector from Massachusetts,  voted for Monroe.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1816.
         For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1824.
The results of the 1820 presidential election are provided in the table.
