United States presidential election of 1924,  American presidential election held on November 4, 1924, in which Republican Calvin Coolidge defeated Democrat John W. Davis. Running as the Progressive Party candidate, Robert M. La Follette captured some one-sixth of the popular vote.
Upon the unexpected death of Pres. Warren G. Harding in 1923, Coolidge ascended to the presidency. He had inherited an administration mired in scandal, including the Teapot Dome Scandal, in which federal oil reserves had been secretly leased by the secretary of the interior. Cautiously, quietly, and skillfully, Coolidge rooted out the perpetrators and restored integrity to the executive branch, convincing the American people that the presidency was once again in the hands of someone they could trust. As such, in June, when the Republican convention met in Cleveland, Ohio, Coolidge was easily nominated as the Republican candidate for the election of 1924, while La Follette finished a distant second. Governor Frank Lowden of Illinois was nominated as Coolidge’s running mate, but he refused to accept; the vice presidential slot eventually went to the World War I general Charles G. Dawes. The Republican platform focused on the continuation of Coolidge’s strong record in boosting the economy and maintaining honesty in government.
The Democrats had made impressive gains in the 1922 Congressional midterm elections, and they hoped that their success would extend to the presidency in light of the Harding administration’s scandals. However, a persistent rift between rural and urban Democrats would prevent the party from gaining the momentum it needed. Rural Democrats supported William Gibbs McAdoo, a progressive who had been Pres. Woodrow Wilson’s secretary of the treasury and was Wilson’s son-in-law. Among McAdoo’s supporters were those associated with the Ku Klux Klan (KKK); on the issue of whether the KKK’s activities should be censured, McAdoo himself remained neutral. Urban Democrats supported New York Gov. Alfred E. Smith, who was backed by states with big electoral votes. At the Democratic convention, which opened at the end of June in New York City, a deadlock developed in the balloting. Neither candidate was able to secure the two-thirds majority necessary to earn the nomination, partly because of Catholic and Protestant tension. After two weeks of bickering, McAdoo and Smith dropped out of the race, and John W. Davis was nominated on the 103rd ballot. The vice presidential contest was much easier, with Charles W. Bryan, brother of William Jennings Bryan and governor of Nebraska, nominated on the first ballot. The Democratic platform condemned child labour and demanded prosecution of monopolies and federal aid for education. There was a vote on whether the KKK should be denounced by name in the platform, though this vote narrowly failed.
In July the Progressive Party, made up of forces dissatisfied with the conservative attitudes and programs of the Democrats and Republicans, held a convention of its own. The Progressive Party included liberals, agrarians, Republican progressives, socialists, and labour representatives. It chose as its presidential candidate Sen. Robert M. La Follette of Wisconsin, who in 1911 had organized what became an independent party formally called the Progressive but generally known as the Bull Moose Party. The 1924 Progressives pledged a “housecleaning” of executive departments, public control of natural resources, public ownership of railways, and tax reduction.
The 1924 campaign was notable for its use of radio broadcasting of the political conventions and of party advertisements. The rising art of photojournalism was also employed to record campaign actions. Coolidge did not travel much during his campaign and gave few speeches. Despite this, his rivals had little chance against him. Davis and Bryan failed to rally enough support within their divided party, and the Progressive Party suffered from lack of press coverage and funds. Coolidge won 54 percent of the popular vote (to Davis’s 29 percent and La Follette’s 17 percent), and he received more electoral votes, 382, than the other two candidates combined—136 for Davis, and just 13 for La Follette.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1920. For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1928.
The results of the 1924 U.S. presidential election are provided in the table.
