United States presidential election of 1796,  American presidential election held in 1796, in which Federalist John Adams defeated Democratic-Republican Thomas Jefferson.
The election of 1796 marked the emergence of the political party system in the United States. In the previous elections of 1789 and 1792, George Washington won unanimous support with no party affiliation, but over the course of his presidency a strong political divide had formed around the fiscal policy of Alexander Hamilton. Hamilton and others who favoured a loose interpretation of the Constitution and a strong central government formed the Federalist Party in 1791. Their opponents, favouring a strict interpretation of the Constitution and states’ rights, rallied around Thomas Jefferson. Though Jefferson maintained that the party system was unfavourable, he formed his own party, later to become known as the Democratic-Republican party.
Political issues in the 1790s began to be viewed along these party lines, and the rift between the Federalists and the Democratic-Republicans was furthered by foreign policy disputes. In 1796, though there was not yet a clear procedure for selecting partisan candidates, informal and secretive caucuses were held for the parties’ congressional delegations to choose presidential and vice presidential nominees. The Democratic-Republicans chose Jefferson, and the Federalists nominated Vice Pres. John Adams. Neither party was able to decide on a vice presidential candidate. At the time, however, the Constitution—not having anticipated the rise of the party system—stated that the candidate with the second highest total of votes would become vice president.
Though unfamiliarity with contested presidential elections and the indirectness of the electoral system led to low public interest, the election was closely fought—in part because of the rapidly forming party divide. The result was a narrow victory for Adams, who carried 71 electoral votes to Jefferson’s 68. Adams swept the northeast, while Jefferson won much of the south and west. Under the original electoral system devised under the Constitution (not changed until the Twelfth Amendment in 1804), Jefferson became Adams’s vice president—a situation that, owing to their conflicting political parties, proved difficult for the Adams administration.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1792. For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1800.
The results of the 1796 U.S. presidential election are provided in the table.
