United States presidential election of 1888,  American presidential election held on Nov. 6, 1888, in which Republican Benjamin Harrison defeated Democratic incumbent Grover Cleveland, winning in the electoral college 233–168 despite losing the popular vote. It was the second time in American history (1876 being the first) that a presidential candidate had won a majority of the electoral vote while losing the popular vote—a circumstance that would not happen again until the election of 2000.
The defining issue of the 1888 presidential campaign was effectively set by Grover Cleveland in his State of the Union address the previous year. Atypically, he devoted the entire speech to one issue: tariff reform. Cleveland advocated strongly for a reduction in the protective tariff, which compelled manufacturers to charge consumers more to make up the cost of importing materials. This position stood in stark contrast to the Republican protectionist position, which called for the tariff to be increased, thereby driving up the cost of imported goods and pushing consumers toward domestically produced ones.
At the Democratic convention in June, Cleveland was nominated for another term with Ohio Sen. Allen G. Thurman filling the vice presidential slot on the ticket. (Thomas A. Hendricks, Cleveland’s first vice president, had died during the first year of his term, and the Constitution at the time did not allow for a replacement.) Later that month, the Republicans held their convention, initially nominating James G. Blaine, who had served as secretary of state under James Garfield and had run against Cleveland in 1884. When Blaine declined, several other contenders emerged, among them New York railroad maven Chauncey Depew and Ohio Sen. John Sherman. However, Depew dropped out at the behest of New York Republican boss Thomas C. Platt, who preferred Benjamin Harrison, a Civil War brigadier general and grandson of William Henry Harrison, ninth president of the United States. The added weight of Blaine’s endorsement sealed Harrison’s nomination. New York banker Levi Morton was nominated as his running mate. Several smaller parties, including the Prohibition Party and the suffragist Equal Rights Party, also put forth candidates.
Keeping with tradition, neither presidential candidate actively campaigned for the presidency. (Harrison, however, did accept delegations at his Indianapolis home.) The task of generating support fell to a range of surrogates, of which the Republicans could afford far more because of aggressive fundraising. Morton, the vice presidential candidate, toured widely, despite his advanced age and declining health. The red kerchief he constantly used to wipe his brow became a symbol of the campaign; supporters waved similar kerchiefs at his rallies. Blaine and Sherman continued to rouse anti-free-trade sentiment, which was further inflamed by a Republican who, posing as a British immigrant, solicited direction on whom to vote for from the British ambassador. The ambassador’s reply, which expressed the British government’s preference for Cleveland, was published and used as evidence of Cleveland’s free-trade sympathies. (The United Kingdom strongly advocated free trade.) The Democrats in turn published a letter from the Republican National Committee that exhorted the use of “floaters,” or paid nonresident voters, in Indiana; the Republicans decried it as a fraud. (Despite their denials, however, the Republicans did in fact deploy hordes of paid “floaters” in Indiana, swinging that state, which had gone to Cleveland in the previous election, in favour of Harrison.)
Come election day, Cleveland garnered more than 100,000 more votes than Harrison but ultimately lost the election in the electoral college. In addition to capturing Indiana, Harrison also prevailed in New York and Ohio, the home states of Cleveland and Thurman, respectively, and fringe parties helped to siphon votes from Cleveland in other states. Thus, when the electoral votes were tallied, Harrison won comfortably, with 233 electoral votes to Cleveland’s 168. Four years later, Cleveland would defeat Harrison to become the first president to serve nonconsecutive terms in office.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1884. For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1892.
The results of the 1888 U.S. presidential election are provided in the table.
