Francis Fukuyama,  (born October 27, 1952, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.), American writer and political theorist, perhaps best known for his belief that the triumph of liberal democracy at the end of the Cold War marked the last ideological stage in the progression of human history.
Fukuyama studied classics at Cornell University, Ithaca, New York. (B.A., 1974), and political science at Harvard University (Ph.D., 1981). In 1979 he began a long-term association with the research organization RAND Corporation, in Santa Monica, California, and Washington, D.C. He later helped shape foreign policy for the U.S. Department of State (1981–82), specializing in Middle Eastern affairs and serving as a delegate to an Egyptian-Israeli conference on Palestinian autonomy. In 1987 he coedited The Soviet Union and the Third World: The Last Three Decades, and two years later he rejoined the State Department to focus on European political and military issues. He held a chair as professor at George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia, from 1996 to 2001.
Fukuyama’s first major work, The End of History and the Last Man (1992), earned international acclaim and was widely read by both the mainstream public and academics. His thesis—introduced as a magazine article in 1989, when communism in eastern Europe was collapsing—posited that Western-style liberal democracy not only was the victor of the Cold War but marked the last ideological stage in the long march of history. He traced parallel tracks with his follow-up books: Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity (1995), which was popular in the business market; and The Great Disruption: Human Nature and the Reconstitution of Social Order (1999), a conservative look at American society in the second half of the 20th century. After the September 11 attacks in 2001, critics of his thesis argued that Islamic fundamentalism threatened the hegemony of the West. Fukuyama dismissed them, however, by arguing that the attacks were part of “a series of rearguard actions” against what he believed was the prevailing political philosophy of the new globalism.
In 2001 Fukuyama became a professor at the School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University, Washington. Shortly thereafter he published Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the Biotechnology Revolution (2002), which examines the potential role biotechnology could play in the course of human development. The work reveals the dangers of preselecting human traits, extending average life spans, and an overreliance on mood-altering drugs. As a member of the President’s Council on Bioethics (2001–05), Fukuyama argued for tight federal regulation of genetic engineering. He later wrote State-Building: Governance and the World Order in the 21st Century (2004), in which he discussed how fledgling democratic nations could be made to succeed.
Although long considered a major figure in neoconservatism, Fukuyama later distanced himself from that political movement. He also became an opponent of the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq, a war he had initially supported (see Iraq War). In America at the Crossroads: Democracy, Power, and the Neoconservative Legacy (2006), he criticized neoconservatives and Republican Pres. George W. Bush and his administration’s policies after the September 11 attacks. In the 2008 presidential election he supported the Democratic candidate—and eventual winner—Barack Obama. Fukuyama claimed that the world was experiencing a “democratic recession,” especially after the election of Republican Donald Trump as U.S. president and the United Kingdom’s decision to withdraw from the EU (“Brexit”), both of which occurred in 2016. The rise of identity politics was the topic of Identity: The Demand for Dignity and the Politics of Resentment (2018).
In 2005 Fukuyama founded the magazine The American Interest, which sought “to explain America to the world, and the world to Americans.” Five years later he became a fellow at Stanford University’s Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies. Fukuyama became director of the institute’s Center on Democracy, Development, and the Rule of Law in 2015.
