Serviceberry,  (genus Amelanchier), also known as shadbush or juneberry,  genus of some 20 species of flowering shrubs and small trees of the rose family (Rosaceae). Most species are North American; exceptions include the snowy mespilus (Amelanchier ovalis), which ranges over Europe, and the Asian serviceberry, or Korean juneberry (A. asiatica), which is a small tree native to East Asia. The name shadbush refers to the tendency of certain species to produce their profuse small blossoms when American shad (Alosa sapidissima) swim upriver to spawn in early spring. Several species of serviceberries have entered cultivation as ornamental plants, and some species bear fruit that is used in making jellies.
Serviceberries are deciduous plants that bear simple, alternately arranged leaves. The flowers are usually white with five petals; terminal clusters can contain up to 20 flowers. The fruits are reddish to purple-black pomes resembling tiny apples and are eaten by birds and other wildlife.
The popular ornamental species of Amelanchier include the juneberry, or Saskatoon serviceberry (A. alnifolia), a shrub that grows up to about 3 metres (10 feet); the Canadian, or shadblow, serviceberry (A. canadensis), which reaches up to about 8 metres (26 feet); and the Allegheny serviceberry (A. laevis), which is similar to A. canadensis but is taller and has more nodding flower clusters. The downy serviceberry (A. arborea) is also similar to A. canadensis but is more vigorous and has larger hanging flower clusters. The apple serviceberry (Amelanchier ×grandiflora), a natural hybrid of A. arborea and A. laevis, grows up to 9 metres (29.5 feet) and has larger individual blossoms, pinkish on some trees. Running serviceberry (A. spicata) is a spreading shrub about 1 metre (3.3 feet) tall that is useful in semiwild plantings and for stabilizing soil, especially on embankments. Given that the wild types of Amelanchier appear to hybridize freely, the taxonomy of the genus is somewhat contentious.
