baobab,  (genus Adansonia),  genus of nine species of deciduous trees of the hibiscus, or mallow, family (Malvaceae). Six of the species (Adansonia grandidieri, A. madagascariensis, A. perrieri, A. rubrostipa, A. suarezensis, and A. za) are endemic to Madagascar, two (A. digitata and A. kilima) are native to mainland Africa and the Arabian Peninsula, and one (A. gregorii) is native to northwestern Australia. They have unusual barrel-like trunks and are known for their extraordinary longevity and ethnobotanical importance. Given their peculiar shape, an Arabian legend has it that “the devil plucked up the baobab, thrust its branches into the earth, and left its roots in the air.”
The African baobab (A. digitata) boasts the oldest known angiosperm tree: carbon-14 dating places the age of a specimen in Namibia at about 1,275 years. Known as the “Tree of Life,” the species is found throughout the drier regions of Africa and features a water-storing trunk that may reach a diameter of 9 metres (30 feet) and a height of 18 metres (59 feet). Older individuals often have huge hollow trunks that are formed by the fusion of multiple stems over time. The tree’s unique pendulous flowers are pollinated by bats and bush babies. Its young leaves are edible, and the large gourdlike woody fruit contains a tasty mucilaginous pulp from which a refreshing drink can be made. Since 2005, 9 of the 13 oldest African baobab specimens and 5 of the 6 largest trees have died or suffered the collapse and death of their largest or oldest stems, a statistically unlikely phenomenon that scientists suggested may have been caused by the effects of climate change.
In 2012 morphological and phylogenetic data revealed A. kilima to be a species distinct from A. digitata. Although superficially similar to the African baobab, it favours mountain habitats in mainland Africa and features distinct floral and pollen characteristics, as well as fewer chromosomes.
The six Madagascan baobab species feature compact crowns and gray-brown to red trunks that taper from top to bottom or are bottle-shaped to cylindrical. The flowers range from red to yellow to white and have five petals. Some species are pollinated by bats and lemurs, while others rely on hawk moths. Given the threats of habitat loss and their slow generation time, three species (A. grandidieri, A. perrieri, and A. suarezensis) are listed as endangered on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, including the iconic baobabs of the famous Avenue of the Baobabs (A. grandidieri) in the Menabe region. The remaining three species (A. madagascariensis, A. rubrostipa, and A. za) are considered to be “near threatened.”
The single Australian baobab species, A. gregorii, called boab, or bottle tree, is found throughout the Kimberley region of Western Australia. Reaching heights of about 12 metres (39 feet), the tree features the characteristically swollen trunk of the genus and bears compound leaves that are completely shed during drought periods. The white flowers are large, perfumed, and pollinated by hawk moths. Although that species was once presumed to be a remnant left behind when the Gondwana landmass broke apart 180 million years ago, the fact that the boab has not evolved to be markedly different from other baobabs suggests a much younger age for the species and that the boab originally came to Australia by long-distance seed dispersal from Africa.
All baobab species are extensively used by local peoples. Many species have edible leaves and fruits and are important for a number of herbal remedies. A strong fibre from the bark is used for rope and cloth in many places, and the trees supply raw materials for hunting and fishing tools. Naturally hollow or excavated trunks often serve as water reserves or temporary shelters and have even been used as prisons, burial sites, and stables. The trees are culturally and religiously important in many areas.
