Cinchona,  (genus Cinchona),  genus of about 23 species of plants, mostly trees, in the madder family (Rubiaceae), native to the Andes of South America. The bark of some species contains quinine and is useful against malaria. During the 300 years between its introduction into Western medicine and its medical use during World War I, quinine from cinchona was the only effective remedy for malaria.
Cinchona trees are evergreen with simple, oppositely arranged leaves. The tubular flowers are small and usually creamy white or rose in colour. The flowers are borne in terminal clusters, and the petals have characteristically hairy margins. The fruit is a small capsule.
Malaria was likely unknown in the New World before the arrival of Europeans, but cinchona was recognized fairly quickly as an effective treatment for the disease. By 1650 shipments of cinchona bark were being regularly sent to Spain from its colonies. The skillful use of “Peruvian bark” by the English physician Thomas Sydenham (1624–89) helped to separate malaria from other fevers and served as one of the first practices of specific drug therapy.
For many years it was unclear which species were the best sources of effective bark, and exports were often adulterated with the bark of other trees. In 1820 the first quinine alkaloids were extracted and described, and it finally became possible to associate the various Cinchona species with their alkaloid concentrations. Within five years the extracted alkaloids had become standard treatment for malaria.
An explosion in demand for quinine among Europeans living in the tropics led Dutch and British naturalists to smuggle Cinchona seeds from South America to plantations in Asia in the 1850s and ’60s. There they conducted intensive research leading to new high-yield strains and improved processing methods. Four species of Cinchona were cultivated for many years, primarily in Java and also in India and Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) as sources of quinine and quinidine, which is used mainly for cardiac rhythmic disorders. and the lifesaving drugs became much more widely available.
