Cycadophyte,  any member of a diverse collection of mostly extinct primitive gymnospermous plants. They probably had their origins among the progymnosperms of the Devonian Period (416 to 359 million years ago), possibly among a primitive, long-extinct group of non-seed-bearing plants, the Aneurophytaceae, in which disposition of fertile structures and patterns of branching bear some resemblance to those of seed ferns.
Although some botanists prefer to restrict the term cycadophyte to the members of the division Cycadophyta, three groups of primitive seed plants are discussed here, of which the seed ferns (division Pteridospermophyta) and cycadeoids (division Cycadeoidophyta) are represented only by extinct forms. A third group, the order Cycadales (cycads), is today represented by 11 living genera and some 150 species.
A number of lines of seed-bearing gymnospermous plants are discernible among fossil plants of the late Paleozoic Era (542 to 251 million years ago) and early to middle Mesozoic Era (251 to 65.5 million years ago). Among them a rather loose assemblage of forms, referred to as seed ferns, or pteridosperms, is well represented. The Carboniferous Period (about 360 to 300 million years ago) especially has been called the “age of ferns” because of the abundance of fossilized fernlike leaves. In time, many of these “ferns” were recognized as seed plants, and it has been determined that seed ferns were a dominant vegetation in the late Paleozoic. Seed ferns generally are characterized as having been slender trees or, in some cases, woody, climbing vines, but generally with large, fernlike fronds.
Characteristic seed-fern foliage consisted of large compound leaves composed of second- and sometimes third-order branches. The latter bore fernlike leaflets, hence the name seed fern, although they are only remotely related to true ferns. Seed-fern stems generally possessed variable amounts of soft, loose wood and relatively large zones of cortex and pith; in this respect they resembled the stems of cycads and differed considerably from the stems of conifers, which have compact wood and relatively small zones of cortex and pith.
Reproductive organs of seed ferns were borne upon the foliage; single ovules and seeds were borne in place of pinnae, while male organs often occurred as compound pollen organs composed of partially or wholly united microsporangia. As in other gymnosperms, the ovule consisted of one megasporangium within a single integument. It is believed that, as the reproductive cycle progressed, the megasporangium, also called the nucellus, probably gave rise first to a quartet of megaspores. One of these then produced a large fleshy female gametophyte bearing several archegonia, each with a single egg. Following pollination and fertilization, the ovule developed into a seed with an embryo nested in the fleshy female gametophyte, which served as a food source during germination and seedling growth.
Although a few groups of pteridosperms persisted from the late Paleozoic Era well into the Mesozoic, the common cycadophytes of the latter ages were members of the Cycadeoidophyta (also known as Bennettitophyta). They are well represented in the later Mesozoic Era, well into the Cretaceous Period (about 145.5 to 65.5 million years ago), by members of the genus Cycadeoidea, which had rather squat, barrel-shaped, unbranched trunks and once-pinnate compound leaves. The stems were armoured with the persistent bases of leaves; internally there was a thick pith surrounded by a narrow zone of vascular tissue from which vascular strands extended directly into the leaf bases. The fossilized trunks of these plants display scattered strobili among leaf bases of the characteristic armour. Fossil cycadeoids are widespread but are especially abundant in the Black Hills region of South Dakota.
Earlier in the Mesozoic Era, cycadeoids of a more slender, branching form, exemplified by Williamsonia, were abundant. As in Cycadeoidea, the fronds were single pinnate compound leaves.
The feature that set the cycadeoids apart from other cycadophytes was the compound strobili, which some, but not all, possessed. These strobili were composed of both male and female sporophylls, in some cases subtended by a system of bracts. Although often described as flowerlike and indeed sometimes depicted as having a floral, rosette form, cycadeoid “flowers,” unlike true flowers (found in the angiosperms), were composed of sporophylls bearing “naked” (i.e., gymnospermous) ovules. They are not now considered to have given rise to any group of the true angiospermous flowering plants.
Although cycadeoids flourished for millions of years, and must therefore be considered as a highly successful line of plants, they eventually became extinct in the Cretaceous Period.
The living cycads are for the most part palmlike, cone-bearing plants, generally of low stature. Although few genera, species, and individuals exist, they are extremely important plants in terms of the information that can be gained from studying them. Their reproduction is very primitive in that they rely on flagellated, motile male gametes (spermatozoids), a feature linking them with other plants fertilized by motile flagellated sperm (zooidogamous), such as ferns, club mosses, and other vascular cryptogams. Without knowledge of fertilization in the cycads and Ginkgo, it is highly unlikely that scientists would have more than remote theories as to the reproductive modes of seed ferns and other extinct groups of seed plants. Research on cycad reproduction is also providing information on the early origins of insect pollination, long thought to have evolved along with the relatively more recent angiosperms, or flowering plants.
Seed-fern fossils are found in both the Northern and Southern hemispheres, but many more have been described from Europe and North America than from other regions, primarily because many of the paleobotanical studies are concentrated there. Pteridosperms have been identified in Australia and India in recent years. In both hemispheres, seed ferns are common in coal measures, from which it may be inferred that, ecologically, they were plants of warm humid climates.
Abundant fossils of cycadeoids and cycads have been discovered and described from the Mesozoic Era. The oldest remains of undisputed cycads date from the Triassic Period, about 250 to 200 million years ago (e.g., Leptocycas, Antarcticycas), but some problematic forms (e.g., Primocycas, Archaeocycas) are of the Paleozoic Era. Most Mesozoic cycads resembled extant genera (e.g., Cycadites, Pseudocycas, Cycadospadix), and some are referred to present genera (e.g., Macrozamia zamoides, Zamia coloradensis). Fossil forms have been found in many places where they are now extinct (for example, Greenland, Antarctica, Alaska, Argentina, France, Austria), testifying to much milder climates in now temperate and even subarctic regions.
Ten genera of cycads are widely recognized. There are three endemic Australian genera—Macrozamia (14 species), Lepidozamia (two species), and Bowenia (two species); four American and Caribbean genera—Microcycas (one species), Zamia (about 35 species), and Ceratozamia and Dioon (10 species each); and two African genera—Encephalartos (about 40 species) and Stangeria (one species). The genus Cycas, with about 24 species, is the most wide-ranging, extending from eastern Australia westward across the Pacific and Indian oceans to Madagascar and the east coast of South Africa. In addition to the above well-known genera, a collection of cycad specimens from northwestern Colombia included a new genus now described under the name Chigua. Chigua reveals features hitherto undescribed in any American genus or species, for the specimens, which in most respects resemble Zamia, are unique in having leaflets with midribs and lateral veins, a characteristic formerly known only in Stangeria.
Cycads are plants of subtropical habitats, where they occupy a variety of ecological situations ranging from rain forests, to mesophytic savannas, to near-desert scrublands. Now nowhere abundant in nature, wild populations of cycads in many regions are endangered. For example, Australian cycads have been moved from the noxious weeds list (because of certain toxic properties dangerous to cattle) to a protected status.
