Cypress,  any of 12 species of ornamental and timber evergreen conifers constituting the genus Cupressus of the family Cupressaceae, distributed throughout warm-temperate and subtropical regions of Asia, Europe, and North America. Many resinous, aromatic evergreen trees called cypress belong to other genera of the same family, especially species of false cypress and cypress pine. The name “cypress” is occasionally used for some species of fustic and for bald cypress; in eastern Canada it often denotes jack pine.
Cypress trees are often 25 metres (80 feet) tall and are pyramidal in shape, especially when young. Some species develop flattened, spreading heads at maturity, and others are shrubs less than 6 metres tall. Their bark is sometimes smooth, but in most species it separates into thin plates or strips that may be shed from the tree. The leaves are spreading and awl-shaped on young shoots but are characteristically small, scalelike, and appressed to the branch on older branchlets. They are usually aromatic, with glandular pits on the outer surface, and cover the stem in opposite pairs, giving the branchlet a four-sided appearance.
Tiny male and female reproductive structures (cones) are borne on the same tree, generally at the tips of different branches. The cones are small, usually spherical, with three to six pairs of woody or leathery scales that are attached to the cone axis by the back of the scale, and have a small projection on the outer surface. Fertile scales bear from 6 to more than 100 winged seeds each, depending on the species; the seeds ripen at the end of the second season after fertilization, but they may be retained for several more years until the cone breaks open.
Cypresses are of limited importance as timber trees; the most useful wood is obtained from the Bhutan, Italian, and Monterey cypresses (C. torulosa, C. sempervirens, and C. macrocarpa, respectively). Their wood is light, moderately hard, and very durable in contact with the soil but is usually knotty and has an odour sometimes considered offensive. These three trees, together with the Arizona (C. arizonica and C. glabra), Gowen (C. goveniana), Kashmir (C. cashmeriana), Mexican (C. lusitanica), mourning (C. funebris), and Sargent (C. sargentii) cypresses, are cultivated as ornamentals for their foliage and graceful habit, especially when young. Mourning and Italian cypresses have been used by some cultures as symbols of death and immortality. The hybrid or Leyland cypress (Cupressocyparis leylandii) is an ornamental windbreak developed by crossing the Monterey cypress with the yellow cypress (Chamaecyparis nootkatensis).
Most cypresses do not withstand severe frost. They have few insect pests but are susceptible to crown gall, stem canker, and root rot.
