Fabales,  order of dicotyledonous flowering plants in the Rosid I group among the core eudicots. The order comprises 4 families (Fabaceae, Polygalaceae, Quillajaceae, and Surianaceae), 754 genera, and more than 20,000 species. However, more than 95 percent of the genera and species belong to Fabaceae, the legume family. Fabaceae is the third largest family of angiosperms, exceeded only by Asteraceae (aster or sunflower family) and Orchidaceae (orchid family). Along with Poaceae (the grass family), Fabaceae is the most important plant family in the production of food for humans and livestock, as well as in the production of industrial products.
Because they develop bacteria-harbouring root nodules that maintain the nitrogen balance in the soil, which is necessary for plant growth, the legumes are also an essential element in nature and in agriculture. Legumes are perhaps best known by their more common cultivated names, such as peas, beans, soybeans, peanuts (groundnuts), alfalfa (lucerne), and clover. The characteristic fruit of most legumes is a pod (legume) consisting, in essence, of an ovary that is a tightly folded leaf, as in a pea pod. The pod normally splits into two halves when mature.
Fabaceae, with about 730 genera and nearly 20,000 species, occurs in all terrestrial habitats occupied by plants, although the greatest number of species is in the tropics, where the group probably originated. There are also many legumes in the temperate plains, woodlands, and deserts. A few succeed as weeds in farming, industrial, and urban environments. They are less common in the northern boreal forests  and are rare in aquatic habitats. Beyond their natural occurrence, many legumes—e.g., Glycine max (soybeans) and Phaseolus (several species of beans)—are cultivated every year on a single vast area of land. Many species are seeded as pasture components; others are planted for soil improvement or to prevent erosion; woody species are grown for firewood and timber in developing countries; and dozens of species are popular ornamentals. Thus, legumes are cosmopolitan, not only in the wild but also in the human environment that has replaced the wilderness throughout much of the world.
Polygalaceae, the milkwort family, is the second largest family in the order, with about 21 genera and some 1,000 species. Its members are distributed worldwide, except for the Arctic and New Zealand. The genus Polygala contains about a third of the species in the family.
Surianaceae, with five genera and eight species, is restricted to Australia (Cadellia, Guilfoylia, and Stylobasium), Mexico (Recchia), and pantropical littoral areas (Suriana). Quillajaceae, with one genus (Quillaja) and three species, is restricted to temperate South America.
Members of Fabaceae include trees, herbaceous or woody vines, and perennial or annual herbs. The leaves are usually compound, and in some the leaflets are secondarily compound. The simple leaves of some are presumably reduced from the compound forms. The most striking of these modified leaf forms are the several hundred species of Australian  Acacia, in which the apparently simple leaf represents the flattened and modified axis of a compound leaf. Stipules, a pair of appendages subtending the leaf petiole, are usually present.
The flowers may be solitary or bunched in leaf axils. The inflorescences, when present, are of various kinds, simple or branched in diverse ways. The flowers are usually bisexual, but unisexual flowers occur sporadically throughout the family. Some legumes produce two kinds of flowers, commonly on the same plant. The typical kind have conspicuous petals that open so that cross-pollination (in some, an obligatory mechanism of propagation) is possible (chasmogamous); in others all parts are reduced and the petals do not open, thus enforcing self-pollination (cleistogamous). In the chasmogamous flowers, the sepals are most commonly partly fused, and the five petals alternate in position with the sepals. There are commonly 10 stamens, but there may be fewer or more. The stamens may remain free or they may be fused into a single tubular structure (monadelphous) or into a group of nine united stamens with a free stamen above this (diadelphous).
Most of these floral features, however, also can be found in other plant families. It is the pistil, or gynoecium, of Fabales that is unique. The single carpel develops into a fruit (the pod, or legume) that generally splits open (dehisces) along one or both edges (sutures) at maturity, releasing the seeds that have developed from the ovules. This basic legume type is idealized in a pea or bean pod, which bears two rows of marginally placed ovules along the upper suture. But evolution within the family has variously modified many legume fruits, and they bear but scant resemblance to that of a bean or pea. Some retain the form of the basic type but do not split open when ripe (indehiscent), as with Robinia (locusts) and Cercis (redbud). In many Fabaceae—for instance, Melilotus (sweet clover)—the fruit has been reduced to a single-seeded indehiscent structure that resembles a tiny nutlet. In others, it is several-seeded and indehiscent but is divided transversely into single-seeded segments that break apart at maturity (e.g., Desmodium). In another variant, the fruit coat becomes fleshy and plumlike as in the tropical Andira inermis (angelin tree). There are species in which the fruit is flattened and winged, facilitating wind transport. A few legumes have fruits that are produced or that mature underground; the peanut (Arachis hypogaea) is the best-known example. The peanut flower is actually produced above ground but assumes a position close to the soil surface as it ages. The ovary elongates and develops as a subterranean pod. All of these and other modifications are derivative and can be traced back to the basic, dehiscent pod of the pea or bean.
Seeds within the legumes are also variable, ranging from the size of a pinhead to that of a baseball. Legume seeds are sometimes quite colourful; the Abrus precatorius (jequirity bean) and Ormosia species, for example, produce striking black and red seeds. These seeds have been used as currency by native peoples and in the production of beads and handbags, especially in the more tropical regions. They may be quite poisonous if eaten, however.
Polygalaceae contains trees, shrubs, and even parasitic herbs that lack green chlorophyll. Leaves are usually spirally arranged, simple, and without toothed margins. The flowers are bisexual, usually strongly irregular in shape, and superficially similar to legume flowers of Fabaceae. Flowers are arranged in spikes, racemes, or panicles. Two of the five sepals are often petaloid. The three or five petals are often fused to the anthers to form a tube, and the stamens often open by terminal slits. Fruits that develop are quite variable in structure, including capsules, nuts, winged samaras, and fleshy drupes. Many seeds contain an aril.
Members of Surianaceae are trees or shrubs with simple, spirally arranged leaves. The flowers are bisexual and usually radially symmetric, with five sepals and petals except in the unisexual and wind-pollinated Stylobasium, which lacks petals. The number of carpels varies from one to five. The fruits are berries, drupes, or nuts.
The three species of Quillaja, the only genus in Quillajaceae, are small, evergreen trees with bark containing considerable quantities of saponins. Leaves are spirally arranged and toothed. The terminal inflorescence contains five parted flowers usually with a well-developed nectary inserted into the hypanthium (floral cup). The flowers are rather remarkable looking with the stamens opposite the sepals borne on the outer edge of the hypanthium disk and the stamens opposite the petals borne near the base of the ovary. The five carpels of the ovary mature into follicles splitting along one side to release winged seeds.
