Ficus,  (genus Ficus),  genus of about 900 species of trees, shrubs, and vines in the family Moraceae, many of which are commonly known as figs. Native primarily to tropical areas of East Asia, they are distributed throughout the world’s tropics. Many are tall forest trees that are buttressed by great spreading roots; others are planted as ornamentals.
Most Ficus species are evergreen; there are a few deciduous members in nontropical areas. The leaves are usually simple and waxy, and most exude white or yellow latex when broken. Many species have aerial roots, and a number are epiphytic. The unusual fruit structure, known as a syconium, is hollow, enclosing an inflorescence with tiny male and female flowers lining the inside.
Members of the genus are characterized by a unique pollination syndrome. Each species is pollinated by and houses the young of a species-specific wasp (see fig wasp). This remarkable pollination system has a fundamental impact on tropical forest ecology. When the pollen-bearing wasp leaves a Ficus plant, the fruit crop ripens quickly, providing a rich feast that attracts a host of mammals and birds. Moreover, as a consequence of the wasp’s short adult lifetime (as little as two days), there are some trees both receiving and releasing fig wasps throughout the year. This pattern results in a steady supply of fruit, making Ficus fruits a critical resource for many animals during times of food shortage. If the plants were to be cut out of a forest or the fig wasps were to somehow be removed, there would almost certainly be a dramatic reduction in animal life, as is suggested by the lower population densities of fruit-eating mammals on small islands that lack Ficus species.
The common fig (Ficus carica) is cultivated for its pear-shaped edible fruits, which are really hollow fleshy receptacles (syconia) containing hundreds of male and female flowers.
Some species, including the New World F. obtusifolia and F. nymphaeifolia, are known as strangler figs. The seeds of strangler figs germinate on a host tree and grow around its trunk in a strangling latticework, eventually killing the host tree. One freestanding New World species, F. insipida, has the highest photosynthetic rate of any forest tree measured, supporting rapid growth and abundant fruiting. It can quickly colonize abandoned farm fields in large numbers, but, as the forest matures, most die as other plants take over.
The banyan (F. benghalensis) and some related species have aerial roots that become greatly enlarged and spread away from the main stem, acting as auxiliary trunks to support the massive crowns. The Bo tree, or pipal (F. religiosa), is sacred in India because of its association with the Buddha. Another notable Ficus species is the sycamore fig (F. sycomorus), which has mulberry-like leaves, hard wood, and edible fruit.
The India rubber plant (F. elastica), a large tree that was formerly an important source of rubber, is now cultivated as an indoor potted plant. The fiddle-leaf fig (F. lyrata), the weeping fig (F. benjamina), and some climbing species such as the climbing fig (F. pumila) are also popular ornamentals.
