Honeysuckle,  (genus Lonicera),  genus of about 180 species of ornamental shrubs and climbers of the family Caprifoliaceae. Honeysuckles are native to temperate zones of both hemispheres, but they also grow in the Himalayas, southern Asia, and North Africa; the majority of species are found in China. Honeysuckles flourish in any ordinary garden soil, and a number are cultivated for their attractive flowers.
Honeysuckle plants can be evergreen or deciduous, with simple leaves arranged oppositely along the stems. The winter leaf buds have distinctive scales. Most species have two-lipped fragrant flowers with a sweet nectar. The tubular flowers are commonly borne in pairs. The fruit is a red, orange, or black berry that is attractive to wildlife.
Perfoliate, or sweet, honeysuckle (Lonicera caprifolium) is native to Eurasia but has become established in North America. Its clustered night-blooming purple-white flowers are pollinated mostly by night-feeding hawk moths, because the flower tubes are too long for most other insects to reach the nectar. The fruit is a red-orange berry.
Another climbing species is the giant Burmese honeysuckle (L. hildebrandiana), with 15-cm (6-inch) deep green leaves, 17-cm (7-inch) yellow flowers, and green berries. The Japanese honeysuckle (L. japonica) of eastern Asia has become an invasive species in many areas by growing over other plants and shutting out light. It has fragrant yellowish white flowers and black berries. Trumpet honeysuckle (L. sempervirens) has oval, sometimes joined leaves and climbs high in forest trees. Its orange-scarlet spikes of 5-cm (2-inch) tubular five-lobed flowers and red berries are common throughout eastern North America.
Woodbine, or European honeysuckle (L. periclymenum), native to Eurasia, twines to 6 metres (20 feet). Its whorled many-flowered clusters of yellowish purple-tinged blooms are followed by red berries. Some of the garden varieties of woodbine are prized for their delicious fragrance.
Some of the more widespread shrub honeysuckles are Tartarian honeysuckle (L. tartarica), from southeastern Europe and Siberia, and four Chinese species—winter honeysuckle (L. fragrantissima), privet honeysuckle (L. pileata), box honeysuckle (L. nitida), and lilac-flowered honeysuckle (L. syringantha).
