Ipomoea,  genus of about 500 mostly warm-climate trees, shrubs, and twining and trailing herbaceous plants of the family Convolvulaceae. Several species are known as morning glories and are cultivated as ornamental plants for their attractive flowers. The sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas) is an important food crop.
 Members of the genus Ipomoea usually have simple leaves, the margins of which may be entire, lobed, or divided, depending on the species. The trumpet- or funnel-shaped flowers are commonly borne in the axils of the leaves and are variable in size and colour. The fruit is a capsule and usually contains 4–6 seeds.
Sweet potato (I. batatas), a perennial, forms roots as it trails along the ground. The edible roots are enlarged for food storage. Its leaves are oval to lobed, and the 5-cm (2-inch) flowers are pink to rose violet. It probably originated in tropical South America.
Jalap (I. purga), native to tropical Mexico, is an upright herb with solitary reddish flowers. Its apple-sized turnip-shaped roots are the source of an ancient purgative, still in use.
Common morning glory (I. purpurea), an annual vine that bears heart-shaped leaves and purple, pink, or white flowers about 7 cm (3 inches) across, has become a troublesome weed in parts of southeastern North America. It is cultivated in many places.
Heavenly blue morning glory (I. violacea)—a twining perennial vine, usually cultivated as a garden annual—bears clusters of blue to purplish, sometimes white, flowers, 12 cm (4.7 inches) across, among heart-shaped leaves. It is native to tropical America. This vine bears seeds containing the alkaloids d-lysergic and d-isolysergic acids (similar to LSD), and the seeds are traditionally used among Mexico’s Zapotec peoples for ceremonial and curative purposes.
One of the largest-flowering ipomoeas is the moonflower (tropical white morning glory; I. alba), a rampant perennial climber with 15-cm (6-inch) white, fragrant, night-blooming flowers. It contains a milky juice used for coagulating Castilla rubber.
Bush morning glory (I. leptophylla), with tuberous roots and erect branches, grows up to about 120 cm (47 inches) tall and bears 7.5-cm (3-inch) purple or pink flowers. It is native to central North America.
The morning glory tree (casahuate; I. arborescens) is one of several similar tropical American tree and shrub morning glories.
