jute, Hindi pat, also called allyott,  either of two species of Corchorus plants—C. capsularis, or white jute, and C. olitorius, including both tossa and daisee varieties—belonging to the  hibiscus, or mallow, family (Malvaceae), and their fibre. The latter is a bast fibre; i.e., it is obtained from the inner bast tissue of the bark of the plant’s stem. Jute fibre’s primary use is in fabrics for packaging a wide range of agricultural and industrial commodities that require bags, sacks, packs, and wrappings. Wherever bulky, strong fabrics and twines resistant to stretching are required, jute is widely used because of its low cost. Burlap is made from jute.
Jute has been grown in the Bengal area of India (and of present-day Bangladesh) from ancient times. The export of raw jute from the Indian subcontinent to the Western Hemisphere began in the 1790s. The fibre was used primarily for cordage manufacture until 1822, when commercial yarn manufacture began at Dundee, Scot., which soon became a centre for the industry. India’s own jute-processing industry began in 1855, Calcutta becoming the major centre. After India was partitioned (1947), much of the jute-producing land remained in East Pakistan (now Bangladesh), where new processing facilities were built. Besides the Indian subcontinent, jute is also grown in China and in Brazil. The largest importers of raw jute fibre are Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, Belgium, and France.
The jute plant, which probably originated on the Indian subcontinent, is an herbaceous annual that grows to an average of 10 to 12 feet (3 to 3.6 metres) in height, with a cylindrical stalk about as thick as a finger. The two species grown for jute fibre are similar and differ only in the shape of their seed pods, growth habit, and fibre characteristics. Most varieties grow best in well-drained, sandy loam and require warm, humid climates with an average monthly rainfall of at least 3 to 4 inches (7.5 to 10 cm) during the growing season. The plant’s light green leaves are 4 to 6 inches (10 to 15 cm) long, about 2 inches (5 cm) wide, have serrated edges, and taper to a point. The plant bears small yellow flowers.
The jute plant’s fibres lie beneath the bark and surround the woody central part of the stem. The fibre strands nearest the bark generally run the full length of the stem. A jute crop is usually harvested when the flowers have been shed but before the plants’ seedpods are fully mature. If jute is cut before then, the fibre is weak; if left until the seed is ripe, the fibre is strong but is coarser and lacks the characteristic lustre.
The fibres are held together by gummy materials; these must be softened, dissolved, and washed away to allow extraction of the fibres from the stem, a process accomplished by steeping the stems in water, or retting. After harvesting, the bundles of stems are placed in the water of pools or streams and are weighted down with stones or earth. They are kept submerged for 10–30 days, during which time bacterial action breaks down the gummy tissues surrounding the fibres. After retting is complete, the fibres are separated from the stalk by beating the root ends with a paddle to loosen them; the stems are then broken off near the root, and the fibre strands are jerked off the stem. The fibres are then washed, dried, sorted, graded, and baled in preparation for shipment to jute mills. In the latter, the fibres are softened by the addition of oil, water, and emulsifiers, after which they are converted into yarn. The latter process involves carding, drawing, roving, and spinning to separate the individual fibre filaments; arrange them in parallel order; blend them for uniformity of colour, strength, and quality; and twist them into strong yarns. Once the yarn has been spun, it can be woven, knitted, twisted, corded, sewn, or braided into finished products.
Jute is used in a wide variety of goods. Jute mats and prayer rugs are common in the East, as are jute-backed carpets worldwide. Jute’s single largest use, however, is in sacks and bags, those of finer quality being called burlap, or hessian. Burlap bags are used to ship and store grain, fruits and vegetables, flour, sugar, animal feeds, and other agricultural commodities. High-quality jute cloths are the principal fabrics used to provide backing for tufted carpets, as well as for hooked rugs (i.e., Oriental rugs). Jute fibres are also made into twines and rough cordage.
