Milkweed,  (genus Asclepias),  genus of about 140 species of herbaceous perennial flowering plants belonging to the dogbane family Apocynaceae (formerly in Asclepiadaceae). Milkweeds are found throughout North and South America, and several are cultivated as ornamentals. Many milkweed butterflies, including monarch butterflies, rely exclusively on milkweed plants as a food source for their larvae. These plants contain acrid milky juices that probably make the larvae and their subsequent stages distasteful to predators.
Most milkweeds have milky juice, flowers with five united petals, podlike fruits, and, usually, tufted seeds. Male and female parts of each flower are united in a single structure, and the flowers are typically borne in clusters. The pollen is characteristically massed in bundles called pollinia, pairs of which are linked by a yokelike bar of tissue contributed by the stigma of the pistil. Parts of the pollinia stick to visiting insect pollinators, which then carry them to other flowers to facilitate cross-pollination. This method of pollination is complex, but, when successful, the great numbers of pollen grains transferred result in the production of many seeds. The silky-haired seeds are drawn out of their pods by the wind and are carried off.
A number of milkweed species are grown horticulturally for their beauty or notable adaptations. Common milkweed (Asclepias syriaca), bloodflower (A. curassavica), and showy milkweed (A. speciosa) often are cultivated as ornamentals and to attract butterflies. The butterfly weed (A. tuberosa) of North America has bright orange flowers and is an important butterfly host plant. Urban and agricultural development has led to a decline in both wild milkweeds and the butterfly populations that depend on them, and the planting of milkweed species that are native to a given area is encouraged by conservationists.
The fluffy seed fibres of common milkweed and swamp milkweed (A. incarnata) are a source of milkweed floss.
