Nelumbonaceae,  the lotus-lily family of the order Proteales, consisting of two species of attractive aquatic plants. One of these species is the sacred lotus of the Orient (Nelumbo nucifera) and is found in tropical and subtropical Asia. The other species is the American lotus, or water chinquapin (N. lutea, or N. pentapetala), found in the eastern United States and southward to Colombia.
Some authorities consider the two species to constitute a separate order (Nelumbonales) because of important botanical characteristics that suggest a different evolutionary origin from the other water lilies. Unlike other water lilies, the plants of Nelumbonaceae have pores in the seed coat but lack latex-bearing tubes; there are also chromosomal differences. The family is further characterized by circular, centrally stalked, slightly hairy leaves, up to about 60 cm (2 feet) across, that are funnel- or cup-shaped. The leaves extend, in the Asian species, as much as 2 m (6.5 feet) above the water instead of floating on it. The large, attractive flowers also stand high above the water on strong, leafless stalks. They may be up to 25 cm across and have a number of petals, which close at night. The flowers of the sacred lotus, which stand as much as 1.8 m above the water, are pink or rose-coloured and fragrant. The American lotus has pale yellow flowers that rise about 60 cm above the water.
Many varieties of the sacred lotus exist in cultivation, including dwarf forms and colour varieties ranging from white to red. The plant’s many nutlike fruits are produced in the flat upper surface of a spongy receptacle or expanded, fleshy, capsulelike structure, which is wider at the upper end than at the base. The whole structure dries at maturity, breaks off, and floats about, releasing the seeds, actually the true fruits, through numerous holes in the flat surface. The seeds sink to the bottom and establish new plants. The dried receptacles are used by florists in dried arrangements.
The whole plant of both species is edible. The rootstocks (rhizomes) of N. nucifera are eaten in Asia either boiled or preserved in sugar and are the source of the starch known as lotus meal. The boiled young leaves are eaten as a vegetable. Even the stamens are used in Southeast Asia for flavouring tea. The American lotus is similarly edible, especially the large rhizomes, which were once a source of starchy food for the American Indians.
The plants are particularly beneficial to wildlife. Beaver, for instance, eat the rootstocks, and fish obtain shade and shelter among the underwater portions of the plants.
The seeds of the Oriental lotus have been ascribed remarkable powers of longevity and, under ideal conditions, may survive many years. Seeds recovered from an ancient peat bog in Manchuria have been shown by radioactive carbon dating to be some 1,000 years old, yet were capable of germinating.
