Pandanales,  diverse order of the monocotyledon (monocot) group, whose 1,345 species range from large arborescent plants of rainforests and coastal areas in the tropics to twining herbs and lianas, as well as minute, saprophytic herbs of the forest floor. The order is made up of five families: Pandanaceae (screw pine family), Cyclanthaceae (Panama hat plant family), Triuridaceae, Stemonaceae, and Velloziaceae.
The four genera of the family Pandanaceae—Pandanus (screw pine), Freycinetia, Sararanga, and Martellidendron—are distributed in coastal or marshy areas in the tropics and subtropics of the Old World (Paleotropics). They are abundant in the Malay Archipelago, Melanesia, and Madagascar and have a few species in Hawaii, New Zealand, southern China, and Japan.
Fibre from the leaves and roots of the screw pine is used for mats, baskets, cording, and fishing nets. A few species (P. leram, P. andamanensium, and P. utilis) have edible starchy fruits. Leaves of the most common species, P. odoratissimus, are used to make an Indian perfume and flavouring (kewra attar) popular in Southeast Asia. Several are ornamentals, including P. veitchii, which is appreciated for its dark green glossy leaves with silvery white borders, and Freycinetia banksii, which is trained to grow around peat-covered pillars in New Zealand.
In Pandanaceae the spiral ranks of leaf bases that are pressed closely together are distinctive. The leaves are alternate and arranged in three rows, except in Sararanga, where they are arranged in four. The leaf sheath is not well differentiated except in Freycinetia, and petioles are absent. The simple leaf blades are very long and narrow and usually leathery and rigid, with fibrous spines along the margins and midrib. Silica has not been observed in the family, but calcium oxalate is abundant as raphides and other crystalloid forms. Cyanogenic compounds are reported in some species of screw pine.
Pandanus, Martellidendron, and Sararanga are dioecious. Freycinetia was long thought to be dioecious, but bisexual inflorescences have been discovered in F. reineckei in Samoa.
Pandanus, a genus of about 700 species, occupies many habitats. Its species occur along seashores and lagoons, in mangrove fringes and lowland swamps, along rivers, in mountain forests, and in shady forests, where they may be understory shrubs. They represent a diversity of growth forms. Many are trees, reaching up to 20 metres (about 65 feet) with leaves 5 metres (16 feet) or longer. Most species have large stilt roots that support the trunk. The stem terminates in several equal branches, each of which ends in a dense crown of leaves. Coastal species often have spreading branches supported by lateral roots. Such branches may separate and form new individuals in a kind of vegetative reproduction.
The genus is thought to be pollinated by the wind; however, white to pink spathes enclose the inflorescences, and an odour is known to be emitted from some inflorescences (such as P. odoratissimus), and so insects or animals probably pollinate the flowers to some degree. Animals and sea currents disperse the yellow, pink, or red drupes.
Freycinetia is found from Sri Lanka through Southeast Asia to northern Australia, Polynesia, and New Zealand. The woody plants climb by means of flattened, often long and wiry roots. Their leaves, which are less than 2 metres (6.5 feet) long, are linear, obovate (the widest axis above the middle), or ovate (the widest axis below the middle) in shape. They have membranous earlike appendages near the base and spiny margins, at least near the tip.
The inflorescence in Freycinetia is a terminal spadix, usually borne in groups of three but rarely solitary. The spadix bears several bracts; the lower ones are leaflike, and the next higher are variously coloured (orange, pink, salmon, red, yellow, lavender). The uppermost are often fleshy and edible, containing hexose (sugar). Female spadices bear single or united carpels, and the males bear densely crowded stamens, each with a minute filament, a globose, linear, or oblong anther, and a blunt tip. No perianth is evident at maturity in either male or female flowers. The stamens and pistils are so closely crowded that definition of single flowers is very difficult.
Pollination of Freycinetia by birds and bats has been reported in Indonesia, Samoa, Hawaii, and New Zealand. Bats and birds are attracted by the edible bracts and by the pollen that is borne in a waxy matrix of edible oils.
The genus Sararanga has only two species: S. sinuosa, native to New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, and the Admiralty Islands, and S. philippinensis, native to the Philippines. The plants grow inland in mountain forests and on woody slopes near the sea. Both species are trees with long, narrow leaves. The inflorescences are pendant and borne in panicles, and the flowers have a cupule apparently representing a perianth. The greenish white inflorescences are assumed to be wind-pollinated.
Martellidendron contains seven known species—six native to Madagascar and one endemic to the Seychelles islands in the mid-Indian Ocean. The genus was formerly included in the more widespread Pandanus, but molecular studies have shown it to be distinct from that genus and morphologically separable as well.
