passion flower,  (genus Passiflora), also spelled passionflower,   genus of more than  500 species of mostly tendril-bearing vines in the family Passifloraceae, and their characteristic flowers. Most species are found throughout neotropical regions of the Americas. Some are cultivated as ornamentals; others are grown for their edible fruits. Many are important host plants to butterflies.
Most passion flowers are climbing or prostrate vines with grasping tendrils; some are trees or shrubs. The plants can be herbaceous or woody. The simple leaves are entire or lobed, and a single plant may produce a diversity of leaf shapes.
The passion flower blossom varies in form from a shallow saucer shape to a long cylindrical or trumpet-shaped tube, producing at its upper border five sepals, five petals, and many threadlike or membranous outgrowths from the tube, which constitute the most conspicuous and beautiful part of the flower, called the corona. From the base of the inner part of the tube rises a stalk bearing above the middle a ring of five stamens (the male pollen-producing structures). Above the stamens is the female structure, or ovary, at the top of which arise three widely spreading styles. Each style ends in a button-like stigma, giving an appearance rather like a large-headed nail. The flowers can be minute or large and showy. The ovary, with a single compartment, contains numerous seeds arranged in three groups and ripens into a berrylike or capsular fruit.
The wild passion-flower, passion vine, or maypop (Passiflora incarnata) climbs about 3 to 9 metres (10 to 30 feet) high and has pink and white flowers about 4 to 7.5 cm (1.5 to 3 inches) across and a yellow, berrylike, edible fruit about 5 cm long. The yellow passion-flower (P. lutea) is a smaller plant with greenish yellow flowers and purple fruits.
Some highly perfumed passion fruits are eaten as delicate dessert fruits, as the giant granadilla (P. quadrangularis). The purple passion fruit, also called purple granadilla or maracuyá (P. edulis), and the yellow granadilla (P. laurifolia), as well as the wild passion flower, are widely grown in tropical America for their fruit. Passiflora maliformis is the sweet calabash of the West Indies. The size of these fruits usually does not exceed that of a hen’s egg, but that of the giant granadilla is like a gourd and may weigh up to 3.5 kg (about 8 pounds).
The passion flower blossom is often used to symbolize events in the last hours of the life of Christ, the Passion of Christ, which accounts for the name of the group. Thus, the corona represents the crown of thorns; the styles represent the nails used in the Crucifixion; the stamens represent the five wounds; and the five sepals and five petals represent 10 of the apostles, excluding Judas, who betrayed Jesus, and St. Peter, who denied him three times on the night of his trial.
