poplar,  (genus Populus),  genus of some 35 species of trees in the willow family (Salicaceae), native to the Northern Hemisphere. The poplar species native to North America are divided into three loose groups: the cottonwoods, the aspens, and the balsam poplars. The name Populus refers to the fact that the trees were often planted around public meeting places in Roman times. The wood of poplars is relatively soft and hence is mostly used to make cardboard boxes, crates, paper, and veneer.
Poplars are rapid-growing but relatively short-lived trees. They are widely distributed throughout the northern temperate regions, ranging from North America through Eurasia and northern Africa. The leaves are alternate and oval or heart-shaped in outline, with finely to coarsely toothed margins (leaf edges). The leaves characteristically tremble in the breeze, because of their flat petioles (leaf stalks). In North America, aspens usually have nonsticky buds and smooth gray-to-green bark, whereas cottonwoods and balsam poplars have sticky buds and bark that is darker and deeply furrowed. Poplars are dioecious plants, meaning the male and female flowers grow on separate trees. The flowers bloom in drooping catkins (pendulous unisexual flower clusters) before the leaves emerge, to facilitate wind pollination. The fruits are small thick-walled capsules that contain many minute seeds clothed in cottony tufts of silky hairs. The seeds are often released in great quantities, and the fluffy seed hairs assist in wind dispersal.
Two well-known poplar species of Eurasia are the white and black poplars. The white poplar (P. alba)—also known as silver poplar for its leaves, which have white felted undersides, and as maple leaf poplar for the leaves’ lobed margins—is widely spreading or columnar in form, reaching 30 metres (100 feet) in height. The gray poplar (P. ×canescens), a close relative of the white poplar, has deltoid (roughly triangular) leaves with woolly grayish undersides. The black poplar, or black cottonwood (P. nigra), has oval fine-toothed leaves, is long-trunked, and grows to a height of 35 metres (115 feet). Columnar black poplars are widely used in ornamental landscape plantings, particularly among the villas of Italy and elsewhere in southern Europe. White and black poplars are widely planted in the eastern United States and in Canada.
The balsam poplar, or tacamahac (P. balsamifera), which is native throughout northern North America in swampy soil, is distinguished by its aromatic resinous buds. The buds of the balm of Gilead poplar (P. ×jackii), which is similar, are used to make an ointment. The western balsam poplar, also called black cottonwood (P. trichocarpa), grows some 60 metres (195 feet) tall and is one of the largest deciduous trees of northwestern North America.
The common European aspen (P. tremula) and the American quaking, or trembling, aspen (P. tremuloides) are similar trees and reach a height of about 27 metres (90 feet). Quaking aspen is distinguished by its leaves, which have more-pointed tips, and spreads by rhizomes (underground stems). Clonal colonies of quaking aspen can grow quite large, and the most massive clonal organism on Earth is believed to be a forest of genetically identical trees, known as Pando, in Utah. The American big-tooth aspen (P. grandidentata) grows up to 18 metres (59 feet) and has larger, somewhat rounded, coarse-toothed leaves.
Cottonwood trees have distinctive deeply fissured bark and are exceptionally tolerant of flooding and erosion. Native to North America, the common, or eastern, cottonwood (P. deltoides) reaches nearly 30 metres (100 feet) tall and bears thick glossy leaves. The Fremont, or Alamo, cottonwood (P. fremontii) is the tallest of the cottonwoods and is found throughout southwestern North America.
The tulip trees of the genus Liriodendron (family Magnoliaceae) are sometimes referred to as tulip, or yellow, poplars. Known for their showy flowers and distinctive leaves, the genus consists of two species, the Chinese tulip tree (L. chinense), native to China and Vietnam, and the American tulip tree (L. tulipifera), found throughout eastern North America.
