Primulaceae,  the primrose family, of the order Ericales, containing 58 genera and nearly 2,600 species of flowering plants. The group is worldwide in distribution, including in the Old World tropics, throughout the Americas, and in temperate and colder regions of the Northern Hemisphere; many members are Arctic or Alpine. The family underwent significant taxonomic revision and includes the now disbanded families Maesaceae, Myrsinaceae, and Theophrastaceae, according to the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group IV (2016).
Members of Primulaceae include annual or perennial herbs, shrubs, lianas, and trees. Most have simple leaves, often with a toothed margin. The flowers are borne in groups on leafless stalks and have a tube of fused petals with spreading lobes, the stamens being attached to the tube and oriented opposite the petals. The style is often short, and the ovary is not divided by partitions; the placenta, on which the ovules are borne, is very much swollen. The fruits are often capsules. Secretory canals containing yellow, red, or brown tannins, for example, are frequent.
The major genera are Primula (some 500 to 600 species, including the former genera Dodecatheon, Dionysia, and Cortusa), Ardisia (about 450 species), Androsace (about 160 species, including the former genera Douglasia and Vitaliana), Myrsine (155 species, including the former Rapanea and Suttonia), Lysimachia (150 species), Maesa (150 species), Discocalyx (115 species, including Tapeinosperma), Embelia (100 species), Parathesis (85 species), Stylogyne (60 species), and Clavija (50 species). Smaller genera include Jacquinia (35 species), Anagallis (28 species), Cyclamen (about 20 species), and Samolus (15 species).
A number of Primulaceae species are cultivated as garden ornamentals. These include various Primula species, notably garden primroses and shooting stars, creeping Jenny (Lysimachia nummularia), yellow loosestrife (L. punctata), florist’s cyclamen (Cyclamen persicum), and scarlet pimpernel (Anagallis arvensis).
