Proteales,  the protea order of dicotyledonous flowering plants, with 3 families, around 75 genera, and nearly 1,060 species. Along with Buxales, Ranunculales, Trochodendrales, and Sabiaceae, Proteales is part of a group known as peripheral eudicots in the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group III (APG III) botanical classification system (see angiosperm).
The largest family in the order is Proteaceae, which has close to 75 genera and 1,050 species and is confined predominantly to the Southern Hemisphere, mostly in Australia, South Africa, and Madagascar. Platanaceae has a single Northern Hemisphere genus Platanus, with 8–10 species. Similarly, Nelumbonaceae has just one aquatic genus, Nelumbo (lotus), with two north-temperate species. The reassignment of these families into a single order was a surprising consequence of family-level molecular studies. It is hard to imagine three such disparate families being grouped into a single order, but even nonmolecular data offer some support for this relationship, particularly the relationship of Platanus and Proteaceae.
Members of Proteaceae are woody trees and shrubs. The plants are characterized by flowers that are usually individually small but are combined into dense, often showy inflorescences (floral clusters). They have a four-parted perianth (whorl of petal-like parts), with the four stamens (male pollen-producing structures) joined to the tips of the perianth segments, sometimes with only the anther (pollen sac) visible. The simple or sometimes much-divided leaves are usually alternately arranged and are often densely covered with hairs or have a thick cuticle, and the stomata in some species are restricted to deep pits with occluded entrances. Some or all of these traits may be adaptations to help retard water loss. The plants typically grow in regions that have a long dry season each year. Even distantly related members of the family may exhibit similar adaptations to fire, namely massive underground woody tubers or seeds held in woody follicles that are released only after a burn.
The largest genera of Proteaceae are Grevillea (including Hakea), Protea, Banksia, Helicia, Leucadendron, and Persoonia. Australia has the greatest diversity of genera in the family, with 45 (35 of them endemic, or only found there). South Africa has 14 genera (11 endemic), and New Caledonia has 9 genera (6 endemic). Eastern Malesia and New Guinea together have 8 genera (none endemic), and South America has 8 genera (4 endemic).
In warm regions, several species of Proteaceae are cultivated as ornamentals, including Leucadendron argenteum (silver tree), the leaves of which are covered with fine silky hairs; different species of Banksia (Australian honeysuckles); members of Embothrium (fire bushes, or fire trees); and members of Grevillea. Grevillea robusta (silky oak), native to Australia, is widely grown in warm climates. Macadamia integrifolia (macadamia) is grown for its edible seeds.
Platanus is the genus of plane trees, sycamores, and buttonwood. These are deciduous trees of the Northern Hemisphere, with light scaly bark and palmately-lobed leaves. The flowers are small and grouped together in dense, unisexual, wind-pollinated heads that dangle on thin stems. Platanus occidentalis is the American sycamore, and P. orientalis is the Oriental plane tree; the two species have been hybridized, and many of the cultivated plane trees may be of hybrid origin.
Two species of lotus, the sacred lotus (Nelumbo nucifera) and the American lotus (Nelumbo lutea), are the sole members of the aquatic family Nelumbonaceae. These water plants are easily recognized by their large round leaves, which are held above the water surface like inverted umbrellas, and by their flowers, which are similar to those of water lilies but have free carpels immersed in a large obconical (inverted cone shape) receptacle. The seeds have an extremely hard covering and can remain viable for centuries in river mud. The family bears a superficial resemblance but a distant relationship to the water lilies (family Nymphaeaceae), where they were formerly included.
