Quillwort,  (family Isoetaceae),  family of about 250 species of seedless vascular plants of the order Isoetales. Quillworts are the only extant members of the order and are usually placed in a single genus, Isoetes (also spelled Isoëtes). The plants are aquatic or semi-aquatic, and most are native to swampy, cooler parts of North America and Eurasia. See also lycophyte and lower vascular plant.
Quillworts are herbaceous, spore-bearing plants with grassy spikelike leaves. The spirally arranged quill-like leaves are divided into vertical rows of cavities that are connected to one central conducting strand. The leaves rise from a cormlike or tuberlike base, with roots below. A large saclike round-to-oblong sporangium is sunk into a pit on the inner surface of each leaf base, where a small thin structure known as a ligule also occurs. Most quillworts grow submerged in fresh water all or part of the year. The terrestrial species tend to grow in seasonally wet habitats, and the plants die back to the corm when the soil dries.
The taxonomy of quillwort species was obscured for many years before the phenomenon of interspecific hybridization was recognized. Numerous sterile quillwort hybrids with abortive spores exist, and in some cases these hybrids have regained fertility through a process of chromosome doubling. As a result, these plants have proliferated as reproductively competent polyploid species. In 2016 the Pteridophyte Phylogeny Group, an informal group of taxonomists from around the world, published their first taxonomic consensus known as PPG I, which recognizes about 250 species.
The common quillworts of Eurasia (Isoetes lacustris) and the very similar North American species (I. macrospora) are aquatic. Their stiff dark green recurved spiky leaves grow around a stumpy corm. Italian quillwort (I. malinverniana) has longer spiraling leaves that float on the water surface. Sand quillwort (I. histrix), an inconspicuous terrestrial European species, has very narrow 5–7-cm (2–3-inch-) long leaves that curl back to the ground from a fat white tufted base.
A number of quillworts are listed as endangered species by the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species, largely due to habitat loss, water pollution, and small population sizes. Among these, several are critically endangered, including the possibly extinct Pindus quillwort (I. heldreichii) of Macedonia, I. stephansenii and I. wormaldii of southern Africa, and Piedmont quillwort (I. malinverniana) of Italy.
