Ramie,  (Boehmeria nivea), also called China grass,  fibre-yielding plant of the nettle family (Urticaceae) and its bast fibre, native to China. Green ramie, or rhea (Boehmeria nivea, variety tenacissima) may have originated in Malaysia and is also a fibre source.
The perennial plant produces many stalks, each growing from 1.9 to 2.4 metres (3 to 8 feet) high. The leaves, growing on the upper portion of the stalk, are somewhat heart-shaped with serrated edges. The leaves have bright green upper sides and undersides that are covered with white hairs; those of the green ramie variety are green on both sides. Greenish white flowers form drooping clusters growing from the angles between leafstalks and stems.
The individual fibre cells are quite long, averaging 13 to 15 cm (5 to 6 inches) in length. Ramie fibre is pure white in colour, lustrous, moisture-absorbent, and readily dyed. The fibres are spun into yarn, which can then be woven into textiles. The fibre is stronger than flax, cotton, or wool. Fabric made from ramie fibre is easily laundered, increasing in strength when wet, and does not shrink or lose its shape. It dries quickly and becomes smoother and more lustrous with repeated washings. Ramie is resistant to mildew and other types of microorganism attack and does not change colour with prolonged exposure to sunlight.
Crops, which are usually propagated with cuttings from underground stems (rhizomes), grow best in well-drained sandy soil and in warm moist climates with evenly distributed rainfall averaging at least 75 to 130 mm (3 to 5 inches) per month. Harvesting takes place when the lower portion of the stalk turns brown and the tips of new stalks appear. The stalks are usually cut by hand. Ramie fibres are obtained by decortication, a hand or mechanical process in which the bark and the adhering fibre are separated from the stalk and soaked in water, allowing the fibre to be scraped from the bark.
Given the laborious and time-consuming processing that it requires, ramie has had limited acceptance for modern textile use. The fibre’s extraction and cleaning are expensive, chiefly because several steps—involving scraping, pounding, heating, washing, or exposure to chemicals—are needed to separate the raw fibre from the adhesive gums or resins in which it is ensheathed. Spinning the fibre is made difficult by its brittle quality and low elasticity, and weaving is complicated by the hairy surface of the yarn, resulting from lack of cohesion between the fibres. The greater utilization of ramie depends upon the development of improved processing methods.
The ramie plant has been cultivated in eastern Asia for fibre since prehistoric times. Ramie fabric was used in ancient Egypt and was known in Europe during the Middle Ages. Ramie fibre, also known as China grass, and ramie fabric, variously known as grass linen, grass cloth, or China linen, have been exported from East Asia to the Western Hemisphere since early in the 18th century, but commercial production of ramie products did not achieve importance in the West until the 1930s. Because of its desirable properties, including strength and durability, ramie has frequently been promoted as a textile fibre of great potential.
Ramie is used to make such products as industrial sewing thread, packing materials, fishing nets, and filter cloths. It is also made into fabrics for household furnishings and clothing, frequently in blends with other textile fibres. Shorter fibres and waste are used in paper manufacture. Ramie leaves are edible and are a key ingredient in certain gelatinous rice cakes and rice dumplings in parts of East Asia.
China leads in the production of ramie; other producers include Japan, Taiwan, the Philippines, and Brazil.
