Rosales,  the rose order of dicotyledonous flowering plants, containing 9 families, 261 genera, and more than 7,700 species. Rosales, which is in the Rosid I group among the core eudicots, is related to other orders with members that can undergo nitrogen fixation (for example the legumes of the order Fabales). Rosales is a diverse order that includes families previously placed in the former orders Urticales and Rhamnales. The families in Rosales vary greatly in size, with about 93 percent of the species included in the four largest families: Rosaceae, Urticaceae, Moraceae, and Rhamnaceae. The order includes some of the best-known ornamental and edible-fruit plants in the temperate parts of the world. In addition to roses, Rosales includes elms, spireas, hawthorns, apples, peaches, cherries, pears, plums, strawberries, raspberries, and figs.
Members of Rosales grow abundantly throughout the world. Their distribution ranges from Arctic regions to the tropics, from sea level to high mountains, and from forests to grasslands and deserts. Representatives of this order are frequent, and sometimes dominant, members of a variety of ecological communities. While the order as a whole can be found almost anywhere in the world, the geographic distribution of specific families and genera is more restricted. Several types of distribution patterns are found, some based on geography, others on climate.
The vast majority of the 90 genera and some 2,500 species of Rosaceae, or the rose family, are found in the north temperate zone. A few groups are widespread across most of the zone; they can be found in a variety of habitats. For example, Prunus, which includes cherries, plums, and peaches, is one of the most widely distributed genera of the order. Prunus is most abundant in North America, Asia, and southern Europe but is also well represented in the subtropics, extending southward to Malaysia and northern Australia and through Central America to Brazil and Chile. Another widespread genus is Crataegus (hawthorns), which is particularly abundant, in terms of both individuals and diverse forms, throughout eastern North America. Various kinds of hawthorns also exist westward across North America, southward to Mexico and the Andes Mountains, and throughout much of Europe, the Middle East, and Asia.
Some genera and species in Rosaceae frequently grow on more than one continent, but there are discontinuities  in their ranges. For instance, Waldsteinia fragarioides (barren strawberry) occurs in areas that are widely separated geographically: eastern North America, western North America, southeastern Europe, and East Asia. Physocarpus (ninebark) follows the same pattern, except that it is absent from Europe. This overall distribution pattern developed near the beginning of the Paleogene Period, about 60 million years ago, at which time the Bering Strait served as a bridge between western North America and Asia. North America and Europe as well were closer geographically than at present; there was a widespread forest across Europe, Asia, and North America, and over time plants could readily migrate between the regions. With subsequent changes in climate and the advance of glaciers over much of the Northern Hemisphere, many plants that were broadly distributed became eliminated from some areas while persisting as relicts in others.
Other members of Rosaceae are distributed in temperate climates of both the Northern and Southern hemispheres but not in between. Fragaria chiloensis, a species of wild strawberry, is found in three discrete areas: Chile and Argentina, California northward to the Aleutian Islands, and the Hawaiian Islands. Geum (avens) has a distribution ranging across North America, Europe, and East Asia, and some species grow in the Andes Mountains of South America, Patagonia, South Africa, Auckland Island, New Zealand, and Tasmania.
Rhamnaceae, or the buckthorn family, which includes 52 genera and more than 900 species of shrubs and trees, is distributed worldwide, especially in the tropics and warm temperate region.
Elaeagnaceae, or the oleaster family, consisting of 3 genera and 45 species of shrubs and trees, is centred in the north temperate region and warm tropics, with extensions into Malesia and Australia.
Two small shrubby or woody families are restricted in their distributions. The monotypic Barbeyaceae (Barbeya oleoides) is known from northeast Africa and Arabia, whereas the two species of Dirachmaceae (Dirachma socotrana, D. somalensis) occur in Somalia and Socotra.
Urticaceae, or the nettle family, is worldwide in distribution but most diverse in the tropics. Urticaceae contains 54 genera and more than 2,600 species, which are mostly herbs but are occasionally shrubs or even trees. Genera of the previously recognized family Cecropiaceae are now included in Urticaceae. The large genera Pilea (500–600 species) and Elatostema (300 species) are almost entirely tropical and subtropical. Some of the tropical and subtropical species of Urticaceae are shrubs or trees; many of the herbaceous species form dense ground covers in moist climates or grow as epiphytes on moss-covered tree trunks and tree branches in humid regions. Although there are not many species in temperate areas, the often weedy family may occupy extensive areas and may become so dense as to prevent the growth of other species of plants. Urtica (nettles) can be especially common, widespread, and often abundant. Single plants of Urtica dioica (stinging nettle) are able to form extensive colonies within a short time by growing underground stems called rhizomes. Members of Cecropia (75 species) have large palmately lobed leaves; these fast-growing “pioneer trees” are prominent in disturbed areas in the Neotropics.
Moraceae, or the mulberry family, contains 38 genera and about 1,100 species. The family is found principally in the tropics and subtropics, but a few genera, such as Morus (mulberry), the food plant of Bombyx mori (silkworm moth), and Broussonetia papyrifera (paper mulberry), a source of fibres for paper in Asia, are primarily distributed in temperate regions. Ficus (about 750 species) is the largest genus in the family. It is a taxonomically complex genus that includes trees, shrubs, lianas, and strangler figs.
Ulmaceae, or the elm family, contains about 35 species, all woody, in 6 genera. The family is widely distributed in the north temperate zone, especially Asia. Ulmus (elms) is the largest genus in the family. Elms are found primarily in the north temperate areas but extend as far south as the Himalayas and Indochina in Asia and Mexico in North America. Zelkova (four to five species) has a discontinuous distribution and is found from the eastern Mediterranean region to the Caucasus and in East Asia. The genus once had a much wider distribution, dating back about 65.5 million years ago to the beginning of the Paleogene Period, and is known in the fossil record from several sites in North America and Eurasia.
Cannabaceae, or the hemp family, which includes the 9 genera of the former family Celtidaceae, consists of 11 genera and about 170 species. Most members of the family are trees, though Cannabis sativa (hemp) is a coarse, erect annual herb, and the three species of Humulus (hops) are twining or scrambling herbs. Celtis (hackberry) is the largest genus in the family, with about 100 species distributed in the Northern Hemisphere and in southern Africa.
