Suicide tree,  (Tachigali versicolor),  tropical tree of the pea family (Fabaceae), found in old-growth forests from Costa Rica to northern Colombia and named for its imminent demise after fruiting. The suicide tree possesses one of the densest and hardest woods of any Central American tree and is locally important for timber. Its bark is used by native peoples in the Amazon basin to treat fungal skin infections.
A large buttressed tree, the suicide tree often reaches heights of more than 30 metres (100 feet). Mature plants are distinguished by thin, reddish, rippling bark that gives the impression of a tightly flexed muscle, and the stems of the juveniles resemble a tightly twisted rope. Leaves range from 5 to 10 cm (2 to 4 inches) long. Flowers are produced from March to June and are pale yellow to light gold and grow in a spike roughly 12 cm (5 inches) long. Its wind-dispersed seeds are enclosed in single elliptical wings about 11–15 cm (4–6 inches) long. (See rainforest ecosystem sidebar, “‘Flying’ Trees.”) These normally develop to full size by August but are retained on the tree until the following dry season (January–March).
Suicide trees are remarkable in that they flower and fruit only once during their lifetimes. This phenomenon, known as monocarpy, is an oddity among long-lived plants in general and is nearly unique among tropical trees. In addition, within a local population of suicide trees, flowering by individual trees seems to take place only at four-year intervals. How flowering is synchronized remains a mystery, but many interesting consequences are clear. First, by producing only one great pulse of seedlings, a single tree avoids the general problem that plagues most other tree species that reproduce throughout their adult life—the local buildup of species-specific pathogens that kill the seedlings. Furthermore, after producing the great burst of seedlings, the parent tree slowly dies and eventually falls down. Owing to its great size and wood density, this creates a huge hole in the canopy and gives the seedlings both access to light and space to grow.
