Trochodendrales,  a small order of dicotyledonous flowering plants comprising just one family (Trochodendraceae) with two genera of evergreen trees (Trochodendron and Tetracentron), each with a single tree species. Along with Buxales, Proteales, Ranunculales, and the family Sabiaceae, Trochodendrales is part of a group known as the peripheral eudicots. These are plants with the basic eudicot characters of triaperturate pollen and a lack of the ethereal oils that are found in many basal angiosperms such as the magnoliids. Notably, unlike most other flowering plants, the wood of both species of Trochodendrales lacks specialized water-conducting cells (vessel cells). Instead of vessels, the water-conducting cells of Trochodendrales are tracheids, a narrower conducting cell type found elsewhere in the gymnosperms (such as conifers) and only a few other flowering plant families.
Despite the primitive wood, both species have flowers that are considered quite specialized. Trochodendron aralioides, of South Korea, Japan, and Taiwan, is a small broadleaf evergreen tree up to 12 metres (about 40 feet) in height with pinnately veined leaves (i.e., the leaves have a midrib from which comblike lateral veins arise) and flowers in clusters at the branch tips. The flowers lack sepals and petals (the outer and inner floral whorls or showy flower parts), and they are either male only or bisexual (with each tree bearing only one type of flower). Both types of flowers have an array of about 70 stamens (male pollen-producing structures), and in the bisexual trees there are 5 to 11 or more partially fused carpels (female ovule-bearing structures) inside the arrangement of stamens. The common name for the genus is wheel tree because of the characteristic ring of stamens on the flowers. Trochodendron flowers are insect-pollinated, and the plant is sometimes cultivated as an ornamental.
Tetracentron sinense, of central and south-central China, Nepal, and northern Myanmar (Burma), is a medium-sized tree, 4.5 to 27 metres (about 15 to 88.5 feet) tall, with palmately (fingerlike) veined leaves. Unlike Trochodendron, Tetracentron has small, wind-pollinated flowers arranged in dangling, slender catkins; the flowers are bisexual and consist of three whorls, four tepals (intermediate between sepals and petals), four stamens, and four carpels. It is also cultivated occasionally as an ornamental.
