Urena, also called aramina, bun ochra, caesar weed, or Congo jute,  (Urena lobata), 
plant of the family Malvaceae; its fibre is one of the bast fibre group. The plant, probably of Old World origin, grows wild in tropical and subtropical areas throughout the world.
Urena has long been used for its fibre in Brazil, but it has been slow in achieving importance as a cultivated fibre crop and is still considered a troublesome weed in some countries. Commercial cultivation of the plant began in the Belgian Congo in the 1920s and in Central Africa in the 1930s.
The plant, an herbaceous perennial, is usually many-branched in the wild state and grows about 1 to 2 metres (3 to 7 feet) high. Cultivated plants, densely sown, reach 3 to 4.5 metres (10 to 15 feet) in height, with branches and leaves mainly concentrated near the top. The leaves vary in size and shape but are usually somewhat round, with 3 to 7 lobes and serrated edges. The flowers, growing singly in the axil of the leaf, have five petals that are usually pink. The small seeds have hooklike appendages and are produced in the greatest quantities by uncultivated plants.
Urena grows best in hot, humid climates, with direct sunlight and rich, well-drained soil. It is found wild in the tropical and temperate zones of North and South America and in Asia, Indonesia, the Philippines, and Africa. Cultivated crops, usually grown as annuals, are found mainly in the Congo Basin and Central Africa, with smaller plantings in Brazil, India, and Madagascar. Harvesting when the plants are in full flower yields a fibre of high quality. The plants’ stalks are cut by hand, above the woody plant base. After the stalks are subjected to a retting operation, the fibres are removed by hand.
Urena fibre is lustrous and creamy white or pale yellow in colour. The fibre strands are about 1 metre (3.3 feet) long. Urena fibre is fine, soft, and flexible and is readily dyed. Used much like jute, which it resembles in appearance and strength, urena is made into cordage, burlap (hessian), sacking fabrics, and carpeting materials and is often blended with jute or other fibres.
The name urena apparently derives from the name given to the plant on India’s Malabar Coast.
