viola,  (genus Viola),  genus of about 500 species of herbs or low shrubs in the family Violaceae, including the small solid-coloured violets and the larger-flowered, often multicoloured violas and pansies. Members of the genus Viola occur naturally worldwide but are found most abundantly in temperate climates, the greatest variety occurring in the Andes Mountains of South America. Many are cultivated for their attractive flowers.
Viola species may be annuals or perennials. Because Viola freely hybridize, however, it is often difficult to identify their species. The flower, variable in colour but not red, usually grows singly on a stalk and has five petals, four arranged in unlike pairs, the fifth with a spur. The leaves may grow on the same stalk as the flower (stemmed violets) or on separate stalks (stemless violets). Though the best-known Viola species have heart-shaped leaves, the leaves of other species may have different shapes.
Typically, the plants grow in meadows or damp woods. All wild species bloom early in the spring, but some cultivated varieties bloom later. Many species have two types of flowers. One type is showy and appears in the spring but often does not produce seeds in some species. The fertile, less conspicuous flower appears in early summer and is completely closed and self-fertilizing.
Among the most common North American species are the common blue, or meadow, violet (Viola sororia) and the bird’s-foot violet (V. pedata). The common blue violet grows up to 20 cm (8 inches) tall and has heart-shaped leaves with finely toothed margins. The flowers range in colour from light to deep violet, or they may be white. The bird’s-foot violet, a perennial named for its deeply cleft leaves, has variably coloured flowers, with lilac and purple combinations.
Species of Viola have been widely cultivated in gardens and nurseries. The popular florist’s violets, consisting of several hybrids (many of them V. odorata), are usually called sweet violets.
The pansy (V. ×wittrockiana) is a hybrid that has been grown in gardens for centuries. The tufted pansy, or horned viola (V. cornuta), is the parent of numerous forms of bedding pansies. The wild pansy (V. tricolor), also known as Johnny-jump-up, heartsease, and love-in-idleness, has been widely naturalized in North America.
The so-called African violet (Saintpaulia ionantha) belongs not to Violaceae, in the order Malpighiales, but to Gesneriaceae, in the order Lamiales.
