Vitales,  grape order of flowering plants, a basal member in the rosid group of the core eudicots in the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group III (APG III) botanical classification system (see angiosperm). The order consists of the single family Vitaceae, which contains 16 genera and about 770 species, mostly in the tropics or warm temperate regions of the world. The affinities of Vitaceae have long been uncertain, with no obvious close relatives to the family.
Most of the members of Vitaceae are vines or lianas, and they are usually characterized by swollen leaf nodes and by tendrils or flat-topped flower clusters (cymes; see inflorescence) that emerge on the opposite side of the stem from the leaf. The leaves are often palmately compound or lobed, and the flowers are small, with stamens equal in number to and opposite the petals. Fruits are few-seeded berries (such as grapes), and the stems are often strongly lenticellate.
Vitis, the grape genus, has approximately 65 native species, several of which are economically important. V. vinifera (common grape) has a long history of cultivation and selection, probably originating in the Mediterranean region. Following an infestation in 1867 by Phylloxera vitifoliae (grape phylloxera), a parasitic insect that kills grape vines, rootstocks of resistant American grape species were grafted onto European varieties. Grapes from different species are eaten fresh or dried (raisins and currants), and there are now hundreds of varietals derived from V. vinifera and related species used to produce different kinds of wine and to distill into brandy, including cognac and Armagnac.
Species of other genera are widely cultivated, such as Parthenocissus quinquefolia (Virginia creeper) in temperate areas, and Cissus incisa (grape ivy) in tropical areas, or they are commonly cultivated as houseplants. Species of the genus Tetrastigma are the only host plants for the parasitic plant Rafflesia arnoldii (monster flower, also sometimes called corpse flower for its strong odour), which is native only to a few areas within the Malay Archipelago. This species has the largest flower in the world, often measuring nearly 1 metre (3.3 feet) across, and is critically endangered.
