wasabi,  (Eutrema japonicum), also called Japanese horseradish,  plant of the mustard family (Brassicaceae) and a pungent paste made of its ground rhizomes. The plant is native to Japan, South Korea, and Sakhalin, Russia, and its cultivation is limited because of its specific growing requirements. Given the high price and limited availability of true wasabi rhizomes, the wasabi paste of Western restaurants is commonly made from horseradish (Armoracia rusticana), another plant of the mustard family.
Wasabi is a slow-growing perennial plant that reaches about 20–60 cm (8–24 inches) in height. The large circular to kidney-shaped leaves are showy and attractive and are borne on long petioles (leaf stalks). The plants bear small clusters of white flowers with four petals arranged in a cross shape. The fruits are dry siliques. The fleshy rhizomes can grow up to 3 cm (about 1 inch) in diameter.
The wasabi plant grows wild along streams in the mountains and mountain valleys. Cultivation is difficult even in ideal settings that emulate a stream bank, as the plant requires cool, humid, and shady conditions and is prone to disease. The rhizome can take up to three years to reach maturity, and any breakage of the brittle leaves by farmworkers or animals can slow its growth. Given the stringent environmental requirements, wasabi is grown commercially mainly in Japan’s Shizuoka prefecture, especially in the Izu Peninsula, and in Iwate and Nagano prefectures. There are several different styles of wasabi cultivation in Japan, each associated with differing qualities of wasabi rhizomes. Traditional methods typically employ few fertilizers and rely on mineral-rich spring water and manual labour, making them minimally impactful on the environment. The fields are carefully engineered with rocks and gravel to replicate the plant’s natural habitat and to accommodate gentle flooding, and some have been in continuous production for hundreds of years.
Wasabi has also been successfully cultivated in China, Korea, Taiwan, New Zealand, and the United States, though usually on a small scale. There has been limited success with growing the plants in greenhouses or using hydroponics, and these operations have been quite costly.
Wasabi paste is spicy and pungent in flavour and is most commonly served with sushi and sashimi. The vapours tend to stimulate the nose more than the taste buds, and its unique taste and smell are due to the formation of volatile compounds known as isothiocyanates when the cells are ruptured from being cut or grated. Fresh wasabi paste loses its pungency when exposed to air, so the rhizome is often grated immediately before serving, traditionally with a sharkskin or wooden grater. It is also available as a dried powder or in a tube. True wasabi is naturally green in colour, while Western wasabi, made of horseradish, usually has green colorants added.
