roller coaster,  elevated railway with steep inclines and descents that carries a train of passengers through sharp curves and sudden changes of speed and direction for a brief thrill ride. Found mostly in amusement parks as a continuous loop, it is a popular leisure activity.
On a traditional roller coaster, gravity powers much of the trip. The potential energy for the entire ride is usually introduced in a large initial climb that is converted to kinetic energy on the first—and often sharpest—drop. Entertainment value is provided by the velocity of the descent as well as by the inverted loops, barrel rolls, and banked turns that create positive gravitational forces, or g-forces, that press down upon the rider in the seat. The so-called negative g-forces create the rider’s sense of weightlessness when lifted from the seat over the peaks of hills. On most roller coasters, riders remain seated beneath a safety bar, but variations include riders’ standing on a platform or hanging from a shoulder harness.
Among the predecessors of modern roller coasters were rides in Russia in the 15th century: sleds constructed of cut lumber and tree trunks sped down man-made ice-covered hills. The rides were more elaborate than simply sledding, reaching speeds of 50 miles (80 km) per hour and earning the nickname “flying mountains.” Both children and adults would make the trek up stairs about 70 feet (21 metres) high to an ice-block sled outfitted with a straw seat. Though some constructions were hundreds of feet in length, the trip back down was relatively brief. A ride inaugurated at St. Petersburg in 1784 comprised carriages in grooved tracks that traveled up and down small hills by means of power generated by the height and slope of the initial descent.
The activity was taken to Paris in 1804 in the form of a ride called the Russian Mountains (Les Montagnes Russes). Small wheels were added to the sleds on this ride, a key modification that later persuaded some historians to credit it as the first wheeled coaster. Little attention was given to safety measures, yet, oddly enough, the injuries that passengers suffered from runaway cars increased the ride’s notoriety and attendance. In 1817 the Belleville Mountains (Les Montagnes Russes de Belleville) and the Aerial Walks (Promenades Aériennes) in Paris improved on the original Russian Mountains by adding locking wheels, continuous tracks, and, eventually, cables that hoisted cars to the top of the hill.
In the early 19th century, the so-called Mauch Chunk Switchback Railway in Pennsylvania became the prototype for roller coasters in the United States, the country most associated with thrill rides. Its origins were in Gravity Road, which mining company entrepreneur Josiah White built in 1827 to haul coal from the mines at Summit Hill to the Lehigh River landing at Mauch Chunk (now the town of Jim Thorpe)—a 9-mile (14.5-km) downhill journey. Trains of as many as 14 cars, loaded with 50,000 pounds (23,000 kg) of anthracite coal, sped down the mountain under the command of a single courageous “runner," who operated a brake lever. Mules dragged the cars back up the mountain. Coal was hauled in the morning, but increasingly the afternoon runs along Gravity Road carried passengers paying 50 cents per ride.
By the mid-19th century, the demand for coal was increasing, so White added a backtrack with two 120-horsepower steam engines at the top of nearby Mount Pisgah, which pulled the trains up the incline of 664 vertical feet (202 metres), assisted by “barney," or “safety," cars. The ingenious addition of a ratchet rail running between the dual two-rail tracks, when engaged by a ratchet on the barney, prevented the cars from rolling backward. This safety device, later perfected, also gave rise to the clanking sound that would characterize future roller coasters. In 1872 a tunnel was completed that became a more efficient coal route than Gravity Road, but the Mauch Chunk Switchback continued as a thrill ride. By 1873 some 35,000 tourists annually were taking an 80-minute, 18-mile (29-km) scenic ride up and down Mount Pisgah and neighbouring Mount Jefferson for the cost of $1.
By the end of the 19th century, American trolley companies were building amusement parks at the end of their lines to attract evening and weekend riders. The best-known trolley terminus was Coney Island in New York City, which became home to several competing theme parks inspired by the 1893 World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago. Just as Coney Island transformed the hot dog (or frankfurter, a German invention) into a uniquely American food, it likewise popularized roller coaster culture in the United States.
In 1884 inventor La Marcus Thompson, the “Father of the Gravity Ride,” had opened a 600-foot (183-metre) switchback railway at Coney Island. With a top speed of 6 miles (9 km) per hour, Thompson’s ride, called the Switchback Railway, was little more than a leisurely gravity-powered tour of the beach there. Still, its popularity enabled him to recoup his $1,600 investment in only three weeks.
Within a few months, however, Thompson’s monopoly on Coney Island coasters was over. Charles Alcoke also built a slow scenic railway, connecting the ends of the track in a continuous loop in order to return riders to their starting position. Although the Alcoke coaster challenged the attendance records of Thompson’s Switchback Railway, it was Phillip Hinkle’s 1885 technological advancement that gave the industry a lift. The Hinkle coaster’s route was elliptical and featured a powered hoist that pulled cars to the top of the first hill, making it a far more exciting ride than the slow-moving Switchback. Thompson, who built 50 more Switchbacks in the United States and Europe, went on to construct the Scenic Railway on the Boardwalk in Atlantic City, N.J., in 1887. It was a rolling tour through elaborate artificial scenery—vividly coloured tableaus, biblical scenes, and flora—illuminated by lights triggered by the approaching cars. This ride was the precursor of Space Mountain at Disneyland in Anaheim, Calif., and other 20th-century theme-park journeys.
Nearer the end of the 19th century, the roller coaster industry literally was turned upside down. Somersaulting looped track rides had first been attempted in Paris in the middle of the century. The rides were based on a popular child’s toy that exploited centrifugal force to keep a small ball rolling on a looped track without falling off. But passengers found the inversions uncomfortable and dangerous, and looping coasters were not seen again until 1895, when Lina Beecher installed the Flip-Flap Railway at Paul Boyton’s Sea Lion Park in Coney Island. Though uncomfortable and still dangerous, the 25-foot (7.5-metre) circular loop became popular despite operating for only a few years.
In an attempt to reduce the high g-forces of the vertical loop, Edward Prescott built the 1901 Loop-the-Loop at Coney Island, with a softer, oval-shaped design. It was better crafted than Flip-Flap, but it would still be another 75 years before a successful vertical loop was realized. Although hampered by a low seating capacity that eventually ran it aground, Loop-the-Loop was the top ride for coaster enthusiasts for the next six years, until the advent of the first high-speed coaster, Drop-the-Dip (later called Rough Riders). These increased levels of danger, however, brought improvements in safety, such as the introduction of lap bars, which kept passengers seated. Prior to lap bars, riders simply held on to seat handles during inversions while being pressed into their seats by the g-forces of the vertical loop.
The golden age of coasters arrived in the United States in the 1920s, when more than 1,500 roller coasters were in operation in the country. Coasters were among the biggest attractions at amusement parks, and improvements in safety helped to advance coaster design. John Miller, who was chief engineer for La Marcus Thompson and worked with other designers, owned more than 100 patents, notably on safety features. His most important was the safety chain dog, or safety ratchet (patented in 1910), which prevented cars from rolling backward down the lift hill in the event the pull chain broke. It attached to the track and clicked onto the rungs of the chain. His underfriction wheels, or upstop wheels (1919), kept coaster cars locked on their tracks, which enabled them to safely reach high speeds, bank suddenly, and turn upside down.
In the 1920s Riverview Park in Chicago came closest to rivaling Coney Island, with always at least 6, and sometimes as many as 11, coasters in operation. The Fireball (formerly the Blue Streak) was hyped as the fastest coaster ever built, but the Chicago park’s claim that it reached speeds of 100 miles (160 km) per hour was likely exaggerated by almost 35 percent. The Chicago building code limited track height to 72 feet (22 metres), but the Fireball was one of the first coasters to circumvent this law by ending the first drop in a man-made ditch. In 1924 the Fireball was outpaced by the Bobs, a collaboration between noted inventors Frederick Church and Harry Traver. Riders of the Bobs traveled along 3,253 feet (991.5 metres) of track with 16 hills and 12 curves.
Traver, who in 1903 had invented the graceful Circle Swing after viewing seagulls circling the mast of a ship, is perhaps best known for three terrifying rides built in 1927—the Cyclone at Crystal Beach (Ridgeway, Ontario, Canada), the Lightning at Revere Beach (Revere, Mass.), and the Cyclone at Palisades Park (Fort Lee, N.J.). Not only did the Cyclone at Crystal Beach feature a 90-foot (27-metre) drop and hairpin turns, but a nurse was always on duty on the loading platform.
Meanwhile, the Philadelphia Toboggan Company turned the local Coney Island park near Cincinnati, Ohio, into its test bed with the introduction of the Wild Cat and the completely enclosed Twister. Indeed, the Wildcat at Rocky Springs (Lancaster, Pa.), built in 1928 by Philadelphia Toboggan, is considered the steepest wooden coaster ever made, with a reputed drop of 90 feet 3 inches (27.5 metres) at 60 degrees. It was demolished in 1984.
The most memorable classic coaster still standing may be the Cyclone at New York City’s Coney Island. Built in 1927 by the Harry C. Baker Company and based on a design by Vernon Keenan, the Cyclone had a remarkably steep 58-degree drop, considered intense even by later standards. From its 10-foot (3-metre) lighted sign to the slogan of “steepest drops, sharpest turns, fastest speeds” on each ticket, the Cyclone has long been a quintessential roller coaster experience.
