All-American Girls Professional Baseball League (AAGPBL),  American sports organization that, between 1943 and its dissolution in 1954, grew from a stopgap wartime entertainment to a professional showcase for women baseball players.
From the time of its inception in 1943 until the time of its demise in 1954, the AAGPBL included some 545 women, who were recruited from the United States, Canada, and Cuba. The league’s founder was Chicago Cubs owner and chewing gum magnate Philip K. Wrigley. He started the league out of a concern that men’s major league baseball would suffer when players were called for military service. The “Belles of the Ball Game,” however, delivered such a high level of play that, at the league’s peak in 1948, they drew more than a million fans to the stands.
During the 1940s women’s amateur softball leagues flourished throughout the United States and Canada. When Wrigley conceived his scheme, he scouted talent from these amateur leagues for his predominantly Midwestern professional league. During the early seasons the league used a large, almost softball-sized ball, which was pitched underhand. By the league’s final years, however, the women’s game resembled conventional baseball much more closely, with teams using a smaller hard ball and pitchers employing an overhand pitch.
Despite promoting women’s baseball as a legitimate professional sport, Wrigley and Arthur Meyerhoff, the league’s later owner, were not champions of feminism. Team names such as the Milwaukee Chicks, the Fort Wayne Daisies, and the Rockford Peaches reveal their biases. Players were also required to embody what Wrigley designated as “the highest ideals of womanhood.” On the field, these ideals translated to the wearing of lipstick and short skirts that were extremely ill-suited for sliding into bases. Off the field, “the girls” endured mandatory charm-school classes and were forbidden to wear trousers or drink alcohol. The league, nonetheless, produced a number of excellent baseball players including first baseman Dorothy Kamenshek, second baseman Sophie Kurys, and pitcher Jean Faut. Televised major league baseball and lackadaisical promotion of AAGPBL games, however, led to the league’s demise in 1954.
