Arizona Diamondbacks, also called D-backs,  American professional baseball franchise based in Phoenix that plays in the National League (NL). In 2001, in only their fourth season in Major League Baseball, the Diamondbacks won the World Series.
The Diamondbacks were founded in 1998 as an expansion franchise, along with the Tampa Bay Devil Rays (now known as the Tampa Bay Rays). In their first season the Diamondbacks unsurprisingly finished last in their division. The team added free agent pitcher Randy Johnson before the 1999 season, and he—along with another new acquisition, Luis Gonzalez, and holdover third baseman Matt Williams—led the Diamondbacks to a rapid improvement as they won 100 games and earned a postseason berth (a first-round loss to the New York Mets). When Curt Schilling went to the team during the 2000 season and joined Johnson in the starting rotation, the Diamondbacks boasted arguably the top pair of pitchers in baseball, and the twosome were at their most dominant in 2001. That year Johnson and Schilling finished first and second in voting for the Cy Young Award (given annually to the league’s best pitcher) while leading Arizona to its second division title. The team then advanced to its first World Series, where it defeated the New York Yankees in a dramatic seven-game series behind co-Most Valuable Player performances by the two star pitchers.
The Diamondbacks again advanced to the postseason in 2002, but that success was followed by a quick descent into the divisional cellar as Arizona posted a 51–111 record in 2004. The team traded away both Schilling (2003) and Johnson (2005; though he returned to Arizona from 2007 to 2008) and attempted to rebuild around young position players and dominant pitcher Brandon Webb. That core led the D-backs to a second trip to the NL Championship Series in 2007 (a loss to the Colorado Rockies), and a significantly revamped squad again reached the postseason in 2011, where Arizona lost in the divisional round. Arizona then reeled off five consecutive nonwinning seasons before the team, in 2017, unexpectedly added 24 wins to its previous year’s total and qualified for the play-offs (another loss in the divisional round). The team won just 82 games in 2018 and missed the postseason.
