Bill Veeck, byname of William Louis Veeck, Jr.,  (born February 9, 1914, Hinsdale, Illinois, U.S.—died January 2, 1986, Chicago, Illinois), American professional baseball club executive and owner, who introduced many innovations in promotion.
Veeck grew up with baseball management. His father, a Chicago sportswriter, became president of the National League Chicago Cubs (1919–33), and young Veeck himself sold peanuts and scorecards at Wrigley Field during Cubs home games. He became treasurer for the Cubs in 1940. In 1941, with Charley Grimm, a former player and manager of the Cubs, he bought the Milwaukee Brewers, then the name of a Cub minor league property. They helped move the club from last place in 1941 to second place in 1942 and first place in 1943–45 while raising attendance to the highest level then known in the minor leagues. Improvement in team members was accompanied by a number of amusing promotional efforts, including giving away live animals and scheduling morning games with free breakfast for overnight workers.
In 1946 Veeck headed a syndicate that bought the franchise of the American League (AL) Cleveland Indians, who had not won a pennant since 1920. In the first year, the Indians drew more than one million fans for the first time. Veeck then hired Larry Doby, who, as a result, became the first African American ever to play in the AL. Shortly afterward Veeck also signed Satchel Paige, a well-known veteran of the Negro leagues. The Indians won the pennant and the World Series in 1948.
In 1949 the club was sold, and Veeck headed another group that bought the St. Louis Browns of the AL. In 1951, while still owner of the Browns, Veeck staged his most famous promotion when he had 3-foot 7-inch Ed Gaedel pinch-hit. Finding it impossible to throw to Gaedel’s strike zone, the pitcher walked him. Although the crowd thoroughly enjoyed the stunt, the league commissioner declared Gaedel’s contract invalid the following day. In 1953 Veeck sold his controlling interest in the Browns, and the franchise relocated to Baltimore.
Veeck returned to baseball in 1959, when he headed a group that acquired control of the AL’s Chicago White Sox. The team won its first pennant since 1919 that year, and attendance rose to nearly 1.5 million. He introduced a number of lasting innovations during this stint of owning the club, such as adding players’ last names to the back of their uniforms and installing the first scoreboard that set off fireworks when the home team hit a home run. Veeck sold his share of the ball club in 1961. In 1975 Veeck again headed a group that took control of the White Sox. In 1981 he sold the team once more, largely because of the financial difficulties stemming from intense bidding among baseball team owners for the contracts of free-agent players. Veeck, who believed that baseball’s primary function should be to entertain, became disillusioned with what he regarded as an increased emphasis on baseball as a business.
Veeck wrote, with Ed Linn, Veeck as in Wreck (1962), The Hustler’s Handbook (1965), and Thirty Tons a Day (1972).
