Bo Jackson, byname of Vincent Edward Jackson,  (born November 30, 1962, Bessemer, Alabama, U.S.), American athlete who starred for the Kansas City Royals of Major League Baseball and the Los Angeles Raiders of the National Football League (NFL) during his short but storied professional career and who is widely considered one of the greatest all-around athletes in history.
Jackson’s outstanding athletic ability manifested itself early in life. At McAdory High School in McCalla, Alabama, he excelled in athletics (track and field), baseball, and football, winning two state decathlon titles, throwing multiple no-hitters for the baseball team, and playing nearly every snap on offense and defense for the football team, in addition to handling all kicking duties. He was drafted by the New York Yankees out of high school, but he instead decided to attend Auburn University. Jackson lettered in all three sports at Auburn, but he made his biggest impact on the football field, where he was twice named a consensus All-American running back (1983 and 1985) and won the 1985 Heisman Trophy after rushing for 1,786 yards and 17 touchdowns.
Despite stating publicly that he did not want to play for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, Jackson was selected by the franchise with the first overall pick of the 1986 NFL draft. True to his word, he spurned the Bucs and signed with the Royals after that team selected him in the fourth round of the 1986 major-league draft. Jackson played in just 53 games in the minor leagues before making his debut with the Royals in 1986. Eligible again for the NFL draft in 1987, he was selected in the seventh round by the Raiders, whose owner, Al Davis, agreed to pay Jackson a full-time salary while allowing him to miss early-season games to complete his yearly baseball obligations.
It was during his time as a Royal and a Raider that Jackson made a massive impact on American sporting culture. He quickly gained national attention via his seemingly preternatural exploits, such as nearly scaling a 7-foot (2.1-metre) outfield wall to slow himself after making a running catch, rushing for a then team-record 221 yards in just his fifth career NFL game while playing to a national audience on Monday Night Football, and routinely throwing runners out at home plate from the outfield on the fly. Even in failure Jackson showed amazing athleticism and strength, as he did on those occasions when he broke his bat in two over his thigh after striking out. Jackson’s celebrity was augmented by a popular series of television commercials he filmed for the Nike shoe company that showed him demonstrating a wide range of athletic prowess while famous athletes declared that “Bo Knows” the sport in question.
In 1989 Jackson was named to the American League All-Star team during a season in which he established career highs with 32 home runs and 105 runs batted in. The following year he rushed for 698 yards and five touchdowns over 10 games to earn Pro Bowl honours, thus becoming the first athlete to make all-star teams in two major North American sports. In January 1991 Jackson injured his hip during a Raiders play-off game, and the resulting deterioration of the joint led to his never playing in the NFL again. He was subsequently released by the Royals and played three partial seasons for the Chicago White Sox (1991, 1993) and the California Angels (1994) with mixed results before retiring in 1995. Although his hip injury prevented him from fully realizing his athletic potential on the professional level, Jackson was nevertheless a cultural sensation who made a significant impact on the history of American sports.
