Bud Selig, byname of Allan H. Selig,  (born July 30, 1934, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, U.S.), American businessman who served as the de facto (1992–98) and official (1998–2015) commissioner of Major League Baseball (MLB).
After earning a bachelor’s degree in history and political science from the University of Wisconsin at Madison in 1956, Selig served two years in the military before returning to Milwaukee to work as a car dealer. An avid baseball fan, he eventually became the largest public stockholder in the Milwaukee Braves franchise, and, when the team moved to Atlanta in 1965, he organized a group of investors to bring a major league baseball team back to Milwaukee. His group failed in an attempt to buy the Chicago White Sox in 1969, but the following year they succeeded in acquiring—for $10.8 million—the bankrupt Seattle Pilots, which the group renamed the Milwaukee Brewers. With Selig as club president, the Brewers grew into a successful franchise, making it to the World Series in 1982.
After baseball commissioner Fay Vincent resigned his post in 1992, Selig became the de facto commissioner when his fellow owners selected him to be chairman of the Major League Executive Council. In that capacity, he presided over the contentious 234-day strike by players in 1994–95 that led to a precipitous drop in game attendance and the cancellation of the World Series for the first time since 1904. He formally assumed the title of baseball commissioner in 1998 after league owners unanimously voted to give him a five-year term. This marked the first time that a team owner had been chosen for the commissioner’s post.
While some accused Selig of looking after the owners’ interests at the players’ expense, others praised him for the changes he was able to bring about in the sport, including the introduction of three-division leagues and the corresponding fourth “Wild Card” play-off berth (1994; a second Wild Card was added to each league in 2012), as well as interleague play (1997). However, his 2003 decision to start awarding home-field advantage in the World Series to the league that won the annual All-Star Game was predominantly met with scorn by fans and media who complained that something as important as home-field advantage in the championship series should not be determined by an exhibition game.
In 2002 Selig and the league owners pushed for a luxury tax on team payrolls and increased revenue sharing between large- and small-market franchises. Another strike was narrowly averted after the players’ union finally agreed to the tax and revenue sharing as part of a new collective-bargaining agreement. Despite Selig’s actions, massive payroll disparities between large- and small-market franchises persisted, and occasionally grew even wider, over the course of his commissionership. Nevertheless, MLB’s overall revenues skyrocketed during Selig’s tenure: the league brought in just over $1 billion annually when he became commissioner but was nearly a $10 billion-a-year industry by 2015.
A major issue during Selig’s tenure as commissioner was the use of banned substances, especially steroids, by players. After appearing at a congressional hearing on the topic in 2005, he introduced harsher penalties for the use of such substances. Despite those measures, however, steroids continued to be a growing problem. In 2006 Selig asked former U.S. senator George Mitchell to lead an investigation into the illegal use of performance-enhancing drugs. Mitchell’s report, issued in December 2007, stated that drug abuse was pervasive throughout the major leagues. The report led Selig to create a permanent substance-abuse investigations department within Major League Baseball.
In 2008 Selig, who had previously resisted similar technological advances, oversaw the implementation of limited instant replay—the process whereby umpires consult a video monitor to review the previous play—in order to analyze disputed home runs. The instant replay process was expanded in 2014 to allow managers to challenge one umpire’s ruling per game (plus a second if the first challenge is upheld upon review), with the exception of ball and strike calls at home plate.
In January 2015 Selig retired and was replaced as MLB commissioner by Rob Manfred, formerly the chief operating officer of MLB. Selig was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, New York, in 2017.
