Chicago White Sox, also called South Siders,  American professional baseball team based in Chicago that plays in the American League (AL). The White Sox have won three World Series titles, two in the early 1900s (1906, 1917) and the third 88 years later, in 2005. They are often referred to as the “South Siders,” a reference to their location in relation to Chicago’s other major league team, the Cubs.
The White Sox were originally known as the Sioux City (Iowa) Cornhuskers, and the team was founded as a minor league organization in 1894. The club was purchased by Charles Comiskey at the end of its first season and was relocated to St. Paul, Minnesota. The team moved to Chicago in 1900, and the renamed American League was elevated to major league status the following year, with Chicago taking the first league title in 1901. The Chicago incarnation of the franchise was known as the White Stockings until 1904, when they took on their current name.
The team’s image was long tarnished by its appearance in the 1919 World Series, in which Chicago players conspired to fix the outcome in favour of the underdog Cincinnati Reds. Gambling connections were eventually linked to eight members of the team, including outfielder Shoeless Joe Jackson. In what became known as the Black Sox Scandal, evidence revealed that the men had intentionally lost the World Series in eight games, earning the players bans and damaging the reputation of the team and the sport. In the wake of the scandal, the White Sox struggled for the next 86 seasons, winning just one AL pennant—in 1959 with a hustling team nicknamed “the Go-Go Sox,” though they also won a division championship in 1983 with a group of players remembered for “winning ugly.”
While they did not have many successful teams during much of the 20th century, the White Sox featured a number of future Hall of Famers, including Eddie Collins, Luke Appling, Al Simmons, Luis Aparicio, and Nellie Fox, as well as fan favourites Minnie Miñoso and Harold Baines. In 1981 the Sox signed Carlton Fisk, an 11-time all-star (four with the White Sox) and one of the greatest catchers of all time. First baseman Frank Thomas played 16 years for the team and won back-to-back AL Most Valuable Player awards in 1993 and 1994.
In 2005 manager Ozzie Guillen led a veteran White Sox team to an unexpected championship, the team’s first World Series title since 1917. The White Sox returned to the postseason in 2008 but failed to advance past the first round of the playoffs. The following three seasons saw the team finish no higher than second in its division, and mounting tensions between Guillen and team management led to his being released from his contract shortly before the end of the 2011 season. The White Sox then entered a prolonged rebuilding period that saw the team predominantly finish toward the bottom of the divisional standings through the end of the decade.
