Cincinnati Reds,  American professional baseball franchise based in Cincinnati, Ohio. The Reds play in the National League (NL) and were founded in 1882. They have won five World Series titles (1919, 1940, 1975, 1976, 1990) and nine NL pennants.
The city of Cincinnati lays claim to hosting the first truly professional baseball team, called the Red Stockings, which began play in 1869 and was undefeated in its first 81 games against amateur clubs. Another Cincinnati-based team by the same name was one of the founding members of the NL in 1876, but this team was expelled from the league in 1880 for playing games on Sunday and allowing liquor on the grounds of its ballpark. While 1882—the year a Red Stockings club that featured a few members of the banned NL squad joined the nascent American Association (AA)—is officially recognized by Major League Baseball as the current franchise’s first year, most Cincinnatians nevertheless consider the Reds the oldest franchise in baseball, and the Reds organization itself includes these earlier clubs in the team history.
The Red Stockings finished atop the AA in their first season and posted winning records in most of their eight years in the league. The team moved back to the NL in 1890, which was the same year it shortened its nickname to “Reds.” Cincinnati fielded a number of mediocre teams through the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th, never finishing higher than third place in the NL until 1919. The 1919 squad won 96 games behind outfielder Edd Roush and pitcher Dolf Luque on its way to the franchise’s first World Series berth. The Reds won the World Series five games to three over the Chicago White Sox, but their championship was tarnished when eight of Chicago’s players were accused of having taken bribes to throw the series (see Black Sox Scandal). Cincinnati’s success was short-lived, however, and in the mid-1920s the team returned to the bottom of the NL for a long stretch, including four straight last-place finishes from 1931 to 1934.
In 1938 the Reds’ young star pitcher Johnny Vander Meer became the only player in baseball history to throw no-hitters in consecutive starts. Vander Meer was a part of a nucleus of players that also included future Hall of Fame catcher Ernie Lombardi and that led the Reds to NL pennants in 1939 and 1940, as well as a World Series win in the latter season. By the middle of the decade, the Reds again found themselves routinely finishing in the bottom half of the NL.
Fearing association with communism at the height of the Red Scare in the United States, the team officially changed its nickname to “Redlegs” from 1954 to 1959. During this period one of the Reds’ few bright spots was Ted (“Big Klu”) Kluszewski, a power-hitting first baseman who famously cut the sleeves off his uniform to free his huge biceps. In 1956 Cincinnati called up outfielder Frank Robinson from the minor leagues, and he quickly became one of the biggest stars in the game. Robinson led the Reds to a pennant in 1961 (which was followed by a loss to the New York Yankees in the World Series), but in 1965 he was traded to the Baltimore Orioles for three players of relatively little consequence in what is considered by many observers to be one of the worst trades in the history of the game.
Baseball in the 1970s was dominated by Cincinnati teams known as the “Big Red Machine,” which had left behind Crosley Field, with its distinctive left field terrace, for a new home, Riverfront Stadium. Boasting a regular lineup that featured three future Hall of Famers (catcher Johnny Bench, second baseman Joe Morgan, and first baseman Tony Pérez) as well as all-time major league hits leader Pete Rose, the Big Red Machine—under the guidance of manager Sparky Anderson—won five division titles in the first seven years of the decade. The Machine’s first two trips to the World Series ended in disappointment, however, as it lost to Robinson’s Orioles in 1970 and the Oakland Athletics in 1972, which was followed by a surprising loss to the underdog New York Mets in the 1973 NL Championship Series. The years of frustration ended in 1975, when the Reds won a remarkable 108 games and beat the Boston Red Sox for the franchise’s first World Series title in 35 years. While the 1976 Reds won six fewer games than their 1975 counterparts, they led major league baseball in all the major offensive statistical categories and swept both teams they faced in the postseason en route to a second consecutive championship, leading a number of baseball historians to claim that they were the second greatest team ever, after the famed 1927 Yankees.
The Reds closed out the 1970s with two second-place divisional finishes and an NL Championship Series loss in 1979, but they missed out on the postseason in each season of the following decade. The team’s most notable event of the 1980s was the 1989 lifetime ban from baseball of then manager Rose for gambling on the sport.
In 1990 the Reds surprisingly rebounded from their turbulent 1989 by winning their division after having never fallen out of first place for the entire season, the first time the feat had occurred in NL history. Behind first-year manager Lou Piniella, all-star shortstop Barry Larkin, and a motley crew of relief pitchers known as the “Nasty Boys,” the Reds swept Oakland to win the franchise’s fifth World Series.
Cincinnati fielded a few competitive teams through 1999, but the Reds of the first decade of the 21st century finished most of their seasons with losing records. In 2003 the Reds got a new home, the Great American Ball Park.
In 2010 the Reds ended a 15-year play-off drought—and surprised most baseball observers—by winning a divisional title after having placed no higher than third in their division in the previous nine seasons. Cincinnati bested that achievement in 2012 by winning 97 games (the team’s highest win total since the days of the Big Red Machine) and captured another NL Central championship. The Reds were then eliminated in the Division Series, and, the following year, the team won 90 games but lost in a one-game Wild Card play-off. Cincinnati could not continue its unexpected success, and the team returned to the lower echelons of the NL the following season.
