Cleveland Indians,  American professional baseball team based in Cleveland that plays in the American League (AL). The Indians have won six AL pennants and two World Series titles, the first in 1920 and the second in 1948.
The Indians began as a minor league club based in Grand Rapids, Michigan, and moved to Cleveland in 1900. The team was elevated to major league status in 1901 and was called the Cleveland Bluebirds, or Blues. They became the Cleveland Bronchos in 1902 before taking on the name “Naps” the following year in honour of their new star player, Nap Lajoie. In 1915 owner Charles Somers requested that local newspapers pick a new name for the franchise, and “Indians” was chosen. In 1916 the team traded for Tris Speaker, who led the Indians to their first World Series championship in 1920.
The Indians did not reach the postseason again for 28 years, but their return was memorable. The 1948 Indians were led by shortstop-manager Lou Boudreau, the AL’s Most Valuable Player that year, one of five future Hall of Fame members on the team. The others were outfielder Larry Doby, the first African American to play in the AL, and three pitchers: Bob Feller, Bob Lemon, and 42-year-old rookie and former Negro league star Satchel Paige. (In 1975 the Indians made Frank Robinson the major league’s first African American manager.) The Indians finished the 1948 regular season tied with the Boston Red Sox, whom they defeated in the first one-game playoff in major league history. Cleveland then bested the Boston Braves in six games to capture their second World Series title.
The Indians won 111 games in 1954 but were swept by the New York Giants in a World Series that produced one of baseball’s most enduring images—Willie Mays’s over-the-shoulder catch of Indian Vic Wertz’s towering drive to deep centre field in the first game. Thereafter the Indians entered a long period of mediocrity, finishing with a losing record in 27 of the 34 seasons between 1960 and 1993. A popular legend attributes this period to the “curse of Rocky Colavito,” visited on the Indians in 1960 when the team traded Colavito, the AL’s leading home-run hitter, in 1959 to the Detroit Tigers for Harvey Kuenn, who had led the league in batting averages.
Under manager Mike Hargrove, the Indians reemerged and won five straight AL Central Division titles (1995–99), advancing to the World Series twice during their run (the Indians lost in both World Series appearances). The success of those teams—which featured Manny Ramírez, Omar Vizquel, and Jim Thome, among others—in addition to the popularity of Cleveland’s new ballpark, Jacobs Field, led to the Indians setting a record for consecutive sold-out home games, 455 between 1995 and 2001 (since broken by the Boston Red Sox). Soon after the end of that streak, the team’s performance began to falter. Cleveland posted just two winning records from 2002 to 2012, but one of those seasons (2007) ended with a dramatic seven-game loss to the eventual champion Red Sox in the AL Championship Series.
In 2013 the Indians, under new manager Terry Francona, added 24 wins to their total from the previous season and made a surprising trip to the postseason, where the team lost in a one-game Wild Card playoff. Three years later the Indians overcame a rash of injuries to their pitching staff to win a division title. Owing to Francona’s masterful manipulation of his depleted roster, Cleveland then lost just one game during the AL playoffs en route to a return to the World Series, where the Indians lost a dramatic seven-game series to the Chicago Cubs. Cleveland won another division title in 2017. In the course of doing so, the team ran off a modern Major League Baseball-record 22-game winning streak, but the team’s season again ended in disappointment as the Indians lost their opening playoff series. The Indians won a third consecutive division title in 2018 but once again lost their first series of the postseason. Cleveland’s three-year postseason streak came to an end with a second-place divisional finish in 2019.
Over the years, the Indians have been the subject of several motion pictures—including The Kid from Cleveland (1949) and Major League (1989)—and, for a period, entertainer Bob Hope was a part owner of the team.
