Kansas City Royals,  American professional baseball team based in Kansas City, Missouri. The Royals have won four American League (AL) pennants and two World Series championships (1985 and 2015).
The Royals were founded in 1969 as an expansion franchise that was granted by Major League Baseball after the Kansas City Athletics moved to Oakland the previous year. The Royals did not take long to overcome the usual trials of an expansion club; they finished in second place in the AL Western Division three times in their first seven seasons. In an effort to cultivate prospects other franchises had missed, team owner Ewing Kauffman founded the Royals Baseball Academy in Sarasota, Florida, in 1970. The academy aimed to use technological innovations and advanced training techniques to develop baseball skills in overlooked prospects with raw athletic ability, and it produced 14 major leaguers from the 77 prospects that attended the academy in its four years of existence. In 1973 three key members of the Royals during the team’s most successful era made their debut: second baseman Frank White (a member of the first Royals Academy class), outfielder and designated hitter Hal McRae, and future Hall of Fame third baseman George Brett. The trio anchored Royals squads that won three consecutive division titles between 1976 and 1978 but that were defeated by the New York Yankees in each of the AL Championship Series (ALCS) of those seasons. After another second-place finish in 1979, Kansas City won a fourth division crown in 1980, as well as its first AL pennant, which was followed by a loss to the Philadelphia Phillies in the World Series.
The Royals made the postseason the following year despite having an overall losing record, owing to a midseason player’s strike that led to an idiosyncratic split-season play-off format. The team was quickly eliminated, and the next two years saw it finish second in its division. In 1984 the Royals once more advanced to the ALCS, where they were swept by a powerhouse Detroit Tigers squad. The team’s postseason disappointment finally ended in 1985 when the Royals—with Cy Young Award-winning pitcher Brett Saberhagen and all-star closer Dan Quisenberry complementing an offense led by Brett—went to their second World Series, where they faced the cross-state rival St. Louis Cardinals. After trailing in the Series three games to one, the Royals won Game Five on the road to set up a Game Six that became notorious for a controversial ninth-inning decision by umpire Don Denkinger. In that game the Cardinals led 1–0 in the bottom of the ninth when pinch-hitter Jorge Orta was called safe on an infield single that was shown to be an out on television replays. The Royals took advantage of the break and rallied to score two runs in the inning and force a deciding Game Seven, which they won handily to claim their first World Series title.
Kansas City’s remarkable stretch of seven play-off appearances in 10 years proved to be short-lived, as the team entered into a long postseason drought beginning in 1986. The Royals added two-sport star Bo Jackson that year, bringing hope that the franchise would continue its winning ways, but a severe hip injury he sustained while playing football for the Los Angeles Raiders in 1991 effectively ended his promising career and began a trend of the team’s failing to capitalize on its promising young players. While the team did boast all-star first baseman and designated hitter Mike Sweeney through the late 1990s and the middle of the first decade of the 21st century, the Royals of that time were notable for their propensity to acquire young talented players—such as outfielders Carlos Beltrán, Johnny Damon, and Jermaine Dye—only to trade them away before they reached their prime. That practice, combined with the financial difficulties of fielding a competitive “small-market” team in that period, resulted in the Royals’ finishing with losing records for the vast majority of those two decades, including four 100-loss seasons between 2002 and 2006.
In 2013 a young Royals roster finally broke through after years of frustration and posted the franchise’s best record (86–76) since the strike-shortened 1994 season, finishing five games out of a berth in the postseason. Kansas City built on that momentum the following year and captured an AL wild-card position. The team then won a dramatic extra-inning wild-card contest and swept its Division Series to earn a spot in the AL Championship Series. There the Royals swept the Baltimore Orioles to advance to the World Series, becoming the first team in major league history to open a postseason with eight consecutive victories. The team’s magnificent run ended in a loss to the San Francisco Giants in the seven-game series. The Royals continued their strong play in the following season, winning an AL-high 95 games and advancing to a second consecutive World Series. There the Royals staged a series of timely rallies to beat the New York Mets in five games and capture the second world championship in franchise history. The team’s resurgence was short-lived, however, and the Royals failed to qualify for the play-offs in the following season. Kansas City’s fall from baseball’s elite was rapid, and the team lost 104 games in 2018.
