Major League Baseball, as the combined National and American leagues in the United States are now called, faces new challenges—both external and internal—with the increase of baseball’s international appeal. External pressures include strong professional baseball leagues in Japan, Taiwan, and South Korea (see Japanese baseball leagues) that could hamper major league baseball’s expansion into those Asian markets. Internal pressures involve such issues as the location of the major leagues themselves, which are no longer based exclusively in the United States (each league includes a Canadian team), and the enormous increase in the number of foreign players, particularly Latin Americans from the Caribbean basin. Both of these factors could hinder the sport’s ability to market itself as “all-American.” When the major leagues and affiliated minor leagues were called organized baseball to distinguish them from independent baseball (i.e., the Negro leagues), they withstood gambling scandals, desegregation controversies, expansion, and rule changes. Now Major League Baseball may be facing yet a new test: how to deal with the globalization of the game.
Though there have been Latin Americans in the major leagues since the 19th century, not until now have they been so numerous and played so many different positions and roles. At the start of the 2000 season, there were 71 major league players from the Dominican Republic, 33 from Puerto Rico, 31 from Venezuela, 14 from Mexico, 9 from Cuba, 8 from Panama, 2 from Colombia, and 1 from Nicaragua. Thus, of some 1,200 players in the major leagues, 169 (about 15 percent) were from Latin America. There were also a number of players of Latin descent (mostly with Puerto Rican, Cuban, or Mexican ancestry) born in the United States. However, the increase in Hispanic players on the field has not been accompanied by a proportionate rise in the number of Hispanic managers. There have been a few Latin managers in the past—Miguel Angel González, Octavio (“Cookie”) Rojas, Preston Gómez, and Tony Pérez, for example—but in each case these men were the sole Latin major league managers during their tenure.
In the past, Latins gravitated to positions in which strength was not at a premium. Their forte tended to be fielding, and in some cases pitching, but not hitting. By contrast, the 1990s featured Latin sluggers in the outfield (José Canseco, Juan González, Manny Ramírez, and Sammy Sosa), catchers (Iván [“Pudge”] Rodríguez and Sandy Alomar), and hard-hitting first basemen (Rafael Palmeiro and Andrés Galarraga). Latin pitchers tended to be, and still are, guileful rather than fast, but this, too, has changed. Pedro Martínez and Armando Benítez, for example, both have exceptional speed.
The dramatic increase in Latin players in the major leagues is due to several factors. First, the major league expansion that began in 1961 eventually increased the number of teams from 16 to 30 and forced owners to look farther afield to fill player rosters. Second, the increasing competition for young athletes in other professional sports, such as gridiron football and basketball, decreased the number available to play baseball. The popularity of football (soccer) in the suburbs, the unsuitability of baseball to the inner city (because of the need for large fields), and fewer collegiate scholarships being offered in baseball in comparison with gridiron football and basketball also served to make the game less attractive to young men in the United States. By contrast, boys play baseball year-round in the warm Caribbean basin and Panama, and there is little competition from other sports. In Mexico, Central America, Venezuela, and Colombia, football plays a more important role than baseball, but, particularly in Venezuela, baseball is also a strong component of the national culture. Further, baseball’s lifting of the colour bar with the signing of Jackie Robinson in 1947 permitted black Latin players to play major league baseball and thereby greatly increased the number of players eligible to play in the United States. Finally, Latin American players are cheaper to sign and develop than other players are in the United States. Many Latin players come from impoverished backgrounds; they seldom have legal representation; and they typically are not covered by the rules governing recruitment (except in Puerto Rico).
Baseball arrived in Latin America primarily through Cuba. In 1864 Nemesio and Ernesto Guilló took the first ball and bat to the island on their return from Springhill College in Mobile, Alabama, and in 1868 they organized the Habana (Havana) Baseball Club. They were among the many Cuban men sent to be educated in the United States during the second half of the 19th century, and a number of these men returned to Cuba with a love for baseball. For instance, between 1875 and 1877 the brothers Teodoro and Carlos de Zaldo studied at Fordham College, in the Bronx in New York City, and, upon their return to Cuba in 1878, they founded the Almendares Baseball Club, which became the Havana club’s rival. Soon after, an amateur Cuban league was organized, which slowly became professional, evolving into the Cuban winter league that operated until 1961, when it was abolished by Fidel Castro’s regime.
Cubans played baseball in the United States at an early date. From 1871 to 1873 Esteban Bellán, another Cuban Fordham student, played third base, shortstop, and some outfield (in a total of 59 games) for the Troy Haymakers and the New York Mutuals, teams in the National Association, the earliest American professional league. Bellán was the first Latin American in what could be considered the major leagues. The first black professional team in the United States, founded in 1885 by waiters at New York’s Argyle Hotel, was called the Cuban Giants, though not a single player on the team was Cuban. They were all African Americans styling themselves as Cubans, obviously mimicking Cuban teams in the New York and New Jersey area at the time. The Cuban Giants thrived when they moved to Trenton, New Jersey, and one of their splinter squads visited Havana in 1900, where they astonished Cuban citizens with both their name and their skill. Multiracial Cuban teams began to travel through the United States during the first two decades of the 20th century, barnstorming and competing in independent circuits. Some Cuban players, such as shortstop Luis (“Anguila” [meaning “eel”]) Bustamante, gained renown. The All Cubans, and eventually the Cuban Stars, both East and West (the East team played in New York and the West team in Ohio), became famous, and the Stars were entered as charter members of the Negro National League in 1920. A Cuban left-handed slugger, Cristóbal Torriente, playing for the Chicago American Giants, reached stardom in the Negro National League. Averaging .335 at bat, he played 17 years in the Negro leagues and later was also outstanding in Cuban League play.
Meanwhile, white Cuban players (of Spanish, as opposed to African, ancestry) entered the minor leagues of organized baseball in the Connecticut League and the New York–New Jersey League. Colombian player Luis Castro became the second Latin American in the majors when he spent the 1902 season with the Philadelphia Athletics as a utility infielder. The meaningful entry of Latin players into the major leagues was yet to come, but the way was paved by the U.S. occupation of Cuba between 1906 and 1909.
After defeating Spain in the 1898 Spanish-American War, the United States governed Cuba until 1902, when the independent Cuban republic was proclaimed. But the Cuban constitution contained an amendment that gave the United States the right to intervene in instances of political turmoil. After a hotly contested presidential election in Cuba in 1906 led to open civil war, U.S. troops landed and installed a military government. During the three-year occupation, the presence of baseball on the island increased. Negro-circuit and major league teams played often in Cuba. The Cincinnati Reds visited in the fall of 1908 and were shut out three times by Almendares pitcher José de la Caridad Méndez. Because Méndez was black, he was unable to play on a major league team; he had a notable career as a player and later as manager of the Kansas City Monarchs, one of the best teams in the Negro leagues. When white Cubans Rafael Almeida and Armando Marsans joined the National League Cincinnati Reds in 1911, they became the first significant major league Latin American players in the 20th century.
During the 1913–14 season the Longbranch Cubans of the New York–New Jersey League became a repository of Cuban talent for the major leagues. Two players who made the grade, pitcher Adolfo Luque and catcher Miguel Angel González, not only had long, distinguished careers in the majors in the United States but also became the patriarchs of professional baseball in Cuba nearly until its demise. González was a “good field no hit” catcher (a phrase he coined), while Luque became the first Latin star in the major leagues. He won 27 games for the Reds in 1923 and went on to amass 193 victories over a 20-year career. Such other Cubans as Angel Aragón, Merito Acosta, Oscar Tuero, José Acosta, and Pedro Dibut had brief, undistinguished major league careers in the late 1910s and the ’20s, but they still were the first substantial group of Latin Americans to play in the majors.
