Manny Ramirez, in full Manuel Aristides Ramirez,  (born May 30, 1972, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic), Dominican American professional baseball player who is considered one of the greatest right-handed hitters in the history of the game.
Ramirez left the Dominican Republic in 1985 for the New York City borough of the Bronx, where he graduated from George Washington High School in 1991. He was drafted by the Cleveland Indians in June 1991, and in his first professional season, while playing for Cleveland’s Burlington, North Carolina, minor-league affiliate, he was voted Appalachian League Player of the Year. Ramirez joined the Indians in 1993 and established himself as one of the most productive batters in Major League Baseball. Although sidelined by a hamstring injury for part of the 2000 season, he amassed 38 home runs and 122 runs batted in (RBIs) for the Indians in 118 games while compiling a .351 batting average. During the following winter, he signed an eight-year, $160 million contract with the Boston Red Sox.
Ramirez, who had been named an American League (AL) All-Star in each season since 1998, continued to produce in Boston. Additionally, his offbeat personality and unusual behaviour (such as occasionally playing in the outfield with a water bottle tucked into his back pocket) both on and off the field—which was usually excused by local media as simply “Manny being Manny”—served to lighten the mood around Boston’s Fenway Park, where the team’s failure to win a World Series since 1918 often created a defeatist and moribund atmosphere. In 2004 Ramirez sparked a postseason run for the Red Sox that resulted in the team’s first World Series title in 86 years, and he was voted Most Valuable Player of the World Series. During that Series, Ramirez had 7 hits in 17 at bats, including a home run and four RBIs, for a .412 average during a four-game sweep of the St. Louis Cardinals. In 2007 Ramirez batted .296 during the regular season with 20 home runs and 88 RBIs, but it was his performance in the playoffs that was truly notable. He broke the career postseason home run record during the AL Championship Series, where his .409 batting average keyed a Boston rally from a three-games-to-one deficit over his old Cleveland Indians team, and the Red Sox went on to win another World Series, sweeping the Colorado Rockies in four games.
Ramirez’s aloof attitude, history of questionable injury claims, and oft-expressed dissatisfaction with Red Sox management served to sour both the team and its fans on the slugger over his eight years in Boston. Soon after hitting the 500th home run of his career in 2008, he was traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers. Ramirez joined the Dodgers at the mid-season trading deadline and quickly endeared himself to Los Angeles fans. He was credited with bringing a looser attitude to his new team, which went from a 54–54 record when he arrived to a final 84–78 record, the National League (NL) West Division title, and a berth in the NL Championship Series. In 53 games with the Dodgers—approximately a third of the regular-season schedule—Ramirez hit .396 with 17 home runs and 53 RBIs and thereby supplied the team with some much-needed right-handed power.
After heated negotiations between Ramirez’s agent and the Los Angeles front office, he re-signed with the Dodgers in March 2009. Ramirez continued his hot hitting the following season: through the first 27 games of 2009, he was batting .348 with 6 home runs and 20 RBIs. But on May 7 he was suspended for 50 games because he had tested positive for use of performance-enhancing drugs; he claimed it was a false positive caused by his prescription medication. His play fell off after his return to the Dodgers, and he finished the season with a .290 batting average. He was waived by the Dodgers in August 2010 and was claimed by the Chicago White Sox. Ramirez signed with the Tampa Bay Rays before the 2011 season. He went just 1-for-17 in five games with the Rays before abruptly retiring in April after he had reportedly tested positive for performance-enhancing drugs a second time. Ramirez returned to professional baseball in February 2012, playing in the minor leagues for a number of franchises as well as with a team in the top Taiwanese baseball league. In 2014 he became a player-coach for the Chicago Cubs’ minor-league AAA affiliate.
Ramirez returned to the playing field in 2017 when he signed with the Kochi Fighting Dogs of a Japanese independent league. However, he left the team later that year because of a knee injury.
