Oakland Athletics, also called Oakland A’s,  American professional baseball team based in Oakland, California, that plays in the American League (AL). The Athletics—who are often simply referred to as the “A’s”—have won nine World Series championships and 15 AL pennants.
Founded in 1901 and based in Philadelphia, the A’s were one of the original eight members of the AL. The first half century of the franchise’s existence was dominated by the iconic Connie Mack, who managed the A’s from the team’s inaugural year to 1950. The A’s posted winning records in their first seven seasons, including AL pennants in 1902 and 1905, the latter of which earned the team its first World Series berth, in which the A’s came up on the short end of a five-game series with the New York Giants. The A’s returned to the World Series in 1910 and 1911, winning on each occasion behind the pitching of Charles Bender and Eddie Plank, as well as the batting of third baseman Frank (“Home Run”) Baker, second baseman Eddie Collins, and the other members of the famed “$100,000 infield” (so called because of the purported combined market value of the foursome). This core advanced to two more World Series in 1913 and 1914 (a win over the New York Giants and a loss to the Boston Braves, respectively) before competition from the newly formed Federal League forced Mack to sell off his star players to other teams in order to keep the franchise solvent. As a result, the A’s first period of dominance was immediately followed by a woeful stretch of seven consecutive last-place finishes from 1915 to 1921 (including a 117-loss season in 1916).
The year 1925 was extremely significant for the struggling franchise. In addition to the A’s finishing that season with their first winning record in a decade, the year saw three future Hall of Famers—first baseman Jimmie Foxx, pitcher Lefty Grove, and catcher Mickey Cochrane—make their debuts with the team, joining a solid core that already featured all-time great outfielder Al Simmons. After finishing in second place behind the powerhouse New York Yankees in 1927 and 1928, the A’s won both the AL pennant and the World Series title in 1929 and 1930. The A’s lost in their third consecutive trip to the World Series in 1931 (a seven-game defeat at the hands of the St. Louis Cardinals), which was followed by another slide back to the bottom of the AL. In the 20 seasons between 1935 and 1954, the A’s never placed higher than fourth in the league, with 11 last-place finishes. The team’s prolonged poor play, combined with the emergence of the crosstown Phillies of the National League, led to increased financial strain on the A’s ownership and the sale of the team to an out-of-town businessman in 1954, who in turn moved the A’s to Kansas City, Missouri, in 1955.
The A’s did not post a single winning season in their 13 years in Kansas City, and their tenure in the city was most notable for flamboyant businessman Charlie Finley’s purchase of the team in 1960. Finley introduced a number of quirky innovations to the team and its ballpark in an attempt to stimulate attendance, but these failed to have much of an impact, and the resulting loss of income—combined with his clashes with local civic leaders—led Finley to move the team to Oakland in 1968. Propelled by such young greats as outfielder Reggie Jackson and pitchers Catfish Hunter, Vida Blue, and Rollie Fingers, the A’s quickly turned the franchise’s fortunes around in their new home, winning three consecutive World Series titles from 1972 to 1974. The small-market A’s lost most of their big stars with the advent of free agency at the end of the 1976 season, and they entered yet another rebuilding period.
The A’s of the 1980s and early 1990s showcased slugger Mark McGwire, closer Dennis Eckersley, and stolen-base king Rickey Henderson, and they advanced to three consecutive World Series (1988–90), winning a Bay Area showdown in 1989 over the now San Francisco Giants. The late 1990s saw the Athletics turn to a new management strategy that focused on acquiring cheaper, less-known players by giving added weight to in-depth statistical analysis (such analysis is referred to as sabermetrics) over traditional scouting methods, a strategy that became known by the term “Moneyball” (so named after the title of a best-selling book about A’s general manager Billy Beane). Many other franchises began implementing variations of that strategy after Beane built teams that qualified for five postseason berths in a seven-year span (2000–06) while having one of the lowest payrolls in baseball.
The A’s were not able to duplicate that period of surprising success while maintaining one of the lowest payrolls in baseball over the following five years. However, in 2012 the team produced a 20-game improvement over its 2011 record and rallied from a five-game deficit to the Texas Rangers with nine games remaining in the regular season to capture the AL West championship before losing in the divisional playoff round. The A’s won another division championship in 2013 but were once again eliminated in the AL Division Series. In 2014 Oakland sent its fans on an emotional roller coaster: the team had far-and-away the best record in the majors at the All-Star break (59–36) but threatened an epic collapse in the stretch run, as the team ultimately squandered its division lead and finished just one game ahead of the Seattle Mariners for the second AL wild-card position. The A’s then lost a 12-inning wild-card contest to the Kansas City Royals to end one of the more-frustrating seasons for any team in recent baseball history. Oakland’s on-field performance then fell off, as the team had three consecutive last-place divisional finishes from 2015 to 2017. In 2018 the A’s added 22 wins to their record to qualify for an unexpected playoff berth, but the playoff futility of the team that began in the Moneyball era continued with a loss in the Wild Card Game. The A’s repeated those results (a 97–65 record and a loss in the Wild Card Game) in 2019.
