Ray Dandridge, in full Raymond Emmett Dandridge, bynames Dandy and Hooks,  (born August 31, 1913, Richmond, Virginia, U.S.—died February 12, 1994, Palm Bay, Florida), American professional baseball player who spent most of his career between 1933 and 1955 playing in the Negro leagues and on teams outside the United States.
Dandridge was an outstanding defensive third baseman. Although he had little power, he often posted batting averages of over .300.  He began his career with Negro league teams in Detroit and Nashville in 1933, but after one season he moved on to the Newark Dodgers (later called the Eagles) of the Negro National League, where he was a star player for seven seasons during the 1930s and ’40s. The most productive period of his career, however, was spent in Mexico. The colour barrier in the United States and the lure of higher salaries in Mexico landed Dandridge on the Veracruz Blues, a team that featured other Negro League stars, including Willie Wells, Josh Gibson, and Cool Papa Bell. Dandridge played in the Mexican League for eight seasons—for both Veracruz and Mexico City—between 1940 and 1948, compiling a .347 cumulative batting average. Not only did Dandridge make more money than he would have playing in the Negro leagues, but he and the other black players from the United States were treated with a respect that they were unaccustomed to back at home and were often extremely popular with the Mexican fans. Dandridge was elected to the Mexican Baseball Hall of Fame in Monterrey in 1989.
Dandridge returned from Mexico in 1949 to manage and play for the New York Cubans. That year he also was signed by the New York Giants, who assigned him to their minor league club in Minneapolis, Minnesota, where he was chosen as the American Association Rookie of the Year. At the time Dandridge was 36 years old, although he had told the Giants he was 29. In 1950 he was selected as the Most Valuable Player in the American Association after tallying 195 hits and posting a .311 batting average. He played two more seasons in Minneapolis, followed by three years with various minor league teams before retiring in 1955. Despite his success, Dandridge was never able to fulfill his dream of playing in the major leagues. He was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, New York, in 1987.
