Tampa Bay Rays,  American professional baseball team based in St. Petersburg, Florida, that plays in the American League (AL). The Rays began play in 1998 and were known as the Devil Rays until the end of the 2007 season.
In the years before the advent of the Rays, the Tampa–St. Petersburg area was often suggested as a relocation site for many struggling major league baseball teams. The region had been a centre for major league spring training since the Chicago Cubs moved their operation to Tampa in 1913, and many teams expressed interest in moving to a site with a well-established fan base. However, no teams relocated to the area, and Tampa Bay went without a major league franchise until it was granted an expansion team at the 1995 Major League Baseball owner meetings.
Months before their inaugural season began, Tampa Bay signed future Hall of Famer Wade Boggs, who grew up in Tampa and further spurred fan interest in the new team. However, the Devil Rays franchise did not have an auspicious beginning: it posted losing records in each of its first 10 seasons and finished last in its division in every year save one, when it finished second to last.
In 2008 the newly renamed Rays engineered one of the greatest turnarounds in professional sports history. Behind the leadership of manager Joe Maddon and the play of young stars Scott Kazmir, Matt Garza, Evan Longoria, and Carl Crawford, the Rays posted a 95–67 record—a 29-game improvement from their 2007 mark of 66–96—and qualified for the first playoff appearance in the franchise’s history as AL East Division champions. In the American League Championship Series, the Rays bested the defending world champion Boston Red Sox in seven games to advance to the World Series. The Rays lost the World Series in five games to the Philadelphia Phillies, but their 2008 season still stood as one of the most dramatic one-year turnarounds in sports history.
The Rays again reached the playoffs in 2010, and in 2011 they staged the greatest last-month comeback in Major League Baseball history. That season the team rallied from a nine-game deficit to the Red Sox in the Wild Card standings to clinch a playoff berth with a victory in the final game of the season, in which they trailed 7–0 in the eighth inning. However, the Rays lost their opening playoff series in both 2010 and 2011. The team won a one-game Wild Card postseason contest in 2013 but again lost in the Division Series round. The Rays’ play then fell off, and Maddon departed for the Cubs after Tampa Bay finished the 2014 season with a losing record. That season marked the beginning of a four-year streak of losing seasons that was snapped in 2018 when the rebuilt Rays won a surprising 90 games but finished outside postseason qualification. Tampa Bay further improved in 2019, winning 92 games and the Wild Card Game to advance to the Division Series, which the Rays lost in five games. The Rays had the best record in the AL in 2020 (40–20, since the MLB shortened its season amid the COVID-19 pandemic) and then won their second pennant with a seven-game ALCS victory over the Houston Astros. The franchise was denied its first championship, however, as the Los Angeles Dodgers won the World Series in six games.
