Texas Rangers,  American professional baseball team based in Arlington, Texas, that plays in the American League (AL). The Rangers began play in 1961 as the Washington (D.C.) Senators and have won two AL pennants (2010 and 2011).
The Senators finished in last place or tied for last place in each of their first three seasons, and they lost at least 100 games in their first four seasons. Despite the addition of towering slugger Frank Howard before the 1965 season, the Senators did not greatly improve on their ignoble beginning. After the franchise’s third last-place finish in 1968, Washington hired all-time great Ted Williams to become the team’s manager, despite his never having coached baseball on any level before. Williams guided the Senators to their first winning season (with an 86–76 record) in his inaugural year at the helm, but the team regressed in each of its next two seasons. The Senators’ continued subpar play contributed to years of poor attendance and insufficient revenue, and team ownership relocated the franchise to Arlington after the 1971 season.
Renamed in honour of the state’s renowned military-cum-police force the Texas Rangers, the team had little more luck in its first year in Arlington than it had experienced in Washington. Not only did the Rangers lose 100 games but Williams—arguably the team’s biggest attraction—retired. The Rangers brought in Billy Martin to manage the team toward the end of the 1973 season. The following year, led by recent acquisition Fergie Jenkins’s expert pitching, Texas won 84 games and finished in second place in its division. However, the Rangers were never able to break through to a division title for the remainder of the decade.
In the early 1980s third baseman Buddy Bell blossomed into an all-star, but the Rangers did not have much team success, with five of the franchise’s six seasons from 1980 to 1985 ending with losing records. Texas added more young talent, such as outfielder Ruben Sierra and second baseman Julio Franco, throughout the decade, but the team’s long postseason drought continued into the 1990s. One bright spot of this time was future Hall of Fame pitcher Nolan Ryan, who played with the Rangers from 1989 to 1993 and who pitched his sixth and seventh career no-hitters during his tenure with the team. In 1989 the team was sold to an investment group that included future U.S. president George W. Bush, who would serve as the Rangers’ managing general partner until 1994.
By the mid-1990s the Rangers had amassed a lineup full of powerful hitters, including catcher Ivan Rodriguez, outfielder Juan Gonzalez, and first baseman Rafael Palmeiro, and they won three AL West titles (1996, 1998, and 1999) in four years. Texas’s first forays into the postseason were disappointments, however, as it lost decisively to the New York Yankees in the first round of the play-offs each year. In 2001 the team made headlines when star shortstop Alex Rodriguez signed for a then record $252 million over 10 years, despite the fact that the Rangers had finished a distant last place in their division the previous year. His presence failed to raise the Rangers out of the divisional cellar in his three seasons with the team, and Texas traded him to the Yankees in 2004 in order to begin a rebuilding process.
Ryan was hired to serve as team president in 2008 (and became part of the team’s ownership group in 2010), and a Rangers squad stocked with both promising prospects and established veterans, such as third baseman Michael Young, surged back into the postseason in 2010 after capturing the AL West title. The Rangers then ran off the first two play-off series wins in franchise history to capture the AL pennant and advance to the World Series, which they lost to the San Francisco Giants. Texas won a second consecutive AL pennant in 2011 and faced the St. Louis Cardinals in the World Series, which Texas lost in seven games. The Rangers returned to the postseason in 2012, but they were quickly eliminated after losing the newly instituted one-game Wild Card play-off contest to the Baltimore Orioles. In 2013 the team lost a tie-breaking 163rd regular-season game to the Tampa Bay Rays and missed out on an appearance in the Wild Card play-off. The following season, the Rangers endured an injury-plagued campaign that saw the team fall from play-off contention to posting the worst record in the AL (67–95). The downturn proved short-lived, as Texas won 88 games and a division title in 2015 but was eliminated in its opening play-off series. In 2016 the Rangers set a modern baseball record for winning percentage in one-run games by going 36–11 (.766) in those close contests and captured another division title. However, the team was defeated in the divisional series by the Toronto Blue Jays for the second straight year. The Rangers then began a streak of losing seasons just as their cross-state rival Houston Astros ascended to the top of the AL.
