Toronto Blue Jays,  Canadian professional baseball team based in Toronto. The Blue Jays play in the American League (AL) and are the only franchise in Major League Baseball that plays in a city not in the United States. The team has won two AL pennants and two World Series titles (1992, 1993).
The Blue Jays played their first game in 1977, after joining the AL alongside fellow expansion team the Seattle Mariners. Toronto finished at the bottom of the AL East in each of its first five seasons, which led to the hiring of manager Bobby Cox in 1982. Cox guided the “Jays” (as the team is sometimes known by its fans) to their first winning season in 1983—the beginning of an 11-year streak of years with a record over .500—and a franchise-record 99 wins and a division title in 1985. This meteoric Toronto rise stalled in the 1985 AL Championship Series (ALCS), which the team lost in seven games to the Kansas City Royals after holding a three-games-to-one series lead. Led by the play of outfielder George Bell and shortstop Tony Fernández, the Blue Jays finished near the top of the divisional standings throughout the remainder of the 1980s, including a second-place finish in 1987 in a play-off race that was decided only in the final weekend of the regular season.
In 1989 the Blue Jays began playing their home games in the Skydome—known as the Rogers Centre from 2005—which was the first stadium in the world to have a retractable roof. That season, with new manager Cito Gaston, Toronto again captured a divisional crown, but they were defeated by the eventual champion Oakland Athletics in the ALCS. The Jays again lost in the ALCS in 1991 (to the Minnesota Twins). In 1992 the team reached its first World Series, behind the play of first baseman John Olerud, outfielder Joe Carter, and second baseman Roberto Alomar, and Toronto defeated its former manager Cox’s Atlanta Braves in six games. Toronto returned to the World Series the next year and beat the Philadelphia Phillies on Carter’s series-winning home run in the ninth inning of game six, which was only the second such homer (after Bill Mazeroski’s World Series winner in 1960) in major league history. In the following years, Jays pitcher Pat Hentgen became an AL Cy Young Award winner (as the best pitcher in the league), and the team acquired superstar pitcher Roger Clemens, but Toronto nevertheless began posting losing records for the first time in over a decade.
Between 1998 and 2007 the Blue Jays finished in third place in the AL East division behind the dominant (and free-spending) New York Yankees and Boston Red Sox teams eight times. The Toronto teams of that era featured slugger Carlos Delgado and pitching ace Roy Halladay, and they finished with winning records more often than not, but they were unable to overtake the two powerhouse franchises. Toronto rehired Gaston (who had been fired in 1997) in the middle of the 2008 season to try to recapture the team’s past glory, but he retired at the end of the 2010 season after having led the Blue Jays to three straight fourth-place finishes. Before the 2013 season, the Blue Jays made a series of transactions to assemble a roster laden with established stars and emerging talents, and the team was widely seen as the favourite in its division, if not in all of Major League Baseball. However, the club instead produced an incredibly underwhelming campaign, finishing in last place in the AL East, with a 74–88 record. The Blue Jays again reloaded in 2015, acquiring perennial All-Stars Troy Tulowitzki and David Price at the trade deadline, who helped propel Toronto to the team’s first play-off appearance in 22 seasons, where the Jays were eliminated in the ALCS. The team returned to the ALCS the following season (where it again lost) but failed to qualify for the play-offs in 2017.
