John D. Barrow,  (born November 29, 1952, London, England—died September 26, 2020), British astrophysicist who received the 2006  Templeton Prize for Progress Toward Research or Discoveries About Spiritual Realities.
Barrow earned a doctorate (1977) in astrophysics at the University of Oxford, and he taught at Oxford, the University of California, Berkeley, and the University of Sussex before the publication in 1983 of his first book, The Left Hand of Creation: The Origin and Evolution of the Expanding Universe, coauthored with Joseph Silk. Barrow first won wide attention with his book The Anthropic Cosmological Principle (1986), cowritten with Frank J. Tipler. In this work the two scientists set forth weak, strong, and final versions of the anthropic principle—the notion that the universe contains conditions ideal for the development of living beings. Barrow’s 1988 book, The World Within the World, was a study of the origin and development of laws of nature. In 1989, at age 36, he became the youngest person to deliver the Gifford Lectures at the University of Glasgow, in the centennial year of the series.
In 1999 Barrow became professor of mathematical sciences at the University of Cambridge. In that year he was also appointed director of the Millennium Mathematics Project, a public education program to help young people understand and appreciate mathematics and its applications. From 2003 to 2007 he was the professor of astronomy at Gresham College in London. Barrow lectured on cosmology at such venues as the Venice Film Festival, 10 Downing Street (the residence of the British prime minister), Windsor Castle, and the Vatican Palace. His interest in making science understandable to laypeople was demonstrated in a 2006 lecture at London’s Royal Society, in which he explained why it was possible to send a rocket to the Moon but not to predict tomorrow’s weather accurately. In addition to his numerous nonfiction books, Barrow wrote the critically acclaimed play Infinities (2002), which was staged at several theatres, including La Scala in Milan.
The recipient of many honours, Barrow was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 2003. His various awards included the Dirac Medal (2015) and the Royal Astronomical Society’s Gold Medal (2016).
