Patrick Matthew,  (born October 20, 1790, near Perth, Scotland—died June 8, 1874, near Errol), Scottish landowner and agriculturalist best known for his development of an early description of the theory of evolution by natural selection. His ideas, published within a book on forestry in 1831, bore similarities to several concepts developed by British naturalists Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace published some three decades later.
Matthew was born at Rome, a farm near Perth, Scotland, to John Matthew and Agnes Duncan. Agnes Duncan’s close relatives included high-ranking members of the Royal Navy, such as Admiral Adam Duncan, who led British naval forces against the Dutch at the Battle of Camperdown in 1797. In 1807 at age 17, after the death of his father, Matthew took over the care of the Gourdiehill estate (a property near Errol inherited from Admiral Duncan). The majority of his time afterward was spent managing the thousands of fruit trees and growing grains on the estate. However, he was also active in the Chartist movement, a British working-class parliamentary reform movement that strove for universal manhood suffrage, vote by ballot, annually elected Parliaments, and other demands.
Some 28 years before Darwin unveiled On the Origin of Species (1859), Matthew published On Naval Timber and Arboriculture (1831), whose text was primarily concerned with the practices of silviculture (branch of forestry focused on the theory and practice of controlling forest establishment, composition, and growth) as they related to the construction of Royal Navy vessels. He also expressed his thoughts about artificial selection as it applied to developing trees in the work, noting that those trees that were not strong enough would “fall prematurely without reproducing,” their niches replaced by fitter specimens. Matthew also indicated the possibility of developing new species: “the progeny of the same parents, under great difference of circumstance, might, in several generations, even become distinct species, incapable of co-reproduction.” Such ideas appeared to foreshadow the process of adaptation and speciation developed more completely by Darwin and Wallace. Matthew’s work, however, emphasized the role of catastrophes in driving speciation—similar to French zoologist Georges Cuvier’s catastrophist theories—in which new species emerged from mass extinctions. That perspective differed from Darwin’s, which focused on competition occurring within populations living in areas relatively free from ecological disturbances.
In April 1860, months after Darwin’s On the Origin of Species was published, The Gardeners Chronicle and Agricultural Gazette, a popular periodical within British horticultural circles, quoted at length from a Times of London review of the book. Matthew replied in a letter to the editor that he, and not Darwin, had developed and published much the same natural law of selection decades earlier and backed up his claim by quoting from On Naval Timber and Arboriculture. Matthew’s assertion appears to have been supported a few weeks later by Charles Darwin himself, who acknowledged that Matthew “anticipated” his explanation by several years while also admitting his ignorance of Matthew’s work.
