Alice Cunningham Fletcher,  (born March 15, 1838, Havana, Cuba—died April 6, 1923, Washington, D.C., U.S.), American anthropologist whose stature as a social scientist, notably for her pioneer studies of Native American music, has overshadowed her influence on federal government Indian policies that later were considered to be unfortunate.
Fletcher taught school for a number of years, lectured occasionally on various topics, and was an early member and secretary of Sorosis and in 1873 a founder and secretary of the Association for the Advancement of Women. A growing interest in archaeology and ethnology led to extensive reading in those fields, guided by Frederic Ward Putnam, director of Harvard’s Peabody Museum, and by 1878 to fieldwork with American Indian remains in Florida and Massachusetts. In 1881 she went to Nebraska and began living among the Omaha. Her subsequent efforts to improve the lot of Native Americans reflected a missionary zeal and a paternalism toward Indians that was characteristic of the 19th century.
Concerned that the Omaha were about to be dispossessed, Fletcher went to Washington in 1882, drafted a bill to apportion Omaha tribal lands into individual Indian holdings, or allotments, and successfully lobbied for its passage in Congress. Appointed by President Chester A. Arthur to supervise the apportioning, she completed granting the land parcels in 1884 with the assistance of a young clerk in the Indian Bureau, Francis La Flesche, brother of writer-activist Susette La Flesche. The son of the principal Omaha chief, La Flesche lived with her as her adoptive son (unlegalized) and collaborated with her in her studies of native peoples and cultures.
Fletcher went to Alaska and the Aleutian Islands to study indigenous educational needs in 1886. Her tireless championing of Native American welfare—together with that of Mary Bonney and others—was instrumental in the passage of the Dawes General Allotment Act (1887), which further apportioned remaining tribal lands and provided for eventual citizenship for Native Americans. Though viewed as humanitarian at the time of its enactment, the Dawes Act came to be regarded as a public policy failure.
In the years following, Fletcher conducted land apportionment among the Winnebago and Nez Percé Indians and wrote Indian Story and Song from North America (1900) and The Hako: A Pawnee Ceremony (1904; reissued 1996). Her major work is thought to be The Omaha Tribe (1911), an exhaustive study written with Francis La Flesche. From 1899 to 1916 she was on the editorial board of the American Anthropologist, to which she was also a frequent contributor, and in 1908 she led in founding the School of American Archaeology (later the School of American Research) in Santa Fe, New Mexico.
