Structural functionalism,  in sociology and other social sciences, a school of thought according to which each of the institutions, relationships, roles, and norms that together constitute a society serves a purpose, and each is indispensable for the continued existence of the others and of society as a whole. In structural functionalism, social change is regarded as an adaptive response to some tension within the social system. When some part of an integrated social system changes, a tension between this and other parts of the system is created, which will be resolved by the adaptive change of the other parts.
The origin of contemporary references to social structure can be traced to the French social scientist Émile Durkheim, who argued that parts of society are interdependent and that this interdependency imposes structure on the behaviour of institutions and their members. To Durkheim, the interrelations between the parts of society contributed to social unity—an integrated system with life characteristics of its own, exterior to individuals yet driving their behaviour. Durkheim pointed out that groups can be held together on two contrasting bases: mechanical solidarity, a sentimental attraction of social units or groups that perform the same or similar functions, such as preindustrial self-sufficient farmers; or organic solidarity, an interdependence based on differentiated functions and specialization, as seen in a factory, the military, government, or other complex organizations. Other theorists of Durkheim’s period, notably Henry Maine and Ferdinand Tönnies, made similar distinctions.
A.R. Radcliffe-Brown, a British social anthropologist, gave the concept of social structure a central place in his approach and connected it to the concept of function. In his view, the components of the social structure have indispensable functions for one another—the continued existence of the one component is dependent on that of the others—and for society as a whole, which is seen as an integrated organic entity. His comparative studies of preliterate societies demonstrated that the interdependence of institutions regulated much of social and individual life. Radcliffe-Brown defined social structure empirically as patterned, or “normal,” social relations—i.e., those aspects of social activities that conform to accepted social rules or norms. These rules bind society’s members to socially useful activities.
Structural functionalism underwent some modification when the American sociologist Talcott Parsons enunciated the “functional prerequisites” that any social system must meet in order to survive: developing routinized interpersonal arrangements (structures), defining relations to the external environment, fixing boundaries, and recruiting and controlling members. Along with Robert K. Merton and others, Parsons classified such structures on the basis of their functions. This approach, called structural-functional analysis (and also known as systems theory), was applied so broadly that some sociologists took it to be synonymous with the scientific study of social organization.
The preeminence of structural functionalism came to an end in the 1960s, however, with new challenges to the functionalist notion that a society’s survival depended on institutional practices. This belief, along with the notion that the stratification system selected the most talented and meritorious individuals to meet society’s needs, was seen by some as a conservative ideology that legitimated the status quo and thereby prevented social reform. It also ignored the potential of the individual within society. In light of such criticism of structural functionalism, some sociologists proposed a “conflict sociology,” which held that dominant institutions repress weaker groups and that conflict pervades all of society, including the family, the economy, polity, and education. This neo-Marxist perspective gained prominence in the United States with the social turmoil of the civil rights movement and the antiwar movement of the 1960s and ’70s, influencing many younger sociologists.
Other criticisms leveled at structural functionalism from a variety of theoretical perspectives were that it was based on faulty analogies between societies and biological organisms; that it was tautological, teleological, or excessively abstract; that its conception of social change as an adaptive response was inadequate; and that it lacked a methodology for empirical confirmation.
