Transnationalism,  economic, political, and cultural processes that extend beyond the boundaries of nation-states.
The concept of transnationalism suggests a weakening of the control a nation-state has over its borders, inhabitants, and territory. Increased immigration to developed countries in response to global economic development has resulted in multicultural societies where immigrants are more likely to maintain contact with their culture of origin and less likely to assimilate. Therefore, loyalty to the state may compete equally with allegiance to a culture or religion. With increased global mobility and access to instantaneous worldwide communication technology, boundaries dissolve and the territorial controls imposed by the traditional nation-state become less relevant. However, state definitions of citizenship and nationality and the rules for political participation may become more relevant for transnational groups.
Globalization is a related concept that represents the intensification of economic, cultural, and political practices accelerating across the globe in the early 21st century. Although many large corporations have been operating globally for decades, the Internet has enabled small organizations and individuals to access instantaneously a worldwide communication network. Global processes are closely related to transnationalism yet tend to be separate from specific national boundaries. Transnational processes, on the other hand, are anchored in and transcend one or more nation-states. The impacts of the transnational migration of groups, although different, need to be understood within the context of globalization. The changes created by each are mutually reinforcing.
Processes contributing to transnationalism include the economic influences of corporations operating globally, often referred to as transnational corporations, and cooperative agreements between governments. These arrangements offer new trade and industrial opportunities for private business and government alike. New prospects for employment in developed nations tend to draw migrant groups from less-developed nations. New advances in transportation and communication technologies, such as the Internet, provide potential avenues of virtual connectivity among these individuals and groups moving across national borders. The formation of the European Union resulted in the reexamination of long-term relationships with transnational groups (such as the Turkish and Kurdish populations).
Another major process influencing transnationalism is the growing economic dependence among developed nations on migrant group labour. The relationship between these groups and their nations of residence has become one of interdependence. Beyond economic considerations, this implies that host countries reciprocate by providing avenues for civic participation and in some cases the rights of citizenship for transnational groups.
Transnationalism is commonly contrasted with nationalism. Here, nationalism is characterized as a strong belief among people who share a common language, history, and culture that the interests of the nation-state are paramount. This requires a strong sense of belonging, identity, and loyalty where the benefits of membership are acquired through citizenship. Historically, migrant groups moving from one nation to another were expected to prove their belonging and loyalty by adopting the prescribed moral and political values of their nation of immigration. Permanent residence carried an expectation of acquired citizenship and nationality in those countries based on notions of “national assimilation” (e.g., United States and France) as opposed to ancestry (such as Germany). After a generation, many of these groups were fully assimilated into the dominant culture of the nation of immigration. For many, the connection with their country of emigration took the form of diaspora—the formation of tightly bounded communities on the basis of common cultural and ethnic references between places of origin and arrival. This dynamic gave rise to large numbers of ethnic communities within nation-states, retaining elements of culture in terms of identity yet remaining subservient to national loyalty. Nonetheless, the loyalties of migrant groups often transcend this critical feature of the nation-state with primary allegiance and identity given to religion or their culture of origin. Dual loyalties have led some nations to liberalize their laws regarding dual citizenship or provide rights and privileges to noncitizen groups who permanently reside within their borders, while others have adopted the opposite position and made their immigration policies more exclusionary.
Transnational community refers to those groups who migrate and reside in a receiving nation for a considerable time yet maintain strong transnational ties. Those ties may be reinforced formally by the rules and regulations of the state (immigration laws, definitions of citizenship), by links with political parties or religious groups, or informally through connections among families and households in the sending and receiving countries. As developed nations became more economically dependent on immigrant workers, there was more political pressure for the state to enter reciprocal relationships with those groups, particularly those of long-term residence. For example, until 2000 the rules and regulations for defining and obtaining German citizenship excluded the substantial long-residing Turkish population in the country. Many Turkish citizens had lived in Germany for many decades and desired dual citizenship. They defined citizenship in terms of political representation and nationality as an ethnic identity conflicting with the German definition of citizenship, which combined citizenship with nationality. The Turkish minority was rooted in a Turkish national identity and a Muslim religious identity, both foreign to the German collective identity, yet Germany was in many ways economically dependent on that minority. Pressure for change resulted in the reform of Germany’s citizenship and nationality law in 2000. While still not allowing for dual citizenship, the regulations governing naturalization of foreign nationals were liberalized, and it became possible to acquire German citizenship as a result of being born in Germany.
The economic interdependence between nation-states and their transnational communities, engendered by forces of globalization, are forcing state action to redefine concepts such as citizenship and nationality, which are deeply embedded in a nation’s culture, history, and traditions.
