Abruzzi, also called Abruzzo,  regione, central Italy, fronting the Adriatic Sea and comprising the provincie of L’Aquila, Chieti, Pescara, and Teramo. Most of the region is mountainous or hilly, except for such intermontane basins as those of L’Aquila, Sulmona, and Fucino. The Apennines, the dominant physical feature, consist of three chains trending northwest-southeast, of which the easternmost, including the Gran Sasso d’Italia (9,560 feet [2,914 m]) and Maiella groups, is the highest. From the Gran Sasso, sand and clay hills present a gradual slope eastward to the narrow Adriatic shoreline. The few small coastal harbours have little economic importance for fishing or commerce. The principal rivers (the Tronto, Pescara, Sangro, and Trigno) drain to the Adriatic, providing irrigation in their lower courses. The course of these streams is irregular, and, because of massive deforestation on the upper slopes, floods and landslides occur frequently during the spring and fall rains.
The ancient Italic tribes that once inhabited the region long resisted conquest and retained their own character even after Roman rule was imposed on them. The name of the region, originally Aprutium, is believed to have come from that of one of the ancient tribes, the Praetutii. Under Lombard rule during the early Middle Ages, the Abruzzi was controlled by the duchy of Spoleto, and Molise (the region to the south) by the duchy of Benevento. The Normans established themselves in the area in the 12th century, and the region sided with the Hohenstaufens in their long struggle with the papacy. After the fall of the Hohenstaufen dynasty in the 13th century, Abruzzi and Molise in turn came under Angevin (house of Anjou), Spanish, and Bourbon rulers. Under the last, as part of the Kingdom of Naples, they were divided into Abruzzo Ulteriore I, Abruzzo Ulteriore II, Abruzzo Citra, and Molise. As Abruzzi e Molise, they became part of the Kingdom of Italy in 1860 and in 1965 were divided into the separate regions of Abruzzi and Molise. The regional capital is L’Aquila. An earthquake that struck L’Aquila on April 6, 2009, damaged many of the city’s medieval buildings and killed more than 275 people.
The rugged terrain of Abruzzi long hindered its economic development. Construction of a motorway from the west to the Adriatic coast at Pescara opened the region to the rest of Italy. Agriculture is mainly of local importance, except in the intensively cultivated intermontane basins. Wheat, grapes, fruit, and olives are the most widespread crops, while tobacco, sugar beets, and saffron represent the cash crops. Livestock raising has been the mainstay of much of the region; migratory herding of sheep from mountain pastures in the Abruzzi to lowland winter pastures outside of the region continues, although on a decreasing scale. Pigs are raised, and the region’s smoked ham and sausages are well known. Industrial development, concentrated chiefly in the provincial capitals, is slight. The main rail artery is the Rome-Pescara line, and local rail connections are slowly losing traffic to buses and trucks. Tourism is increasing in the coastal resorts but is not yet a major economic factor. Area 4,168 square miles (10,794 square km). Pop. (2006 est.) 1,305,307.
