Ajaria, also spelled Adjara, Adzhariya, or Adžarija,  autonomous republic in Georgia, in the southwestern corner of that country, adjacent to the Black Sea and the Turkish frontier. It is largely mountainous with the exception of a narrow coastal strip. Batumi is the capital and largest city. Area 1,112 square miles (2,880 square km). Pop. (2014) 333,953; (2017 est.) 339,000.
Two east-west ranges, the Ajar-Imeretinsky in the north and the Shavshetsky in the south, rise from the Black Sea coastal lowlands to more than 9,200 feet (2,800 metres). Between the ranges lies the Ajaristskali River valley, which is closed at the eastern end by a third range, the Arsiyan Mountains. The coastal lowland area, which widens somewhat to the south of Batumi and again in the north around Kobuleti, has a humid subtropical climate with average January temperatures ranging from 41 to 46 °F (5 to 8 °C) and average August temperatures ranging from 70 to 73 °F (21 to 23 °C). The climate becomes more severe in the foothills and mountains as elevation increases; above 6,000 feet (1,800 metres) it is cold, and snow lies on the summits for six months. The highest rainfall in Georgia occurs at Batumi, where an average 62 inches (1,600 mm) are recorded annually. Subtropical vegetation prevails in the lowland areas, and coniferous forests, scrub, and alpine meadows predominate on the mountain slopes.
The population includes Georgians, Russians, Armenians, and the Ajars themselves, a Georgian population Islamicized under Turkish rule. Although the Ajars are not a nationality distinct from other Georgians, they do represent a distinctive cultural segment of the Georgian homeland. Of the total population, less than one-half is urban and two-thirds live in the coastal lowlands and foothills.
Subtropical crops, which form the basis of the republic’s economy, include tea, citrus fruits, and avocados, tung trees (for oil), eucalyptus trees (camphor oil), and bamboo. Tobacco is grown in the higher areas, in which livestock raising is also important. Industrial development is concentrated around Batumi, the terminus of a pipeline from Baku on the Caspian Sea. Industrial activity includes oil refining, shipping and shipbuilding, food processing, light manufacturing, and the production of wine, plywood, furniture, and chemical pharmaceuticals. The republic is linked with the rest of Georgia by a road over the Goderdzi Pass in the Arsiyan Mountains and by the Transcaucasian Railway, which runs north along the coast from Batumi, then eastward. Ajaria has air services from Batumi to Tbilisi, Georgia; Moscow; and other cities.
Ajaria was under Turkish rule from the 17th century until 1878, when it was annexed by Russia and attached to Georgia. From 1922 to 1991 it was an autonomous republic of the U.S.S.R.; following the dissolution of the U.S.S.R., it became part of the newly independent country of Georgia. From 1991 to 2004, the region was under the leadership of Aslan Abashidze, a pro-Russian ruler from a distinguished family of Ajar descent. Following a constitutional amendment passed by the Georgian parliament in April 2000, Ajaria was officially designated an autonomous republic. Relations between Ajaria and the central Georgian government—already somewhat contentious—worsened following the 2004 election of Georgian Pres. Mikheil Saakashvili, whose authority Abashidze refused to recognize. In May 2004 Abashidze ordered the destruction of two bridges linking Ajaria with the rest of Georgia, as well as the dismantling of rail lines—moves he argued were acts of self-defense against a Georgian invasion. Within days of an ultimatum issued by Saakashvili calling for Abashidze to return to Georgia’s constitutional framework, as well as in the wake of broad demonstrations against the Ajar leader, Abashidze resigned his position and departed for Russia, and Ajaria was quickly placed under central authority.
