Andhra Pradesh,  state of India, located in the southeastern part of the subcontinent. It is bounded by the Indian states of Tamil Nadu to the south, Karnataka to the southwest and west, Telangana to the northwest and north, and Odisha to the northeast. The eastern boundary is a 600-mile (970-km) coastline along the Bay of Bengal. Telangana was a region within Andhra Pradesh for almost six decades, but in 2014 it was carved off to form a separate state. The capital of both Andhra Pradesh and Telangana is Hyderabad, in west-central Telangana.
The state draws its name from the Andhra people, who have inhabited the area since antiquity and developed their own language, Telugu. Andhra Pradesh came into existence in its present form in 1956 as a result of the demand of the Andhras for a separate state. Although it is primarily agricultural, the state has some mining activity and a significant amount of industry. Area 106,204 square miles (275,068 square km). Pop. (2011) 84,665,533.
The state has three main physiographic regions: the coastal plain to the east, extending from the Bay of Bengal to the mountain ranges; the mountain ranges themselves, the Eastern Ghats, which form the western flank of the coastal plain; and, in the southwest, the plateau to the west of the Ghats. The coastal plain, also known as the Andhra region, runs almost the entire length of the state and is watered by several rivers, flowing from west to east through the hills into the bay. The deltas formed by the most important of those rivers—the Godavari and the Krishna—make up the central part of the plains, an area of fertile alluvial soil.
The Eastern Ghats are part of a larger mountain system extending from central India to the far south and running parallel to the east coast. Interrupted by the great river valleys, the mountains do not form a continuous range. They have highly porous soils on their flanks.
The plateau region in the southwestern portion of the state—part of the Deccan (peninsular India) and commonly called Rayalaseema—is composed of gneissic rock (gneiss being a foliated rock formed in Earth’s interior under conditions of heat and pressure). It is highest in the far southwest, where elevations exceed 2,000 feet (600 metres), sloping downward toward the northeast. The Penneru River forms the main drainage system. As the result of erosion, the plateau is a region of graded valleys, with red sandy soil and isolated hills. Black soil is also found in certain parts of the area.
A summer that lasts from March to June, a season of tropical rains that runs from July to September, and a winter that lasts from October to February constitute the three seasons of Andhra Pradesh. Summers are extraordinarily hot and humid, with maximum daily temperatures exceeding 95 °F (35 °C) and even surpassing 104 °F (40 °C) in the central portion of the state. Summer nightly minimums drop to below about 70 °F (20 °C) only in the far southwest. Winters are somewhat cooler, with January maximum temperatures between 86 and 95 °F (30 and 35 °C) in all but the northeastern portion of the state. Winter lows drop below about 60 °F (15 °C) only in the extreme northeast.
Annual precipitation, which derives largely from the southwest monsoon rains, generally decreases toward the southwestern plateau area. Coastal areas receive about 40 to 47 inches (1,000 to 1,200 mm) per year, while the westernmost part of the plateau may receive only half that much. Rainfall totals in portions of the northeastern mountains exceed 47 inches and can be as high as 55 inches (1,400 mm).
Mangrove swamps and palm trees fringe the coastal plain of Andhra Pradesh, while thorny vegetation covers the scattered hills of the plateau. About one-fifth of the state’s total area is forest-covered, with dense woodlands occurring primarily in the Eastern Ghats. The forests consist of both moist deciduous and dry savanna vegetation; teak, rosewood, wild fruit trees, and bamboo are plentiful. Elsewhere in the state, neem (which produces an aromatic oil), banyan, mango, and pipal (or Bo; Ficus religiosa) are among the common trees. Andhra Pradesh also has an array of flowering vegetation, including jasmine, rose, and a number of endemic species—particularly in the hilly region of the Eastern Ghats.
Animal life, apart from common domestic types (dogs, cats, and cattle), includes tigers, blackbucks, hyenas, sloth bears, gaurs, and chital, which abound in the hills and forest areas. There also are dozens of species of birds, including flamingos and pelicans as well as some rare varieties, such as the Jerdon’s courser (Rhinoptilus bitorquatus), which is found in the thorny or scrub-covered areas surrounding the Eastern Ghats. The eastern coast is a nesting ground for sea turtles.
