Basilicata,  region, southern Italy, along the Golfo di Taranto (Gulf of Taranto), consisting of the provinces of Potenza and Matera. Bounded by the regions of Puglia (north and east), Calabria (south), and Campania (west), Basilicata is roughly divided into a western mountainous section, dominated by the Appennino Lucano, and an eastern section of low hills and wide valleys, while along the Ionian Sea the sand and clay hills overlook narrow coastal plains. The extinct volcano of Monte Vulture (4,350 ft [1,326 m]) stands isolated from the Apennines in the north.
Known in ancient times as Lucania (q.v.), the region was under Lombard rule in the early Middle Ages. It was controlled by the dukes of Benevento and then by the princes of Salerno. After an interval of Byzantine control, the Normans took over and made Melfi (q.v.) the capital of one of their dominions. Until the fall of the Swabian Hohenstaufens (1254), Basilicata played a significant part in the affairs of southern Italy; afterward, passing through Angevin and Spanish hands, it followed the variable fortunes of the Kingdom of Naples until united with Italy in 1860. The region was coextensive with Potenza province until the establishment of Matera province in 1927.
The mainstay of the economy is agriculture, but yields are generally low because of poor soil and the rugged terrain. Crops include wheat, rye, grapes, and olives; sheep, goats, pigs, and an increasing number of beef and dairy cattle are raised. New crops introduced in the eastern and coastal areas include tobacco, vegetables, sugar beets, and flowers. Industry is virtually nonexistent except for olive presses and flour mills, although natural gas has been discovered near Matera and there is a chemical plant at Pisticci. Potenza (q.v.), the regional capital, and Matera (q.v.) are the only sizable cities. The region suffered severe damage in a disastrous earthquake in 1980. The main railroad line of Basilicata links Potenza with Naples and Battipaglia in the northwest and with Taranto in the east, connecting also with the Ionian railroad (Taranto–Reggio di Calabria).  Area  3,858 sq mi (9,992 sq km). Pop. (2006 est.) 594,086.
