Bath and North East Somerset,  unitary authority, geographic and historic county of Somerset, southwestern England. It lies southeast of the city of Bristol and encompasses the city of Bath (the main administrative centre), several small urban areas between Bath and Bristol, and the countryside stretching to the southwest.
Bath, noted for its architecture and antiquities, is the main urban centre and the unitary authority’s only city. It was founded as Aquae Sulis by the Romans, who had been attracted by the hot mineral springs on the site. Many remains of Roman villas and related structures in the unitary authority are probably associated with the Roman spa at Bath. The city thrived as a centre of the wool and cloth trades during the Middle Ages and as a fashionable resort during the 18th and 19th centuries. It was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1987. The unitary authority is also the site of the Wansdyke, a now mostly obliterated trenched embankment that was probably built as a boundary between Saxon invaders from the north and the surviving Roman British population to the south.
The unitary authority is an area of gently rolling hills and valleys that incorporates a section of the River Avon (Lower, or Bristol, Avon) and the southernmost of the limestone hills of the Cotswolds in the north; the limestone Mendip Hills rise to 1,000 feet (305 metres) in the southwest. The quaint historical villages of Claverton, Freshford, and Monkton Combe east of Bath have numerous buildings constructed of locally quarried Cotswold limestone, much of which is also used in modern road construction. Dairy and some beef cattle graze the fertile valley pasturelands; cereals and fodder crops are extensively grown there.
The industrial towns of Midsomer Norton and Radstock (formerly known as Norton Radstock) in the south of the district were at the centre of the former Somerset coalfield and are now centres for manufacturing and engineering. Keynsham, located on the River Avon between Bath and Bristol, has past links to the brass industry. It also had a long chocolate-making tradition that stretched from the mid-18th century until 2010, when Cadbury ceased production there.  Today Keynsham is focused on its role as a historic market town. In addition to Bath, both Keynsham and Midsomer Norton have administrative functions in the unitary authority. Area 134 square miles (346 square km). Pop. (2001) 169,040; (2011) 176,016.
