Berkshire,  geographic and ceremonial county of southern England. The geographic county occupies the valleys of the middle Thames and its tributary, the Kennet, immediately to the west of London. It is divided into six unitary authorities: Bracknell Forest, Reading, Slough, West Berkshire, Windsor and Maidenhead, and Wokingham.
The historic county covers a larger and somewhat different area. It excludes the unitary authority of Slough, which belongs to the historic county of Buckinghamshire, but it includes the district of Vale of White Horse and the part of the district of South Oxfordshire that lies west of the Thames, both now in the administrative county of Oxfordshire. In 1998 an administrative county of Berkshire was abolished, and its administrative powers were assigned to the six unitary authorities.
The eastern end of the geographic county is underlain largely by the river gravels and terraces of the Thames, and there are stretches of infertile, often forested land, including Windsor Forest. The western part of the county is crossed by chalk downs, or uplands, that reach a height of 975 feet (297 metres) in Inkpen Beacon. Through these downs the Thames cuts its way by means of the Goring Gap. The Thames and Kennet valleys provide major routes westward from London for the railways to Oxford, Bristol, and the west of England. The motorway from London to southern Wales crosses the county.
The Berkshire Downs supported numerous prehistoric settlements linked by ridgeways that led particularly to the focus of Stonehenge in the adjoining county of Wiltshire. The major archaeological monument in the historic county, dating from the Iron Age, is the Uffington White Horse, which is carved into the chalk of the White Horse Hill. The monument is 360 feet (110 metres) long and has a maximum height of 130 feet (40 metres). Settlements uncovered in the river valleys and eastern Berkshire also date from the Iron Age, and the Belgic site at Silchester, southwest of Reading, later became a Roman crossroads. Berkshire was alternately claimed by the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms of Wessex and Mercia and was the native shire of Alfred the Great, born at Wantage in 848. With the Norman Conquest of 1066 the strategic importance of the Thames valley became recognized, and the first Windsor Castle was built, later to become the main residence of the British royal family outside London. Wallingford and Abingdon were the leading towns in the county in the Middle Ages. Windsor and Eton, on opposite banks of the Thames on Berkshire’s eastern boundary, contain the county’s most noted structures. Eton College, England’s best-known boys’ school, endowed by Henry VI and dating in part from the 15th century, is also located there.
Proximity to London and to major transport routes encouraged the spread of several waves of industrial and urban development particularly within the geographic county. In the 19th century Reading, the county town (seat), was the focus of growth. Following World War I a new industrial centre grew up at Slough, while later growth occurred at Bracknell, one of Britain’s new towns. Meanwhile, residential development spread westward from London, and, with excellent road and rail links, even Hungerford and Newbury at the western end of the county are within regular commuting range of London. Towns such as Maidenhead and Wokingham along the M4 motorway attracted industrial and office development and numerous firms in the high-technology and software development sectors. Agriculture within the geographic county is now largely restricted to West Berkshire; the chalk downs support cereal crops, and Newbury and Lambourne are known for their racehorses. Area, geographic county, 487 square miles (1,262 square km). Pop. (2001), geographic county, 800,118; (2011) geographic county, 861,870.
