Bexley,  outer borough of London, England, on the eastern perimeter of the metropolis. It is part of the historic county of Kent, on the south bank of the River Thames. Bexley extends to the borough of Bromley in the south. The present borough of Bexley was established in 1965 by the amalgamation of the former boroughs of Bexley and Erith, the urban district of Crayford, and part of Chislehurst and Sidcup. Within the borough are such areas as (roughly from north to south) Thamesmead, Abbey Wood, Belvedere, Erith, Northumberland Heath, East Wickham, Welling, Bexleyheath, Barnehurst, Crayford, Blackfen, Blendon, Bridgen, Bexley, Halfway Street, Longlands, North Cray, Sidcup, and Foots Cray.
The settlement of the region dates to the Paleolithic Period (Old Stone Age), and deneholes (ancient underground chambers) and traces of Roman settlement have been found there. Erith was granted a charter as early as the 7th century, and it later developed as a royal dockyard (see London Docklands). It was there in the 16th century that the British fitted out major warships such as the Henry Grâce à Dieu (also called the Great Harry).
Rapid development of the borough began in the 19th century, when Bexley grew as a residential suburb of London. Its historic buildings include the ruined Lesnes Abbey (an Augustinian house of the 12th century) and the 16th-century Hall Place, a stone and brick manor house with extensive gardens. Red House, in Bexleyheath, was built for the 19th-century designer and poet William Morris; purchased by the National Trust, it was opened to the public in 2003. St. Paulinus, Crayford, is the oldest local church, with parts dating from the 12th century; the church of St. Mary the Virgin, Bexley, was built in the 12th or 13th century.
Industries, based on imported raw materials or on the vast local supplies of water, are concentrated along the valley of the River Cray and along the Thames at Erith. They include oilseed and food processing, printing, and the manufacture of paper, plastics, and chemicals. Business and financial services also are important. Leisure facilities include sports stadiums at Erith and Crayford. Area 23 square miles (61 square km). Pop. (2001) 218,307; (2011) 231,997.
