Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén,  megye (county), northern Hungary. It is bounded by Slovakia to the north and northwest and by the counties of Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg to the east, Hajdú-Bihar to the southeast, Jász-Nagykun-Szolnok to the south, and Heves and Nógrád to the southwest. Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén is one of the most populous and most industrialized counties in Hungary. Miskolc is the county seat. Major cities include Miskolc, Edelény, Kazinbarcika, Mezőkövesd, Ózd, Sárospatak, Szerencs, Sátoraljaújhely, Tiszaújváros, and Tokaj.
The terrain is mostly hilly with riverine lowlands created by streams flowing north-south from Slovakia to the Tisza River. Several of these in upper Borsod have been dammed for flood control and storage. The natural vegetation covering the mountains is a mix of Subcarpathian flora and the characteristic vegetation of the Great Alfold (Great Hungarian Plain, or Nagy Magyar Alföld). There are several protected species, including the ostrich fern and Iris hungarica. The Aggtelek Caves, located on the Hungarian-Slovakian border about 30 miles (50 km) northwest of Miskolc, rank as one of Europe’s largest underground cave systems, with subterranean lakes and limestone formations. The caves and their surroundings were designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1995.
The  Bodrogköz region, a flatland in the east, is the county’s most arable area, and peas and lentils are grown there. The Tokaj district is renowned for its dry or semisweet szamorodni (“as it comes”) and sweet aszú wines, made from Furmint and Hárslevelű grapes. The Tokaj wine region was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2002.
Although the mining of brown coal in the Borsod Basin was significant from the beginning of the 19th century through most of the 20th century,  the majority of the mines there have closed because of high operational costs. There are, however, considerable lignite reserves in the county. The economy of Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén has changed greatly since the end of the communist era, shifting from a focus on steelmaking and chemical manufacturing to lighter industries. The county’s most prominent industries now include electronics, engineering, the automotive industry, and food processing. Moreover, research and development has increased in importance, taking advantage of the support provided by the University of Miskolc
There are significant mineral water reserves and more than 70 springs and wells with hot or warm thermal water, making the county a popular tourist destination. Lillafüred is a well-known spa and resort. Other renowned resorts include Miskolc-Tapolca, Bogács, and Mezőkövesd.  Sátoraljaújhely, just north of Sárospatak, is a commercial centre with Baroque houses and a Piarist church dating from about the 13th century. In the southwest of the county is the Matyó area, centred on Mezőkövesd, where quaint ornate local costumes survive. On the Mohi lowlands, to the south of the Bükk Mountains, King Béla IV’s Magyar army was routed by the Mongol invaders in 1241. Area 2,798 square miles (7,247 square km). Pop. (2011) 686,266; (2017 est.) 654,402.
