Brandenburg,  Land (state), eastern Germany. The current territory of Brandenburg state occupies what were the east-central and eastern portions of former East Germany, extending east-west from the Oder and Neisse rivers to the Elbe region and north-south from the Mecklenburg lake district to lower Lusatia (Lausitz). Brandenburg is bounded by the German state of Mecklenburg–West Pomerania to the north, by Poland to the east, and by the states of Saxony to the south, Saxony-Anhalt to the west, and Lower Saxony to the northwest. Embedded within the middle of Brandenburg is the national capital,  Berlin, a state in its own right. Brandenburg’s capital is Potsdam. Area 11,381 square miles (29,476 square km). Pop. (2011) 2,455,780.
The landscape of present-day Brandenburg is very much the product of glaciation. Most of the state consists of a sandy plain that is interspersed with numerous fertile areas and stretches of pine and fir forests. Because of its sandy soils, it was formerly popularly known as the “sandbox of the Holy Roman Empire.” It is, however, traversed by tributaries of the Elbe and Oder rivers and boasts more than 3,000 lakes. About half of the state’s area is used for agriculture, and roughly another one-third of the region is covered by forests. The Lower Oder Valley National Park, established in 1995 in the northeasternmost part of Brandenburg, is part of a joint Polish-German effort to help preserve the region’s distinctive flora and fauna. Ironically, the ecology of the region benefited from decades of the relative economic neglect of the area. The state lies wholly within the North European Plain (see European Plain) and has a moderate climate, determined both by maritime influences, which predominate in areas to the west, and by continental influences, which affect the east.
Brandenburg is one of Germany’s least densely populated states. It is mostly inhabited by ethnic Germans; a small indigenous Slavic group, the Sorbs (concentrated in the southeastern part of the state); and a relatively small immigrant population. Unlike the other eastern German states, Brandenburg experienced a positive rate of population growth from 1995 to 2000, largely as the result of the suburbanization of the economic activities and population of Berlin. Since 2000, however, the population trajectory for Brandenburg has reversed, though growth has continued in suburban areas near Berlin, which were among the very few areas within eastern Germany that grew early in the century. Potsdam, Cottbus, Brandenburg city, and Frankfurt an der Oder are Brandenburg’s only significant cities, none of which is large.
While still a dominating factor on the landscape, agriculture plays a relatively small role in terms of economic output and employment in Brandenburg. Rye, wheat, barley, potatoes, sugar beets, rape, and fodder crops are the principal crops grown. Livestock raising and the market gardening of fruits and vegetables, especially apples, cherries, asparagus, peas, and cucumbers, are also important. Dairying, especially for the production of butter and cheese, is another significant economic activity.
The major industrial resource in Brandenburg is lignite, which is mined in the Lusatia field, located in the southeastern part of the state and in neighbouring Saxony. Output and employment in this sector burgeoned under the autarkic economic policies of East Germany, but following unification both output and employment plummeted drastically, the latter by some nine-tenths. Still, the Lusatia field produces about one-fifth of all German lignite, which serves as a resource for producing energy, chemicals, and other products. Two positive impacts of reduced coal mining have been ongoing work to revegetate the extensive open-pit mines and greatly improved air quality, resulting from both the closing of many pollution-spewing plants and the fitting of others with filters that reduce airborne exhaust.
Brandenburg is one of Germany’s poorer states. Following unification many factories closed, employment declined, and unemployment increased dramatically, to about one-sixth of the workforce, a level that changed little in the mid- and late 1990s and the first years of the new century. Brandenburg has a varied industrial base, with engineering, steelmaking, metalworking, paper production, food processing, petroleum refining, mining, and the production of energy from lignite most well represented. The Brandenburg-Berlin region, including especially Potsdam in Brandenburg, is the site of an emerging cluster of biotechnology research-and-development activities. Urban-industrial nodes in Brandenburg include Cottbus, Frankfurt an der Oder, Schwedt, Eissenhüttenstadt, Eberswalde, Oranienburg, Potsdam, Fürstenwalde, and Brandenburg city.
The larger towns in Brandenburg serve as regional centres for service activities, while the important Studio Babelsberg in Potsdam produces both films and television programming for a wider clientele. The state also gained service-sector jobs in the transportation, wholesale, and retail sectors as the result of growth and suburbanization in the Berlin region. Brandenburg has a modest-sized tourist sector that largely serves Germans, most notably Berliners, rather than foreign visitors. In addition to the Lower Oder Valley National Park, primary natural attractions include the lovely Spreewald in the southeast and the lake country in the north. In the city of Potsdam, more than 1,200 acres (500 hectares) of beautiful parks containing gardens and 150 historic buildings—including a Prussian imperial residence, the New Palace (Neues Palais); the dramatic Sanssouci Palace; and the Cecilienhof, in which the World War II Potsdam Conference was held—have been designated a UNESCO World Heritage site.
Brandenburg is served by many major east-west transport routes, including rail links and highways between both eastern and western Germany and eastern and western Europe. In addition, several navigable rivers and canals cross Brandenburg, again primarily with an east-west orientation, including the Elbe-Havel, Oder-Spree, and Oder-Havel canals, which link the major rivers of the region for barge traffic. (See also Havel, Spree, and Elbe rivers.) Most of these routes have been improved and expanded since unification. In addition, Schönefeld airport, serving Berlin and located near the border between the two states, underwent expansion beginning in the late 1990s.
Brandenburg’s state government is dominated by a Landtag (state parliament) and a minister-president, who is generally a leading member of the Landtag’s strongest party. Brandenburg’s universities include a technical university in Cottbus and newly founded universities in Potsdam and Frankfurt an der Oder, the latter cooperating closely with a Polish university as a step toward bringing Germans and Poles closer together.
The major cultural centre in Brandenburg is Potsdam, with its many architecturally significant buildings associated with Prussian royalty, some of which house important art collections. The city hosts the annual Potsdam Sanssouci Music Festival. Other notable music festivals are held each year at the Rheinsberg Palace in the northern part of the state and at the ruins of Chorin Abbey in the northeast.
The historic principality of Brandenburg originated as a margravate, or mark, that was an electorate of the Holy Roman Empire. Brandenburg was the nucleus of the dynastic power on which the kingdom of Prussia was founded, and it was merged administratively with that kingdom in 1701. It became a province of Prussia in 1815 and remained such after the unification of Germany (1871) and until the end of World War II. After the war that part of Brandenburg west of the Oder River was constituted as a separate state upon the dissolution of Prussia by the Allies in 1947. In 1952, however, Brandenburg’s old administrative identity was lost when the East German states were dissolved into new Bezirke (districts). The state of Brandenburg was re-created primarily out of the former East German districts of Potsdam, Frankfurt, and Cottbus in the process of the unification of East and West Germany in 1990. Subsequent efforts to merge the separate administrative entities of Berlin and Brandenburg into a single state have so far been unsuccessful.
