Bromley,  outer borough of London, England, on the southeastern perimeter of the metropolis. Most of the borough is part of the historic county of Kent, but its westernmost extensions belong historically to Surrey. Bromley is the largest in area of the London boroughs. The present borough of Bromley was established in 1965 by the amalgamation of the former boroughs of Beckenham and Bromley and (in Kent) the urban districts of Orpington, Penge, and part of Chislehurst and Sidcup. The borough extends over such areas as (roughly from north to south) Mottingham, Sydenham (in part), Elmstead, Penge, Anerley, Chislehurst, Beckenham, Bromley, Elmers End, Shortlands, St. Paul’s Cray, Bickley, Petts Wood, Southborough, St. Mary Cray, Kevingtown, Orpington, Hayes, West Wickham, Locksbottom, Keston, Farnborough, Chelsfield, Green Street Green, Pratt’s Bottom, Leaves Green, Downe, Cudham, Biggin Hill, and Westerham Hill.
The first charter of the village of Bromley dates to 862 ce. From early times the bishops of Rochester were lords of the manor; from Norman times until 1845, they resided at Bromley Palace, which was replaced by a new structure in 1775 and now houses a civic centre and the town hall. In 1205 King John granted a charter to hold a Tuesday market. In 1477 the market day was changed to Thursday, and two annual fairs were established. Although the fairs were discontinued in 1865, a market is still held.
The priory at Orpington, which probably dates from 1270, houses the Bromley Museum. The Bromley parish church was destroyed during the Battle of Britain by German bombing in 1941 but was subsequently restored; it retains its medieval tower. Nearby are the remains of Crofton Roman villa, which was inhabited from about 140 to 400 ce. Wickham Court, constructed in the Tudor style, is another notable structure. In a cloistered redbrick building with wrought-iron gates is Bromley College, a charitable institution that was founded in 1666 to provide a home for widows of Anglican clergy. Camden Place, built in 1609, was the home of the exiled Napoleon III and the empress Eugénie. A memorial cross on Chislehurst Common is dedicated to their son, Louis Bonaparte, who was killed in the Zulu War (1879). William Pitt the Elder lived at Hayes Place (demolished by 1934), and William Pitt the Younger was born there in 1759. From 1842 until his death, the naturalist Charles Darwin lived at Down House (now a museum) in the village of Downe, where he wrote the landmark On the Origin of Species. The author H.G. Wells was born in Bromley in 1866.
In the extreme northwestern corner of the borough stood the Crystal Palace. Built of glass and iron for the Great Exhibition of 1851 in Hyde Park (in Westminster), it was reerected in 1852–54 on Sydenham Hill, overlooking London from the south. The Crystal Palace was destroyed by fire in 1936, but the grounds (Crystal Palace Park) now contain a sports and recreation centre and a concert bowl, which were opened in 1964.
Chislehurst is known for its “caves,” which are 18th- and 19th-century chalk mines said to date originally from Roman times. They were used as shelters during the air raids of World War II.
The old Kent market town of Bromley became a major residential area following the growth of rail access to London after 1860. It is now also an important centre for shopping, entertainment, and business offices. Light industry has developed along the Cray valley. The civil airport at Biggin Hill, which was a key wartime fighter base, handles domestic flights. Public open spaces include the commons at Hayes and Chislehurst and the parkland at Petts Wood. Area 58 square miles (150 square km). Pop. (2001) 295,532; (2011) 309,392.
