Buryatiya, also spelled Buryatia,  republic of Russia in eastern Siberia. Buryatiya lies along the eastern side of Lake Baikal, with a panhandle bordering Mongolia and extending westward beyond the southern end of the lake. It was created in 1923 by the union of the Buryat-Mongol and Mongolo-Buryat autonomous oblasti (provinces) and was called the Buryat-Mongol Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic until 1958 and simply the Buryat A.S.S.R. from then until 1991.
Buryatiya consists of a complex of mountain ranges, plateaus, basins, and river valleys. It includes the Sayan Mountains in the panhandle, which rise to over 10,000 feet (3,000 metres); the Khamar-Daban Range, which rises from the southern end of Lake Baikal; the Barguzin Mountains, which parallel the lake’s northeastern shore; the Vitim Plateau in the northeast; and the Yablonovo Range on the republic’s eastern border. The chief river systems are the Selenga, a navigable river flowing into Lake Baikal, and the Vitim, a northward-flowing tributary of the Lena River. Thick, poorly drained forests, or taiga, mostly of conifers, cover 70 percent of Buryatiya’s area, while in the intermontane basins and valleys, steppe vegetation prevails. Poor soils predominate in the taiga, but fertile black earths can be found in the steppe regions. The continental climate has long winters and warm summers. Most of the republic receives less than 20 inches (500 mm) of rain annually.
Colonization, which began in the mid-17th century by Russians seeking gold and furs, reached significant proportions only after the coming of the Trans-Siberian Railroad at the end of the 19th century. Though they originally offered strong opposition to the Russian settlers, the Buryats, an Asian people, eventually forsook their lifestyle as nomadic herdsmen living in felt tents and adopted a sedentary agricultural life. Most now live in the permanent wooden houses typical of Siberian peasant life. The Buryat people compose only one-fourth of the republic’s population (the remainder being mostly Russian). About 60 percent of the population lives in urban areas, with the greatest concentration in the Selenga River basin, in which Ulan-Ude, the capital and largest city, is located.
Buryatiya’s rich mineral resources include gold, tungsten, molybdenum, nickel, aluminum, iron, manganese, and coal. The chief industries include mining and metallurgy; machine manufacturing; timber working and sawmilling; the production of building materials (cement, glass, asbestos); and leather, textile, food, and fish processing. Stock raising (cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, and reindeer) and horse breeding are major agricultural activities. The chief area of cultivation is the broad Selenga River valley, in which spring wheat, potatoes, vegetables, and sugar beets are grown. Fur farming (silver fox and raccoon) and hunting (chiefly squirrel and sable) are also important, as is fishing on Lake Baikal. The republic is traversed by the Trans-Siberian Railroad, with a branch from Ulan-Ude to Ulaanbaatar in Mongolia. A major new railroad, the BAM (Baikal-Amur Mainline), part of which crosses Buryatiya, was opened in 1989. Roads join Ulan-Ude to Ulaanbaatar in Mongolia and Irkutsk in Russia. Water transport, mainly along the Selenga and across Lake Baikal, is well developed. Area 135,600 square miles (351,300 square km). Pop. (2008 est.) 959,892.
