Caerphilly, Welsh Caerffili,  county borough, southeastern Wales. The area west of the River Rhymney forms part of the historic county of Glamorgan (Morgannwg), and the area east of the river belongs to the historic county of Monmouthshire (Sir Fynwy). Caerphilly county borough extends from the edge of Brecon Beacons National Park in the north to the outskirts of the city of Cardiff in the south and includes several deep valleys separated by wooded hills. Ystrad Mynach is the county borough’s administrative centre.
An Iron Age fort and a medieval castle mound have been discovered north of the town of Risca. About 75 ce the Romans built a fort at the present-day town of Caerphilly in the south and a command garrison on the west side of the Rhymney valley at Old Gelligaer. In 1268 Gilbert de Clare, lord of Glamorgan, began construction of Caerphilly Castle, but in 1270 Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (the last Welsh prince of Wales) destroyed the structure. It was begun again in 1271 and survived the damage of the English Civil Wars in the 1640s. The castle, occupying an area of 30 acres (12 hectares), is the largest in Great Britain after Windsor.
The Rhymney valley underwent rapid development as a coal-mining district in the 18th and 19th centuries with the coming of the Industrial Revolution. Coal mines were opened in the valleys to the east, around Blackwood and Abercarn, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Coal mining virtually ceased in the area during the late 20th century, and the county borough suffered economically, although other economic activities have developed in many towns. Caerphilly town has become an important shopping centre for the surrounding area as well as a residential base for workers who commute to Cardiff. The eastern part of the county borough lies within the commuting sphere of Newport. The former mining town of Rhymney, farther north, has some breweries and light engineering.  Area 107 square miles (277 square km). Pop. (2001) 169,519; (2011) 178,806.
