Camden,  inner borough of London, England, in the historic county of Middlesex. It lies to the north of Westminster and the historic City of London. The borough extends some 5 miles (8 km) from below High Holborn (road) to the northern heights of Hampstead Heath. Camden was created a borough in 1965 by the amalgamation of the former metropolitan boroughs of Hampstead, Holborn, and St. Pancras. Camden includes (from north to south) Highgate (in part), Hampstead, West Hampstead, Kentish Town, Camden Town, Kilburn (in part), Somers Town, St. Pancras, Bloomsbury, and Holborn.
The route of an ancient Roman highway is partly followed by Watling Street, a section of which (in modern Kilburn High Road and Shoot-up Hill) skirts Camden’s western edge. In the southern part, the Holborn district covers an area once occupied by two medieval villages (Holborn and St. Giles) and by three estates—Blemondesberi (Blemundsbury), the Soke of Portlepoole, and the Liberty of Ely Place.
Hampstead was a village in Anglo-Saxon times; in the 10th century ce its manor was bestowed on the monastery at Westminster. In 1086 St. Pancras was held by St. Paul’s Cathedral and divided into the manors of Pancras, Tothele (Totenhall), and Rugmere and a portion of land identified as Kennistoune or Cantelowes. In the 15th century Eton College obtained Chalcot’s Farm (which gave its name to Chalk Farm) as an endowment from Henry VI; the prestigious secondary school still owns much property in the area.
Following the dissolution of the monasteries in the 1530s, manors throughout the region were allocated to landed gentry. Many of the place-names of Camden remain associated with these landlords, notably the dukes of Bedford, the Lords Southampton, and the Somers family. Camden Town, from which the borough derived its name, was so called for the estate of Charles Pratt, 1st Earl Camden, who in 1791 provided land there for building. With the increase in population, the expansion of the canal system, and the advent of the railways in the 19th century, villages grew and agricultural land north of Holborn disappeared. Today the lodging houses, tenements, railway stations, and railroad marshaling yards of southern and central Camden offer striking contrasts to the expensive residential areas in the north of the borough, including the “villages” of Hampstead and Highgate, which have been surrounded by the northward spread of Greater London.
Historic landmarks include the chapel of St. Etheldreda, which is a remnant of a 13th-century structure, at Ely Place. In Holborn are the legal centres of Gray’s Inn and Lincoln’s Inn; the half-timbered Staple Inn is a former Inn of Chancery dating from Elizabethan times. Around Lincoln’s Inn Fields are Sir John Soane’s Museum and other historic edifices. St. Pancras Gardens is in the former churchyard of St. Pancras Old Church (14th century; remodeled 1848); St. Pancras New Church (1822; restored 1953) is an exemplary Regency structure. To the south is the church of St. Giles-in-the-Fields (1733). Cast-iron dogs in the style of Sir Edwin Landseer guard the main doors of the church of St. George (1724) in Hanover Square. The parish church of Hampstead is a mid-18th century structure. Also in Hampstead is the late 17th-century Fenton House, a museum owned by the National Trust. Kenwood House, the former home of the Mansfield family, was remodeled (1764–73) by Robert Adam; its extensive grounds are now the setting for summer lawn concerts, and displayed within the house is a collection of masterpieces mainly by 18th-century British painters. Heath House was the centre of abolitionist activity in the late 18th century, and Burgh House (c. 1703) is now used as a cultural centre and museum. The Romantic poet John Keats met his fiancée, Fanny Brawne, while residing at Wentworth Place; now known as Keats House, the site (restored 1974–75) includes a museum.
The neoclassical British Museum is within the famous district of Bloomsbury, near research institutes, colleges, and the main offices of the University of London. The British Library was opened at St. Pancras in 1998. Other notable buildings include Friends’ House (1926), the Town Hall (1937), and the Wellcome Institute building (1932). A well-known landmark is the 620-foot- (189-metre-) high BT Tower (1964; formerly the Post Office Tower). Just north of Euston Road in Somers Town are the 19th-century railway terminals of King’s Cross (1852), St. Pancras (1868), and Euston (1837).
In Camden Town the production of tourist-oriented crafts has displaced former furniture and piano-making trades. Hatton Garden is the centre of London’s diamond, gold, and silver trades. Tottenham Court Road has developed into a specialist shopping area.
The borough’s public open spaces include Primrose Hill, the eastern end of Regent’s Park, Parliament Hill, Hampstead Heath, Lincoln’s Inn Fields, and Coram’s Fields. The Fitzroy Square area has been noted for its association with such artists and writers as Roger Fry, John Constable, Virginia Woolf, and George Bernard Shaw. Karl Marx, who spent most of his later years in Camden, is buried in Highgate Cemetery, as are a number of other luminaries, including writers George Eliot, George Henry Lewes, Radclyffe Hall, and Douglas Adams; poet Christina Rossetti; painters John Singleton Copley and the Australian Sidney Nolan; philosopher Herbert Spencer; and scientist Michael Faraday.
Camden has a long history of multiethnicity. Greek and Irish communities became established there in the 17th century. Italian immigrants, fleeing the upheaval of the Napoleonic Wars, settled in parts of Hatton Gardens and Saffron Hill, Holborn. Many Germans later settled in St. Pancras, and in the mid-20th century a large Cypriot community became established in Camden Town. Ethnic minorities constitute more than one-fifth of the population, with large numbers of South Asians and Africans. Area 8.4 square miles (22 square km). Pop. (2001) 198,020; (2011) 220,338.
