Central Kalimantan, Indonesian Kalimantan Tengah,  propinsi (or provinsi; province), south-central Borneo, Indonesia, bounded by the provinces of East Kalimantan (Kalimantan Timur) to the north and northeast and South Kalimantan (Kalimantan Selatan) to the southeast, by the Java Sea to the south, and by the province of West Kalimantan (Kalimantan Barat) to the west. The capital is Palangkaraya, in the southeast-central part of the province.
The Schwaner Mountains and the Muller (Müller) Mountains run parallel to the northwestern boundary of the province, and an offshoot of the Muller range skirts the northern boundary. Mount Raya, the highest peak in the Schwaner range, reaches 7,474 feet (2,278 metres). To the south of these mountains lies an expanse of alluvial plain that constitutes the central and southern parts of the province. The southern coastal lowlands are covered with wide swamp belts intersected by estuaries formed by the southward-flowing Lamandau, Arut, Seruyan, Katingan, Kahayan, Kapuas, and Barito rivers and their tributaries. Most of the province is covered by dense tropical rainforest.
Agriculture is the principal occupation in this sparsely populated province. Rice, corn (maize), cassava, sweet potatoes, peanuts (groundnuts), and soybeans are major crops, and rattan, wild rubber, and beeswax are among the valuable nontimber forest products. Manufacturing activities are generally limited to small-scale and cottage industries, such as sawmilling, rice and flour milling, wood and timber processing, small-boat construction, weaving, and beadworking.
Compared with the economies of other Indonesian provinces, the economy of Central Kalimantan has grown slowly, largely because of the extent of the southern swamps and the difficulty of communication. Rivers provide limited inland transport routes because their flow fluctuates considerably, and they are subject to seasonal flooding. Larger cities and most of the sizable towns are linked by major roadways, however. The principal airports of Central Kalimantan are located in Palangkaraya and Sampit in the south-central region, as well as in Pangkalanbun in the southwest; smaller facilities serve the interior regions.
In the inland areas, the population consists mostly of Dayak groups (referring to non-Muslim indigenous peoples who trace their ancestry to the interior of Borneo). Among the most prominent of these peoples are the Ngaju, the Ot Danum, and the Maanyan. Malays and Chinese, as well as more-recent immigrants from elsewhere in Indonesia, constitute the majority of the coastal population. Many of the interior peoples are Christian, although some Ngaju communities practice a local religion called Kaharingan. Islam predominates in the coastal areas. Area 59,292 square miles (153,565 square km). Pop. (2000) 1,855,473; (2010) 2,212,089.
