Cheshire,  geographic and historic county and former administrative county of northwestern England, bordering Wales to the west, fronting the Dee and Mersey estuaries to the northwest, and flanked by the Pennine uplands, partly within the Peak District National Park, to the east. In 2009 the administrative county of Cheshire, which had comprised six districts—the city of Chester and the boroughs of Congleton, Crewe and Nantwich, Ellesmere Port and Neston, Macclesfield, and Vale Royal—was abolished and reconstituted as two unitary authorities, Cheshire East and Cheshire West and Chester. The geographic county comprises the entire former administrative county and the unitary authorities of Halton and Warrington. The historic county excludes the parts of the two unitary authorities north of the River Mersey, which belong to the historic county of Lancashire, but it encompasses several areas outside the geographic county: the metropolitan borough of Wirral in the metropolitan county of Merseyside; the part of the metropolitan county of Greater Manchester south of the Rivers Mersey and Tame (below Mossley), including parts of the metropolitan boroughs of Oldham, Tameside, Stockport, Manchester, and Trafford; and the north side of Langdendale, in the High Peak district of the administrative county of Derbyshire.
Most of the geographic county is underlain by Triassic sandstones and marls, which give a distinctive red colouring to many soils and building stones in churches. Atop the simple structure of the Cheshire Plain, however, lies a highly fragmented pattern of glacial clays, sands, and gravels, meandering rivers, and scattered distinctive small lakes, or meres.
Hill forts of the Bronze and Iron ages were built on the lightly wooded sandstone mid-Cheshire ridge, the watershed between the catchments of the River Dee in the west and the Rivers Weaver and Dane in the east. The Romans built a legionary fortress at Chester (Deva) about 71 ce as a base for the conquest of northern Wales and the defense of the northwest. For some four centuries after the Roman departure, Celtic-speaking Britons defended the area, but in 830 the Anglo-Saxons conquered it and incorporated it into the kingdom of Mercia. Norsemen invaded and occupied the Wirral peninsula during the 9th and 10th centuries, when the historic county of Cheshire first emerged as a subdivision of Mercia.
During the late Middle Ages, Cheshire enjoyed a measure of self-government and freedom from aristocratic control as a direct dependency of the crown. The county participated in the rebellion led by Sir Henry Percy (Hotspur) in 1403 and generally sided with the Lancastrians during the Wars of the Roses. From the 17th and 18th centuries, the towns of Northwich, Middlewich, and Nantwich prospered through the mining of rock salt. During the 18th century many of Cheshire’s towns, like those of neighbouring Lancashire, became centres of textile manufacture. Congleton and Macclesfield specialized in silk production, whereas other towns produced cotton. The town of Crewe developed as a railway centre during the 19th century. The expansion of the industrial region of Manchester into northeastern Cheshire, the incorporation of Wirral into the port complex of Liverpool, and the development of a chemical industry during the 19th century consolidated the historic county’s position among Britain’s major industrial areas.
