Chūbu,  chihō (region), central Honshu, Japan. Situated between Kantō region (east) and Kinki region (west), it encompasses the ken (prefectures) of Niigata, Toyama, Ishikawa, Fukui, Yamanashi, Nagano, Gifu, Shizuoka, and Aichi. The region’s name is derived from its location in the central part (chūbu) of Japan.
Although there is no core to unite Chūbu region into a single functional unit, it constitutes a coherent geomorphological whole. Its major configuration is formed by the overlapping of the Northeast, Southwest, and Shichito-Mariana mountain arcs. The mountains, lowlands, and volcanic zones intersect the general trend of Honshu almost at right angles. Structural examples are the trend of the Akaishi, Kiso, and Hida (Japanese Alps) ranges; the lowland of the Fossa Magna rift; and the Fuji Volcanic Zone. Honshu attains its greatest width of 174 miles (280 km) in the Fossa Magna and its greatest height of 12,388 feet (3,776 metres) at Mount Fuji.
Chūbu region may be divided into three distinct subregions. The Hokuriku area along the Sea of Japan (East Sea) includes Niigata, Toyama, Ishikawa, and Fukui prefectures. It is generally referred to as Ura Nihon (“Back Japan”) because of the gloom and snow of its winter weather. Industrial developments include aluminum smelting and fertilizer production.
Tōsan—consisting of the inland prefectures of Yamanashi, Nagano, and Gifu—was the sericultural (silkworm-raising) centre of Japan before World War II. In addition to rice, fruit and mulberry trees are grown; the major manufactures are precision instruments. The area’s high mountains and deep gorges are a source of hydroelectric power and a tourist attraction.
Tōkai, or Omote Nihon (“Front Japan”), is composed of Shizuoka and Aichi prefectures. The climate contrasts with that of Hokuriku, being characterized by windy, bright winters. Since the early 20th century the area has experienced rapid industrial and urban growth under the influence of Ōsaka in neighbouring Kinki, supported by the establishment of a modernized transportation system. Its phenomenal growth is typified by that of Nagoya, the capital of Aichi prefecture and one of Japan’s leading industrial centres. Area 25,786 square miles (66,786 square km). Pop. (2010) 21,715,822.
