Conwy,  county borough, northwestern Wales, along the Irish Sea. Conwy’s coast includes the rugged headlands of Penmaenmawr and Great Orme’s Head along with a low-lying strip reaching east to the mouth of the River Clwyd. From the coast the county borough extends inland along both sides of the River Conwy to the mountains of Snowdonia. The area west of the River Conwy and a small enclave east of the river below Llanrwst lie within the historic county of Caernarvonshire (Sir Gaernarfon). The portion of Conwy to the east of this area belongs to the historic county of Denbighshire (Sir Ddinbych). Conwy town is the administrative centre.
Conwy Castle (1283), built on the River Conwy estuary by Edward I of England, was a vital link in a chain of English strongholds in the then newly invaded North Wales. The castle guarded the entrance to the once-navigable River Conwy at the town of Conwy and dominated coastal access to the region of old Caernarvonshire and Anglesey. This edifice, along with other fortifications built by Edward I, was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1986.
Most of the county borough’s population is concentrated along its coastal strip, where tourism is the main industry. Colwyn Bay is one of the most popular seaside resorts and the largest town. The town of Abergele, located east of Colwyn Bay, was one of the first places in North Wales where “sea bathing” became popular. It is now a thriving market centre with weekly cattle markets. The coastal resorts of Conwy, Penmaenmawr, Llanfairfechan, and Llandudno all have lengthy sand beaches. The stone statue of a rabbit checking its watch, located on the western promenade of Llandudno, commemorates the part the town played in inspiring Lewis Carroll’s Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland (1865).
Much of the interior of Conwy is farmland (including pastureland) and scenic hills. Snowdonia National Park covers the western interior, and numerous visitors travel each year to the mountain resort of Betws-y-Coed for its celebrated waterfalls. Area 435 square miles (1,126 square km). Pop. (2001) 109,596; (2011) 115,228.
