Denbighshire, Welsh Sir Ddinbych,  county of northern Wales extending inland from the Irish Sea coast. The present county of Denbighshire includes the Vale of Clwyd along the River Clwyd and an inland area between the Clwydian Range in the east and the Clocaenog Forest in the west that ascends to the Berwyn mountains in the south. The lower Vale of Clywd and the seacoast are part of the historic county of Flintshire (Sir Fflint). The southernmost portion of the present county, bordering the Berwyn range, belongs to the historic county of Merioneth (Meirionnydd). The remaining central portion of the present county constitutes only a part of the historic county of Denbighshire, which also encompasses the eastern portion of the county borough of Conwy, most of the county borough of Wrexham, and a small northern section of the county of Powys. Ruthin is the county’s administrative centre.
The Vale of Clwyd and the upper reaches of the River Dee have been focuses of human settlement since ancient times. The discovery of the hill fort of Pen-y-Corddyn in the hills just south of the village of Llanddulas provides evidence of Iron Age settlement. An important ancient route along the North Wales coast passed through the historic county of Denbighshire, which was the site of two Roman roads. Evidence indicates that the Romans mined lead in the area. In the southeast is a section of Offa’s Dyke, an earthwork that marked the boundary between Wales (west) and England (east). Among the county’s medieval monuments is the beautiful, ruined Valle Crucis Abbey (founded by the Cistercians c. 1200), near Llangollen.
After Edward I conquered northern Wales in the late 13th century, the English built castles at Denbigh, Ruthin, and other sites in the area. An act of Henry VIII formed the county of Denbighshire out of various local lordships. During the English Civil Wars, Charles I took refuge in the county in 1645, and Denbigh Castle was one of the last Welsh strongholds to surrender to the Parliamentary forces, who razed it. The spread of Nonconformism (non-Anglican Protestantism) during the 18th century and the development of coastal resorts during the 19th century mark the later history of Denbighshire. During this period the area around Wrexham in the eastern part of the historic county was at the forefront of the Industrial Revolution as a centre of coal mining, metalworking, and machinery manufacture.
Tourism is the main industry in the area now administered by the county council of Denbighshire. Llangollen, nestled between the Berwyn mountains on one side and the Ruabon and Llantysilio mountains on the other, is world-famous for the annual International Musical Eisteddfod (festival), begun in 1947. The town has leather-manufacturing and wool-milling industries. Ruthin’s castle has been converted into a luxury hotel. Denbigh has some light industry, and Corwen is primarily an agricultural market town. Along the coast are the popular seaside resorts of Prestatyn and Rhyl. Sheep raising and dairy farming are the dominant economic activities in the interior countryside. Area present county, 323 square miles (837 square km). Pop. (2001) 93,065; (2011) 93,734.
