Dorset,  administrative, geographic, and historic county of southwestern England. It is bordered by the English Channel (south) and the counties of Devon (west), Hampshire (east), and Somerset and Wiltshire (both north). The historic town of Dorchester, in the south, is the county seat.
The administrative, geographic, and historic counties cover somewhat different areas. The administrative county comprises six districts: the borough of Christchurch, East Dorset, North Dorset, Purbeck, West Dorset, and the borough of Weymouth and Portland. The geographic county encompasses those districts as well as the unitary authorities of Bournemouth and Poole. The historic county excludes Bournemouth, Christchurch, and part of East Dorset, which instead belong to the historic county of Hampshire. Along its western border the administrative county has gained small areas of the historic counties of Devon and Somerset through boundary adjustments, while a small section of the historic county of Dorset lies in the administrative county of Somerset.
Chalk uplands cross into Dorset from adjoining Wiltshire. As the North Dorset Downs, they stretch through the county to beyond  Dorchester; as the South Dorset Downs, they form a narrow band of chalk terrain eastward to Swanage. Between those two areas of chalk is a triangular zone of lower-lying land developed on various sands and clays and forming an extension of the Hampshire basin. This area is drained in the west by the Rivers Frome and Piddle into Poole Bay and in the east by the Rivers Avon (East, or Hampshire, Avon) and Stour. To the north and west of the North Dorset Downs, along the county’s border with Devon and Somerset, is found a somewhat similar band of mixed terrain developed on various sands and clays. The northern part is largely drained into Christchurch Bay by the Stour and its tributaries.
Prehistoric peoples were active on the chalk uplands of Dorset. There are abundant monuments from the Neolithic Period, Bronze Age, and Iron Age. One monument that seems to have been occupied throughout prehistoric times is Maiden Castle just outside Dorchester, the main town in Roman times. The area subsequently became part of the West Saxon kingdom, and as Wessex it has been immortalized in the writings of Thomas Hardy. In the early 19th century the county was the scene of the Tolpuddle martyrs’ historic stand for organized labour.
Apart from the urban complex of Bournemouth and Poole in the southeastern corner of the geographic county, Dorset is mainly rural. Agriculture remains the major user of land, though not the major employer of labour. On the chalk uplands, large farms concentrate on dairying and the cultivation of barley. In the mixed sand and clay terrain, farms are smaller, and agricultural enterprises are mixed. Pig and poultry production is carried on, as is some horticulture. Forestry now plays an important role, with most of the woodland owned by the Forestry Commission. Portland stone and Purbeck marble are renowned as building stone. Dorset also has one of the few remaining mines in the country for ball clay, which is important in the ceramics industry and is still taken to Staffordshire. Limited supplies of petroleum and natural gas are found in the Kimmeridge area on the coast.
Tourism has played an increasing role in the economy, particularly in the geographic county’s major urban centres, the coastal towns of Bournemouth, Poole, and Weymouth. Bournemouth has been known as a holiday resort since 1879, and Weymouth and Portland annually attract large numbers of tourists as well. Dorset’s coastal areas, as well as those of the neighbouring East Devon district, were designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 2001.
Manufacturing is important in parts of Poole and Bournemouth and includes pottery and brick production, engineering, electronics, pharmaceutical products, and chemicals. Area administrative county, 981 square miles (2,542 square km); geographic county, 1,025 square miles (2,655 square km). Pop. (2001) administrative county, 390,980; geographic county, 692,712; (2011) administrative county, 412,905; geographic county, 744,041.
