East Kalimantan, Indonesian Kalimantan Timur,  propinsi (or provinsi; province), east-central Borneo, Indonesia. It is bounded by the East Malaysian state of Sarawak to the northwest, by the Celebes Sea to the northeast and the Makassar Strait to the southeast, and by the Indonesian provinces of North Kalimantan (Kalimantan Utara) to the north, South Kalimantan (Kalimantan Selatan) to the south, Central Kalimantan (Kalimantan Tengah) to the southwest, and West Kalimantan (Kalimantan Barat) to the west. East Kalimantan also includes a number of islands in the Celebes Sea, including Bilangbilangan and the Derawan archipelago. The capital of East Kalimantan is Samarinda, on the southeastern coast.
The Iran Mountains rise in northeastern Borneo, and among the spurs of the range are some of East Kalimantan’s highest peaks, including Mount Kemul (6,735 feet [2,053 metres]) and Mount Menyapa (6,562 feet [2,000 metres]). The Mahakam River, together with its tributaries, the Telen and the Belayan, has formed an inland basin covered by swamps that includes the Semayang, Melintang, and Jempang lakes in the southeastern part of the province. The mountains are covered by dense tropical rainforests of teak, oak, pine, alder, maple, and ash. Heavy rainfall has resulted in advanced decomposition and impoverishment of the soils.
Agriculture employs more than half of the province’s population, and manufacturing activities are dominated by extractive industries such as logging and mining. The province experienced a resource boom in the early 21st century, and East Kalimantan became one of Indonesia’s most attractive regions for both local and foreign investment. The mining of coal and gold bolstered the local economy, but at a steep environmental cost, as small landholders struggled to maintain traditional farming practices. There is an oil refinery near Balikpapan, and oil and natural gas are extracted from offshore fields in the southeast.
The best paved roads are confined to the southeastern coastal plains, although the expansion of mining and logging activities into the interior has been accompanied by the development of more robust infrastructure. Major routes connect Samarinda with the inland city of Tenggarong, on the Mahakam River, and with the southeastern coastal city of Balikpapan. There is an international airport in Balikpapan, and the smaller airport at Samarinda handles domestic flights.
The population of the interior of East Kalimantan consists largely of various Dayak groups (a term generally applied to non-Muslim indigenous peoples who trace their ancestry to the interior regions of Borneo). Among the most prominent of these peoples are the Kenyah and the Kayan. The coastal regions are populated by peoples of diverse ancestry, including local Kutai Malays, Bugis (from southern Celebes), Javanese (from the island of Java), Banjar (from South Kalimantan), and Chinese, among others. Islam is the dominant religion near the coast, but much of the inland population is Christian. Kutai National Park is located near the city of Bontang on the eastern coast of the province. Area 49,833 square miles (129,067 square km). Pop. (2010) 3,028,487; (2015) 3,422,676.
