Flintshire, also called Flint, Welsh Sir Fflint,  county in the northeastern corner of Wales, bounded on the east by the River Dee and England and bounded on the west by Denbighshire. The present county of Flintshire encompasses an area along the lower Dee and the Dee estuary and extends inland to the Clwydian Range. The historic county of Flintshire, which covers a larger area, includes all of the present county as well as the northern portion of the present county of Denbighshire and the eastern portion of the county borough of Wrexham, which is an outlying exclave of the historic county of Flintshire. Mold is the administrative centre of the county.
A Celtic tribe known as the Deceangli held the region before they were overrun by the Romans in the 1st century ce. Roman remains in the area are quite sparse, however. According to legend, the village of Bangor Is-coed, in the present county borough of Wrexham, was the site of the oldest monastery in Britain (c. 180). It was destroyed early in the 7th century by the king of Northumbria in the last great battle between the Britons of Wales and the Anglo-Saxons. Both Offa’s and Watt’s dykes traversed Flintshire and demarcated England on the east from Wales on the west. Flintshire was the scene of protracted fighting in the 12th and 13th centuries as its Welsh inhabitants resisted Anglo-Norman domination. Tightening their hold on the region, the English built great castles at Dyserth, Rhuddlan, and Flint, and King Edward I of England achieved a final conquest of the area in 1284. That same year he formed the county of Flintshire and gave the castle at Caergwrle to his queen, Eleanor of Castile. The original Hawarden Castle, an important English stronghold in the Welsh Marches (border country) during the years following the Edwardian conquest, underwent numerous Welsh attacks. Flintshire was the site of a Cistercian abbey at Basingwerk (1131), near Holywell, and a Dominican priory at Rhuddlan (1258). In addition to the remains of castles at Flint and Rhuddlan, there is a castle at Ewloe that was built by Welsh princes in imitation of Norman work.
Henry VIII increased the county’s territory in the mid-16th century. In the English Civil Wars of the mid-17th century, Flintshire was solidly royalist. The Greenfield valley at Holywell was one of the birthplaces of the Industrial Revolution, and rich coal deposits along the River Dee gave rise to an iron and steel industry and to shipbuilding during the 19th century.
Eastern Flintshire remains a heavily industrialized region, although it has lost most of its heavy industry, including the huge former steelworks at Shotton. Smaller and more diverse industries in engineering, chemicals, and synthetic textiles—particularly rayon—have developed in Flint, Connah’s Quay, and other towns. Mold is a market centre for the agricultural region to the west. Tourist attractions in Flintshire include St. Winifred’s Well at the parish church in Holywell and the extensive bird havens along the shore of the Dee estuary. Daniel Owen, widely considered the father of the Welsh novel, was born in Mold in 1836. Area 323 square miles (837 square km). Pop. (2001) 148,594; (2011) 152,506.
