French Guiana,  overseas territorial collectivity of France, situated on the northeastern coast of South America. French Guiana is bounded by Brazil to the south and east, Suriname to the west, and the Atlantic Ocean to the northeast. The capital is Cayenne.
Geologically, the rock underlying French Guiana forms part of the crystalline massif of the Guiana Highlands. Rivers—which flow generally northeastward, to the sea—have greatly eroded the massif, and most of French Guiana is low-lying. The Maroni River forms the French Guiana–Suriname border in the west, and the Oyapock River forms the border with Brazil in the east. The Tumuc-Humac Mountains in the south reach an elevation of 2,300 feet (700 metres). Recent alluvial deposits have formed a swampy coastal plain southeast of Cayenne. Older alluvial deposits form a savanna west of Cayenne. Dense tropical forests (mostly hardwoods) predominate outside the coastal plain and cover more than nine-tenths of the land area.
French Guiana is subject to heavy rainfall between December and July; annual precipitation reaches 150 inches (3,800 mm) around Cayenne and tapers off toward the northeast. High temperatures predominate, and monthly averages vary between 77 and 80 °F (25 and 27 °C) at Cayenne. Wildlife includes tapirs, caimans, ocelots, sloths, great anteaters, and armadillos.
French Guiana’s population is principally Creole (mixed descent, also referred to as Guianese Mulatto), with minorities of metropolitan French, Haitians, Surinamese, Antilleans, Chinese, Brazilians, South Asians, and others. The principal languages spoken are French (official); Guianese Creole French; several indigenous languages, including Wayampi, Carib, and Emerillon; and the various languages of the immigrant communities. The principal religious affiliation is Christianity (primarily Roman Catholicism), adhered to by more than four-fifths of the population.
The populace is concentrated principally in and around Cayenne, the largest city, and the coastal regions; the interior is largely uninhabited. Demographic rates are those generally typical of a developing country. There was immigration from Southeast Asia, Haiti, and the French Caribbean territories beginning in the late 20th century.
French Guiana has a developing market economy, patterned on that of metropolitan France and sustained by aid and technical assistance from France. A rocket-launching base at Kourou, used by the European Space Agency, is of great importance to the economy, accounting for about one-fourth of the country’s annual gross domestic product (GDP). Services, manufacturing, and construction are the largest sectors of the economy. The gross national income (GNI) per capita is among the highest in South America.
Agriculture produces only a small part of GDP. Subsistence farming predominates and centres on the growing of cassava, rice, bananas, and cabbages. Most small farms are worked and owned by families, but there are some large estates engaged in growing cash crops, largely for export to metropolitan France.
The heavily forested land includes valuable commercial species. Some forestland is reserved by the state, but most is open to exploitation. Most of the timber cut is used for industrial purposes, and of that about two-fifths is exported. Pastures support mainly cattle, pigs, and poultry. Meat and milk production is limited, and large quantities of both must be imported. Shrimps account for a large portion of the annual fish catch.
Mineral exploitation is of negligible importance, and French Guiana must import fossil fuels and metallic minerals. Gold and clays are the only minerals extracted.
Manufacturing industries are concentrated on cement, rum, and finished wood products. Most capital and consumer goods must be imported. Electricity is generated entirely from thermal plants using imported fossil fuels.
Most of the labour force is employed in services and industry, with a small fraction in agriculture. Wages and benefits are legislated at the same rates as those that prevail in France. Unemployment and inflation rates are high.
Although about two-fifths of the country’s roads are paved, the road system is underdeveloped in the interior. Dégrad des Cannes, Larivot, Saint-Laurent du Moroni, and Kourou are principal ports. Some of the country’s waterways are navigable by small oceangoing craft, but most are navigable only by shallow-draft vessels. There is an international airport at Cayenne.
The balance of trade is chronically unfavourable, with the value of exports far outweighed by that of imports. Machinery, food and agricultural products, and refined petroleum dominate imports, whereas motor vehicles and their parts, gold, electrical machinery and electronics, fish, and shrimps are the leading exports. Major trading partners are France, the other countries of the European Union, and the French Antilles (Guadeloupe, Martinique, Saint Barthélemy, and Saint Martin).
