Fribourg, German Freiburg,  canton, western Switzerland, bounded by Lake Neuchâtel and the cantons of Vaud on the west and south and Bern on the east, with enclaves within Vaud. It lies in an elevated plain (Swiss Plateau) and rises from flat land in the west through a hilly region up to the PreAlps in the south and east. The highest summits are to the south in La Gruyère district and include the Vanil Noir (7,836 feet [2,389 metres]). The canton is bisected by the Sarine River (Saane), which flows from south to north (to join the Aare), and by its tributaries. On the west, La Broye flows northeast into Lakes Morat (Murtensee) and Neuchâtel, and, in the southwest, La Veveyse flows south to Lake Geneva (Lac Léman).
Traces of prehistoric settlements have been found on the shores of Lakes Neuchâtel and Morat. The canton, made up of districts acquired by its capital, the city of Fribourg, reached its present extent with the inclusion of the town of Morat (now Murten) in 1803. It joined the Sonderbund (separatist league of Catholic cantons) in 1846 but surrendered to the federal army in 1847. Predominantly Roman Catholic, it has numerous monasteries and convents.
The canton is predominantly rural. Cattle breeding and dairying (including the processing of milk and cheese, notably in La Gruyère district) are important. Market gardening, cereals, tobacco, and fruit prosper in the fertile north and on hillsides in the centre of the canton. Light industries, including food processing, and the manufacture of machinery, metal products, and precision instruments, are largely concentrated in Fribourg city, Düdingen, and Murten and the timber industry in La Gruyère. Power plants in the Sarine district generate electricity for home use and for export. Tourism is most developed in the mountain and lake regions and in Fribourg. The canton is served by the main railway line from Lausanne to Bern, with several branch lines.
Situated on the Swiss linguistic frontier, Fribourg’s population is two-thirds French speaking (west) and one-third German speaking (east). Area 645 square miles (1,671 square km). Pop. (2007 est.) 258,252.
