Galway, Irish Gaillimh,  county in the province of Connaught (Connacht), western Ireland. It is bounded by the Atlantic Ocean (west) and by Counties Mayo (north), Roscommon (north and east), Offaly (east), Tipperary (southeast), and Clare (south). The county seat, Galway city, on Galway Bay, is administratively independent of the county.
 The eastern two-thirds of the county is part of the Irish central lowland. In the west is Connemara, mainly a lowland, with peat bogs, many lakes, heathlands, and uplands such as the Twelve Bens and the Maumturk Mountains, with many summits higher than 2,000 feet (600 metres).
Galway has the largest Irish- (Gaelic-) speaking population of any Irish county, and the Irish college at Spiddal has facilities for those wishing to study the language. About one-third of the county’s people live in villages and towns, which, apart from the city of Galway, are small.
The living conditions in Connemara are among the hardest in Ireland. Many people live on small farms in a coastal belt about one mile wide. In the east, areas of cultivable soil are used for crops or for the rich pastures that often develop in this area of high rainfall. Sheep are kept in large numbers. Rough woodlands, patches of rocky heath, and peat bogs create gaps in the pattern of agricultural settlement. Only a few short streams flow over much of the lowland, but there are numerous shallow depressions called turloughs that provide good pastures in dry periods. Galway produces a black marble and a green-streaked Connemara marble of great beauty. The county also has light industry.
The descendants of the followers of the Norman Richard de Burgh, who assumed rule of Connaught in the 1230s, became known as the tribes of Galway. The county was given its shire boundaries in the reign of Elizabeth I. After 1652 the land settlement of Oliver Cromwell established a new class of landed proprietors. Area 2,354 square miles (6,098 square km), excluding Galway city. Pop. (2006) 159,256, excluding Galway city; (2011) 175,124, excluding Galway city.
