Gīlān,  province, northwestern Iran, bounded by the Caspian Sea and the Republic of Azerbaijan on the north, Ardabīl province on the west, Zanjān province on the southwest, Qazvīn province on the south, and Māzandarān province on the east. The capital is Rasht.
Gīlān was within the sphere of influence of the successive Achaemenian, Seleucid, Parthian, and Sāsānian empires that ruled Iran until the 7th century ce. The subsequent Arab conquest of Iran led to the rise of many local dynasties, and Gīlān acquired an independent status that continued until 1567. Gīlān is mentioned in The Regions of the World, a Persian geography of 982. During the rule (1073–92) of Malik-Shāh, the third Seljuq sultan, a secret sect of Ismāʿīlīs who formed the core of Shīʿite resistance against the Seljuqs was established in Gīlān and eventually became known as the Assassins. The Turko-Mongol invasions in the 13th century resulted in a huge influx of refugees, including the Qājārs, into the sparsely populated region. The Qājārs helped the Ṣafavid rulers seize power at the beginning of the 16th century. Later the Qājārs sided with Nādir Shāh in 1736, when he was threatened by the Afghans. The Qājārs rose as a dynastic power in 1796, displacing the Zand dynasty. Olearius, an 18th-century traveller, mentions the Gīlān fisheries.
In the 19th century the rivalry between Russia and Great Britain in Iran took the form of economic intervention. After losing several battles with Russia, Iran was forced to grant economic and naval benefits to that country in Gīlān, under the treaties of 1813 and 1828. In 1907 Great Britain and Russia divided Iran into three zones; the northernmost, including the province of Gīlān, was the Russian zone. These events led to the growth of nationalist movements, and contingents recruited from Tabrīz, Gīlān, and Eṣfahān liberated Tehrān, with the result that Aḥmad Mīrzā, son of Shāh Moḥammad Alī, was proclaimed ruler. In the aftermath of the Russian Revolution, Bolshevik troops had control of almost the entire Iranian Caspian seacoast, and a separatist group proclaimed the short-lived Soviet Socialist Republic of Gīlān. In the treaty of 1921 the Soviet Union handed back the region around Enzeli and gave Iran equal navigation rights on the Caspian Sea.
Gīlān divides into a coastal plain including the large delta of the Safīd Rūd and adjacent parts of the Elburz Mountains. The soil is fertile loam, with dunes and marshy stretches along the lower plain. The jungle-like forest contains partly endemic species such as the Caucasian wingnut (a kind of walnut), and silk trees cover part of the plain. Animals include wild boar, lynx, panther, hyena, jackal, and deer, with waterfowl in the coastal stretches. On most cultivated land in Gīlān, rice is grown. Other crops include tobacco, fruits, vegetables, and tea (grown in the foothills above the rice fields). Fishing, developed by the Russians in the 19th century, has been government run since 1953 and is important; most of the catch (sturgeon, salmon, whitefish) is either dried or canned and is exported, as is the caviar, which in the early 1970s accounted for about one-fifth of world production. Gīlān has a few modern factories, mainly for tea and rice processing. Modern developments include a dam at Manjīl.
Gīlān’s capital and commercial centre is Rasht, which has a silk mill and a plant processing kenaf (hemp) fibre; rice-straw mats are also made. Rasht is linked to Qazvīn, Tehrān, and other coastal ports by road; it has an airport, and a natural-gas pipeline passes through the city en route to Azerbaijan. Mahījān, Langarūd, and Bandar-e Anzalī (a busy Caspian port) are other important economic centres. Area 5,679 square miles (14,709 square km). Pop. (2006) 2,404,861.
