Gorontalo,  propinsi (or provinsi; province), in the centre of the northern peninsula of the island of Celebes (Sulawesi), Indonesia. It is bounded to the north by the Celebes Sea, to the east by the province of North Sulawesi (Sulawesi Utara), to the south by the Gulf of Tomini, and to the west by the province of Central Sulawesi (Sulawesi Tengah). Its territory also includes scores of small coastal islands. The capital is the city of Gorontalo, in the southeastern part of the province. Area 4,346 square miles (11,257 square km). Pop. (2010 prelim.) 1,040,164.
Gorontalo has a varied topography, ranging from coastal flatlands to undulating hills to inland peaks that rise above 6,500 feet (2,000 metres) in elevation. The area is drained primarily by the Paguyaman, Bone, and Randangan rivers. Coral reefs lie offshore. Much of the land is forest-covered. Notable tree species include meranti (or sal; Shorea species), ebony, and eucalyptus. Rattan is plentiful, as are orchids, flowering trees, and shrubs, including  various species of Macaranga (of the Malpighiales order).
In biogeographical terms, Gorontalo is part of Wallacea, the transitional zone between the Asian, or Oriental (Paleotropical), and Australian (Notogaean) faunal realms. Consequently, it is home to numerous unique species, most notably babirusas, anoas (dwarf buffalo), Gorontalo macaques, and eastern tarsiers. Chickenlike maleo megapodes (Macrocephalon maleo) also inhabit the region.
The Gorontalo people (including the Bolaang-Mongondow) constitute the overwhelming majority of the population. Their language is Gorontalo, and it is spoken in various dialects across the province. Islam is the principal religion.
Agriculture is the predominant occupation in Gorontalo, with corn (maize), rice, coconuts, sugarcane, candlenuts, cocoa, cloves, and coffee among the main field crops. The primary products of horticulture include bananas, papayas, and mangoes; chili peppers and tomatoes; turmeric and ginger; and orchids and other decorative plants. Chickens, cows, and goats are the most common farm animals. Offshore fisheries yield mostly skipper, snapper, tuna, and mackerel.
After agriculture, services and trade are the leading sectors of Gorontalo’s economy. The Trans-Sulawesi Highway runs mainly along the southern coast but stretches inland in the more densely populated east-central region. Another major road parallels the northern coast. An international airport and the largest seaport of the province are both located near the capital.
The island of Celebes was part of the Buddhist Srivijaya empire of Palembang (in southeastern Sumatra) before coming under the influence of the Hindu Majapahit empire of eastern Java in the 14th century. The gradual disintegration of the Majapahit empire toward the end of the 15th century allowed both the older, 14th-century kingdom of Gorontalo to gain strength and new kingdoms to arise across the island. The southwestern Makassarese state of Gowa, whose ruler adopted Islam in 1605,  extended his control over the northern states.
Just a few years after the conversion of Gowa, the Dutch arrived on Celebes. In 1658 they built a fort at Manado, on the tip of the northern peninsula, and the following decade they attacked and defeated Gowa with the help of Gowa’s rival, the Buginese state of Bone (now called Watampone). Gowa formally surrendered to the Dutch in 1669. During the 18th century, when wars raged between the Makassarese and the Buginese, the northern states survived as Dutch protectorates. Temporary control of the island by the British in 1810–16 encouraged the state of Bone to rebel against the Dutch in 1825, and that resistance was not fully crushed until 1860. By 1911 Dutch rule had been established across the island.
Following Japanese occupation (1942–45) during World War II, Celebes formed part of the Dutch-sponsored state of East Indonesia, until it was incorporated into the Republic of Indonesia in 1950. The island was split in 1960 into two large administrative units, one encompassing the northern region and the other spanning the south. In 1964, in response to ongoing social and political unrest, these units were further divided to become the four provinces of Central, North, South, and Southeast Sulawesi. In 2000 the province of Gorontalo was created by law from roughly the western half of North Sulawesi; the provincial government was installed in 2001.
