Greater London,  metropolitan county of southeastern England that is also generally known as London. A brief treatment of the administrative entity follows. An in-depth discussion of the physical setting, history, character, and inhabitants of the city is in the article London. Descriptions of London from early editions of Encyclopædia Britannica and from the Book of the Year writings contemporaneous with World War II can be found in BTW: London Classics.
The administrative structure of Greater London includes 33 separate boroughs, 14 of which constitute Inner London and the others Outer London. The Inner London boroughs are Camden, Hackney, Hammersmith and Fulham, Haringey, Islington, Kensington and Chelsea, Lambeth, Lewisham, Newham, Southwark, Tower Hamlets, Wandsworth, the City of Westminster, and the City of London. The 19 boroughs of Outer London are Barking and Dagenham, Barnet, Bexley, Brent, Bromley, Croydon, Ealing, Enfield, Greenwich, Harrow, Havering, Hillingdon, Hounslow, Kingston upon Thames, Merton, Redbridge, Richmond upon Thames, Sutton, and Waltham Forest.
The present metropolitan county of Greater London constitutes nearly all of the historic county of Middlesex (which comprises the bulk of Greater London north of the River Thames), parts of the historic counties of Kent, Essex, and Hertfordshire, and a large part of the historic county of Surrey.
Until 1889 the only part of London that had an administrative existence apart from the historic counties was the historic City of London, which was confined to the area of the medieval city. During the period 1889–1965, the County of London, carved from parts of the historic counties of Middlesex, Surrey, and Kent, administered an area that comprised present-day Inner London plus the outer boroughs of Newham and Haringey. The 1889 boundaries had been adopted in response to the rapid development of suburban areas in the 19th century. By the mid-20th century, however, the suburban population of London had spread far beyond the boundaries of the County of London. In an attempt to address that shift, the present boroughs were established in 1965 by amalgamating several existing boroughs and districts, at the expense of the surrounding counties, to form the new metropolitan county of Greater London.
The present-day City of London covers an area of 1.1 square miles (2.9 square km) at the heart of Greater London and is a centre of world finance. Greater London forms the core of a larger metropolitan area (with a proportionately larger population) that extends as far as 45 miles (70 km) from the centre. Area 607 square miles (1,572 square km). Pop. (1991) 6,679,699; (2001) 7,172,091; (2011) 8,173,941.
An overview of selected statistics and cultural features of Greater London borough by borough is provided in the table.
