Gwynedd,  county of northwestern Wales, extending from the Irish Sea in the west to the mountains of Snowdonia in the east. It encompasses most of the historic counties of Caernarvonshire and Merioneth. Caernarfon is the administrative centre of the county.
The county is named for the medieval Welsh princedom of Gwynedd, which, under the Llewellyns, proudly held out against the territorial ambitions of Edward I of England in the late 13th century. From their great castles at Caernarfon and Conwy, the Normans did not penetrate inland. Gwynedd thus has remained a stronghold of Welsh culture, with a far higher proportion of Welsh-speaking people (two-thirds) than any other county in the principality. Apart from the concentrations at the coastal resorts, the present dispersed settlement pattern is a complex product of Welsh family homestead inheritance practices.
The county largely comprises mountains of old hard rock cut by Ice Age glaciers. It includes most of Snowdonia National Park, which in turn covers much of the county. The park takes its name from Snowdon (Yr Wyddfa), a peak with an elevation of 3,560 feet (1,085 metres), the highest point in England and Wales. The area’s ruggedness and wetness largely restrict farming to breeding hardy sheep. Increasingly, the family farms have proved to be uneconomical, and many have been merged into larger units with associated depopulation. Since the 1950s, English people from the metropolitan areas of the Midlands and Lancashire have bought the vacated farm buildings as “second homes.” There are slate quarries in the hills and extensive forests managed by the Forestry Commission. Tourist attractions include hill climbing. The county’s lakes furnish water for large English cities, Liverpool and Birmingham in particular.
North of the mountains are the lowlands of the scenic Lleyn Peninsula (a popular tourist destination) and the Menai coast. Prehistoric dolmens, stone circles, and standing stones show that these lowlands have been inhabited since early times. Agricultural activities include potato farming and dairying on the Lleyn Peninsula. The most populous part of the county is along the Menai Strait around Caernarfon and Bangor. Tourists flock to Caernarfon to see its castle, which, along with other fortifications built by Edward I, was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1986. Bangor is a cultural centre with a university and cathedral. Area 979 square miles (2,535 square km). Pop. (2001) 116,843; (2011) 121,874.
