Hidalgo,  estado (state), east-central Mexico. It is bounded by the states of San Luis Potosí to the north, Veracruz to the north and northeast, Puebla to the east, Tlaxcala and México to the south, and Querétaro to the west. The state capital and largest city is Pachuca (Pachuca de Soto).
Northern and eastern Hidalgo rise from the Mesa Central to the Sierra Madre Oriental amid some of the most precipitous relief in Mexico, with peaks reaching 10,000 feet (3,000 metres). In the south and west the slopes generally yield to a cool, semiarid tableland. The varied climate facilitates production of crops, including corn (maize), alfalfa, sugarcane, beans, barley, fruits, coffee, tobacco, and maguey (agave), used in making the alcoholic beverage pulque. Cattle and sheep are raised. Hidalgo contains extensive deposits of silver, gold, lead, mercury, copper, and opals. On the flanks of the Sierra Madre are Lake Metztitlán and the Tulancingo River valley, a centre of textile industries. Motor vehicles, cement, metal products, and processed foods and beverages are also manufactured. Major highways link Tulancingo, Pachuca, and many smaller towns with Mexico City.
The ruins of Tula, near the modern settlement of the same name, are believed to be those of the Toltec capital, which benefited from obsidian mining in the region. Hidalgo was part of the state of México until 1869, when it was established as a separate state named in honour of the revolutionary patriot Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla. State government is headed by a governor, who is elected to a single term of six years. Members of the unicameral legislature, the State Congress, are elected to three-year terms. The state is divided into local governmental units called municipios (municipalities), each of which is headquartered in a prominent city, town, or village.
Although Hidalgo is somewhat densely populated, about half of the people live in rural agricultural areas, including many members of indigenous groups, such as the Otomí. About one-sixth of residents speak an indigenous language. Among the state’s cultural institutions are the Regional Museum of Actopán (founded in 1933), with displays relating to the Otomí Indians; and the Autonomous University of Hidalgo (founded 1869 as the Scientific and Literary Institution; present status, 1961). Area 8,036 square miles (20,813 square km). Pop. (2010) 2,665,018.
