Jiangxi, Wade-Giles romanization Chiang-hsi, conventional Kiangsi,  sheng (province) of southeast-central China. It is bounded by the provinces of Hubei and Anhui to the north, Zhejiang and Fujian to the east, Guangdong to the south, and Hunan to the west. On the map its shape resembles an inverted pear. The port of Jiujiang, some 430 miles (690 km) upstream from Shanghai and 135 miles (220 km) downstream from Wuhan (Hubei), is the province’s principal outlet on the Yangtze River (Chang Jiang). The provincial capital is Nanchang.
The name Jiangxi literally means “West of the [Yangtze] River,” although the entire province lies south of it. This seeming paradox is caused by changes made in administrative divisions throughout China’s history. In 733, under the Tang dynasty, a superprefecture named Jiangnan Xi (“Western part of South of the Yangtze”) Dao was set up, with its seat at the city of Hongzhou (now Nanchang). The present provincial name is a contraction of that name.
Lying in the midst of a longitudinal depression between China’s western highlands and the coastal ranges of Fujian province, Jiangxi constitutes a corridor linking the province of Guangdong, in the south, with the province of Anhui and the Grand Canal, in the north. Throughout China’s history, Jiangxi has played a pivotal role in national affairs because of its position astride the main route of armies, commerce and trade, and large population migrations. Area 63,600 square miles (164,800 square km). Pop. (2010) 44,567,475.
Topographically, Jiangxi corresponds to the drainage basin of the Gan River, which runs northeastward in descending elevation from the southern tip of the province to Lake Poyang and the Yangtze in the north. This basin is surrounded by hills and mountains that rim the province from all sides. Among the more important ranges are the Huaiyu Mountains, to the northeast; the Wuyi Mountains, to the east; the Jiulian and Dayu ranges, to the south; the Zhuguang, Wanyang (including Mount Jinggang), Wugong, and Jiuling ranges, to the west; and the Mufu and Lu ranges, to the northwest and north. A remarkable feature of these mountains is that they rise in disconnected masses and thus contain corridors for interprovincial communication, especially along the Hunan border. The mountains to the south, too, present no formidable barrier. The Meiling Pass is a broad and well-paved gap leading to Guangdong province.
Other mountains are found in the centre and north of the province. East of the Middle Gan valley are the Yu Mountains. Made up of short and moderate hills separated by a network of streams, the country traversed by this range consists of a succession of small valleys with bottomlands from 5 to 12 miles (8 to 19 km) wide. The Lu Mountains, in the north, rise sharply to some 4,800 feet (1,460 metres) from the lowlands west of Lake Poyang.
The principal river of Jiangxi is the Gan, which traverses the entire province from south to north. Its headwaters are two streams that converge to form one river at Ganzhou. Along its course this great river receives several large tributaries from the west and a lesser number of smaller tributaries from the east.
Besides the Gan, other rivers of Jiangxi form distinct basins of their own in the northeastern and northwestern parts of the province. These include the Xin River, which rises near Yushan in the northeast and runs westward to Lake Poyang; the Chang and Le’an rivers, also in the extreme northeast of the province; and the Xiu River, which, rising in the Mufu Mountains in the northwest, drains southeastward into Lake Poyang.
Ultimately, all Jiangxi’s rivers drain into Lake Poyang, which is connected with the Yangtze by a wide neck at Hukou, a short distance east of the Yangtze port of Jiujiang. In summer, when the Yangtze rises, Lake Poyang gains in size and depth: it reaches a length of about 95 miles (150 km) from north to south and a width of some 19 miles (31 km) from east to west; its depth averages 65 feet (20 metres). In winter, when the Yangtze waters recede, it shrinks in size, leaving shallow channels of water in many places. If the high-water stage occurs simultaneously on the Yangtze, the Gan, and other rivers, floods inevitably result. The lake also serves as a useful reservoir.
The soil in the plains of northern Jiangxi is alluvial and permits intensive cultivation. The hilly lands in other parts of the province have red and yellow soils. On farms with clayey red soils, where the rains have washed away the mineral contents as well as the humus, the soil requires working over and the addition of green manure or chemical fertilizers in order to become productive.
Situated in the subtropical belt, Jiangxi has a hot and humid summer lasting more than four months, except in places with high elevation such as the Lu Mountains. High temperatures in Nanchang in July and August average 95 °F (35 °C). In winter temperature variations between north and south are greater. January temperatures in the north at times fall to 25 °F (−4 °C), while those in the south average 39 °F (4 °C). Most of the province has a growing season of 10 to 11 months, thus making possible two crops of rice. Rainfall is plentiful, particularly during May and June. Average annual rainfall is about 47 inches (1,200 mm) in the north and 60 inches (1,500 mm) in the south; in the Wuyi Mountains region it can reach 78 inches (2,000 mm).
The mountainous areas are heavily forested. The Wuyi Mountains have tracts of broad-leaved evergreen trees, as well as conifers. Lush forests in the region from Ji’an southward contain pine, fir, cedar, oak, and banyan. In many areas, few natural forests have been preserved; they have been replaced with commercial species such as tea, tung, camphor, bamboo, and pine. The mountains are also home to many rare wild animals, including the endangered Chinese giant salamander (Andrias davidianus) and the South China tiger (Panthera tigris amoyensis), though it is not known if any of the latter are left in the province. Lake Poyang and the marshy areas associated with it constitute a major habitat for aquatic birds, notably as a wintering ground for the Siberian crane (Grus leucogeranus).
Jiangxi received successive waves of migration from North China through the ages. Its population is virtually all Han (Chinese); minority groups include the She, Hmong (called Miao in China), Mien (called Yao in China), and Hui (Chinese Muslim) peoples. The Hakka, descendants of a unique group of migrants from North China, have maintained their separate identity with their own dialect and social customs.
The language usually spoken is Mandarin, though the somewhat mutually intelligible Gan language (related to the Hakka language) of the lower Yangtze is also common. In the regions south of Guixi, Gan is influenced by the languages of western Fujian, and it is heavily tinged with the Cantonese language in the Dayu region, south of Ganzhou.
Most of Jiangxi’s people live in rural areas. The leading city is Nanchang. Situated on the right bank of the Gan River, a short distance before it enters Lake Poyang, Nanchang is the focal point for rail and river transport, an industrial centre, and a trading centre for agricultural products. Jiujiang, on the south bank of the Yangtze some 85 miles (140 km) north of Nanchang, is the principal port through which the province’s products are exported. Just south of Jiujiang is the beautiful resort of Guling, perched at about 3,500 feet (1,060 metres) in the Lu Mountains.
From Nanchang southward up the Gan are Ji’an, rich in literary lore and the commercial metropolis of the middle Gan valley, and Ganzhou, the centre of culture and trade in the upper Gan valley. Other cities dot the hinterland on both sides of the river. The leading city in the extreme northeast is Jingdezhen, the porcelain capital of China. The vast stretch of country east and southeast of Nanchang contains many cities of historical and commercial importance, the largest of which is Fuzhou. The west and northwest of the province is a focus of heavy and light industry, of which the coal city Pingxiang, on the Hunan border, is the major centre.
The beautiful basin of the Gan River, together with the valleys of its many tributaries, was one of the nation’s most affluent regions before trade patterns were changed by the opening of treaty ports to the Western powers in the mid-19th century. Nevertheless, Jiangxi is still one of China’s wealthier agricultural provinces. Since 1949 the reclamation of unused land, treatment of red soil to make it more fertile, construction of irrigation projects and hydroelectric power stations, and increased use of chemical fertilizers and mechanization has increased the amount of arable land to more than one-third of the total area of the province.
Food crops produced in Jiangxi include rice, sugarcane, fruits, peanuts (groundnuts), and sweet potatoes. Of these, rice is by far the most important. The Lake Poyang plain and lower Gan and Xiu valleys are the principal areas of rice production; two crops per year are raised in all parts of the province, and yields have increased through use of improved hybrid rice varieties. Jiangxi also produces a great variety of commercial crops: tea is grown on hillsides in many regions; ramie, used for making a fine, silky fabric, is raised south and west of Lake Poyang; cotton is grown on the plains northeast of the lake; tobacco is produced in the Zhejiang border area; and sugarcane is raised in the northeast and in the south. Other important commercial crops include soybeans, rapeseed, and sesame seeds. Jiangxi is a great provider of fruit, especially citrus, watermelons, pears, and persimmons. The hills of the province also supply the country’s apothecaries with such important herbs as the three-foliaged orange, the greater plantain (Plantago major), and the gallnut; and the indigo plant is grown in the valleys east of Lake Poyang.
Jiangxi is one of the main timber-producing regions of southern China. The timber produced there—used for building material and for furniture—is floated down (i.e., north) to Zhangshu, Nanchang, and Jiujiang for export to all parts of China. No less important are camphor trees and giant bamboo. The timber industry also yields valuable by-products, especially tung oil, resin, turpentine, lampblack (for making Chinese ink sticks), and tea oil.
Livestock raised in Jiangxi include water buffalo, pigs, chickens, and ducks. Inland fishing is a major industry on Lake Poyang. In addition, fisheries are found along the numerous rivers and in the almost countless village ponds. Jiangxi has become a leader in freshwater aquaculture, raising dozens of varieties (notably species of carp).
Copper and tungsten are the most important minerals. Copper mining rose to prominence in the province following the discovery of the vast reserves at Dexing, in northeastern Jiangxi. The region surrounding Dayu, on the Guangdong border, is the centre of tungsten mining, and extensive deposits have been discovered at the extreme southern tip of the province. The ore mined in southern Jiangxi contains 60 percent tungsten; the remaining 40 percent permits the production of sizable amounts of tin, bismuth, and molybdenum. Coal, formerly of great significance, has declined in importance. The area around Pingxiang in the west is still a major regional coking-coal centre, and coal mining is also important at Fengcheng, south of Nanchang. Tantalum, lead, zinc, iron, manganese, and salt are also mined. Most of the province’s electric power is generated by thermal plants or is imported from other provinces; there are some medium and small hydroelectric stations, as well as a major one on the Gan River at Wan’an, some 55 miles (90 km) north of Ganzhou.
Although Jiangxi was long known for commerce and handicrafts, modern industry had only a limited base by 1949. Subsequently, however, the province made immense progress in establishing both heavy and light industries. Nanchang is the largest industrial centre; it has plants for a wide variety of heavy and light industrial products. Jiujiang has an oil refinery and a petrochemical industry; it is also a centre for electrical power generation and for textile mills and textile machinery. Ganzhou is a major industrial centre in the southern part of the province, with metallurgy and auto parts as mainstays. Food processing is an important enterprise in many localities throughout the province.
The development of modern industry, however, did not affect the handicrafts for which Jiangxi has been famous throughout history. The ramie cloth produced in the province continues to be the nation’s preferred choice for summer wear. Other important local products are the typical Jiangxi varieties of paper—lianshi paper for printing (made of bamboo), biaoxin paper for wrapping (also of bamboo), and maobian paper for scribing (made of rice and mulberry straw).
The manufacture of porcelain ware, however, is the foremost activity of the province. During the reign of the Song emperor Zhenzong (997–1022), the town of Fouliang, in northeastern Jiangxi, was by imperial decree made a centre for fine porcelain. From that time on, Fouliang was known as Jingdezhen, for the imperial patron’s year title Jingde. For 10 centuries it has supplied the Chinese people with porcelain ware of all descriptions—ranging from items of daily use to artistic works of rare beauty made for the enjoyment of emperors and collectors. The beautiful translucence and hardness of the porcelains from Jingdezhen are attributable to kaolin (china clay) and petuntse (white briquette), both of which are found in the Yangtze valley and along the eastern shore of Lake Poyang. Most of the population of Jingdezhen is still employed in one way or another in the making of porcelain. The bulk of the output is for domestic trade, although some items are shipped abroad. The government has made an effort to revive and preserve the secret formulas of the Ming and Qing potters, but the tendency seems to be away from handicrafts and toward mechanization. In addition, increased emphasis has been placed on producing porcelain products for architectural and industrial uses, and other activities, such as helicopter production and power generation have also been established there.
Jiangxi has an abundance of inland waterways. Most of the rivers flow diagonally, from east and west toward the centre, emptying into the Gan River and Lake Poyang; many are navigable. On many shallow streams, as well as on the headwaters of the Gan, navigation is by junk. Thus, there are adequate transportation facilities for all counties of the province; Nanchang and Jiujiang are the main centres for transshipment and distribution. Goods for export are carried by large steamships on the Yangtze.
The first major railroad in Jiangxi, built on the eve of World War I, runs north-south, linking Jiujiang with Nanchang. Another, the Zhejiang-Jiangxi railroad, runs east-west, from the Zhejiang border, westward to the Hunan border. This line forms part of a national trunk line that extends westward through Hunan into Guizhou to connect with the rail network of southwestern China. Another line runs southeastward from Yingtan to Xiamen (Amoy) in Fujian. The Beijing-Kowloon (Jiulong; in Hong Kong) rail line, completed in 1997, runs through the province from north to south. There are also railways connecting the province with neighbouring Hubei and Anhui provinces.
Jiangxi’s highways were well developed in the Nationalist period. Many new roads have since been added. The focal centres for the highway system—Nanchang, Linchuan, Shangrao, Ji’an, and Ganzhou—are the hubs of regional road networks and the termini of interprovincial highways. A north-south express highway links Jiujiang, Nanchang, and Ji’an, and another one extends southeastward from Jiujiang to Jingdezhen. Nanchang is the hub of Jiangxi’s air traffic, and there are airports in other major provincial cities.
From 1950 to 1954 Jiangxi was part of the Central South greater administrative region. In 1954 Jiangxi province became directly subject to the central government. Jiangxi’s administrative divisions are arranged in a hierarchy of levels. Immediately below the province level are 11 prefecture-level municipalities (dijishi). Below that level are districts under municipalities (shixiaqu), counties (xian), and county-level municipalities (xianjishi). The lowest political units are the townships.
Before 1949 the greatest scourge was the prevalence of malaria. This debilitating disease annually took a heavy toll of lives. Since 1949, draining the swamps and pools of stagnant water—the breeding grounds of the disease-carrying Anopheles mosquito—and measures taken for epidemic prevention have reduced malaria to a minimum. Another menace to health peculiar to the Lake Poyang region was liver fluke (a kind of flatworm). Many thousands of lives were previously lost every year from this parasite, but this disease, too, is rapidly becoming a danger of the past, following mass control of the fluke embryo in the lake and surrounding waters.
In curative medicine, many improvements have been made. Clinics providing free medical care have been made widely available, and modern hospitals have been established in all cities and counties. In addition, business-oriented health care services have been booming since reform policies were adopted in the late 1980s.
An adequate social welfare program is available. For industrial workers there are measures for accident prevention, as well as insurance programs that provide for hospital treatment, sick leave, disability compensation, maternity leave, and old-age and death benefits. Extra benefits are available based upon cooperation with government policies, such as birth control. In Nanchang and other industrial cities and in the countryside, the government has constructed new housing and expanded recreational facilities. At the same time, the number of low-paid workers without any social security benefits has greatly increased since social and medical reform policies were adopted in the late 1980s.
During the 1950s, Jiangxi served as a laboratory for a number of revolutionary educational experiments. Perhaps the most significant innovation in higher education was the Jiangxi Labour University, founded in 1958 and renamed Jiangxi Agricultural University in 1980. It has its main campus in Nanchang but operates a network of branch campuses, in addition to affiliated technical schools, throughout the province. Aiming at the development of productive work through the dissemination of advanced education, the branch campuses have pioneered a multiplicity of development projects, including building roads in mountainous areas, founding new villages, reclaiming land, building factories, and promoting afforestation. Notable among Jiangxi’s more than 30 other universities and colleges are Nanchang University (founded 1940), Jiangxi Normal University (1940), and the Jingdezhen Ceramic Institute (1909). Popular education has also made advances, and the great majority of the population now has at least a primary-level education. The adult literacy rate is at the national average.
For nearly 2,000 years the people of Jiangxi lived under the pervading influence of Confucian culture. With village life rooted in intensive agriculture and government in the hands of the landlord-scholar-officials, the dynamics of society were regulated by Confucian ethics. Such a culture gave the province many famous people. Besides Tao Qian (a great Jin dynasty poet of the reclusive life), Zhu Xi (the Song dynasty Neo-Confucian philosopher), and Wang Yangming (the Ming philosopher), all of whom either taught or lived there, Jiangxi produced a full quota of statesmen during both the Song and the Ming dynasties.
Yet, despite the dominance of Confucian learning and culture, peasant rebellions also were a strong tradition in the province. An uprising in 1927 at Nanchang serves as the founding date of the Red Army, which took place in the vicinity of Mount Jinggang in the southwest near the border between Jiangxi and Hunan. It also was the first major revolutionary base of the Chinese Communist Party, which then was transferred to the Ruijin area, in southeastern Jiangxi. The Jiangxi Soviet was set up there, and it was from that base that the communists began the Long March in October 1934.
Present-day cultural centres include the Jiangxi branch of the Academia Sinica (Chinese Academy of Sciences), the Jiangxi Library, and the Jiangxi Provincial Museum—all in Nanchang. Jiangxi is renowned for its many areas of scenic beauty. Notable among these are the Lu Mountains massif west of Lake Poyang and the area around Mount Sanqing south of Jiujiang in the Huaiyu Mountains—both noted as cultural centres, places of spectacular scenery, and popular summer resorts and each designated a UNESCO World Heritage site (1996 and 2008, respectively). Also popular tourist destinations are Lake Poyang itself and Mount Jinggang, a state-level natural preservation zone known as much for its unique highland rural landscape as for its historical connections.
Tea is the most famous local speciality product of Jiangxi; the yunwu (“cloud-fog”) tea from the Lu Mountains, Maolü tea from Maoyuan, and Ninghong tea (used as a dieting supplement) from Xiushui are widely renowned. Several varieties of fruit are also prized, especially tangerines from Nanfeng north of Lake Poyang, kumquats from Suichuan in the southwest, and navel oranges from Xinfeng in the south. Notable specialty products of local lakes and rivers include the Wanzai lily (Lilium brownii, variety viridulum), white lotuses from south-central Guangchang, icefish (genus Salangidae) from Lake Poyang, Yangtze sturgeon, and shiyu (“stone fish”) from the Lu Mountains. In addition to the highly prized porcelain produced in Jingdezhen, bamboo curtains decorated with calligraphy produced in Lushan and grass linen of Wanzai are also popular local specialty products for tourists.
In addition, Jiangxi is the home of the influential Yiyang opera style, which is believed to be one of the earliest forms of Chinese opera. It originated in the region around the northeastern city of Yiyang in the mid- to late 14th century and gradually spread to other areas of the country. Despite its historical significance, the Yiyang tradition itself has now almost disappeared.
During the Spring and Autumn (Chunqiu) period (770–476 bce) of the Zhou dynasty (1046–256 bce), Jiangxi was a part of the kingdom of Chu. In the subsequent Warring States (Zhanguo) period (475–221 bce), the territory east of Lake Poyang was annexed by the kingdom of Wu. When a unified empire was established under the Han dynasty (206 bce–220 ce), Jiangxi became the western portion of the large province of Yangzhou and grew rapidly in population and culture.
From 220 to 589, the period of the Six Dynasties, large numbers of families from North China, fleeing the Tatar invaders, settled in Jiangxi. Initially, there were clashes between the northern newcomers and the original inhabitants. In time mutual accommodation prevailed, and the province benefited immensely from the introduction of northern arts, culture, and administrative skills. It was during this period that the Gan River valley became the main highway of the empire. Under the Tang dynasty (618–907) the growth of commerce and population in Jiangxi was even greater than in earlier times. This was caused first by the opening of the Grand Canal, linking Luoyang (in present-day Henan) with the lower Yangtze River, and second by a new influx of people from North China. Equally noteworthy was the spread of Buddhism in this period.
In the Song dynasty (960–1279) Jiangxi became a model of the Confucian state, governed by scholar-officials. The Bailudong (“White Deer Grotto”) Academy, near Lushan, where Zhu Xi taught, became a renowned centre of Confucian learning. From 1069 to 1076 Wang Anshi, a native of Linquan, southeast of Nanchang, was prime minister; Wang introduced reforms to curb the rich and help the poor, only to be overthrown by the conservative champions of the traditional order. In the late Song period and throughout the era of the Mongol conquest, Jiangxi’s cultural and political vigour declined. Such was the obscurantism of the provincial government that it sanctioned a Daoist “papacy” at Mount Longhu, near Guixi, which lasted into the mid-20th century.
In the early years of the Ming dynasty (1368–1644) Jiangxi produced a number of great statesmen, but after a time the government’s despotic tax program alienated the people. From the early 16th century onward, peasant brigands living in the hills fought the government. The widespread unrest was ended after the Qing dynasty (1644–1911/12) reunified the country. During this period of prolonged peace, Jiangxi again became one of the wealthiest regions of China, but its days of prosperity ended in the mid-19th century, when the Yangtze valley was devastated by the great Taiping Rebellion (1850–64) against the ruling Qing dynasty and when treaties with the Western powers diverted trade to coastal regions.
In the first half of the 20th century Jiangxi became a focal point for revolution and war. After the 1911–12 revolution the province fell victim to warlord rule, until Chiang Kai-shek (Jiang Jieshi) brought it under Nationalist control in 1926. Chiang’s break with the communists, however, made Jiangxi a bone of contention between the two sides. An uprising was staged in Nanchang by the communists in 1927, followed by the establishment of peasant bases in the southern counties under the communist leaders Mao Zedong and Zhu De. Such was the growth of their strength that, in 1931, Ruijin was declared the capital of the Chinese Soviet Republic. In the continuing struggle the communist guerrillas withstood Chiang’s “annihilation campaigns,” but his use of an economic blockade forced the communists to flee Jiangxi and to begin their Long March (1934–35) to northwestern China. Chiang then briefly regained control of southern Jiangxi, and Nationalist government reforms were undertaken on an experimental basis in 1934–37. From 1938 to 1945 much of Jiangxi was under Japanese occupation. The communists carried on guerrilla activities inside Jiangxi throughout the period.
After the Japanese withdrawal, communist guerrillas dominated the countryside, while the Nationalist government took precarious control of the cities. In 1949 communist forces crossed the Yangtze from the north and took possession of the province. Jiangxi then entered a prolonged era of stability and progress, marked by considerable development of its industrial base and expansion of its transportation infrastructure.
