Kilkenny, Irish Cill Chainnigh,  county, province of Leinster, southeastern Ireland. The counties of Kilkenny and Carlow are linked for representation in the Irish Parliament, but, for local government and all administrative purposes, Kilkenny has a separate county council. The municipal borough of Kilkenny, in the centre of the county, is the county seat.
County Kilkenny is bounded by Counties Laoighis (north), Carlow and Wexford (east), Waterford (south), and Tipperary (west). The principal rivers are the Barrow, Suir, and Nore. The climate is mild. The county is well wooded; there are several state forests, and reforestation has been under way for many years.
Cereal grains and vegetables are grown in the county, and the southwest part is noted for its apples. Dairying and beef production and the raising of sheep, pigs, and poultry are significant. The wool trade is also important. The brewing of ale and malting of local barley have been carried on since the 13th century. The county also has various food-processing, agricultural engineering, clothing, and handicraft industries. Anthracite coal was long mined in the county, though the industry is no longer in operation; a zinc mine opened for production in the late 1990s.
Among the many prehistoric sites in Kilkenny are Iron Age forts, ancient stones incised with the cryptic ogham script, incised Celtic crosses, and megalithic tombs and underground chambers. At Harristown in the south is one of the largest dolmens (megalithic tombs) in Ireland. The name Kilkenny means “Church [or Cell] of St. Canice,” who founded his church on the site of the present cathedral in Kilkenny city in the 6th century.
Kilkenny became one of the counties of Leinster in 1210, but it had been a place of importance for centuries before. Some of the numerous castles in the county were built by the Irish and some by the Anglo-Normans. There are five round towers, one adjacent to St. Canice’s Cathedral. Thomastown, founded in the 13th century, has many historic remains, and at Jerpoint Abbey (founded 1158) are some of the finest Cistercian ruins in Ireland. There are remains of Augustinian priories at Inistioge, Callan, and Kells. Area 800 square miles (2,073 square km). Pop. (2006) 87,558; (2011) 95,419.
