KwaZulu-Natal, formerly Natal,  province of South Africa, occupying the southeastern portion of the country. It is bounded to the north by Swaziland and Mozambique, to the east by the Indian Ocean, to the south by Eastern Cape province, to the west by Lesotho and Free State province, and to the northwest by Mpumalanga province. Within KwaZulu-Natal is an enclave of Eastern Cape province consisting of the eastern portion of the former Griqualand East (around Umzimkulu). The provincial capital is Pietermaritzburg.
Under the former system of apartheid, or racial separation, Natal province contained the nonindependent Black state of KwaZulu, which served as the legal homeland of the country’s Zulus. Following the repeal of apartheid and the resorption of KwaZulu in 1994, Natal was renamed KwaZulu-Natal. For the history of the province, see Natal.
KwaZulu-Natal is generally hilly or mountainous, especially along its western border. The land rises from the coast to more than 11,000 feet (3,300 metres) along the Drakensberg Escarpment on that border. The slope is not gradual, however, and various rocky outcrops render the terrain into steps of undulating land ascending from an elevation of 500 feet (150 metres) along the coastal plain to areas of 2,000 feet (600 metres) and then 4,000 feet (1,200 metres) in the centre of the province, a region known as the Midlands. Beyond the Drakensberg lies the Highveld, or high plateau.
KwaZulu-Natal’s climate varies from subtropical to temperate. Precipitation decreases from more than 50 inches (1,270 mm) annually along the coast to 30 to 40 inches (760 to 1,020 mm) inland. Temperatures decrease from the frost-free coastal area but still remain warm. In general, summers are hot with occasional rain, while the warm, dry, and sunny winters have made the coast the principal holiday playground of Southern Africa. The higher elevations of the Drakensberg experience freezing temperatures and snow in the winter.
KwaZulu-Natal’s people belong to various ethnic groups. Peoples of Black African descent, mostly Zulu, make up more than four-fifths of the population, while Asians of mostly Indian descent account for about one-tenth and whites of mostly European descent less than one-tenth. Most of the people live along and behind the coast or in the centre of the province; the extreme west and northeast are lightly populated. Many Blacks are concentrated in rural areas consisting of broken, rugged country. Most whites live in or near the port city of Durban or elsewhere along the coast.
Many of the province’s Black citizens have retained much of their cultural identity through their use of the Zulu language and through a rich heritage of folklore, ceremony, and customs that reflect a diversity of tribal allegiances. The rest of the Black Africans speak related Bantu languages. Most of South Africa’s Asians live in KwaZulu-Natal province. More than one-half of the province’s Asians are Hindus, and about one-seventh are Muslims.
A subsistence economy prevails in the areas that were formerly set aside for Blacks. The economy in these areas rests mainly on cattle raising and corn (maize) cultivation and is supplemented by remitted earnings of Blacks who work elsewhere in South Africa. Whites, by contrast, tend to operate in an advanced commercial economy, through which most of the province’s resources have been exploited.
The mineral wealth of KwaZulu-Natal province consists mostly of coal, which is mined in the north around Newcastle and Dundee and provides South Africa with much of its coking and semi-anthracite coal. The most important agricultural area is along the coast, where sugarcane is the major crop. Sugar refining is mainly carried out in Durban. The province produces such subtropical fruits as pineapples and bananas, and the dairy industry is also important. Plantations of pine and eucalyptus in the Midlands provide raw materials for sawmills and for paper and rayon pulp mills.
Durban, together with neighbouring Pinetown, is the province’s economic and industrial centre. It has most of KwaZulu-Natal’s factories and is one of South Africa’s most important industrial regions. Its factories are primarily concerned with textiles and clothing, food processing, chemicals, sugar refining, and oil refining. Pietermaritzburg also has a number of industries, including an aluminum plant, several footwear factories, and food-processing plants. The province’s road and rail networks are well-developed. KwaZulu-Natal’s chief port, Durban, is South Africa’s main cargo port and serves much of the interior of southern Africa.
Pietermaritzburg and Durban both have campuses of the University of Natal. There is also the University of Durban-Westville at Durban and the University of Zululand at Kwa-Dlangezwa, near Empangeni. Moses Mabhida Stadium, which hosts cultural and sporting events, is located in Durban. Area 36,433 square miles (94,361 square km). Pop. (2011) 10,267,300.
