Kyŏnggi, also spelled Gyeonggi,  do (province), northwestern South Korea. It is bounded by the truce line (demilitarized zone) with North Korea (north), by the provinces of Kangwŏn (Gangwon; east) and North Kyŏngsang (North Gyeongsang) and South Ch’ungch’ŏng (South Chungcheong; south), and by the Yellow Sea (west). The national capital, Seoul, is in the middle of the province, although it has been separated administratively from Kyŏnggi since 1946 as a special city. The provincial capital is Suwŏn.
Formerly, Kyŏnggi province was the granary of Seoul; the Kyŏnggi plain, with the Han River and its tributaries flowing through it, produced rice, barley, and wheat. Dairying and truck farming and other types of horticulture are still carried on. As Seoul’s industrial district  spread into the province’s area, and with the construction of highways beginning in the late 1960s, a large part of the province became the outer industrial region of Seoul. The cities of Anyang, Puch’ŏn (Bucheon), Sŏngnam (Seongnam), and Ŭijŏngbu (Uijeongbu) have developed as satellites of Seoul, each carrying on various types of industries, such as shipbuilding, iron and steel manufacturing, and plate-glass production. The city of Inch’ŏn (Incheon) serves as Seoul’s seaport and includes the capital’s international airport. Suwŏn  contains a number of notable historic and prehistoric structures. The province has several UNESCO World Heritage sites: Hwasŏng (Hwaseong) Fortress (designated 1997); prehistoric dolmens (stone tombs) near Inch’ŏn (2000, collectively with dolmens in North Chŏlla and South Chŏlla provinces); and royal tombs of the Chosŏn (Joseon) dynasty (1392–1910) located around the province (2009, along with other such tombs located in Kangwŏn province and in Seoul). The sea around the Paengnyŏng (Baengnyeong) and Yŏnp’yŏng (Yeonpyeong) island groups in the Kyŏnggi Gulf offer good fishing grounds for yellow corbinas and croakers. The islands’ close proximity to the northern border has made the gulf the site of occasional military incidents, such as North Korea’s November 2010 artillery attack on Yŏnp’yŏng Island. Area 3,912 square miles (10,132 square km). Pop. (2010) 11,379,459.
