Lambeth,  inner borough of London, part of the historic county of Surrey, extending southward from the River Thames. It includes the districts of (roughly north to south) Lambeth, Vauxhall, Kennington, South Lambeth, Stockwell, and Brixton and large parts of Clapham, Balham, Streatham, and Norwood. It was established in 1965 by the amalgamation of the former metropolitan boroughs of Lambeth and Wandsworth (in part).
Settlement of the area dates to Roman times or earlier, and many of its place-names may be of ancient derivation. The origin of the name Lambeth is disputed, but the name Lamhytha (probably indicating “Harbour Landing for Lambs”) was recorded in 1088 ce; Domesday Book (1086) lists “Brixiestan” (Brixton) and “Chenintune” (Kennington). Parish churchwardens’ and vestry records exist from the 16th century.
The borough was sparsely populated until the 18th century, and the majority of its inhabitants lived and worked along the Thames. Direct access to the left bank was by ford, horse ferry, or boat until 1750, when Westminster Bridge was opened. Because of its proximity to central London and the use of the river for bulk transportation, Lambeth’s northern section became an important manufacturing centre by the 18th century. Glass and pottery works and, later, machine shops were established. Public gardens laid out at Vauxhall about 1660 were a favourite resort of the diarist Samuel Pepys and others. By 1859 the increasing urbanization of London caused the gardens to be closed and used as a building site.
During World War II, Lambeth’s riverfront industrial areas were heavily bombed, and some commercial and government offices (such as County Hall) later arose in their places near the huge rail terminus of Waterloo Station. The riverfront is now graced by one of Europe’s major cultural centres, the South Bank arts complex, which includes the Royal Festival Hall, Queen Elizabeth Hall, the Royal National Theatre, the National Film Theatre, and the Hayward Gallery. Other attractions include the Imperial War Museum (1920), the London Aquarium (1997), and the London Eye, a Ferris wheel-like structure that takes passengers to a height of 443 feet (135 metres). (Some lesser-known museums also are tucked away in Lambeth, notably the Museum of Garden History [1977] and the Florence Nightingale Museum.) Although famous for its waterfront developments, which are directly across the Thames from the Houses of Parliament and the City of Westminster, Lambeth is largely residential. The borough’s centre of government is two miles south, in Brixton, where there is a sizable Afro-Caribbean community. Africans, South Asians, and Chinese also are numerous; ethnic minorities in Lambeth make up one-third of the population.
In Archbishop’s Park the parish church, St. Mary’s, lies alongside Lambeth Palace, the London residence of the archbishop of Canterbury. Famous hospitals include St. Thomas’s and King’s College. The former Oval Cricket Ground (which has been renamed with each change of sponsor) is in Kennington, and the borough’s parklands include large parts of Clapham, Tooting Bec, and Streatham commons. Area 10.4 square miles (27 square km). Pop. (2001) 266,169; (2011) 303,086.
