Lampung,  propinsi (or provinsi; province), southern Sumatra, Indonesia. It is bounded by the Java Sea to the east, the Sunda Strait to the south, the Indian Ocean to the west, and South Sumatra (Sumatera Selatan) province to the north and northwest. The province includes the islands of Sebuku, Sebesi, Sertung, and Rakata in the Sunda Strait.
The area formed part of the kingdom of Kantoli in southern Sumatra in the beginning of the 6th century and in the 14th century was included in the Hindu Majapahit empire of eastern Java. Hindu and Buddhist archaeological remains have been found at Palas, Talangpadang, Liwa, and Mount Besar. In the 16th century, Lampung was part of the Muslim state of Bantam (now Banten province) under Hasanuddin (ruled 1552–70). The Dutch incorporated Lampung into their colonial empire in 1860. It became part of the Republic of Indonesia in 1950.
The southernmost portion of the Barisan Mountains runs the length of the province from the northwest to southeast and is surmounted by volcanic cones including Mounts Batai, 5,518 feet (1,682 metres) and Tebak, 6,939 feet (2,115 metres). The mountains are flanked by narrow coastland on the southwest and by rapidly descending highlands on the northeast. The eastern lowland area of Lampung stretches from the foothills of the mountains to the belt of swamps along the eastern coast. The Sekampung,  Seputih, and Tulangbewang rivers descend the eastern slopes of the mountains and drain eastward into the Java Sea. Mangrove and freshwater swamp forests are found along the coast; tropical lowland evergreen rainforests extend from the coastal swamps into the mountains.
Most of the population is engaged in agriculture; rubber, tea, coffee, soybeans, sweet potatoes, corn (maize), peanuts (groundnuts), copra, and palm oil are produced. Deep-sea fishing is also important. Industries include wood carving, food processing, cloth weaving, mat and basket making, and the production of handmade paper. Road and railway transport is confined to the foothills of the Barisan Mountains and link Tanjung Kurang, the provincial capital, with Kotabumi, Panjang, and Telukbatung. The eastern half of the province relies mainly on riverine transport. The population is a mixture of Malay, Javanese, and Minangkabau. The Javanese are the most numerous because of a large influx of rural Javanese into Lampung in the early 20th century. Area 13,368 square miles (34,624 square km). Pop. (2000) 6,730,751; (2010) 7,608,405.
