Lancashire,  administrative, geographic, and historic county in northwestern England. It is bounded to the north by Cumberland and Westmorland (in the present administrative county of Cumbria), to the east by Yorkshire, to the south by Cheshire, and to the west by the Irish Sea. Preston is the county seat.
The administrative, geographic, and historic counties occupy somewhat different areas. The administrative county comprises 12 districts: West Lancashire; the boroughs of Burnley, Chorley, Fylde, Hyndburn, Pendle, Preston, Ribble Valley, Rossendale, South Ribble, and Wyre; and the city of Lancaster. The geographic county comprises the entire administrative county and the unitary authorities of Blackburn with Darwen and Blackpool. The administrative and geographic counties include a large area in the eastern boroughs of Pendle and Ribble Valley that belongs to the historic county of Yorkshire—including the towns of Barnoldswick and Earby, the upper Ribble valley, and the Forest of Bowland region.
Apart from that area, the historic county of Lancashire encompasses the entire geographic county and the following areas: the Furness region, comprising the borough of Barrow-in-Furness and part of the district of South Lakeland in the administrative county of Cumbria; a small area west of Todmorden in the metropolitan borough of Calderdale; the parts of the unitary authorities of Halton and Warrington that lie north of the River Mersey; the city of Liverpool and all other metropolitan boroughs in the metropolitan county of Merseyside except Wirral; and most of the metropolitan county of Greater Manchester, including the historic core of Manchester and all or part of every metropolitan borough.
The geographic county comprises two principal physical regions. In the east the gritstones and shales of the Pennines form level, elevated plateaus. The highest summits are Wards Stone at 1,836 feet (560 metres), Pendle at 1,831 feet (558 metres), and Fair Snape at 1,701 feet (518 metres). Coal-bearing rocks in the south form lower plateaus and benches that surround the heather moorlands of Rossendale. In the north the rounded, elevated ridges of the Forest of Bowland, separated by river valleys, have great scenic beauty. The western lowlands, covered with glacial drift and formerly occupied by extensive peat bogs, have largely been reclaimed. The principal river is the Ribble, rising in the Pennines and flowing southwest to the Irish Sea at Preston. The flat coastline, indented by Morecambe Bay and the Ribble estuary, encouraged the growth of ports and resorts. Rainfall decreases westward from some 60 inches (1,500 mm) per year in the uplands to around 30 inches (760 mm) per year on the coastal plain.
Prehistoric sites suggest early settlement of the uplands in the historic county of Lancashire. Neolithic artifacts have been found on the moorlands around Rochdale, and bronze implements at Winmarleigh, Colne, and Pilling. Several stone circles stand in Furness. Ribchester, Lancaster, Kirkham, Wigan, and Manchester (Mamucium), occupied by the Romans, indicate the strategic importance of the lowlands. During the 7th and 8th centuries the Anglians, an Anglo-Saxon people, penetrated the area from the east and south, and it became a province of the Danish-ruled kingdom of Northumbria in the 9th century. Place-names suggest the importance of subsequent Norse settlement in the west. Lancashire was not a rich area in the Middle Ages. The Scottish border wars, the plague known as the Black Death, and the long, drawn-out Wars of the Roses were a drain on resources. Monasticism was strong, with large foundations at Whalley and Lancaster, and many Lancastrians remained faithful to Roman Catholicism even after the Reformation.
The key to the region’s economic development was the textile industry. During the 16th and 17th centuries the towns of Lancashire began to prosper with the manufacture of linen (in the west) and woolen cloth (in the east). The Industrial Revolution originated in Lancashire during the 18th century with the introduction of cotton manufacture, combining the use of waterpower, the mechanization of spinning, and the adoption of the factory system. After 1789 the use of steam power increased, and large-scale exploitation of the coalfield took place. The iron ores of Furness supplied the iron and steel industry and later the shipbuilding sector in Barrow-in-Furness. Industrial development led to the rapid growth of manufacturing towns such as Manchester, Bolton, and Blackburn. And Liverpool thrived as the main port for Lancashire’s growing industrial exports. Newly built canals and railways linked the historic county’s manufacturing towns with the growing urban centres of Manchester and Liverpool.
Textile manufacturing and coal mining, the historic staple industries of the area, declined during the 20th century. After an economic downturn during the late 20th century, the economy of the geographic county of Lancashire began to stablilize around a mix of light industry, engineering, and service activities. A dense network of motorways now supplements the county’s rail system. The rich lowlands remain important agricultural regions. In the Fylde, intensive dairy farming and other forms of livestock husbandry predominate. Market gardening flourishes north and south of the Ribble estuary. Lancaster and Preston are market and industrial centres, while the many coastal towns—including Blackpool, Lytham St. Anne’s, Morecambe, and Fleetwood—are tourist centres.
Among the many well-known people who were born or lived in Lancashire are textile industrialist and inventor Sir Richard Arkwright; James Hargreaves, the inventor of the spinning jenny; footballer Sir Tom Finney; opera singer Kathleen Ferrier; animator Nick Park; and comedian Eric Morecambe. Area administrative county, 1,121 square miles (2,903 square km); geographic county, 1,121 square miles (2,903 square km). Pop. (2001) administrative county, 1,134,974; geographic county, 1,414,727; (2011) administrative county, 1,171,339; geographic county, 1,460,893.
