Languedoc-Roussillon,  former région of France. As a région, it encompassed the southern départements of Lozère, Gard, Hérault, Aude, and Pyrénées-Orientales and was roughly coextensive with the former province of Languedoc. In 2016 the Languedoc-Roussillon région was joined with the région of Midi-Pyrénées to form the new administrative entity of Occitanie.
The Massif Central extends into the département of Lozère and marks the northwestern borders of Gard, Hérault, and Aude. The plain of Languedoc faces the Mediterranean and is separated from the plain of Roussillon to the southwest by the mountains of Corbières. The Pyrenees rise to heights of 11,000 feet (3,400 metres) in the south. In the north the Cévennes mountain range, capped by Mount Aigoual (5,134 feet [1,565 metres]), is part of Cévennes National Park. Some 400 rivers have their sources in Lozère. The region’s principal rivers include the Allier, Aude, Garonne, Gard, Hérault, Tarn, and Têt. A Mediterranean climate prevails along the coast and a mountain climate in Lozère and the Pyrenees.
Languedoc-Roussillon was one of the fastest-growing regions of France, primarily because of an inflow of population, initially from outside France (Spain, North Africa) but more recently from within the country, particularly the Paris region. Hérault and Gard are the two most dynamic départements (where population growth has also been fueled by a high level of natural increase), while in the inland upland areas of Lozère an aging population is increasing only slowly. Three-fourths of the inhabitants now live in urban areas. A number of residents speak a language distinct from French known as Languedoc, or Provençal.
Agriculture in the western upland areas revolves around the raising of beef cattle and sheep (notably in the Cévennes). Forests are exploited commercially also. Traditionally, viticulture has been the dominant activity in the foothills and coastal plains; the wine produced, however, was not of high quality. Since the mid-20th century, however, irrigation has aided diversification and production. Fewer vineyards now exist, but better quality wines are produced. Fruits and vegetables (including apples, peaches, and tomatoes) are now cultivated widely.
The area has never been heavily industrialized, but it does have a tradition of industry. Textile and clothing concerns have long been present, while in the 19th century the mining of coal at Alès led to the development of associated metallurgical industries. Both activities are now in decline. The processing of agricultural produce remains an important activity. Chemical production also has a long history and was initially linked to the needs of vintners. More recently, industrial development has been associated with electronics and information technology, pharmaceuticals, and medical products. Companies have been attracted to the region in part by its sunbelt image. Montpellier, in particular, has become a focus for high-tech industries and research.
Tourism is an important source of income for the area. There are a number of resorts along the coast, including purpose-built resorts such as La Grande Motte and Port Bacarès and older traditional resorts such as Collioure. The mountainous interior is also being increasingly developed for tourism, including winter sports, with Font-Romeu being one of the leading resorts. Roman monuments abound and draw their share of tourists. Among the most famous is the Pont du Gard, an aqueduct that bridges the Gard River near Remoulins.
A coastal motorway links the region to Spain and to the Rhône valley. Another key motorway provides access to western France. High-speed train (train à grande vitesse; TGV) services connect to Lyon, Paris, and northern France. A regional airport is located at Montpellier.
