Laoighis, also spelled Laois or Leix,  county in the province of Leinster, east-central Ireland, formerly called Queen’s county. The county town (seat) is Port Laoise (Portlaoise), in central Laoighis.
Laoighis is bounded by Counties Offaly (north and west), Kildare (east), Carlow and Kilkenny (south), and Tipperary (southwest). County Laoighis consists mainly of the valleys of the upper Nore and upper Barrow rivers. Within the county are the greater part of the Slieve Bloom Mountains, which reach 1,732 feet (528 metres) at Arderin, and the northern part of the Castlecomer Plateau. Most of the county is lowland between the Slieve Bloom and the Castlecomer Plateau. More than four-fifths of the county is improved land.
More than one-third of the population lives in towns and villages, the largest of these being Port Laoise. Many of the farms in Laoighis range from about 70 to 80 acres (28 to 32 hectares) in size, and about three-fifths of the county’s land area is permanent pasture, one-fifth bog, and one-fifth crops. Wheat, barley, turnips, and sugar beets are among the most important crops. Dairying, pig production, and beef cattle provide significant sources of income. Sheep are raised in the Slieve Bloom, where there are also forestry plantations. The county has light industry that includes woodworking and pharmaceuticals. A branch of the Grand Canal was built through Portarlington to Mountmellick in the early 19th century. The main railway line to Cork from Dublin passes through Portarlington (which has a branch to Port Laoise).
The name of the county is derived from Ui Laoighis, the tribe name of the O’Moore clan. The county was divided among seven septs, or clans, after the Anglo-Normans settled the area. Throughout much of the following centuries, war between English forces and the various clans ravaged the territory. In 1556, during the reign of Queen Mary, the British Parliament officially named the area Queen’s county. With the rise of Irish nationalism in the 20th century, its ancient name was restored in 1920. Area 664 square miles (1,720 square km). Pop. (2006) 67,059; (2011) 80,559.
