Mecklenburg–West Pomerania, German Mecklenburg-Vorpommern,  Land (state), northeastern Germany. Mecklenburg–West Pomerania borders the Baltic Sea to the north, Poland to the east, and the German states of Brandenburg to the south, Lower Saxony to the southwest, and Schleswig-Holstein to the west. The capital is Schwerin. Area 8,947 square miles (23,173 square km). Pop. (2011) 1,609,982.
Mecklenburg–West Pomerania extends along the Baltic Sea coastal plain, from the Bay of Lübeck in the west, past the Darss Peninsula, to the Szczecinski Lagoon (Stettiner Haff) in the east. Its hinterland stretches southward to the lower Elbe River in the west and beyond the sources of the Havel River and nearly to the Oder River in the east. Most of Mecklenburg–West Pomerania drains into the Baltic. The region’s landscape was largely shaped by glacial forces, which deposited materials that produced the beautiful hill country and low-lying lands that are now filled with wetlands, lakes, and meandering streams. Nearly two-thirds of the state is covered by farmland and about another one-fifth by forest.
The central part of Mecklenburg–West Pomerania is traversed from west to east by a plateau of hilly country covered by fertile soil and beech forests. The state has more than 1,700 lakes, including Lake Müritz in the south, the largest lake wholly within Germany’s borders and the focus of a national park. The southwest, between the plateau and the Elbe, has poor sandy soils, pine forests, and marshy valleys. In the north the plateau has good clay soils. Along the coast, steep cliffs alternate with beaches and dunes. The northeastern part of the state contains Germany’s two largest islands, Rügen and Usedom, the former especially well known for dramatically high chalk cliffs on the Baltic Sea. Two national parks have been established on the coast, the West Pomeranian Boddenlandschaft National Park, largely on the Darss Peninsula and surrounding waters, and the Jasmund National Park, on the northeastern end of Rügen. The state lies wholly within the North European Plain and has a moderate climate primarily influenced by the Atlantic Ocean and Baltic Sea.
Mecklenburg–West Pomerania is one of Germany’s least populated and least densely populated states. The population is composed largely of ethnic Germans, contains no significant indigenous ethnic minority, and has a very small immigrant population. Mecklenburg–West Pomerania’s population has been declining since 1987, owing to both low birth rates and net out-migration. The state’s most significant urban centres—Rostock, Schwerin, and Neubrandenburg—are relatively small in comparison with cities in other German states.
Agriculture, once a relatively important economic activity in Mecklenburg–West Pomerania, is now most significant for its role in shaping the landscape. Agricultural output makes up only a small percentage of the state’s economic output and employment, though rural areas of Mecklenburg–West Pomerania depend more on agriculture as a way of life than most other parts of Germany. Because of its history of collectivized farming while it was part of East Germany (1945–90), Mecklenburg–West Pomerania has farm units that are large by German and western European standards. The chief crops are rye, wheat, barley, sugar beets, potatoes, and hay. Corn (maize) and peas are also grown, and the state is among Germany’s leading producers of rapeseed. The region’s pastures support herds of sheep, horses, and cattle, which supply milk for the production of butter and cheese. Fishing is carried out in the inland lakes and the Baltic Sea.
As in all other parts of eastern Germany, the Mecklenburg–West Pomeranian economy was radically transformed following German unification in 1990. Employment fell precipitously, and despite high levels of out-migration, unemployment rates soared and remained very high into the early years of the 21st century. The state is relatively poor by German standards and is disadvantaged by several factors, including the lack of an important manufacturing base and significant industrial resources, the lack of large cities with significant concentrations of service activities, a dearth of good rail and highway connections with other regions, and a relatively poor market location within both Germany and Europe. The small manufacturing sector is diversified, with its most notable concentration in the largest towns, including Rostock. Ships are built in Rostock and its outport Warnemünde, as well as in Stralsund, Wismar, and Wolgast. These cities are also ports, as are Mukran and Sassnitz on the island of Rügen.
The capital, Schwerin, and Rostock, Stralsund, Neubrandenburg, and Greifswald serve as regional centres for the provision of local services. At the beginning of the 21st century, one of the best-performing sectors of the Mecklenburg–West Pomeranian economy was its fairly large and rapidly growing tourist industry, which primarily serves Germans. Tourists travel to Mecklenburg–West Pomerania to visit the shorelines and beaches in particular, but the lake country and numerous historic towns are also sought out. Especially notable are the old Hanseatic towns of Rostock and Stralsund, the latter of which has a particularly good ensemble of historic buildings. Indeed, most of the state’s cities and towns contain striking brick buildings, often churches, in the distinctive North German Gothic architectural style.
While Mecklenburg–West Pomerania has good transportation connections for waterborne transportation via its ports, land connections are poorer. Until recently only one major rail line and major autobahn served the state, each from the south and each improved in the postunification era. A new, environmentally controversial east-west autobahn was completed in 2005. Land-based connections with Poland remain less well developed, though an autobahn between Berlin and Poland’s northwestern port of Szczecin traverses the southeasternmost corner of the state.
Mecklenburg–West Pomerania is governed by a Landtag (state parliament) and a minister-president, who is generally a leading member of the Landtag’s strongest party. Rostock and Greifswald are both sites of universities. Rostock and Schwerin are the major cultural centres, with notable museums and architecturally significant buildings. The historic medieval centres of Stralsund and Wismar were designated UNESCO World Heritage sites in 2002. During the summer the popular Mecklenburg–West Pomeranian Music Festival is held in a variety of places across the state.
