Naxçıvan, also called Nakhichevan,  exclave and autonomous republic of Azerbaijan, in the southern part of the Transcaucasian plateau. It is bounded by Armenia to the north and east, Iran to the south and west, and Turkey to the west. The republic, which is mostly mountainous except for a plain in the west and southwest, lies to the east and north of the middle Aras River, which forms the frontier with Iran and Turkey.
The region is subject to earthquakes; that of 1931 was particularly severe. Winter temperatures in the dry continental climate average in the mid- to low 20s F (−7 to −4 °C), and summer temperatures range from the mid-70s to the mid-80s F (mid- to high 20s C). The scarcity of precipitation on the plain (less than 20 inches [500 mm] annually) produces a steppe type of vegetation. In the mountains, where precipitation averages 25 to 30 inches (630 to 760 mm) annually, the flora is mountainous steppe, with dwarf oak and Iberian maple occurring in the upper valleys. Gray alluvial soils prevail in the plain, giving way above 3,300 feet (1,000 metres) to brown and chestnut soils.
The republic, especially the capital city of Naxçıvan (Nakhichevan), has a long history dating back to about 1500 bce. Historically, the Persians, Armenians, Mongols, and Turks competed for the area, but it passed to Russia in 1828, and in 1924 it became an autonomous republic of the Soviet Union. Naxçıvan became part of independent Azerbaijan in 1991.
Azerbaijanis constitute virtually the entire population, though there are also small numbers of Armenians and Russians. Chief cities, besides the capital, are Ordubad and Culfa (Dzhulfa). Agriculture, the principal economic activity, is carried on with the aid of irrigation in the plains. The most important crops are grains (winter wheat, some spring wheat, and barley), cotton, tobacco, mulberries for silkworms, and fruits. Sheep raising provides wool for the Azerbaijan carpet industry. Cattle and goats also are raised. There are mineral-water springs in the foothills. Industrial activity is limited to mining (salt, molybdenum, and lead), cotton ginning, silk textile production, and food processing. The Yerevan-Baku railway follows the Aras valley through the republic, and motor roads link the capital to Yerevan, to Culfa on the Iranian frontier, and to Yevlax in Azerbaijan proper. Area 2,100 square miles (5,500 square km). Pop. (2008 est.) 384,400.
