Nayarit,  estado (state), west-central Mexico. It is bounded by the states of Sinaloa to the northwest, Durango and Zacatecas to the north and northeast, and Jalisco to the south and by the Pacific Ocean to the west. The state capital is Tepic.
The Sierra Madre Occidental rises steeply from the narrow Pacific littoral and, running southeast, cuts the state’s terrain into deep gorges and narrow valleys. Peaks include the volcanoes Ceboruco and Sanganguey. The coastal lagoons are well-known wild bird refuges. Islands and coastal areas in the Gulf of California that belong to Nayarit are part of a larger gulfwide UNESCO World Heritage site designated in 2005. The Río Grande de Santiago, sometimes considered a continuation of the Lerma River, flows into Nayarit from Lake Chapala. The Santiago flows westward through the state, emptying north of San Blas, the state’s chief Pacific port. The river’s valley is extremely fertile, producing corn (maize), tobacco, sugarcane, cotton, beans, coffee, various woods, and medicinal plants. Mining is important in the mountains.
Few of Nayarit’s Native American communities have remained vital, but groups of Huichol and Cora, Tepehuan, and Mexicanero Indians live in remote mountainous areas. The state’s population growth has been slowed because of the large numbers of residents seeking jobs in the Federal District, in factories just south of the U.S.-Mexican border, and within the United States. Major west-coast highways and railroads traverse Nayarit, linking Tepic with Mazatlán (in Sinaloa) and with cities in the interior.
Nayarit was named for a 16th-century Cora governor who resisted the Spanish; Spain did not conquer the region until the early 17th century. Once part of the state of Jalisco, Nayarit became a state in its own right in 1917. State government is headed by a governor, who is elected to a single six-year term. The unicameral legislature, the State Congress, is composed of deputies elected to terms of three years. Like other Mexican states, Nayarit is divided into local governmental units called municipios (municipalities), each of which may include a city or town and its hinterland or, alternatively, a group of villages. Institutions of higher education include the Autonomous University of Nayarit and the Technological Institute of Nayarit, both in Tepic. Area 10,417 square miles (26,979 square km). Pop. (2010) 1,084,979.
