Nevada,  constituent state of the United States of America. It borders Oregon and Idaho to the north, Utah to the east, Arizona to the southeast, and California to the west. It ranks seventh among the 50 U.S. states in terms of total area. It also, however, is one of the most sparsely settled. Carson City, in the western part of the state, is the capital. Nevada became the 36th state of the union on October 31, 1864.
Nevada is located in a mountainous region that includes vast semiarid grasslands and sandy alkali deserts. It is the most arid state of the country. The state takes its name from the Spanish nevada (“snow-clad”), a reference to the high mountain scenery of the Sierra Nevada on the western border with California.
Nevada, which in the early 21st century was one of the fastest-growing states in the country, appears far removed from the days when Virginia City was a fabled frontier town, thriving on the rich silver mines of the Comstock Lode. However, many frontier qualities persist, though subtly transformed by a sophisticated urban environment. The prospectors digging against odds to find a bonanza have been replaced by the fortune seekers in the gambling casinos of Las Vegas and Reno, and the erstwhile “saloon diversions” have evolved into lavish nightclub entertainments.
The majority of Nevadans live in urban areas, with about half of the population residing in the Las Vegas metropolitan area alone. The vast undeveloped lands of the state provide a largely unexplored resource, and its combination of burgeoning cities and desert reaches make Nevada a unique phenomenon among U.S. states. Area 110,572 square miles (286,380 square km). Population (2020) 3,108,462.
Most of Nevada lies within the Great Basin section of the Basin and Range Province, where the topography is characterized by rugged mountains, flat valleys with occasional buttes and mesas, and sandy desert regions. Crossing the state are more than 30 north-south mountain ranges, the majority of which reach more than 10,000 feet (3,000 metres) in elevation; the highest points are Boundary Peak, at 13,147 feet (4,007 metres), and Wheeler Peak, at 13,065 feet (3,982 metres). The southern area of the state is within the Mojave Desert; the lowest elevation, 470 feet (143 metres), is in that region, on the Colorado River just below Black Canyon.
The state’s rivers depend on the melting of winter snows and on spring precipitation. Almost all of the rivers drain into lakes that have no outlets or into shallow sinks that in summer evaporate into alkaline mud flats. The Humboldt, the largest of Nevada’s rivers, provides the state’s only major east-west drainage system. The Truckee, Carson, and Walker rivers, which rise in the Sierra Nevada, serve extensive irrigation and reclamation projects in their areas. The Muddy and Virgin rivers, in southern Nevada, are related to the Colorado River system, which drains into the Gulf of California.
Several lakes provide scenic and recreational attractions. Lake Tahoe, on the California-Nevada border, is particularly notable for its clarity, depth, and scenic beauty. Pyramid, Walker, and Winnemucca lakes are remnants of an ancient sea. In relation to its area, however, Nevada has little surface water. The increasing demands of urbanization, industry, and agriculture are exhausting both groundwater and surface resources, and scarcity of water is an increasing concern. The impounded waters of Lake Mead, extending for some 115 miles (185 km) behind Hoover Dam, provide reserves for the southeastern area. The state relies heavily on allocations of water from the Colorado River, a reliance that has yielded a continuing legacy of litigation and conflict with neighbouring states over water rights.
The mountains of the Sierra Nevada along the state’s western boundary often cause clouds of Pacific origin to drop their moisture before reaching Nevada, thus producing a semiarid climate. The driest regions are in the southeast and near Carson Sink (a now-dry basin that was the centre of a lake system during the last major ice age, some 11,500 years ago), where annual precipitation seldom exceeds 4 inches (100 mm). The northeast has as little as 8 inches (200 mm) of precipitation annually, whereas annual precipitation in the northwestern mountains often reaches 24 inches (600 mm). Temperatures vary as widely. July temperatures average about 70 °F (21° C) in the north and in the mid-80s F (about 30 °C) in the south. In January the averages range from the low 20s F (about −4 °C) in the north to about 40 °F (4 °C) in the south. The northern and eastern areas have long, cold winters and short, relatively hot summers, whereas in southern Nevada the summers are long and hot and the winters brief and mild. Regional differences are pointed up by variations in the growing season: Las Vegas has about 240 days in its growing season, Reno about 155, and Elko only about 100.
