Newham,  inner borough of London, England. It is bordered to the east by the River Roding and Barking Creek, to the south by the River Thames, and to the west by the River Lea. Nearly all of Newham lies within the historic county of Essex. Newham was established in 1965 by amalgamation of North Woolwich, a small part of Barking, and the county boroughs of East Ham and West Ham. It includes such areas and historic villages as (south to north) Silvertown, North Woolwich, Custom House, Canning Town, Beckton, Plaistow, West Ham, East Ham, Upton Park, Stratford, Manor Park, and Forest Gate (in part).
The place-name Ham is recorded in Domesday Book (1086) as Hame; the variants East Ham and West Ham appeared later, as did the name Plaistowe (“Place for Play”), before the 15th century. From the 19th century Londoners from East End communities and European immigrants settled there in great numbers. In the south of the borough, the working-class neighbourhoods of Canning Town, Custom House, and Silvertown sprang up near the Royal Docks—Victoria (1855), Albert (1880), and King George V (1921).
The northern edge of the borough, which is formed in part by the Wanstead Flats, terminates to the west in the shopping centre, railroad yards, and industrial sector of Stratford. In eastern and central Newham is a densely developed area of terraced houses built in the late 19th and early 20th centuries as an intentional consequence of the policy of the Eastern Railway to provide low fares for workers. To the north and south are housing projects dating from the mid-20th century. The Royal Docks are now closed to commercial shipping but are retained as the centrepiece of the mixed-use London Docklands development, which includes a campus of the University of East London. In 1982 the Thames Barrier, a flood-control device, was inaugurated between Silvertown and the south bank (Greenwich borough).
Newham is traversed by the North Circular Road and other major routes; a foot tunnel and ferry link it with Woolwich, south of the Thames. London City Airport—the capital’s smallest but closest international terminal, located between the King George V and Royal Albert docks—was opened in 1987.
The borough’s public open spaces include Central, Brampton, King George V, and Little Illford parks and, along the Thames, the Royal Victoria Gardens and Lyle Park. More than half the population is made up of ethnic minorities (mainly South Asians, but with large numbers of Africans and Afro-Caribbeans). Area 14 square miles (36 square km). Pop. (2001) 243,891; (2011) 307,984.
