Ningxia, conventional Ningsia, in full Hui Autonomous Region of Ningxia, Chinese (Pinyin) Ningxia Huizu Zizhiqu or (Wade-Giles romanization) Ning-hsia-hui-tsu Tzu-chih-ch’ü,  autonomous region located in north-central China. It is bounded to the east in part by Shaanxi province; to the east, south, and west by Gansu province; and to the north by the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region. Most of the region is desert, but the vast plain of the Huang He (Yellow River) in the north has been irrigated for agriculture for centuries. Its capital is Yinchuan, situated in the north a short distance west of the Huang He. Present-day Ningxia was nearly all within the ancient kingdom of the Tangut people, known in China as the Xi (Western) Xia; after its conquest by Chinggis (Genghis) Khan, it was named Ningxia (“Peaceful Xia”). Area 25,600 square miles (66,400 square km). Pop. (2010) 6,301,350.
Physiographically, the Ningxia region can be divided into two parts. Southern Ningxia is part of the Loess Plateau, with the Liupan Mountains as the main ridge. The region is covered with a thick layer of loess (wind-deposited soil)—which in some places is more than 300 feet (90 metres) deep—and the topography is generally fairly flat. Northern Ningxia is made up for the most part of the Ningxia plain of the Huang He. The river enters Ningxia from the Qinghai plateau in Gansu and flows east and then north into Inner Mongolia. West of the plain are the Helan Mountains. These mountains serve as a shelter against the sandstorms from the Tengger (Tengri) Desert, which lies to the west of the mountains.
Situated at an elevation of 3,600–3,900 feet (1,100–1,200 metres) above sea level, the Ningxia plain slopes gradually from south to north. The plain is an arid area, but the Huang He provides irrigation. Many canals have been built over the centuries. The network of willow-lined canals and paddy fields gives the landscape a look resembling that of southern China.
The climate of Ningxia is continental. Temperatures range from an annual average maximum of 80 °F (27 °C) to an annual average minimum of 7 °F (−14 °C). Yearly precipitation on the Ningxia plain is only about 8 to 24 inches (200 to 600 mm).
The ethnic composition of Ningxia includes the Han (Chinese), who constitute the majority of the population; Hui (Chinese Muslims), at more than one-third of the population, the largest minority group; and Manchu and small numbers of Tibetans and Mongols. Nearly all the people speak Mandarin Chinese, with some speaking Tibetan and Mongolian. The predominant religions are Islam and Buddhism; Islam has the most believers, primarily among the Hui.
The region is predominantly rural, with most of the population engaged in pasturing and farming the land. It is one of China’s more sparsely settled areas. In the widely scattered cities, residents traditionally have been devoted to handicrafts. Since 1949, however, more workers have begun to be employed in mining and manufacturing. The capital, Yinchuan, is Ningxia’s largest city.
The Ningxia plain produces abundant wheat and good-quality rice. An intricate system of ancient and new irrigation canals has improved agricultural yields in the region, although the use of chemical fertilizers is well below the national average. The main cash crop is sugar beets. In the mixed agricultural and pastoral areas, a high-quality breed of sheep, a domesticated form of the argali of eastern Mongolia, is raised. Its wool is soft, white, and lustrous. The Manchu especially have long been known for breeding and raising pigs. Melons, apricots, and other fruits are also grown in quantity.
Mineral resources of Ningxia consist mainly of coal reserves, with four main coal fields dispersed throughout the region: in the north near the Inner Mongolian border, around Xiangshan in the west-central area, near Lingwu in east-central Ningxia, and around Guyuan in the south. Coal was mined on a small scale in the past but has been expanded since the construction of the Baotou-Lanzhou railroad in 1958. The region is now one of the major bases of coal mining and thermal power generation in northern China. A large base for the production of energy and chemicals (utilizing coal) has been under development in eastern Ningxia (Ningdong) since the early 21st century. There also are reserves of petroleum, natural gas, gypsum, quartz sandstone, barite, silex (silica), and limestone.
Yinchuan, in the centre of the Ningxia plain, was well known in ancient times as a border city on the western frontier of China. Until the mid-20th century it was largely a trading centre for farm and animal products. Medium-sized and even large factories have since been built there. The Huang He, to the east, provides irrigation and facilities for water transportation.
Industry has grown steadily. Natural resources and agricultural products such as wool and sugar form the foundation of many enterprises. The nearby coal reserves led to the development of a chemical industry in Yinchuan. The region also produces machinery, building materials, and consumer goods such as paper, foodstuffs, and wool and cotton fabrics. An extension of the main railway between Beijing and Baotou (in Inner Mongolia), completed in 1958, links Yinchuan to two major regional industrial bases: Baotou to the northeast and Lanzhou (in Gansu) to the southwest; subsequent branch lines extend south to Baoji in Shaanxi province and west to Wuwei in Gansu province. Several highway and express-highway bridges built across the Huang He since the early 1970s and expressways from Shizuishan in the north to Zhongwei in the west and to Guyuan in the south have further stimulated regional economic development. Yinchuan is the hub of Ningxia’s air travel.
The autonomous region is divided administratively into five prefecture-level municipalities (dijishi). It is further subdivided into districts under municipalities (shixiaqu), counties (xian), and county-level municipalities (xianjishi).
Ningxia was formerly a backward area in education. In 1935 there were only two high schools, two normal (teacher-training) schools, and about 200 elementary schools, attended by very few of the children. Since the communist government was organized in 1949, there has been much improvement. Illiteracy has been markedly reduced. Ningxia University in Yinchuan is the region’s main institution of higher education. Descended from schools founded in 1958, it was designated a university in 1962 and underwent further reorganizations in 1997 and 2002, each time incorporating other higher-education facilities. There are other higher-learning institutions across the region, including Ningxia Medical University (1958) in Yinchuan. Health care also has been transformed with the building of clinics and hospitals.
Traditional Hui cultural life was intimately interrelated with Islam. The Hui woman traditionally kept house; her role was domestic, and she could not undertake outside work. When they went out, Hui women typically wore the veil to conceal their faces, and they were forbidden to talk to males. The traditional culture has undergone changes, however, as Hui women have done farmwork and production work in factories. Some Hui women, especially in urban areas, have adopted contemporary fashion styles, including Western dress.
Yinchuan is at the centre of Ningxia’s culture. Notable are several examples of Buddhist architecture there from the Xi Xia period, as well as imperial and royal Xi Xia tombs about 22 miles (35 km) west of the city. Long sections of the Great Wall of China are extant in northern Ningxia, portions of which are accessible from Yinchuan and other locales. About 30 miles (50 km) south of Yinchuan, on a hillside by the Huang He near Qingtongxia, stands the Buddhist monument of the 108 Pagodas, which dates to the Yuan dynasty (1206–1368). The pagodas, each of which is 8 to 11.5 feet (2.5 to 3.5 metres) high, are arranged up the slope in the form of a large triangle. In the south, situated along the northern route of the ancient Silk Road some 35 miles (55 km) northwest of Guyuan, are a series of grottoes at Mount Xumi that display well-preserved Buddhist statues created during the 6th to the 10th century; the tallest of them measures over 65 feet (20 metres) in height. Farther south, the Liupan Mountains are also an important tourist destination.
