Nógrád,  megye (county), northern Hungary. It is  bounded by Slovakia to the north and by the counties of Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén to the northeast, Heves to the east and southeast, and Pest to the southwest and west. Salgótarján is the county seat.
The Hungarian population of Nógrád is descended from the Palóc, a group of people from northeastern Hungary. Some towns (including Nógrád, Bánk, Felsopetény, and Alsópetény, among others) are inhabited by notable ethnic Slovak populations, while others (principally Szendehely and Berkenye) are home to significant ethnic German populations.
The second smallest county in Hungary, Nógrád is dominated by the North Hungarian Mountains (Északi-középhegység), a continuation of the Transdanubian Mountains that includes the Mátra Mountains in the east and the andesite volcanic mass of the Börzsöny Mountains in the west. The lower, diverse landscape of the Cserhát region stretches between the two mountain chains. The andesite formations of the Karancs and the basalt formations of the Medves stand out on the northern frontier. The rivers of Nógrád, with the intermediation of the Ipoly River—which marks the county border—flow into the Danube and through the Zagyva River into the Tisza. The once abundant oak and beech forests have diminished considerably.
The majority of the area is used for farmland despite unfavourable soil conditions. Grain, sunflowers, potatoes, poppy seeds, and lentils are important, as is livestock. The industrialization of the county was set off by the start of the mining of brown coal in the Salgótarján region in 1848. The large majority of mines were operational until the 1960s. Salgótarján thrived as an important centre of metallurgy and of the manufacture of machinery, glass, and chemicals, but its heavy industry declined precipitously in the aftermath of the communist era.
The county was organized around the Nógrád fortress during the rule of Stephen I and extended from Kisoroszi, on Szentendre Island, to the headwaters of the Ipoly. One-third of the county’s northern territories were annexed to Czechoslovakia after World War I. Between 1938 and 1945 the stretch of land inhabited by Hungarians—situated on the opposite side of the border established by the Treaty of Trianon—was re-annexed to Hungary. A popular tourist destination is the old village of Hollóko; designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1987, it is noted for traditional Palóc weaving and embroidery. Area 982 square miles (2,544 square km). Pop. (2011) 202,427; (2017 est.) 192,573.
