North Ossetia–Alania, also called North Ossetia, Russian Severnaya Osetiya–Alaniya,  respublika (republic) in southwestern Russia, on the northern flank of the Greater Caucasus range. It is bordered on the south by Georgia and on the north by the Sunzha and Terek ranges. The capital and largest city is Vladikavkaz.
North Ossetia is mountainous, with the Glavny (Main) Range reaching 15,682 feet (4,780 metres) at Mount Dzhimara and other peaks in the republic reaching more than 14,000 feet (4,250 metres). Parallel to the Glavny crest range is a series of lower ranges through which the rivers have cut deep and picturesque gorges. The republic lies wholly in the basin of the upper Terek River and its fast-flowing tributaries, which emerge in the mountains and join before cutting through the Sunzha Range to the north in another deep gorge. A northern panhandle of the republic extends over the Sunzha and Terek ranges to include part of the middle Terek Plain around Mozdok.
Climate, soils, and vegetation all vary sharply with the relief. In the lowest areas there is steppe vegetation on fertile black soils, which give way higher up to dense deciduous forests of oak and beech. Higher still are coniferous forests of spruce, fir, and pine, eventually giving way to alpine meadow and finally to bare rock and ice. The severity of the temperature regime and the rainfall both increase with elevation. In the river basins precipitation is 24 inches (600 mm) per year or less; in higher areas, up to 35 inches (900 mm).
Ossetes are of mixed Iranian-Caucasian origin; their language belongs to the Iranian group of the Indo-European family of languages. From the 7th century bce to the 1st century ce Ossetia came under Scythian-Sarmatian influence, which was succeeded by that of the warlike Alani, who are believed to be the direct ancestors of the present-day Ossetes. Later the Mongol empire of the 13th century extended its sway over Ossetia, and the Alani were forced to move into the mountainous regions. Russian colonization began in the northern Ossetian area especially after the establishment of the fortress of Vladikavkaz in 1784. In addition to Ossetes and Russians, the republic is populated by Ingush, Armenians, Georgians, and Ukrainians. Eastern Orthodox Christianity is the predominant religion, and Sunni Muslims make up a small but significant minority. Indigenous pre-Christian and pre-Islamic practices exist alongside these and other faiths, and elements of traditional beliefs have been integrated into North Ossetian religious life.
In the 1990s many Ingush in the republic were forced to flee to neighbouring Ingushetiya, and fighting flared in the South Ossetia region of Georgia, where Ossetes sought independence or union with North Ossetia. The city of Beslan, in northeastern North Ossetia, was the site of ethnic violence in 2004, when Chechen militants seized a school and some 1,200 hostages, mostly children; following an armed battle between the militants and Russian security forces, some 325 people were killed and about 700 were wounded.
Industry in the republic is concentrated in Vladikavkaz and includes metallurgy and the manufacture of building materials, chemicals, and foodstuffs; lead, zinc, and dolomite are mined. Timber exploitation, particularly of beech forests, is important on both flanks of the Caucasus. The mountains are also a popular tourist destination. Hydroelectric plants have been built on the Terek River at Vladikavkaz and on the Gizeldon River. Agriculture is concentrated on the lower slopes and near Mozdok; the irrigated fields produce wheat, corn (maize), potatoes, hemp, and fruit. Sheep and cattle are raised on the higher slopes.
Two major highways across the Caucasus pass through Ossetia—the Georgian and Ossetian military highways, which were built in the 19th century during the Russian conquest of the Caucasus. Construction began in the late 20th century on a new all-weather highway. Vladikavkaz is also linked by highways with Grozny (Chechnya) and the Caspian and with Rostov-na-Donu. The republic is also served by the Rostov-Baku railway. Vladikavkaz is the seat of the state university (founded 1969), which is named for the Ossetian national poet Kosta Khetagurov (1859–1906). Area 3,100 square miles (8,000 square km). Pop. (2010) 712,877.
