Northwest Territories,  region of northern and northwestern Canada encompassing a vast area of forests and tundra. Throughout most of the 20th century, the territories constituted more than one-third of the area of Canada and reached almost from the eastern to the western extremities of the country, across the roof of the North American continent. The creation in 1999 of the territory of Nunavut out of the eastern portion of the Northwest Territories reduced the area of the latter by more than half.
The Northwest Territories are bordered by Nunavut to the east, the provinces of Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia to the south, and Yukon to the west. In the north the territories extend far above the Arctic Circle to incorporate numerous islands, the largest of which are Banks and Prince Patrick; several islands also are divided between the territories and Nunavut, notably Victoria and Melville. Yellowknife is the capital and largest city. Area 519,735 square miles (1,346,106 square km). Pop. (2016) 41,786; (2019 est.) 44,826.
Two main types of landscape blend into one another along the timberline, which runs southeastward from near the Mackenzie River delta on the Arctic Ocean to northwestern Manitoba and is just west of—and roughly parallel to—the border with Nunavut. Southwest of this line lies the northernmost part of the Canadian boreal forest (taiga), extending westward to the mountain ranges that border Yukon. North and east of the timberline stretch the relatively barren grounds of the Arctic: reaches of flat, often poorly drained lowlands underlain by rock more than 1 billion years old in the east and more-varied terrain toward the west. Within each of these two regions, the surface vegetation and the animal life it supports vary with soil and climatic conditions. The Mackenzie Mountains in the west and southwest contain the highest and most-rugged relief in the territories; elevations reach 9,098 feet (2,773 metres) at an unnamed peak in the southwest near Mount Sir James MacBrien, itself 9,062 feet (2,762 metres) high.
The most favourable conditions are found in the Mackenzie Lowlands in the west-central portion of the territories, where forests of black and white spruce mixed with deciduous species extend north to the Mackenzie delta. With only about 70 frost-free days, the growing season for herbaceous plants is short. While it lasts, however, wildflowers and grasses flourish, and root and cereal crops can be cultivated. Many species of valuable fur-bearing animals are found in the area, notably muskrat and beaver. Moose, wolves, black and grizzly bears, and mountain sheep and goats also are native.
Although the climate of the Mackenzie Lowlands is milder than that of the remainder of the territories, it is still cool enough to limit navigation on the Mackenzie River system to about four months a year and to cause a permanently frozen subsoil, or permafrost, except in a small area south of Great Slave Lake. Permafrost creates serious construction problems, especially where the subsoil is an unstable mixture of fine silt and water.
North and east of the Mackenzie Lowlands and the tree line, the terrain changes to that of the ancient and rocky Precambrian mass known as the Canadian Shield, the western edge of which is straddled by the two largest lakes in the territories—Great Bear Lake (12,096 square miles [31,328 square km]) and Great Slave Lake (11,030 square miles [28,568 square km]). The Arctic islands to the north comprise the remnants of mountains formed some 300 to 400 million years ago. Tree growth becomes sparse and stunted and eventually disappears, to be replaced by the light but tough vegetation of the Arctic tundra. In these so-called barren lands the soils, where they exist at all on the heavily glaciated surface, are usually sandy and thin. Mosses, lichens, and many small, hardy flowering plants survive in these conditions and support a variety of animal life ranging from small burrowing mammals and their predator, the Arctic fox, to the large caribou and musk ox. The musk ox was in danger of becoming extinct until the Canadian government put it under protection in the early 20th century, and several subspecies of caribou are now at risk. Seals, walrus, and polar bears are prevalent along the coasts. Bird life is plentiful in summer, with some species, notably ptarmigans and ravens, remaining all winter. Mosquitoes and other insects abound during the summers.
The climate in the Mackenzie Lowlands is relatively mild, with warm and dry summers during which average temperatures in July of about 60 °F (16 °C) are recorded at most of the settlements along the Mackenzie River. The winters are long and cold, with an average temperature in January of −16 °F (−27 °C) at Yellowknife, on the northern shore of Great Slave Lake. North and east of the timberline the Arctic climate prevails. Annual precipitation is light, and, although average winter temperatures are similar to those in the subarctic region to the west, summer temperatures do not rise above an average of 50 °F (10 °C) even in July.
