Nuevo León,  estado (state), northeastern Mexico. It is bounded by the United States (Texas) to the north and by the states of Tamaulipas to the east and southeast, San Luis Potosí to the south and southwest, and Zacatecas and Coahuila to the west. The state capital is Monterrey.
Nuevo León is crossed by the southeastward-running Sierra Madre Oriental, which has an average elevation of 5,000 feet (1,500 metres). The extreme north consists of the plain along the Rio Grande (Río Bravo del Norte). The arid and semiarid climate of the northern half of the state supports only cacti and shrubs. Farther south the climate becomes more humid, with forested mountain slopes and subtropical valleys that support a variety of crops.
Nuevo León has one of the largest state economies in the country. Cotton, citrus fruits, sugarcane, cereals (especially corn [maize] and wheat), and vegetables are grown, in part with the aid of irrigation water provided by the international Falcon (Falcón) Dam and Reservoir project on the Rio Grande. Nuevo León’s principal importance lies in its industries. Its ironworks, steelworks, and smelters were the first heavy industrial plants in Mexico. The state also has numerous textile enterprises, a large brewery, and other factories. The wealth and development found in the industrial and financial centre of Monterrey contrast with the relative poverty and underdevelopment elsewhere in the state.
The region was made a state in 1824. During the Mexican-American War it was occupied by U.S. forces, who were widely reported to have brutalized the population of Monterrey. Nuevo León was also the scene of fighting during the Mexican Revolution.
State government is headed by a governor, who is elected to a single six-year term. Members of the legislature (a unicameral House of Deputies) are elected to terms of three years. The state is divided into several local governmental units called municipios (municipalities), each of which may include a city or town and its hinterland or, alternatively, a group of villages. In 2015 Nuevo León became the first Mexican state to elect an independent candidate (Jaime [“El Bronco”] Rodríguez) as its governor.
Monterrey has an international airport. It is also situated on a major highway and railroad link between Laredo, Texas, and the port of Tampico, Tamaulipas, on the Gulf of Mexico. Notable educational institutions include the Autonomous University of Nuevo León, which was founded as a law school in 1824 and now has a main campus in San Nicolás de los Garza, a suburb of Monterrey, and several additional campuses around the state. Area 25,067 square miles (64,924 square km). Pop. (2010) 4,653,458.
