Oaxaca,  estado (state), southern Mexico. It is bounded by the states of Puebla and Veracruz to the north and Chiapas to the east, by the Pacific Ocean to the south, and by the state of Guerrero to the west. The city of Oaxaca (Oaxaca de Juárez) is the state capital.
Two-thirds of the state’s relief is mountainous. The well-watered spurs and foothills of the Sierra Madre del Sur descend in the south to a narrow Pacific coastal plain and in the east to the low Isthmus of Tehuantepec (also known within Oaxaca as the Chimalapas region). Parts of the northern border with Veracruz are extensions of the hot and humid Gulf of Mexico (Atlantic) lowlands.
Oaxaca is one of Mexico’s most ethnically diverse states, with a large concentration of indigenous groups who are chiefly engaged in subsistence farming. Some two-fifths of state residents speak indigenous languages, notably Zapotec, Mixtec, Mazatec, Chinantec, and Mixé. Agriculture and mining employ more than half of the workforce. The chief crops are corn (maize), wheat, coffee, sugarcane, tobacco, fibres, and tropical fruits. The mountains are veined with gold, silver, uranium, diamonds, and onyx, and mining is important. Services also account for a significant proportion of employment; manufacturing is limited.
Although the rail network is incomplete in Oaxaca, air connections are good, and the Pan-American Highway traverses the state. Less than half the population lives in urban areas, including the capital and the much smaller cities of Juchitán (Juchitán de Zaragoza), San Juan Bautista Tuxtepec, and Salina Cruz, a port city.
State government is headed by a governor, who is elected to a single term of six years. Members of the unicameral legislature, the State Congress, are elected to three-year terms. Oaxaca is divided into hundreds of local governmental units called municipios (municipalities), each of which is headquartered in a city, town, or village.
In ancient times Oaxaca was inhabited by more than a dozen indigenous groups, most notably the Zapotec and Mixtec cultures. The Zapotec established a political and cultural centre at Monte Albán, near the present-day city of Oaxaca, about the 1st century bce. Monte Albán reached its zenith between 300 and 900 ce, after which Zapotec influence began to decline in the face of Mixtec encroachment. The Mixtec had conquered the entire region by about the 13th century. After the fall of Mexico to the conquistador Hernán Cortés in 1521, Oaxaca was under Spanish rule for 300 years. Oaxaca became a state in 1824.
The capital is the site of the state’s main cultural institutions, including the Benito Juárez Autonomous University of Oaxaca (founded 1827; university status 1955) and the Regional Museum of Oaxaca (1933), which exhibits the renowned preconquest treasures from Tomb No. 7 at Monte Albán. In 1987 the colonial centre of Oaxaca city and the Monte Albán archaeological zone were collectively designated a UNESCO World Heritage site. Mitla is another monumental ruined city. Area 36,275 square miles (93,952 square km). Pop. (2010) 3,801,962.
