Parma,  city, in the Emilia-Romagna region of northern Italy, on the Parma River, northwest of Bologna. Founded by the Romans along the Via Aemilia in 183 bc, Parma was important as a road junction; its trade flourished, and it obtained Roman citizenship. It became an episcopal see in the 4th century and was later destroyed by the Ostrogoth king Theodoric. The city was rebuilt in the Middle Ages and was ruled by its bishops from the 9th century. Parma enjoyed communal liberty in the late 12th and 13th centuries, until its involvement in the struggles between the Holy Roman Empire and the papacy in the early 14th century led to its subjugation by a series of lordships. Made part of the Duchy of Parma and Piacenza by Pope Paul III in 1545, it was held by the Farnese dukes and later passed to the Austrians, from whom it was taken by Napoleon, who in 1815 gave it to his second consort, Marie Louise of Austria. In 1831 and 1848 it took part in the risings for independence and in 1861 became part of united Italy (see also Parma and Piacenza, Duchy of). During World War II the city was extensively damaged by Allied bombardment.
Famous natives of Parma include the music conductor Arturo Toscanini, the architect and sculptor Benedetto Antelami, and the painters Correggio (Antonio Allegri) and Parmigianino (Francesco Mazzola). The printer and typeface designer Giambattista Bodoni worked and died there.
The city’s imposing Romanesque cathedral, rebuilt after an earthquake in the 12th century, contains magnificent works by Antelami and Correggio, and there are sculptures by Antelami and others of his school in the nearby baptistery (1196–1260). The church of S. Giovanni Evangelista (1494–1510) has frescoes by Correggio and arabesques by Michelangelo Anselmi. The church of Sta. Maria della Steccata (1521–39), the burial place of the Farnese family, is in the form of a Greek cross with a cupola displaying frescoes by Parmigianino. The 16th-century abbey of S. Paolo, with the Camera della Badessa (Room of the Abbess), has been splendidly decorated by Correggio. Notable secular landmarks include the Palazzo della Pilotta (begun 1583), residence of the Farnese dukes, containing the picture gallery, the Biblioteca Palatina (Palatine Library), and the National Museum of Antiquities; the partly ruined Palazzo Ducale (1564); and the Farnese Theatre (1618), all of which were restored after World War II. The university was founded in the 11th century and reorganized in 1601 by Ranuccio I Farnese.
Parma is an important rail and road junction on the main routes from Milan to Bologna. Its economy is mainly agricultural. Parmesan cheese is world famous. Machinery, pharmaceuticals, fertilizer, shoes, and alcohol are also made. Pop. (2006 est.) mun., 175,789.
