Poitou-Charentes,  former région of France. As a région, it encompassed the western départements of Vienne, Charente, Charente-Maritime, and Deux-Sèvres. In 2016 the Poitou-Charentes région was joined with the régions of Aquitaine and Limousin to form the new administrative entity of Nouvelle Aquitaine.
The Massif Armoricain extends into northwestern Deux-Sèvres, while the Massif Central rises to the southeast. The centre of the region is low-lying and punctuated by the shallow valleys of the Vienne, Clain, Charente, and Sèvre Niortaise rivers. An oceanic climate prevails.
The population of the region declined by nearly one-tenth between 1901 and 1946, like that of most of rural France during that period. Since then population growth has been modest. There is no major urban centre, and nearly half of the population still lives in settlements of fewer than 2,000 inhabitants. Rural areas are generally sparsely inhabited and characterized by an aging population. People and economic activity are increasingly concentrated in four main areas: in the Charente valley between Angoulême and Rochefort, along the Châtelleraut-Poitiers-Niort corridor, in the coastal belt, and in the northern area of Bressuire-Thouars in Deux-Sèvres. Two of these towns—Niort and Thouars—rank among the oldest towns in France.
An above-average number of people work in agriculture, although in general the activity is not highly productive. Wheat, barley, and especially corn (maize) are widely cultivated, with the lowlands around Poitiers and the central and southern parts of the region specializing in these crops. Sunflowers are also a key crop in these areas. Brandy, especially cognac (named for a town in the Charente River valley), is produced in Charente and Charente-Maritime. Beef cattle are raised on the Massif Central and the Massif Armoricain, and dairy cows are raised in southern Deux-Sèvres and in central eastern areas of the region. Sheep are grazed extensively in the Montmorillan area of Vienne, while goat cheese is produced around Melle in southern Deux-Sèvres. Shellfish farming, particularly of oysters, is a major activity in coastal areas.
The area is not heavily industrialized. Traditional textile, leather, and papermaking industries have declined. Today food and beverage processing, notably the production of brandy, is the most important industrial activity. Other important industries include chemicals, wood products, and electronics. Employment in services has expanded rapidly, particularly in the larger population centres such as Poitiers, Angoulême, and La Rochelle. Tourism is important along the coast and on the islands of Ré and Oléron. Inland, the Futuroscope theme park is a major tourist attraction in the département of Vienne.
As the natural approach from the southwest to the Paris region, Poitou-Charentes has been the scene of many battles. Among the most memorable were the defeat of the Saracens (Arabs) in 732 by the Frankish leader Charles Martel and the English victory over the French in 1356 at the Battle of Poitiers.
