Puglia, also called Apulia,  regione, southeastern Italy. It extends from the Fortore River in the northwest to Cape Santa Maria di Leuca at the tip of the Salentine Peninsula (the “heel” of Italy) and comprises the provincie of Bari, Barletta-Andria-Trani, Brindisi, Foggia, Lecce, and Taranto. The northern third of the region is centred on the Puglia Tableland, which is flanked on the north by the limestone massif of Gargano Promontory (the “spur” of the peninsula) and on the west by the Neapolitan Apennines. The central third is occupied by the low Murge plateau, which slopes gradually to the narrow coastal plains of the Adriatic Sea in the east. The Salentine Peninsula consists of the lowlands of Lecce, Taranto, and Brindisi and low plateaus east of Taranto and south of Lecce. The main rock material of Puglia is limestone, except on the coastline, which is mostly low and sandy. The only major rivers are the Fortore and the Ofanto, both in the north, but there are many springs. The absence of surface water over large areas led to construction of the Apulian Aqueduct (1906–39), largest of its kind in Italy, which supplies the region with water from the Sele River on the western slope of the Apennine watershed.
Consisting of the areas of ancient Apulia and part of ancient Calabria, Puglia was ruled in the early Middle Ages by Goths, Lombards, and Byzantines and knew its greatest glory under the Hohenstaufen emperors. It was a favourite of the 13th-century Holy Roman emperor Frederick II, and Romanesque cathedrals and palaces bear witness to the flowering of Puglia at that time. Thereafter a long period of decline set in, accentuated by the neglect of its distant rulers (French, Spanish, Austrian, Neapolitan, Bourbon) and by Arab slave raids along the coast. In 1860 Puglia became part of the Italian kingdom.
The region is predominantly agricultural. Wheat, barley, and oats are grown on the plain and in the more fertile parts of the plateaus, while olives, grapes, almonds, figs, and vegetables predominate farther south; tobacco is a specialty of the Lecce Plain. The wines of Puglia are the strongest in Italy and are used to fortify other, lighter varieties. Fishing is carried on in many ports, particularly those of the Gargano Promontory and in Barletta, Monopoli, and Taranto. Nomadic sheepherding is still extensive, although it has decreased in importance. Salt is produced from seawater at Margherita di Savoia near Foggia, and bauxite is mined on the Gargano. While small food-processing industries are widespread, industry is largely concentrated at Bari (chemicals and petrochemicals), the regional capital; Taranto (iron and steel); and Brindisi and Barletta. Foggia is the main rail centre, with connections to all parts of the peninsula. Area 7,470 square miles (19,348 square km). Pop. (2006 est.) 4,071,518.
