Qinghai, Wade-Giles romanization Ch’ing-hai, conventional Tsinghai,  sheng (province) of northwestern China. It is bounded to the north and east by Gansu province, to the southeast by Sichuan province, to the south and west by the Tibet Autonomous Region, and to the west and northwest by the Uygur Autonomous Region of Xinjiang. Qinghai is the fourth largest province-level political subdivision in China in terms of land area, but the sparseness of its population is second only to that of Tibet. The capital is Xining in eastern Qinghai, some 140 miles (220 km) west of Lanzhou in Gansu.
The province derives its name from the large lake, Qinghai Hu (“Blue Lake”), in the northeastern part of the province that is conventionally known as Koko Nor. A historical home of nomadic herdsmen, Qinghai is noted for its horse breeding, and it has earned more recent prominence as a source of both petroleum and coal. Area 278,400 square miles (721,000 square km). Pop. (2010) 5,626,722.
Most of the province consists of mountains and high plateaus, and it has an average elevation of some 9,900 feet (3,000 metres). In the north are the Altun and Qilian mountain ranges, which form the divide between the interior and exterior drainage systems of China. Through the south-central part of the province extend the Bayan Har (Bayankala) Mountains (a spur of the Kunlun Mountains), which help delineate the northern limit of the Plateau of Tibet region in Qinghai and serve as the watershed of the headwaters of the Huang He (Yellow River) and Yangtze River (Chang Jiang). In the south the Qinghai-Tibetan boundary parallels the Tanggula Mountains, where the Yangtze rises. Between these high mountains are broad valleys, rolling hilly areas, and extensive flat tableland.
In the northwestern part of the province lies the Qaidam (Tsaidam) Basin, an immense, low-lying area between the Kunlun and the Qilian ranges; its lowest point is about 8,700 feet (2,650 metres)) above sea level. There are many fertile spots in the piedmont and lakeside areas of the basin. The southwestern part is a broad swamp formed by a number of rivers flowing from the snowcapped Tanggula Mountains.
Qinghai is situated in an area of crustal deformation caused by the collision of the Indian and Eurasian tectonic plates to the south and is subject to frequent seismic activity. Most earthquakes are of moderate intensity, though strong temblors occur periodically. One such major quake, in 1927, killed some 200,000 people, and another, in April 2010 in the southern Yushu region, killed hundreds, injured thousands more, and caused considerable property damage.
The extensiveness and the complex terrain of the region result in great variations in climate, soil, and vegetation. On the whole, the climate is continental, being influenced by the region’s remoteness from the sea and by the mountain ranges in the south and east that bar maritime winds. The average annual precipitation in most places is less than 4 inches (100 mm), most of which occurs during the summer. Winter is long, dry, cold, and windy; summer is short and warm. Strong winds from the Mongolian Plateau blanket the region with sand, a serious menace to agriculture. On the other hand, the plentiful sunshine in the region is beneficial for plant growth. Grass thrives on the vast plateau, and the region possesses some of China’s best pasturelands for sheep, horses, and yaks. Antelope, wild horses, wolves, foxes, bears, snow leopards, and exotic birds such as the black-necked crane (Grus nigricollis) are found there.
Most of Qinghai’s population is Han (Chinese). Minority nationalities include Tibetans, Mongols, Hui (Chinese Muslims), Salar, and Tu (Mongour Tu). A number of Kazakhs, who had moved into western Qinghai in the 1930s, moved back to Xinjiang in the mid-1980s.
The province is largely rural. The major population centres are in eastern Qinghai in the fertile valley of the Huang River (Huang Shui), centred on Xining, which is the main agricultural and industrial centre. A number of cities have grown substantially with development of the province’s mineral and oil and natural gas industries. Since the opening of the Qinghai-Tibet highway and, later, the railway to Tibet, Golmud (Ge’ermu) has become important.
Economically, Qinghai is divided into two major parts by the Koko Nor and the Qinghainan (South Qinghai) Mountains to the west and south of the lake. On the eastern side is the Huang He drainage area, consisting of large tracts of farmland crisscrossed by irrigation canals and dotted with settlements. Spring wheat, barley, and Irish potatoes are produced in much improved yields. Irrigated acreage is low, however, as is the use of chemical fertilizers. On the western side is the plateau basin, where herds of cattle, yaks, horses, and sheep—which represent the province’s major source of wealth—graze on vast stretches of grassland. The output of sheep and yak wool is high and of good quality. Vast pastoral land areas have been opened up for cultivation, introducing a mixed farming-livestock economy. Wheat and rapeseed are produced there. In the southeastern and southwestern portions of the province, pastoral mixed with some stationed farming are scattered in vast areas. The Kunlun and Qilian ranges are well forested, producing spruce, birch, Chinese pine, and Chinese juniper. In the farming areas there are peach, apricot, pear, apple, and walnut orchards.
The exploitation of mineral resources long has constituted a major component of the province’s economy. Petroleum and natural gas reserves are located in the Qaidam Basin, which contains most of the province’s mineral reserves. Qinghai has become China’s largest producer of lithium, and the province has rich deposits of potassium, strontium, bromine, salts, silicon, and magnesium; there are also reserves of copper, lead, and zinc. The abundant water resources in the province have been harnessed at large hydroelectric-power stations constructed on the upper course of the Huang He at Longyangxia (completed 1992) and Lijiaxia (1996).
Before 1949 Qinghai’s limited industrial and commercial development was based on food and animal by-products in such centres as Xining and on a few salt mines in the Qaidam Basin. Since then, industrial growth has been rapid, both for the earlier and the more recent activities. Chemical and machinery plants, iron and steel factories, and electrical equipment firms have been established in Xining and other cities.
Much of the development has been made possible by the opening of new transportation links between Qinghai and other areas of China. The crucial impetus to growth was the opening in 1959 of the rail line between Xining and Lanzhou to the southeast, connecting the province to the national rail network; the line has been extended to Golmud and other places in the Qaidam Basin, and in 2006 it was extended to Lhasa, Tibet. In addition, the Xining-Lhasa highway was widened and paved. Truck transportation is important, and main highways lead from Xining to Lanzhou and Zhangye in Gansu, Xinjiang in Sichuan, and Yushu and Gande in Qinghai. An express highway from Xining to Lanzhou was completed in 2005. Several highways intersect at the southern margin of the Qaidam Basin at Golmud, enhancing its role as a communications centre.
The provincial capital, Xining, is also a prefecture-level municipality (dijishi). The province is also subdivided into one prefecture (diqu) and six autonomous prefectures (zizhizhou), which are further subdivided into districts under municipalities (shixiaqu), counties (xian), county-level municipalities (xianjishi), and autonomous counties (zizhixian). The special status of the Qaidam Basin was reflected in late 1956 by the establishment of a separate Qaidam Administrative District, with its headquarters at Dachaidan, a new settlement situated on the northern edge of a salt swamp and at a major road junction. In 1963 the Qaidam district was reincorporated into an autonomous district designated for the Mongol, Tibetan, and Kazakh minorities there; it was later renamed Haixi Mongol and Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture after the Kazakh minority had moved back to Xinjiang.
The educational system of the province includes public and a few religious schools. For the whole province, there are comprehensive (six-year) elementary schools and junior (three-year) secondary schools, attendance at which is mandatory. By the early 21st century, nearly all school-age children were enrolled. In the past, attendance was low in remote areas, and in order to counteract that some 300 free boarding schools, funded by both the central and provincial governments, have been set up for those areas. Temple education for Tibetans once played an important role in the province, but it has diminished significantly. Traditionally, among the Tibetan Buddhists, a child aspiring to become a lama began his studies at the age of 10 and continued for more than 10 years. A Muslim child’s studies began at the age of 6 and continued for 15 years. Institutions of higher learning are concentrated in Xining and include Qinghai University (founded 1958) and Qinghai Normal University (1956).
Urban cultural institutions such as museums, theatres, and libraries are few. The largely rural lifestyle of Qinghai’s population is strongly influenced by the traditional culture of the several ethnic and nationality groups that make up the population. Among the Mongols and Tibetans, for example, one son from every family was once expected to enter a lamasery, a custom that once limited population growth. However, the effect on the population ceased to be a factor with the decline of this practice and changes in celibacy rules for some sects. The chief lamasery in Qinghai, Ta’er Monastery, is about 15 miles (25 km) from Xining. It is a centre of Tibetan Buddhism, to which thousands of believers make pilgrimages from the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, Tibet, Xinjiang, and Sichuan.
The Ta’er Monastery and other religious and historic sites in and around Xining have become popular tourist destinations in Qinghai. Koko Nor is also a major tourist attraction in the province, with visitors drawn there by the natural setting and abundant migratory birdlife; the lake is also the focus of an annual multistage bicycle road race held in Qinghai.In addition, sanctioned hunting areas have been established in the Burhan Budai Mountains (a range of the Kunluns) on the southeastern edge of the Qaidam Basin that draw an international clientele.
