Quintana Roo,  estado (state), southeastern Mexico, on the eastern side of the Yucatán Peninsula. Its northern shore is on the Yucatán Channel, a passage between the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea; it is also bounded by the Caribbean to the east, by Belize and Guatemala to the south, by the state of Campeche to the west, and by the state of Yucatán to the northwest. The state capital, Chetumal, is located on a sheltered bay at the mouth of the Hondo River, on the frontier with Belize.
Quintana Roo occupies a hot, humid, and heavily forested lowland dotted with cenotes (water-filled sinkholes) and limestone caves. The state administers the coastal islands of Contoy, Mujeres, and Cozumel, among others, as well as cays and reefs off the Caribbean coast, which is occasionally struck by tropical storms and hurricanes. Sian Ka’an Biosphere Reserve, which was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1987, comprises tropical forests and marine reefs southwest of Cozumel Island.
Dozens of Mayan cities rose to prominence in the region in pre-Hispanic times, as evidenced by ruins at El Meco, Tixmul, Cobá, Tulum, and elsewhere. In 1517 the first Spanish landing in Mexico was made at Cape Catoche, on the Yucatán Channel. Many of the present inhabitants are descendants of Maya who rebelled during the Caste War (an indigenous uprising in the Yucatán in 1847–53) and were not conquered again until the early 20th century. In 1902 the Quintana Roo territory was carved from parts of Yucatán and Campeche states. It was named for Andrés Quintana Roo, a writer and leader in the Mexican wars for independence (1810–21). In 1974 it was made a state.
Quintana Roo is sparsely settled; however, its population began increasing rapidly in the late 20th century, owing largely to growth in tourism that was aided by the construction of major highways and airports in the region. The main attractions in Quintana Roo are the resort cities of Cozumel and Cancún, part of the Maya Riviera, which also includes the city of Playa del Carmen. Cancún has outstripped Chetumal as the state’s largest city and commercial centre. Virtually all of the state’s income derives from services, including hotels, restaurants, entertainment, and other tourist-related activities. The chief crops are grains and tropical fruits. Mahogany, ebony, and other hardwoods are harvested, and sponges and turtles are caught along the coast.
State government is headed by a governor, who is elected to a single term of six years. Members of the unicameral legislature (the State Congress) are elected to three-year terms. Quintana Roo is divided into local governmental units called municipios (municipalities), each of which is headquartered in a prominent city, town, or village. Cultural institutions include a museum of Mayan culture and a city museum in Chetumal. The University of Quintana Roo (founded 1991) is located in Chetumal, and  the University of the Caribbean (2000) is in Cancún. Area 19,387 square miles (50,212 square km). Pop. (2010) 1,325,578.
