Richmond upon Thames,  outer borough of London, England. It is drained by a 12-mile (19-km) section of the River Thames, which bisects the borough and also forms its northern and southern boundaries. Richmond upon Thames was established in 1965 by amalgamation of the boroughs of Barnes and Richmond, east of the Thames, which belong to the historic county of Surrey, with Twickenham, historically part of Middlesex. It includes such areas and historic villages as (north to south) Castelnau, Kew, Barnes, Mortlake, East Sheen, Richmond, Whitton, Twickenham, Petersham, Ham, Hanworth (in part), Teddington, Hampton Hill, Hampton, and Hampton Wick.
The name Tudinton (now Teddington) dates to 969 ce; Mortelage (Mortlake) and Patricesham (Petersham) were recorded in Domesday Book in 1086; and the name Cayho (Kew) first appeared in 1327. In the early 16th century the manor house of Rychemonde (now Richmond) was rebuilt by Henry VII in a district known as Shene (Sheen). A bridge was built across the Thames at Kew in the mid-18th century, and another was subsequently built at Twickenham. The local population increased markedly in the 18th century and even more rapidly in the 19th century, when railways arrived.
Notable edifices include Hampton Court, which was a home of Henry VIII; the remains of Richmond Palace (used by Edward III, Henry V, Elizabeth I, and several other monarchs); White Lodge, Richmond Park (now used by the Royal Ballet School); and Strawberry Hill (built in the 18th century by Horace Walpole in Gothic style). Ham House (c. 1610) is in a picturesque riverside setting, and the Octagon, associated with the Orleans House Gallery, is an 18th-century structure set in a wooded garden. Kew Gardens is a world-famous botanical garden on the site of a former royal estate, and the National Physical Laboratory (1900) in Teddington is a centre for technological advancement and for national measurement standards.
Nearly two-fifths of the borough’s area is maintained as public open space, including Richmond and Bushy parks (both former royal hunting grounds), Barnes Common, Sheen Common, Ham Common, Marble Hill Park, and Old Deer Park (site of an observatory used from 1769 to 1981). Twickenham is the headquarters for the Rugby Football Union. At Mortlake is the finish line of the annual 4.25-mile (6.8-km) University Boat Race between the eight-man rowing teams of Oxford and Cambridge.
The borough is primarily residential in character, although it has small riverside industries, including yards for building and repairing small craft. It has rail and London Underground (subway) links and is crossed by major roadways. Area 22 square miles (57 square km). Pop. (2001) 172,335; (2011) 186,990.
