Rio Grande do Sul,  southernmost estado (state) of Brazil, bordered by the state of Santa Catarina (north), Argentina (west), Uruguay (south), and the Atlantic Ocean (east). The capital of Porto Alegre is the state’s main industrial area and port. Rio Grande do Sul is a major agricultural and livestock region.
The region was originally thinly inhabited by Tupí-Guaraní, Ge, and Guaycurú Indians. It was first explored and colonized by the Portuguese during the late 17th century. Long disputed between Spain and Portugal, the region was the site of intermittent warfare between 1754 and 1870. The region was also wracked by wars of secession during the 19th century.
The north occupies part of the Paraná Plateau, which is composed of outpourings of basaltic lava solidified into sheets of rock known as diabase. The plateau stands between 2,000 and 3,000 feet (600 and 900 metres) above sea level. It has been dissected into rolling hills by streams, but its margins are marked by steep cliffs. Cliffs also cap the Geral Mountains, which lie along the Atlantic coast. North of Porto Alegre, the cliffs turn westward and descend southward along the Jacuí River valley. In the south the Jacuí River and its tributary, the Taquari, drain a lowland along the base of the plateau. South of the river gently rolling hills stand between 1,000 and 1,500 feet (300 and 450 metres) in elevation. West of Livramento are tabular landforms of diabase; the Uruguay River cuts through the diabase and is broken by rapids. The coast is lined with sandbars and lagoons, including the Patos Lagoon and Mirim Lagoon.
The climate is generally mild. In winter, cold air masses from the south bring heavy rains and occasional snow to the higher elevations. In summer, the prevailing northeast winds bring less precipitation and hot weather, especially inland. Temperatures range from a minimum of 18 °F (−8 °C) to a maximum of 109 °F (43 °C), with an annual average of 68 °F (20 °C). Precipitation measures about 52 inches (1,300 mm) annually.
Most of the state is tall-grass prairie, with pine and tropical forests in the higher elevations and deeper river valleys. Animal life includes deer, rodents, otters, armadillos, monkeys, and porcupines. Coastal and inland waters abound with fish (anchovies, dolphins, kingfish, flatfish, mullet) and shrimp.
The state’s inhabitants include descendants of the Portuguese in the Jacuí valley, Germans on the lower slopes of the Paraná Plateau and above the Jacuí, and Italians on the plateau. There are also descendants of Polish and other European immigrants. A small percentage of the population is composed of blacks and persons of mixed white and black ancestry, and the northwest has some Indians and Asians.
The main language is Portuguese. The vast majority of the people are adherents of Roman Catholicism; other Christian denominations are also represented.
Educational services include primary, secondary, and technical schools and several universities, such as the Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (founded in 1934) and the Catholic University of Pelotas (1960).
The region was long known as the “Granary of Brazil.” A substantial portion of Brazil’s rice is raised on the floodplain of the Jacuí and Taquari rivers. Wheat and corn (maize) are grown on the Paraná Plateau and the terraces above the Jacuí. Other crops include grapes and tobacco. The southern plains serve as vast pastures for the state’s livestock industry. Herds of cattle and sheep are tended by the gauchos, the herdsmen of the Llanos, whose animals feed across the vast unimproved pasturelands of the plains. Pigs are also raised.
Industrialization did not reach the south until the 1930s, and the state contributes only a small portion of the national industrial output. Industries are concentrated at Porto Alegre, Rio Grande, and Pelotas. Coal is mined at São Jerônimo on the Jacuí River and shipped downstream to Porto Alegre.
The state is served by roads and railways; the main rail line runs west from Porto Alegre through Santa Maria and Alegrete to the Argentine border at Uruguaiana. There are about 800 miles (about 1,300 km) of inland waterways on the Jacuí and Taquari rivers and the Patos Lagoon. There is also shipping along the state’s 390-mile (628-kilometre) ocean coastline and a busy network of airports. Folkloric tradition centres upon the gaucho and his life on the plains. Area 108,784 square miles (281,749 square km). Pop. (2010) 10,693,929.
