Saskatchewan,  province of Canada, one of the Prairie Provinces. It is one of only two Canadian provinces without a saltwater coast, and it is the only province whose boundaries are all wholly artificial (i.e., not formed by natural features). It lies between the 49th and 60th parallels of latitude, it is bounded on the west by longitude 110° west of Greenwich, and its eastern limit, with minor adjustments, is longitude 102° W. Its southern half is largely an extension of the Great Plains of central North America, rarely rising 2,000 feet (610 metres) above sea level. It measures 760 miles (1,223 km) from south to north, tapering from a width of 393 miles (632 km), where it abuts Montana and North Dakota in the United States, to 277 miles (446 km), where it meets the Northwest Territories. Saskatchewan is Canada’s fifth largest province in area and sixth in population. Saskatchewan’s landscape makes its inhabitants conscious of the sky, and the changing patterns of light and shadow on clouds, which commonly offer magnificent sunrises and sunsets, are as much a part of the scenery as any contour of the earth. Economically, the province has always been heavily dependent on the exportation of its agricultural and mineral products and is thus peculiarly sensitive to fluctuations in world markets beyond its own or even Canada’s control. Area 251,367 square miles (651,036 square km). Pop. (2016) 1,098,352; (2019 est.) 1,174,462.
The most important division of the land in Saskatchewan is between the northern one-third of the province, which is part of the Canadian Shield, and the plains, which cover the southern two-thirds. The Canadian Shield is an area of mostly igneous and metamorphic rocks of Precambrian age (about 540 million to 4 billion years old); hence, it is often referred to as the Precambrian Shield. The plains comprise a wedge-shaped succession of sedimentary rocks, the oldest of which abut the shield margin while the youngest occur in the Cypress Hills in the southwestern portion of the province. The highest elevations in Saskatchewan are also found in the Cypress Hills, peaking at 4,567 feet (1,392 metres) above sea level. These hills—the only part of Saskatchewan that escaped glaciation—contain unique plant and animal life. The lowest point in the province, 699 feet (213 metres), is in the extreme northwest.
Continental glaciation greatly influenced Saskatchewan’s landscape, scouring and molding the northern shield to produce a landscape of rocky outcrops, lakes, and rivers. Glacial deposits on the shield tend to be thin and discontinuous. The southern plains are covered with a veneer of sediments laid down by ice sheets and their subsequent meltwaters. The most important agricultural regions occur in areas of finer-grained sediment, while rolling hills of hummocky moraine and other coarser-grained sediments are primarily used for ranching. Cut into the plains are many spectacular river valleys, including those of the North and South Saskatchewan rivers and the Qu’Appelle River. Many of these river valleys were carved by meltwaters during the retreat of the ice sheets.
Some one-eighth of Saskatchewan’s surface area is covered by water, including Lake Wollaston and large portions of Lake Athabasca and Reindeer Lake. Water flowing through the province’s rivers drains variously to the Atlantic and Arctic oceans and to the Gulf of Mexico. Most of Saskatchewan’s waters flow from west to east, its great rivers (which provided the first transportation routes) rising in the Rocky Mountains and emptying ultimately into Hudson Bay. The northwestern portion of the Precambrian Shield, however, drains into Lake Athabasca and then to the Beaufort Sea via the Mackenzie River. The extreme southwestern portion of Saskatchewan, including the Frenchman River, is part of the Missouri River drainage basin that empties into the Gulf of Mexico.
Saskatchewan’s soils can be broadly divided between the forest soils of northern regions and the grassland (prairie) soils of the south. The former tend to be thin and acidic, light in colour, and infertile. Poorly drained peat and mineral soils are also common in northern Saskatchewan. Grassland soils vary in colour from very dark (almost black) in the more humid central zones to dark brown over much of the southern prairie and lighter brown in the drier southwest regions. Climate is a major determinant of soil type. The black and dark brown soils are the most fertile and support the majority of agricultural production.
Climate is a major limiting factor for agriculture, restricting it to the area south of 55° N latitude. Even within this zone, there are as few as 80 to 100 frost-free days annually. Temperature variations are extreme; January temperatures have fallen below the mid −60s F (about −53 °C) in settled parts, and in July temperatures of more than 100 °F (about 41 °C) have been recorded. The normal mean daily reading for the arable regions ranges from −5 to 10 °F (about −21 to −12 °C) in January and from the mid-50s to the mid-60s F (about 13 to 18 °C) in July. In other words, Saskatchewan has a variable climate with cold winters and warm to hot summers. Because the province lies in the continental interior, precipitation is low, averaging from about 10 to 20 inches (about 250 to 510 mm) each year. Most winter precipitation falls as snow, which ranges from about 30 inches (about 750 mm) in the southwest to more than 60 inches (about 1,500 mm) in the north-central area. Drought years are not uncommon.
