Scottish Borders,  council area, southeastern Scotland, its location along the English border roughly coinciding with the drainage basin of the River Tweed. Its rounded hills and undulating plateaus—including the Lammermuir Hills, the Moorfoot Hills, the Tweedsmuir Hills, and the Cheviot Hills—form a section of the Southern Uplands that is dissected by the valleys of the Tweed and its tributaries. Most of the population lives in these valleys, including the Teviotdale and the Lauderdale. The valley of the Tweed broadens in the east to form a fertile agricultural plain known as the Merse. Scottish Borders comprises the historic counties of Berwickshire, Peeblesshire, Roxburghshire, and Selkirkshire and the southern fringes of the historic counties of East Lothian and Midlothian.
Agriculture and fishing play a prominent role in the economy of the Scottish Borders. The upland moors support sheep, and the agricultural land along the valley floors grows barley and fodder crops and pastures beef cattle. The region also accounts for a significant portion of Scotland’s poultry holdings. The chief towns of the Scottish Borders, including Peebles, Galashiels, Selkirk, Jedburgh, and Hawick, produce woolen goods and knitwear, as do several smaller towns and villages. The larger towns, including Kelso, also serve as market centres for the surrounding agricultural area. Electronics firms have supplemented the traditional but gradually declining woolen knitwear and tweed industries. Activities and attractions that are popular with tourists include trout and salmon fishing, grouse hunting, and the moorland scenery. Hadrian’s Wall, a line of fortification along the council area’s southern boundary that marks the Roman Empire’s northern limes (border) in Britain, was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1987; in 2005 UNESCO redesignated it (as a transnational site) with the addition of portions of the Roman limes in western and southern Germany. Borders College has campuses in Duns, Galashiels, and Hawick as well as in Newtown Saint Boswells, the administrative centre. Area 1,827 square miles (4,732 square km). Pop. (2001) 106,764; (2011) 113, 870.
