South Kyŏngsang, also spelled South Gyeongsang, Korean in full Kyŏngsangnam-do or Gyeongsangnam-do,  do (province), southeastern South Korea. It is bordered to the south by the Korea Strait, to the west by South and North Chŏlla (Jeolla) provinces, and to the north by North Kyŏngsang province. Pusan (Busan) and Ulsan—administratively designated metropolitan cities with province-level status—border it to the east. Ch’angwŏn is the provincial capital.
The Naktong (Nakdong) River and its tributaries irrigate most of the province. The Kimhae (Gimhae) Plain is one of the country’s best granaries; part of the Naktong delta, it extends about 10 miles (16 km) north to south and 4 miles (6.5 km) east to west. In addition to rice, barley, beans, and potatoes, South Kyŏngsang’s major agricultural products include cotton, flax, sesame, and fruits such as pears, oranges from the southern seaside, and sweet persimmons.
The length of the province’s irregular coastline, including more than 400 islands, is about 1,400 miles (2,250 km). The interaction of warm and cold ocean currents offshore produces abundant sea life, and more than 40 kinds of marine products are caught annually, making the province one of the country’s leading fisheries.
Various light industries are carried on in the cities of Chinju (Jinju), T’ongyŏng (Tongyeong), and Sach’ŏn (Sacheon), and there are heavy industries and chemical production in the large port cities of Masan and Chinhae (Jinhae). Mount Chiri (Mount Jiri; 6,283 feet [1,915 metres]) is the centrepiece of a national park that straddles the boundary with North Chŏlla province. On the border with North Kyŏngsang province is Mount Kaya (Mount Gaya) National Park, in which Haein Temple, constructed in 802 ce, is located. The depository in the temple, where the Tripitaka Koreana (a collection of more than 80,000 wooden blocks engraved with Buddhist scriptures) is stored, was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1995. Both national parks are popular tourist destinations. Area 4,063 square miles (10,522 square km). Pop. (2015) 3,334,524.
