South Kalimantan, Indonesian Kalimantan Selatan,  propinsi (or provinsi; province), southeastern Borneo, Indonesia. It is bounded by the Makassar Strait on the east, the Java Sea on the south, and the provinces of Central Kalimantan (Kalimantan Tengah) on the west and East Kalimantan (Kalimantan Timur) on the north. It includes the islands of Laut, Sebuku, and Balabalangan in the Makassar Strait. The capital is Banjarmasin, in the southwestern part of the province.
The low-lying Meratus Mountains run in a north-south arc that almost bisects the province; on its southern fringe is the Kusan mountain range. The Meratus range slopes to the east to merge into the flat coastal lowlands and to the west into the swampy basin formed by the Negara River. The eastern coast is marked by several small bays. The offshore island of Laut is nearly flat, with its northeastern coast marked by slightly rising uplands. The province’s low mountains are covered with equatorial forests of teak and ebony and with ferns and other epiphytes (air plants, which grow on other plants or objects rather than growing from the ground); the swamps have mangrove trees and nipa palms.
Most of the population is engaged in shifting agriculture for subsistence, based on the cultivation of rice, corn (maize), and cassava. Rubber and copra (dried coconut meat) are also produced. Processed foods and beverages, furniture, chemicals, and rubber goods are among the products of the manufacturing sector. Gold, iron ore, diamonds, and coal are mined; petroleum, timber, rattan, rubber, and gutta-percha (latex from trees of the sapodilla [Sapotaceae] family) are among the notable exports. Banjarmasin is linked by road to most of the larger cities in the province—notably Martapura in the southwest, Kandangan in the central region, and Amuntai in the northwest. Tanjung, in the northwestern region, and Banjarmasin have airports. The Banjar constitute the dominant ethnic group, but the province also has a significant and diverse population of indigenous peoples collectively called the Dayak. Area 14,959 square miles (38,744 square km). Pop. (2000) 2,984,026; (2010) 3,626,616.
