South Sumatra, Indonesian Sumatera Selatan,  propinsi (or provinsi; province), southern Sumatra, Indonesia. It is bounded to the north by the province of Jambi, to the east by the Bangka Strait, across which lies the island province of Bangka Belitung, to the southeast by the Java Sea, to the south by the province of Lampung, and to the west by the province of Bengkulu. Palembang is the provincial capital and largest city. Area 35,364 square miles (91,592 square km). Pop. (2010) 7,450,394.
The southern portion of the Barisan Mountains extends along the western border of South Sumatra and is surmounted by volcanic cones with an average elevation of 8,000 feet (2,400 metres), including Mount Dempo (10,364 feet [3,159 metres]) and Mount Resagi (7,323 feet [2,232 metres]). The highlands descend rapidly to a wide plain that is separated from the northeastern coast by a belt of swamps as much as 150 miles (240 km) wide. Sluggish and swollen rivers, including the Musi, the Komering, and the Ogan, have carried down huge quantities of eroded materials from the western highlands to form the freshwater and tidal swamps that open out into estuaries along the coast. The low-lying central plains are largely covered with swamp forests, and the seaward margins have mangrove swamps. The mountains are forested with oak, laurel, fern, conifers, and teak.
The population of South Sumatra consists mostly of Minangkabau, Malay, and Javanese peoples, but there also are notable Indian and Chinese minorities as well as people of Arab descent. Islam is the predominant religion.
Agriculture is the mainstay of the economy, and the principal products include rubber, timber, coffee, tea, spices, rattan, pepper, corn (maize), and soybeans. Fruits and vegetables are also grown. The province’s manufacturing sector produces processed foods and beverages, processed tobacco, textiles, carved wood and furniture, paper, leather and rubber goods, chemicals and fertilizers, metal goods, machinery, electrical and transport equipment, and petroleum products; oil refineries are located in the suburbs of Palembang. Roads and the railway are located principally on the central lowlands and along the foot of the Barisan Mountains, linking cities and larger towns—such as Baturaja, Perabumulih, Muaraenim, Lahat, and Lubuk Linggau—with Palembang. There is an international airport in Palembang.
Mention is made in Chinese chronicles of the kingdom of Kantoli (early 6th century ce), with its capital at Palembang. Southern Sumatra became part of the Buddhist Srivijaya empire at Palembang that rose to power in the last quarter of the 7th century. Buddhist rule was replaced by the Hindu Majapahit empire of eastern Java after the defeat of King Parameswara in 1377. The Majapahit empire continued until the beginning of the 16th century. Meanwhile, a Muslim kingdom (later a sultanate) was established at Palembang around 1500; it bore the brunt of Dutch and British attempts at colonial domination in the early 19th century. Dutch rule over Palembang was firmly established in 1823. The Japanese occupied the province in 1942–45 during World War II. South Sumatra, encompassing the entire southern segment of the island of Sumatra as well as the smaller adjacent islands, became part of the Republic of Indonesia in 1950. In 1964 the province of Lampung was created from roughly the southern third of South Sumatra. South Sumatra’s western coastal region became the province of Bengkulu in 1967, and in 2000 the eastern islands were made into the province of Bangka Belitung.
