South Sulawesi, Indonesian Sulawesi Selatan,  propinsi (or provinsi; province), central and southwestern Celebes (Sulawesi), Indonesia. It is bounded by the provinces of Central Sulawesi (Sulawesi Tengah) to the north, Southeast Sulawesi (Sulawesi Tenggara) to the northeast, as well as by the Gulf of Bone to the east, the Flores Sea to the south, the Makassar Strait to the southwest, and the province of West Sulawesi (Sulawesi Barat) to the northwest. The province includes the following islands in the Flores Sea: Selayar, Tambolongang, Kalao, the Tanahjampea group, Bonerate, and Kalaotoa. The provincial capital is Makassar (formerly Ujungpandang). Area 18,038 square miles (46,717 square km). Pop. (2010) 8,034,776.
A north-south chain of mountains surmounted by volcanic cones and broken midway by the Tempe Lake valley runs the length of the province. The Tineba Mountains and the Takolekaju Mountains form the northern part of the chain; separated by steep-sided rift valleys, these two ranges run parallel to each other and cover most of the northern half of the province. The highest peak in Celebes, Mount Rantekombola, rises to 11,335 feet (3,455 metres) in the north-central part of the province. Streams including the Walanae, the Sadang, the Kobo, the Kalaena, the Koladu, and the Kongkong flow down the western and eastern slopes of the mountains and across narrow coastal lowlands. The mountains are covered by dense equatorial forests of teak, oak, banyan, ironwood, and pine; the forests thin out at higher elevations. The streams are tree-lined, even in areas that are otherwise only sparsely forested.
The residents of South Sulawesi are mostly Bugis and Makassarese; the Toraja, a significant indigenous minority, generally inhabit the highland areas. Most of the population adheres to Islam, although many Toraja are Christian or practice local religions.
Much of the population is engaged in agriculture, with rice, corn (maize), copra (dried coconut meat), coffee, spices, vegetable oil, sugarcane, soybeans, and sweet potatoes among the major products. The forests yield teak and rattan. Deep-sea fishing is also important. Manufacturing enterprises produce milled rice, cement, beverages, chemicals, rubber goods, processed coffee, palm oil, woven cloth, paper, metalware, carved wood, and mats and baskets. Silver, tin, nickel, and iron ore are mined. Major roads run almost parallel to the western and eastern coasts, and many other roads connect the larger towns and cities scattered across the southern lowlands. The principal airport is located in Makassar. In addition to Makassar, the main urban centres include Palopo, Parepare, Singkang, and Watampone (Bone).
Celebes was part of the Buddhist Srivijaya empire of Sumatra until the 14th century, when it was absorbed by the Hindu Majapahit empire of eastern Java. With the gradual disintegration of the Majapahit empire toward the end of the 15th century, many small states arose across the island. Power in the southern Celebes fluctuated between two related ethnic groups, the Makassarese and the Bugis. About 1530 the Makassarese state of Gowa emerged as the strongest state, and its ruler adopted Islam in 1605.
Shortly after Gowa’s acceptance of Islam, the Dutch established a trading post at the town of Makassar, which led to warfare with Gowa and to an alliance between the Dutch and the Bugis prince of Bone (now Watampone), Arung Palakka. With Bugis assistance, the Dutch ultimately defeated the Gowa leader in 1669 and secured their position within the region. In the 18th century (c. 1700–65), Arung Singkang, a descendant of the Bugis royal family of Wojo, rose to power and continued the warfare with the Makassarese.
The British occupied Celebes (1810–16) during the Napoleonic Wars, and the Makassarese attacked the British in 1814 and 1816. When Celebes reverted to the Dutch in 1817, some of the southern Celebes states refused to recognize Dutch suzerainty. The state of Bone rebelled in 1825, and although the resistance was temporarily quelled that year by the combined forces of the Dutch and the Makassarese, it was not entirely suppressed until 1860. By 1905 the Dutch had extended their rule over the entire island.
Following Japanese occupation (1942–45) during World War II, Celebes reluctantly became part of the new Dutch state of East Indonesia. Clashes occurred in Makassar, and, with the defeat of the Dutch, Celebes became part of the Republic of Indonesia in 1950. The island was divided in 1960 into two large administrative units, one encompassing the northern region and the other spanning the south. In 1964, in response to ongoing social and political unrest, these units were split further into the four provinces of Central, North, South, and Southeast Sulawesi. West Sulawesi was created from the northwestern segment of South Sulawesi in 2004.
