Suffolk,  administrative and historic county in East Anglia, eastern England. It is bounded to the north by Norfolk, to the west by Cambridgeshire, to the south by Essex, and to the east by the North Sea. The administrative county comprises seven districts: Forest Heath and the borough of Saint Edmundsbury in the west, Mid Suffolk in the middle, Babergh and the borough of Ipswich (the county seat) in the south, and Suffolk Coastal and Waveney on the North Sea coast. The administrative county is nearly coterminous with the historic county, but the historic county also includes the area south of Breydon Water in Great Yarmouth borough in the administrative county of Norfolk.
Suffolk exhibits a wide variety of landscapes. The coastline has fine sandy beaches, crumbling cliffs (the former town of Dunwich has been washed into the sea), deep estuaries, and the spit of Orford Ness. The centre of the county has low rolling hills, and in the west rises a chalk ridge covered by broad, hedgeless fields. The northwestern corner of Suffolk, where it borders Norfolk and Cambridgeshire, forms part of the Fens and is below sea level. East of the Fens lies Breckland, a region of sand, heath, and long lines of trees planted originally for windbreaks and game cover.
The area prospered from early times. Prehistoric flint mines have been found in Breckland. The Mildenhall silver treasure, now on display in the British Museum, dates from the Roman period. During Anglo-Saxon times Suffolk formed part of the kingdom of East Anglia; the wealth of the kings of this period is indicated in the Sutton Hoo ship burial discovered near Woodbridge. The county’s medieval prosperity, which lasted until the 18th century, was based largely upon the woolen cloth industry and is reflected in the many large village churches such as those at Lavenham, Blythburgh, and Southwold. The villages of Lindsey and Kersey gave their names to specific wool fabrics.
Agriculture has been a major economic activity in Suffolk since the 18th century. The most important crops are cereals, sugar beets, and vegetables; food processing is a significant industry. Newmarket in the west is famous for its racing stables, and the county was formerly known for its Suffolk draft horses, also called Suffolk Punch. Lowestoft is a fishing port, and the coast is dotted with holiday resorts. The entry of the United Kingdom into the European Community brought rapid port development at Felixstowe. Area 1,468 square miles (3,802 square km). Pop. (2001) 668,553; (2011) 728,163.
