Surrey,  administrative and historic county of southeastern England. It is situated just southwest of London, adjoining the River Thames. Surrey is bordered to the northwest by Berkshire, to the northeast by the Greater London conurbation, to the east by Kent, to the south by Sussex, and to the west by Hampshire. The administrative centre is at Kingston upon Thames.
The administrative county comprises 11 districts: Mole Valley and Tandridge and the boroughs of Elmbridge, Epsom and Ewell, Guildford, Reigate and Banstead, Runnymede, Spelthorne, Surrey Heath, Waverley, and Woking. The administrative county of Surrey occupies a considerably smaller area than the historic county. The northeastern part of the historic county now lies within Greater London, forming all or most of the boroughs of Croydon, Kingston upon Thames, Lambeth, Merton, Richmond upon Thames, Southwark, Sutton, and Wandsworth. That history accounts for the location of the county’s administrative centre in the London borough of Kingston upon Thames. In addition, a small part of the historic county of Surrey, including Gatwick Airport and its immediate environs, lies within the borough of Crawley in the administrative county of West Sussex. Whereas those parts of other administrative units belong to the historic county of Surrey, the borough of Spelthorne, though assigned to the administrative county of Surrey, forms part of the historic county of Middlesex.
The county consists of lowland crossed by two east-west ridges—the chalk hills of the North Downs just south of the Thames valley and, farther south, a band of lower greensand rocks, which includes the highest point in the county, Leith Hill (965 feet [294 metres]). The two ridges, with their intervening vale and the gaps cut into them by such rivers as the Mole and the Wey, give the county a variety of landscapes, and in 1958 some 160 square miles (415 square km) of southern Surrey were officially designated as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. Interspersed among those natural areas are suburban areas linked economically with neighbouring London.
Archaeological finds provide evidence of human occupation in the historic county of Surrey dating to Palaeolithic times. The area appears to have been relatively thinly populated during the Roman and early Saxon periods. Chertsey Abbey, founded in 666, had large landholdings across the county, and after 1066 large parts of the county belonged to the Norman nobility. Southwark, linked with London by the London Bridge, became an important ecclesiastical centre, and Kingston upon Thames was an important medieval market town.
In the Middle Ages sheep raising was an important activity, and by the 16th century a cloth trade was also growing at Guildford, Godalming, and Farnham. Market gardens, too, became significant in the north and west. The forested hills, sparsely populated until the 19th century, served two main purposes: as hunting preserves (Henry VIII, for example, built a flamboyant hunting lodge at Nonsuch Park) and as a source of timber for charcoal (used in iron smelting and gunpowder production), construction, and shipbuilding.
Transport of those products, originally dependent on rivers, was facilitated after 1800 by the construction of railways. The Surrey Iron Railway from Wandsworth to Merstham, worked by horses, was the first public railway sanctioned by the British Parliament (1801). During the 19th century Surrey acquired the densest network of suburban railways anywhere in the world, originating at seven terminal stations in London and covering northern Surrey. Suburban growth, which had begun in Southwark during the Middle Ages, spread along the railway lines virtually unchecked until World War II. In 1889 the present-day boroughs of Southwark, Lambeth, and Wandsworth were incorporated into the new administrative county of London. After the war, growth continued but under planning restraints, including strict controls in London’s Greenbelt and the designated area of natural beauty. In 1965 the boroughs of Croydon, Kingston upon Thames, Merton, Richmond upon Thames, and Sutton became part of the new metropolitan county of Greater London. Area, administrative county, 642 square miles (1,663 square km). Pop. (2001) 1,059,015; (2011) 1,132,390.
