Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg,  megye (county), northeastern Hungary. It has a very short border with Slovakia in the north and is bounded by Ukraine to the north and northeast, as well as by Romania to the southeast; the counties of Hajdú-Bihar and Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén border it to the southwest and northwest, respectively. Nyíregyháza is the county seat. Other important towns include Mátészalka, Kisvárda, and Nyírbátor.
The whole of Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg is situated on the Great Alfold (Great Hungarian Plain, or Nagy Magyar Alföld). Lying within the county is the Nyírség, a district of sandy soils. The county’s main river, the Tisza (which flows along Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg’s northern border from Tiszabecs to Tiszadob, then turns toward the middle of the county in the Bereg section), traverses an area of predominantly low plains, as do its principal tributaries—the Batár, Túr, Szamos, and Kraszna rivers—as well as the Lónyai main channel, which collects the various rivers of the Rétköz region.
Its relatively cool climate—which makes the county more prone to rain than are other parts of the Great Alfold—is favourable for growing fruits (plums, apples, and nuts), grains (especially rye and wheat), sunflowers, and tobacco. Cattle, pigs, and sheep are raised. With the exception of raw materials used for construction, few natural resources are found in the county.
Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg is one of the least-developed regions of Hungary. During the era of communist rule, thousands travelled regularly to other areas of Hungary to work. This migration stopped in the 1990s. Nyíregyháza evolved into a regional economic centre, where machinery, plastics, and rubber are manufactured. Food processing and the chemical, electronics, textile, and optical industries all play a significant role in the county’s economy.
The settlement of the county, with its network of villages, was typical of the Árpád conquest of Hungary. The mid-18th-century resettlement of the Tirpáks from Békés county, who were of Slovakian origin but became completely “Hungarianized,” solved the county’s problem of sparse population. The Treaty of Trianon, following World War I, ceded significant portions of the Szatmár and Bereg regions to Romania and Ukraine.
The cultural centre of the county is Nyíregyháza, which is home to the University of Nyíregyháza, the Zsigmond Móricz Theatre, the Sóstó Open Air Museum, and the András Jósa Museum. Also eminent are the music festival in Nyírbátor and the festival of Hungarian theatres from the neighbouring countries, organized each year in Kisvárda. The Upper Tisza region is a notable tourist attraction, with the fortress in Kisvárda, Andrássy Castle in Tiszadob, the Transylvanian-style churches in the villages of the Szatmár-Bereg region, and the memorial sites of such famous Hungarians as György Bessenyei, Ferenc Kölcsey, and Zsigmond Móricz. Area 2,292 square miles (5,937 square km). Pop. (2011) 559,272; (2017 est.) 562,058.
