T’ai-chung, Pinyin Taizhong,  former county (hsien, or xian), west-central Taiwan. Since 2010 it has been incorporated administratively into the T’ai-chung special municipality,
The enlarged special municipality is bordered by the counties of Miao-li (Miaoli) to the north, I-lan (Yilan) and Hua-lien (Hualian) to the east, and Chang-hua (Zhanghua) and Nan-t’ou (Nantou) to the south and by the Taiwan Strait to the west. Northern extensions of the Chung-yang (Zhongyang) Range rise to elevations between 8,000 and 13,000 feet (2,500 and 3,900 metres) above sea level and cover most of the eastern part of the region. To the west are alluvial plains, in one of the most prosperous agricultural regions in Taiwan, where paddy rice, sugarcane, sweet potatoes, jute, hemp, and bananas are grown. Cattle and poultry are also raised.
Industries produce textiles, machinery, processed foods, chemicals, and timber; gold and clay are extracted. The Ta-chia (Dajia) Dam, 28 miles (45 km) northeast of central T’ai-chung, supplies electricity for the surrounding region. The T’ai-chung Industrial Park, with an area of 4,900 acres (2,000 hectares), has been developed for industrial expansion. Ma-ling (Maling) city district, on the Ta-chia River, has Taiwan’s first trout farm. The Chen Lan (Zhenlan) temple at Ta-chia is well known as the starting point of an annual pilgrimage to Pei-kang (Beigang) in southern Taiwan in honour of Matsu, goddess of the sea. The Taiwan Provincial Assembly, 6 miles (10 km) south of central T’ai-chung, formerly (until the late 1990s) housed a governmental body concerned with Taiwan (island) affairs.
The former T’ai-chung municipality, administratively independent until the amalgamation of city and county, is situated in the southwestern part of the special municipality. In the 1970s an international seaport, now one of the most important ports on the west coast of Taiwan, was developed on the coast west of T’ai-chung city. The former municipality of Feng-yüan (now a city district of the special municipality), the administrative seat of the county until 2010, is well served by north-south-running railways and roads.
