Thuringia, German Thüringen,  historic region and Land (state) of east-central Germany.  Thuringia is surrounded by the German states of Lower Saxony to the northwest, Saxony-Anhalt to the northeast, Saxony to the southeast, Bavaria to the south, and Hessen to the west. The capital is Erfurt. Area 6,244 square miles (16,172 square km). Pop. (2006 est.) 2,334,575.
Thuringia extends eastward from the Werra River (a headstream of the Weser) to beyond the Saale River as far as the Pleisse and northward from the Thuringian Forest and the northernmost parts of the Franconian Forest to the southern foothills of the Harz mountains. Much of the landscape of southern Thuringia is characterized by the picturesque rounded hills of the Thuringian Forest, whose northern slopes reach elevations of about 3,000 feet (900 metres). Lying between the Thuringian Forest and the Harz range on the northern border is the Thuringian Basin, a fertile agricultural region whose eastward-flowing streams are tributaries of the Saale. The southeastern portion of the state consists of the mountainous region of the Franconian Forest and the Vogtland. Extreme eastern Thuringia is traversed by the westerly offshoots of the Ore Mountains (Erzgebirge), while the Rhön Mountains extend into western Thuringia. A large reservoir is located in Thuringia on the Saale, which flows basically northward. Regrettably, Thuringia has suffered high levels of damage to its forests from pollutants originating from industrial activities in nearly all wind directions. Still, a unique red beech forest habitat has been preserved in the Hainich National Park south of Mühlhausen. Like the rest of Germany, Thuringia has a relatively temperate climate.
Thuringia’s population is almost exclusively composed of ethnic Germans; there are no major indigenous ethnic minorities, and only a very small percentage of the population are foreign nationals. The state, which had been slowly losing population for decades, experienced a decrease in population of about one-tenth in the last decade of the 20th century.
Agriculture contributes only a relatively small amount to total economic output and employment, although half the state’s land is given over to farming. Wheat, barley, sugar beets, rape, fodder crops, and market vegetables predominate in the basin’s agriculture, and orchards and vineyards cover the slopes overlooking the Ilm River. The only notable industrial resources in Thuringia are deposits of lignite and potash worked in the northern part of the Thuringian Basin and natural gas pumped from the western part of the basin.
Thuringia is a relatively poor state by German standards, and, owing to severe economic problems following German reunification in 1990, its populace suffers from high levels of unemployment. The state’s economy is now largely dependent upon service-sector activities, but industrial production, though diminished since 1990, is still important. The principal manufactures are automobiles and auto parts, metalworking, precision machinery and instruments, optics, electrical equipment, a much diminished textile sector, and biotechnology. Glass, wood, and toy industries are found in some towns of the forest valleys. Despite the economic problems that came with unification, Thuringia has one of the most significant concentrations of ‘‘new economy’’ activities among the eastern German states, including a biotechnology industry and the production of microelectronics, optics, medical and electronic equipment, and pharmaceuticals. Auto manufacturing is also important.
Erfurt, Jena, Gera, and Weimar are the main urban localities in the state and serve as regional centres for service activities. A modest tourist industry that largely serves German travelers is focused on cultural activities and historical sites in Eisenach, Meiningen, and Weimar and on the scenic beauties of the Harz mountains and the Thuringian Forest.
Thuringia’s primary transportation facilities are east-west oriented rail and autobahn routes linking major cities in Saxony with north-south rail and autobahn routes in central Germany and the Rhine region.
The state of Thuringia is governed by a Landtag (parliament) and a minister-president, who is generally a leading member of the parliament’s strongest party. Jena, Erfurt, Ilmenau, and Weimar are sites of universities. Weimar is also a major historical and contemporary centre for culture in Thuringia. The city was home to some of Germany’s most important historical cultural figures, such as the writer and philosopher Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and the dramatist Friedrich von Schiller, whose former homes are now museums. Those museums, along with more than a dozen other buildings and parks throughout Weimar dating from the late 18th and early 19th centuries, were collectively designated the UNESCO World Heritage site of Classical Weimar in 1998. Weimar has numerous other sights, notably the Bauhaus museum, also a World Heritage site (1996), as well as art galleries, archives, and theatres, several of which occupy buildings with historical and architectural significance.
Erfurt, another cultural centre, is particularly well endowed with historic architectural treasures. Meiningen is home to renowned theatre productions, which have a long tradition in the city. The Wartburg, a castle located just south of Eisenach, is a World Heritage site (1999) not only because of its feudal origins but also because of its cultural heritage: Martin Luther translated the New Testament into German while in exile there.
