Tipperary, Irish Tiobraid Árann (“House of the Well of Ara”),  geographic county in the province of Munster, south-central Ireland, occupying a broad strip of country between the Rivers Shannon and Suir. It is bounded by Counties Offaly and Laoighis (north), Kilkenny (east), Waterford and Cork (south), and Limerick, Clare, and Galway (west). The geographic county is now divided administratively into a North and a South Riding (called North Tipperary and South Tipperary), with the county towns (seats) at Nenagh and Clonmel, respectively; each riding has a county manager.
Physically, the geographic county may be divided into five main areas, each aligned northeast-southwest, as follows:
In the north, Nenagh, Templemore, and Thurles are urban districts. In the south, Clonmel is a municipal borough, while Carrick-on-Suir, Cashel, and Tipperary are urban districts. Much of the county’s industry is based on the processing of agricultural products. Dairying is important, and the main agricultural products include oats and potatoes. Anthracite coal used to be mined in the county, but mining is now limited to small quantities of lead, zinc, and copper.
England’s Prince (later King) John gave land in 1185 in southern Tipperary to Philip de Worcester and in northern Tipperary to Theobald Walter, who was created chief butler (or botiller) of Ireland; thus were founded the fortunes of the Butler family. In 1328 Edward III made Tipperary a county palatine in favour of the earls of Ormonde, the title of the Butler family, and throughout the late Middle Ages the earls of Ormonde were in the forefront of Irish politics. With the impeachment of the second duke in 1715, the palatine jurisdiction of Tipperary, the last of its kind in Ireland, was abolished. The Rock of Cashel, the seat of the kings of Munster, with its limestone outcrop and medieval ruins, is among the most important archaeological sites in Ireland. Area North Tipperary, 790 square miles (2,046 square km); South Tipperary, 871 square miles (2,258 square km). Pop. North Tipperary, (2006) 66,023; (2011) 70,322; South Tipperary, (2006) 83,221; (2011) 88,432.
