Tripura,  state of India. It is located in the northeastern part of the subcontinent. It is bordered to the north, west, and south by Bangladesh, to the east by the state of Mizoram, and to the northeast by the state of Assam. It is among the smallest of India’s states and is located in an isolated hilly region of the country, with various indigenous peoples—or tribes—accounting for a significant portion of the population. The capital is Agartala, near the Bangladesh border in the northwestern part of the state. Area 4,049 square miles (10,486 square km). Pop. (2011) 3,671,032.
Central and northern Tripura is a hilly region crossed by four major valleys—from east to west, the Dharmanagar, the Kailashahar, the Kamalpur, and the Khowai, all carved by northward-flowing rivers (the Juri, Manu and Deo, Dhalai, and Khowai, respectively). North-south-trending ranges separate the valleys. East of the Dharmanagar valley, the Jampai Tlang range rises to elevations between 2,000 and 3,000 feet (600 and 900 metres). Elevation decreases westward through the successive ranges—the Sakhan Tlang, the Langtarai Range, and the Athara Mura Range—with the westernmost hills, the Deotamura, attaining heights of only 800 feet (240 metres).
The lower valleys in the west and south tend to be open and marshy, although in the south the terrain is heavily dissected and densely forested. West of the Deotamura Range is the Agartala Plain, an extension of the lowlands of the Ganges (Ganga) and Brahmaputra river basins, with an elevation of less than 200 feet (60 metres). It is drained by numerous rivers, the largest of which, the Gumti, emerges from the eastern hills in a steep-sided valley near Radhakishorepur.
The warmest months in Tripura are April and May, when maximum daily temperatures in the lowlands average in the low 90s F (about 33 °C), and minimum temperatures average in the mid-70s F (about 23 °C). The coolest month is January, with temperatures typically rising from the low 50s F (about 10 °C) into the upper 70s F (about 25 °C) daily. Throughout the year, it is cooler in the hill regions.
Annually, the state registers about 80 inches (2,000 mm) of rainfall, most of which is brought by the monsoon, which generally blows from June to September. North-central Tripura usually receives the most rainfall; the southwestern region typically receives the least.
About half of Tripura’s land area is under forest cover. One of the most notable types of trees of the state’s forests is sal, a valuable tropical hardwood. There also are large tracts of bamboo, some species of which are believed to be endemic to the state.
Animal life includes tigers, leopards, elephants, jackals, wild dogs, wild boars, serows (goatlike mammals), and various species of wild cattle, including gayals and other types of gaurs. Several species of primates, including langurs and gibbons, also inhabit Tripura’s woodlands. The state’s lowlands are visited by many types of migratory birds, such as teals, ibises, and storks. Tripura’s flora and fauna are protected in a number of wildlife sanctuaries.
Roughly half of the state’s population belongs officially to Scheduled Castes (a term designating those classes that have traditionally occupied a low position in the Indian caste system) and Scheduled Tribes (a term generally applied to indigenous peoples who fall outside the traditional Indian social hierarchy). The Tripuri constitute more than half the tribal community. Other prominent tribal groups include the Reang, the Chakma, the Halam (a subgroup of the Kuki), the Garo, the Lusai (Mizo), and the Marma (Mogh); most originally moved to Tripura from various hill regions in neighbouring states.
Bengali (Bangla), an Indo-Aryan language, is spoken by more than half the population; it and Kokborok (Tripuri), a Tibeto-Burman language, are the state’s official languages. Manipuri, another Tibeto-Burman language, also is widely spoken.
Hinduism is the religion of the great majority of Tripura’s people. Muslims constitute the largest minority but account for less than one-tenth of the population. There also are small minorities of Christians, particularly among the tribal peoples. Most of the Chakma and Mogh are Buddhist.
Tripura is predominantly rural. The highest densities of rural population are found in the state’s most fertile agricultural lands, located in the western plain and the Gumti, Dharmanagar, and Khowai valleys. Towns are concentrated on the western plain. The state capital of Agartala is the largest city; major towns include Badharghat, Jogendranagar, and Dharmanagar.
The agriculture sector engages roughly two-thirds of Tripura’s workforce and accounts for nearly half the state’s gross product. The major crop is rice, which is grown throughout the state. Cash crops include jute (used in the manufacture of sacking, burlap, and twine), cotton, tea, sugarcane, and various fruits, such as jackfruit, pineapples, oranges, and mangoes. Coconuts and potatoes are also important. Livestock plays only a subsidiary role in the state’s agriculture. Forestry-based industries produce timber, firewood, rubber, and charcoal.
Cottage and small-scale industries account for most of Tripura’s manufacturing sector. Weaving, carpentry, basketry, and pottery are among the state’s most significant cottage industries. Notable products of small-scale industries include processed foods (especially tea, sugar, fruit, nuts, and spices), rubber products, and bricks. Yarn, jute, and steel milling, as well as wood and chemical processing, are among Tripura’s larger-scale manufacturing activities.
Tripura has extensive resources of natural gas that in the early 21st century remained largely untapped. The bulk of the state’s energy is provided by several gas- and diesel-powered thermal plants. There is also a small hydroelectric station on the Gumti River.
Tripura’s hilly topography has continued to impair transportation and communication within the state. Moreover, with Bangladesh bordering the state on three sides, Tripura is virtually isolated from India. There is, however, a national highway that passes through the state, linking the capital city of Agartala in the west with the state of Mizoram in the northeast and Bangladesh in the southeast. Larger towns of Tripura are connected through a network of major roads. The North-East Frontier Railway of India’s national rail network serves several cities in Tripura. Most rivers carry boat traffic, but this is generally for local transport. Agartala is linked by air to several cities in India, including Kolkata (Calcutta) in West Bengal, Guwahati in Assam, and the national capital of New Delhi.
