Tynedale,  former district, administrative and historic county of Northumberland, northern England, in the western part of the county, bordered on the northwest by Scotland. Tynedale is an area of hills, both rounded and craggy, and bleak moorlands separated by the narrow, fertile valleys of the Rivers North Tyne and South Tyne, which merge to form the River Tyne in the southeastern part of the area. The central and northwestern limestone area commonly called the western uplands, with an elevation of 1,000 feet (300 metres), rises in the northeast to an extension of the igneous-based and peat-covered Cheviot Hills, with an elevation of more than 1,500 feet (450 metres). In the south, below the South Tyne valley, the area extends into the Pennines, which are more than 1,800 feet (550 metres) in elevation.
The valleys (dales) penetrate into the uplands from the east, and comparative isolation has given each a distinctive character. The principal market and small industrial centres of the area (Prudhoe, Corbridge, Hexham, and Haltwhistle) are located adjacent to the South Tyne and the middle Tyne, where mixed farming is commonplace. Although of low agricultural value, the area’s moorlands provide pasturage for sheep (especially the locally popular Cheviot and Blackface). Thick spruce forests, part of a reforestation scheme begun in the 1920s and ’30s, are found in the moorland in the northwest near the headwaters of the North Tyne. The dam at Kielder Reservoir was built on the North Tyne to supplement water flow to industries along the Tyne and by pipeline to the Rivers Wear and Tees; the reservoir is a major recreational resource in the area.
Much of the area lies within Northumberland National Park, and tourism is important to the economy. Antiquities of the Anglo-Saxon and Roman periods are gathered at a museum in Corbridge (the site of a Roman camp); and a well-preserved section of Hadrian’s Wall, extending east-west through the area, is directly north of the South and middle Tyne valleys. The valley of the South Tyne and the Tyne is an important avenue for transportation between northwestern and northeastern England.
