Umm al-Quwain, also called Umm al-Qaywayn, al-Qaywayn also spelled al-Qaiwain,  constituent emirate of the United Arab Emirates, located on the Arabian Peninsula facing the Persian Gulf. The second smallest in area and the least populous of the federation’s seven emirates, Umm al-Quwain is roughly triangular in shape and is bounded by the emirates of Ras al-Khaimah (northeast) and Sharjah (south and west). On the northwest, it fronts the Persian Gulf for 17 miles (27 km) in a straight-line distance; actually, Umm al-Quwain’s coastline is much longer and is extremely irregular, with numerous small inlets, spits, and offshore islets. On one of these spits is the town of Umm al-Quwain, which is the capital and largest urban settlement.
In the early 19th century the sheikhs of Umm al-Quwain acknowledged the more powerful state of Sharjah as their liege; the town of Umm al-Quwain was located along the coast, and Sharjah’s rulers, of the Qawasim people, were the dominant power of the lower Persian Gulf. Conflict in the Gulf led Britain to forcibly intervene and compel the Gulf states, including Umm al-Quwain, to sign the General Treaty of Peace of 1820; this was Umm al-Quwain’s first recognition as an independent entity. The sheikhdom subsequently came under British control. When the British finally withdrew from the Persian Gulf area (1971), Umm al-Quwain became a founding member of the United Arab Emirates.
The local economy was traditionally dependent upon pearl diving and fishing, based at Umm al-Quwain town. Between World Wars I and II the harbour, now silted up, was one of the chief trade emporiums of the Trucial Coast. Boatbuilding, long a local specialty, is still practiced.
Umm al-Quwain town is connected by paved road with Ras al-Khaimah city and Abu Dhabi. About 20 miles (32 km) inland from the capital is the oasis of Falaj al-Muʿallá, with extensive plantations of date palms. Otherwise, the emirate is almost entirely uninhabited desert. In 1964–72 a large portion of its revenues came from the sale of postage stamps, printed abroad not for any legitimate postal purpose but entirely for sale to collectors.
The emirate has deposits of natural gas, but no oil has been found. Although electricity and a few modern improvements have been introduced, it has remained the most undeveloped of the seven emirates. Area 300 square miles (780 square km). Pop. (2005) 49,159; (2010 est.) 59,000.
