Victoria,  state of southeastern Australia, occupying a mountainous coastal region of the continent. Victoria is separated from New South Wales to the north by the Murray River for a length of about 1,065 miles (1,715 km) and by an additional boundary of some 110 miles (180 km) linking Cape Howe and the nearest source of the Murray. The western boundary is with South Australia, and the southern coastline on the Tasman Sea and the Indian (Southern) Ocean stretches for about 1,045 miles (1,680 km) and includes the shoreline of Port Phillip Bay. Melbourne, the state capital, is at the head of the bay off Bass Strait.
The discovery and exploitation of petroleum and natural gas in the Gippsland Basin and Bass Strait beginning in the 1960s have provided a great boost to Victoria’s economy. Although production of oil began to decline in the late 20th century, the state has retained its role as a major source of the country’s natural gas and petroleum. Among the Australian states, Victoria is second only to New South Wales in terms of population, production, and influence in federal politics. Area 87,806 square miles (227,416 square km). Population (2016) 5,926,624.
The rich variety of landscapes in Victoria includes both alpine plateaus in the northeast, around Bright, and sandy deserts in the west, near Lake Hindmarsh. This wide range results from a complex geologic history and from variations in the weather as it is experienced in particular areas. These dominant factors have created distinct regions, which create different opportunities and problems.
The main upland areas are a continuation of the Great Dividing Range of eastern Australia. Starting with a width of about 190 miles (310 km) on the New South Wales border, these uplands arc westward across the state, becoming narrower and lower for 400 miles (640 km) before terminating in the Grampians and the Dundas Tableland, 25 miles (40 km) east of the South Australian boundary. The low, wide Kilmore Gap divides this upland core into two distinct regions. The eastern region is more extensive and higher, with several peaks over 5,000 feet (1,500 metres), culminating in Mount Bogong (6,516 feet [1,986 metres]). There are also some high plateaus. The varied geologic structure has been heavily chiseled by perennial streams, fed in spring by melting snow and ice. The highest peak in the western region is Mount William (3,829 feet [1,167 metres]) in the Grampians.
Plains surround Victoria’s upland region on the north, west, and south. Apart from a narrow strip adjoining the Murray River in the north, the vast plains of the northwest region, bounded by latitude 36° S and the Avoca River, are known as the Mallee. This name is derived from a type of eucalypt that sends up a number of slender trunks from a single large underground source. The region’s undulating surface of broad, low ridges and depressions reflects the faulting and folding of the underlying sedimentary rocks, which in turn have been overlain by windblown deposits that have been fixed by drought-resistant vegetation. To the west of the Mallee lies an area known as the Big Desert.
Port Phillip Bay, which was formed by the invasion of the sea after a downward movement of the Earth’s crust, divides the southern plains into two distinct regions. To the east are the Gippsland Plains, intensive settlement of which has destroyed much of the original forest cover. To the west is a region of ancient basaltic flows, above which stand some of the original volcanic cones. The flows cover some 7,000 square miles (18,100 square km) and stretch 190 miles (310 km) west of Melbourne. Partitioning the southern plains into smaller areas are the Otway Ranges and the South Gippsland Highlands (north of Wilsons Promontory).
Australia’s main river, the Murray, flows along nearly the entire length of Victoria’s northern border. The soils and climate along the river’s bank offer reliable conditions for farming. No streams rise in the Mallee, and those that enter from the south fail to reach the Murray, terminating instead in such salt lakes as Lake Tyrrell. Lack of water and wind-erosion hazards in the extreme northwest of the state and in the Big Desert make conditions too difficult for farming. Similarly, the Little Desert, which straddles the state’s western boundary just to the south of the Big Desert, consists of deep sands, deficient in zinc and copper, that render the land unsuitable for settlement. Otherwise, the light soils of the Mallee are easily cultivated, and the development of suitable fertilizers has allowed better crop rotation and the production of improved pasture.
The Loddon River originates in the highlands to the northwest of Melbourne, flows northward across the plains that lie between the Mallee and the uplands, and ultimately joins the Murray at the state’s northern boundary. The area to the west of the river, known as the Wimmera, has cultivable soils consisting mainly of gray clays that swell when wet and crack open when dry. The plains to the east of the Loddon River, which narrow toward Albury in New South Wales, are irrigated and support a wider range of farming activities. In recent geologic time the forerunners of present rivers laid down alluvial deposits that reveal considerable diversity in sand and clay content.
Although the western part of the southern plains has a uniform volcanic origin, there are local differences in the colour, texture, and stone content of the region’s soils. These variations, once masked by the grasslands that covered the area, have been exposed by a generally uniform use of the land for livestock and dairy farming.
