West Dorset,  district, administrative county of Dorset, southern England. The city of Dorchester, in southern West Dorset, is the seat of both the county of Dorset and the district.
The district lies almost entirely within the historic county of Dorset, except for small areas along the northern border that belong to the historic county of Somerset. It occupies an area bordering on Lyme Bay of the English Channel and surrounds to landward the port of Weymouth and the Isle of Portland, which together form the Weymouth and Portland district (borough) in the south. Nearly all of West Dorset is a governmentally designated Area of Outstanding Beauty.
West Dorset’s landscape and some of its towns, vividly described by the 19th-century novelist Thomas Hardy, are dominated by two parallel chalk ridges, oriented east-west and located in the south and east, that merge in central West Dorset to form a horseshoe-shaped upland. The interior valley of the upland and other areas to the north and west of the ridges are intensely cultivated in some places and elsewhere consist of grassland or heath cover. The oceanside cliffs, between the coastal resorts of Lyme Regis and Bridport in the southwest, and the narrow, pebbly Chesil Beach, extending 16 miles (25 km) from Bridport east along the central coast, are popular with tourists.
Lyme Regis, which was a favourite retreat of the rich and famous of the 19th century, was an important medieval port. Bridport has long been known for its manufacture of cordage, twine, and nets. Sherborne, situated in the northern part of the district, was an Anglo-Saxon cathedral city from 705 to 1075, and Dorchester is associated with prehistoric earthworks and Roman ruins; Thomas Hardy was born nearby.
Dairy cattle and cereals (particularly barley) are raised on the chalk ridges, and mixed farming (including pigs, sheep, and horticultural products) is practiced in the lowlands. Area 418 square miles (1,083 square km). Pop. (2001) 92,360; (2011) 99,264.
