Wexford, Irish Loch Garman,  county in the province of Leinster, southeastern Ireland. It is bounded on the east and south by the Irish Sea and from west to north by Counties Kilkenny, Carlow, and Wicklow.  The town of Wexford, on the Irish Sea coast, is the county seat, and there is a county manager.
The Blackstairs Mountains—which have two main peaks, Blackstairs Mountain (2,402 feet [732 metres]) and Mount Leinster (2,602 feet [793 metres])—form a striking range rising from lowlands on all sides. Between the two main summits is the deep Scullogue Gap. Most of the county consists of a lowland between the mountains and the sea, with a maximum width of about 20 miles (30 km) and scattered hills of igneous rock and several hills over 1,000 feet (300 metres) high. Much of the lowland is covered with glacial deposits, including the moraine formed during the last glaciation of Ireland. The coast is composed of wide, sweeping bays with rocky headlands, sand dunes, and cliffs.
Less than two-fifths of the population lives in towns and villages. Wexford, Enniscorthy, Gorey, and New Ross are the largest towns. Farming is the main occupation in the county, and most farms are of medium size, averaging 70–80 acres (28–32 hectares). Much of the land is in pasture, and about two-fifths of the farmland grows cereal crops, half of it wheat. Sugar beets also are an important crop. The chief economic staple is cattle, exported through Dublin or Waterford, and there is some dairying.
The chief industrial towns are Wexford, Enniscorthy, and New Ross. Rosslare is a seaside resort with fine sandy beaches. From Rosslare harbour, the port of call for passenger ships from Fishguard, Wales, there are railways to Wexford town, Dublin, and Waterford.
Anglo-Norman adventurers landed in Wexford in 1169. By Tudor times (16th century), the northern area was dominated by the MacMurrough Kavanagh family. A continuous tradition of town life dates from Norse times. Wexford town as a fortified place was involved in several episodes of warfare: it was stormed by Oliver Cromwell’s forces in 1649, and in May 1798 it was the scene of a major popular rising that met with defeat near Enniscorthy. In 1964 an estate on the slopes of Slieve Coillte, overlooking the River Barrow, was given to the government and was developed as John F. Kennedy Park, a memorial to the former president of the United States. Area 914 square miles (2,367 square km). Pop. (2006) 131,615; (2011) 145,320.
