Worcestershire,  administrative and historic county of west-central England. It is located in the western portion of the Midlands region southwest of West Midlands metropolitan county. The city of Worcester is the county seat.
The administrative county of Worcestershire comprises six districts: Bromsgrove, Malvern Hills, Wychavon, Wyre Forest, the borough of Redditch, and the city of Worcester. The administrative county covers an area smaller than and somewhat different from the historic county and includes several small areas belonging to other historic counties. The area around the villages of Hinton and Childwickham and the parishes of Kemerton and Ashton-under-Hill are part of the historic county of Gloucestershire. A small area between Leigh Sinton and Acton Green and the parish of Stoke Bliss are part of the historic county of Herefordshire. Upper Arley lies in the historic county of Staffordshire, and a small area south of Upper Arley belongs to the historic county of Shropshire.
The historic county of Worcestershire encompasses the remainder of the administrative county as well as the following parishes outside the administrative county: In the administrative county of Gloucestershire, it includes Daylesford, Evenlode, Aston Magna, Blockley, Paxford, Cutsdean, and small areas between Chipping Camden and Honeybourne in Cotswold district; Teddington and Chaceley in Tewkesbury borough; and Staunton and Redmarley D’Abitot in Forest of Dean district. In the northeastern part of the unitary authority of Herefordshire, it includes Edvin Loach, Acton Beauchamp, and Mathon. In Stratford-on-Avon district of the administrative county of Warwickshire, it includes the parish of Oldberrow and an area along the River Stour extending from north of Alderminster to south of Shipston-on-Stour. The historic county of Worcestershire also encompasses a substantial part of the metropolitan county of West Midlands, including portions of the metropolitan boroughs of Birmingham, Dudley and Sandwell.
A fertile lowland plain at the centre of the county is drained by the Rivers Severn and Avon (Upper Avon) and their tributaries, the Rivers Stour and Teme. To the west lie the Malvern Hills, which exceed elevations of 1,300 feet (400 metres) and form the boundary with Herefordshire; they consist of Precambrian gneisses and volcanic rocks. In the south the Avon valley, known as the Vale of Evesham, contains young Lias clays, which provide excellent soil for orchards and market gardening. The Jurassic escarpment of the Cotswolds uplands rises sharply in the southeast. Silurian, Cambrian, and Precambrian rocks make up the Lickey Hills, which rise to an elevation of 956 feet (291 metres) and cross the northeastern part of the county.
The historic county of Worcestershire was heavily wooded in early times and consequently is not rich in prehistoric remains. There are, however, great Iron Age earthworks on the Malvern and the Bredon Hills that have been dated to the 2nd–1st centuries bce. A few traces of the area’s Roman occupation have been found in Worcester city. The earliest Anglo-Saxon settlers of the area were the Hwicce tribe in the 6th century ce. By 679 the Hwiccean kingdom had formed a separate diocese with its seat at Worcester, which became not only an ecclesiastical centre but also the chief point of trade and military communications between England and Wales. The region was subsequently part of the kingdom of Mercia and was temporarily conquered by the Danes in the 9th century. The shire (county) itself originated as an administrative area after the Anglo-Saxons had recovered Mercia from the Danes.
The monastic movement played an important part in Worcestershire’s history during the Middle Ages. No fewer than 13 monastic foundations existed in the county between the 8th and 13th centuries. The monks of Evesham and Pershore began the cultivation of the flowers, fruits, and vegetables in the Vale of Evesham. At the time of Domesday Book (1086), the church owned more than half of the land in Worcestershire, and this inhibited the rise of a local aristocracy. Still, the ruins of the 13th-century Dudley Castle bear witness to the military interests of the county’s Norman nobility. Worcestershire is studded with old churches, abbeys, and priories, including the remains of Benedictine abbeys at Evesham and Pershore and a perfectly preserved priory church at Malvern. The impressive cathedral at Worcester was completed in the 14th century. The historic county also has many fine half-timbered country houses dating from the 15th and 16th centuries, such as the moated Birtsmorton Court.
Two decisive battles in English history were fought in Worcestershire. At Evesham in 1265 Simon de Montfort was slain by the forces of Edward (later Edward I), and at Worcester in 1651 a Parliamentary army led by Oliver Cromwell resoundingly defeated the Scottish forces of Charles II and thus brought to an end the English Civil Wars.
From the late Middle Ages until the 17th century, the city of Worcester and much of southern Worcestershire thrived on the production of wool and woolen cloth, and coal and iron were mined in the north as early as the 13th century. With the construction of canals in the 18th century and railways in the 19th century, the northern fringes of the historic county became part of the growing metropolis of Birmingham and the heavily industrialized Black Country, famed for its coal mining and metal production.
Today agriculture is a major activity in the administrative county. Fruits and vegetables are intensively cultivated in the southeast, including the Vale of Evesham. In other rural areas, dairy farming predominates, and Worcestershire is also an important producer of hops. Heavy industry is important in Worcester and Bromsgrove, and there are machinery and metal industries in Redditch and Kidderminster (also famous for carpets). Stoke Prior, near Droitwich, has important salt and chemical industries. The manufacture of agricultural machinery, fruit canning and processing, cider production, and milk processing occur in Worcester and several market towns. Area administrative county, 672 square miles (1,741 square km). Pop. (2001) administrative county, 542,107; (2011) administrative county, 566,169.
