Yunnan, Wade-Giles romanization Yün-nan, conventional Yunnan,  sheng (province) of China, a mountain and plateau region on the country’s southwestern frontier. It is bounded by the Tibet Autonomous Region to the northwest, the provinces of Sichuan to the north and Guizhou to the east, and the Zhuang Autonomous Region of Guangxi to the southeast. To the south and southeast it adjoins Laos and Vietnam, and to the southwest and west it shares a long border with Myanmar (Burma). The provincial capital is Kunming, in the northeast-central part of Yunnan.
The name Yunnan has been in use since the region was made a province under the Yuan (Mongol) dynasty (1206–1368). Literally meaning “South of the Yun,” it denotes the location as south of the Yun Range (Yun Ling, “Cloudy Mountains”). Although richly endowed with natural resources, Yunnan remained an underdeveloped region until relatively recent times; for centuries the ethnic, religious, and political separatism of the province posed obstacles to the efforts of a central government to control it. Although much of the province is still fairly underdeveloped and isolated, its economic, political, and cultural integration into the whole of China is essentially complete. Area 168,400 square miles (436,200 square km). Pop. (2010) 45,966,239.
Yunnan’s topography is determined by a series of high mountain chains that, starting close together, branch out from the Tibetan border southeastward across the province in fanlike fashion. Running roughly northwest to southeast, these high ranges are, from west to east, the Gaoligong, the Nu, and the Yun. Branching farther out from the Yun Range are some secondary ranges—the Wuliang and the Ailao in the south-central area and the Wumeng in the northeast.
The province consists of two distinct regions separated by the Ailao Mountains—the canyon region to the west of it and the Yunnan-Guizhou (Yungui) Plateau region to the east. In the canyon region the great mountains descend from an elevation exceeding 18,000 feet (5,500 metres) above sea level in the north to about 6,000 feet (1,830 metres) in the south. Flowing through the deep V-shaped valleys between these mountains are the three major rivers of the province: the Salween (Nu), between the Gaoligong and Nu mountains; the Mekong (Lancang), between the Nu and Yunling ranges; and the Black (Lixian), between the Wuliang and Ailao mountains. The towering height of the mountains in the north is such that the valley floors lie at heights averaging 4,000 to 5,000 feet (1,200 to 1,500 metres) below the mountaintops. The river currents, too swift for navigation, represent an enormous potential for hydroelectric power. In the southern part of the canyon region the mountains are much lower and the valleys more open, with many upland plains and fertile irrigated fields. The far western part of the canyons region, the Bao Mountains area around Tengchong, is noted for its many active volcanoes.
The eastern Yungui Plateau region, stretching from the Ailao Mountains to the Guizhou-Guangxi border, is separated from Sichuan by the Yangtze River (Chang Jiang), there called the Jinsha River. Streams on the western fringe of the plateau drain into the Red (Yuan) River, which flows along the eastern slope of the Ailao Mountains to enter the Gulf of Tonkin via Vietnam. The water of the central and eastern parts of the plateau drains into the Nanpan River, which is a headstream of the Xi River system of Guangxi and Guangdong. In the north and northeast of the plateau, the Pudu, Niulan and Heng rivers drain northward at right angles into the Jinsha. The elevation of the entire plateau varies from about 7,000 feet (2,130 metres) at its western end to 4,500 feet (1,370 metres) on the Guizhou border, where intermontane basins provide large stretches of level country suited for agriculture. Yunnan has more lakes than most Chinese provinces, many of them formed when grabens (large areas that dropped along fault lines) filled with water. Lake Dian in Kunming and Lake Er in Dali are among those renowned for their great beauty.
Despite its tropical latitude, the eastern plateau region is noted for its moderate temperatures. Because of the high elevation, summers are cool and winters are mild. June–July temperatures average 71 °F (22 °C), and December–January temperatures average 48 °F (9 °C). This allows for an annual growing season of 10 months. In the western canyon region the high mountains and deep valleys create vertical climatic zones. Sultry heat with high humidity dominates the bottom of the valleys, a temperate zone prevails at 6,000 to 11,000 feet (1,830 to 3,350 metres), and freezing winds envelop the tops of the mountains.
Yunnan, under the influence of rain-bearing monsoon winds blowing from both the Pacific and Indian oceans, enjoys good precipitation (nearly all of it as rainfall). The bulk of the rain falls from May through October, the rain being heavier in the western canyon region than in the eastern plateau region. Average annual rainfall in Kunming is about 49 inches (1,245 mm), whereas in Tengchong it is about 58 inches (1,475 mm).
Yunnan has the greatest variety of biological resources among the Chinese provinces, and it includes plants from tropical, subtropical, temperate, and alpine growing zones. Of some 30,000 species of plants found in China, more than half are in Yunnan. These include more than 6,000 species of medicinal herbs and some 2,500 species of endemic flowers and ornamental plants. About half of Yunnan’s total area is forested (including areas covered in shrubs). The extent of this forest cover has been increasing since the 1990s through an active conservation program that has established numerous protected forests and nature reserves and has promoted reforestation campaigns. In the western canyon region, pine and other coniferous trees thrive at elevations up to 6,000 feet (1,830 metres). In the temperate zone above this—up to about 11,000 feet (3,350 metres)—shrubs of the azalea and rhododendron family carpet the hills. The gorgeous colours of azaleas, camellias, roses, and fairy primroses make the mountain meadow country a gigantic flower garden and a popular destination for botanists and other researchers. Finally, in the zone above this, to about 15,000 feet (4,570 metres), fir, bamboo, dwarf juniper, and flowering herbs grow on mountain podzolic (bleached) soil.
Yunnan is also foremost among the Chinese provinces in its variety of animals, with some 250 species of mammals, 360 of fish, 140 of reptiles, 90 of amphibians, and 780 of birds. In the tropical forests of the south, mammals—including monkeys, bears, elephants, and porcupines—are found in large numbers. Some of them, such as the black snub-nosed monkey (Rhinopithecus bieti) and the Hoolock gibbon (Hylobates hoolock), are now under state protection. A wide variety of domesticated animals are kept in both the western canyon region and the eastern plateau region.
