Zachodniopomorskie, Polish Województwo Zachodniopomorskie,  województwo (province), northwestern Poland. Created in 1999 as part of Poland’s provincial reorganization, it comprises the former (1975–98) provinces of Szczecin and Koszalin, as well as portions of the former provinces of Gorzów, Piła, and Słupsk. It is bordered to the north by the Baltic Sea, to the east by Pomorskie province, to the south by the provinces of Wielkopolskie and Lubuskie, and to the west by Germany. The provincial capital is Szczecin. Area 8,839 square miles (22,892 square km). Pop. (2011) 1,722,883.
Zachodniopomorskie is a low-lying region, dotted with morainal hills, river valleys, and more than 1,500 lakes, including some that are former sea bays. To the north lie the Szczecin and the Koszalin coastlands, featuring the large Szczeciński Lagoon, while the Pomeranian Lakeland occupies the central and southern sections. The province’s main rivers are the Oder (Odra), Rega, Parsęta, Ina, and Drawa. Zachodniopomorskie is among the most wooded of Poland’s provinces, and forests cover one-third of the total area. The climate is one of the mildest in Poland and is influenced by the proximity of the Baltic Sea. The mean annual temperature is 47.3 °F (8.5 °C), and the average annual precipitation ranges from 22 inches (550 mm) in the east to 30 inches (750 mm) in the west.
Zachodniopomorskie has one of the lowest population densities among the provinces. Two-thirds of the population is urban, and the largest cities are Szczecin, Koszalin, Stargard Szczeciński, and Kołobrzeg. Ethnic minorities (mainly Ukrainians displaced after World War II) live in rural areas.
Although almost one-half of the province is utilized as agricultural land—with chief crops being cereals, rapeseed, fodder, and sugar beets—the region has a predominantly maritime economy. The port of Szczecin is linked by the Oder to Świnoujście, a port on the Baltic Sea. Together they constitute the largest port complex in Poland. The Szczecin shipyards are second only to those in Gdańsk. Important industries include fishing and fish processing, chemicals, brewing, timber, and furniture. Local hot springs are tapped by the geothermal heat plant in Pyrzyce. Main rail lines link Szczecin with major Polish cities and Germany, while the port of Świnoujście provides regular ferry connections with Sweden. There is an airport near Szczecin in Goleniów.
Tourism is well-developed. Popular spas and resorts include Międzyzdroje, Kołobrzeg, Kamień Pomorski, and Połczyn-Zdrój. Międzyzdroje also serves as a gateway to the Wolin National Park, known for its sandy beaches backed by steep cliffs. It is also an important habitat for the protected white-tailed eagle (Haliaeetus albicilla) and is the site of a bison reserve. The densely forested Drawno National Park is located in the central lakeland and is traversed by the Drawa River, which is popular with canoeists.
The province contains numerous examples of medieval ecclesiastical architecture, most notably the cathedral in Kamień Pomorski, a brick 12th-century Gothic edifice featuring mid-13th-century murals. Each summer the International Festival of Organ and Chamber Music is held there. The Renaissance-style Castle of the Dukes of Pomerania in Szczecin was virtually destroyed during World War II but has been reconstructed. Another noteworthy ducal castle is found in the coastal town of Darłowo, built in the 14th century but known for a gilded limewood pulpit added in 1639. Annual events include the Festival of Film Stars in Międzyzdroje, which features appearances by Poland’s major film actors, and choral music concerts in Międzyzdroje, Koszalin, and Szczecin. Noteworthy museums include the National Museum in Szczecin and the Regional Museum in Koszalin, both of which focus on the history of Western Pomerania.
In the 9th century Western Pomerania (Pomorze Zachodnie) was inhabited by the West Slavic tribes of the Wolinianie, Pyrzyczanie, and Słowińcy. The main strongholds were Wolin-Jamsborg, Szczecin, Kołobrzeg, and Sławno. In 1000 the first king of Poland, Bolesław I, established a bishopric in Kołobrzeg and introduced Christianity to the region. In the 12th century the duchy of Pomerania was created, and it was ruled by the noble Gryfice family until 1637. In the 14th century the eastern part of the region was incorporated into the Polish state. The Western Pomeranian dukes became German vassals. Between the 13th and the 16th century Western Pomerania, as part of the Hanseatic League, saw a period of a rapid economic development, marked by the flourishing of the grain, herring, and timber trade.
In the aftermath of the Thirty Years’ War (1618–48), the region lost its independence. Szczecin and the surrounding area came under the control of Sweden, and the eastern part of the region was absorbed by Brandenburg. In 1720 the area became a part of Prussia, and from 1871 it belonged to the German state. In the 19th century the main Prussian port was built in Szczecin, along with a shipyard and a steel mill. These industrial developments fueled economic growth. Rural areas were dominated by large estates owned by Prussian Junkers. World War II left many of the region’s towns and cities devastated. After the war Western Pomerania was incorporated into Poland. The German population was forced to leave, and the area was resettled by Poles.
