Zeeland,  maritime provincie (province), southwestern Netherlands. It occupies the delta lands of the Scheldt (Schelde) and Maas (Meuse) rivers. The province comprises Zeeuwsch-Vlaanderen, a strip of the Flanders mainland between the Westerschelde (Western Scheldt) and Belgium, plus six former islands: Schouwen en Duiveland, Tholen, Noord-Beveland, Walcheren, Zuid-Beveland, and Sint Philipsland. None of these has preserved a true insular character, all being connected to each other or to Noord-Brabant province inland by dams or bridges.
Zeeland was disputed between the counts of Flanders and Holland until it was annexed by the latter in 1323. It was finally joined to the United Provinces under Stadtholder William III (1672–1702). Its history has been marked by a permanent struggle against the sea, indicated by its name, meaning “sea land,” and by its heraldic device, Luctor et emergo (“I struggle and emerge”). The coastline of Zeeland has changed continually as islands have been enlarged by alluvial deposition, united and protected by dikes, or washed away by floods. The province was severely damaged by the flood of Feb. 1, 1953, which killed more than 1,800 persons. As a result the Dutch government started the implementation of the Delta Project, to dam the major sea channels and further connect the islands with one another and with the mainland.
After repair to the dikes following the 1953 flood, extensive rural reconstruction was carried out, and the resettlement of many Zeeland farmers in the Northeast Polder of the IJsselmeer allowed the land they had left to be used to enlarge other farms. Farming is now highly mechanized, with efficient methods and high yields per acre. The greater part of Zeeland’s marine clay soil is arable land supporting cereals, potatoes, sugar beets, and other cash crops. Dairy cattle and horticulture (onions, vegetables, and fruit) are also important. Zeeland also has traditional oyster culture and shrimp and mussel fisheries, as well as seaside resorts.
One of the smallest in population of the Dutch provinces, Zeeland has few industries and no large towns. Vlissingen, Middelburg (the capital), Goes, Terneuzen, and Sas van Gent are the main towns. Two nature reserves in Zeeland protect dune areas and wildlife. Area 1,133 square miles (2,934 square km). Pop. (2009 est.) 380,984.
