Augustus Saint-Gaudens,  (born March 1, 1848, Dublin, Ireland—died Aug. 3, 1907, Cornish, New Hampshire, U.S.), generally acknowledged to be the foremost American sculptor of the late 19th century, noted for his evocative memorial statues and for the subtle modeling of his low reliefs.
Saint-Gaudens was born to a French father and an Irish mother. His family moved to New York City when he was an infant and at age 13 he was apprenticed to a cameo cutter. He earned his living at this craft, while studying at night at Cooper Union (1861–65) and the National Academy of Design (1865–66) in New York. In 1867 he traveled to Paris and was admitted to the École des Beaux-Arts. Along with Olin Levi Warner and Howard Roberts, Saint-Gaudens was one of the first Americans to study sculpture in Paris. Late in 1870 he set out for Rome, where, still supporting himself by cameo cutting, he worked for two years copying famous antique statues on commission. He also started to create his first imaginative compositions during this period.
After 1875 Saint-Gaudens settled in New York, where he befriended and collaborated with a circle of men who formed the nucleus of an American artistic renaissance: the group included the architects Henry Hobson Richardson, Stanford White, and Charles Follen McKim and the painter John La Farge. The most important work of Saint-Gaudens’s early career was the monument to Admiral David Farragut (1880, Madison Square Garden, New York), the base of which was designed by White.
From 1880 to 1897 Saint-Gaudens executed most of the well-known works that gained him his great reputation and many honours. Working with La Farge, in 1881 he created two caryatids for a fireplace in Cornelius Vanderbilt’s residence. In 1887 he began the Amor Caritas, which, with variations, preoccupied him from about 1880 to 1898, and also a statue of a standing Abraham Lincoln (Lincoln Park, Chicago). The memorial to Mrs. Henry Adams (1891) in Rock Creek Cemetery, Washington, D.C., is considered by many to be Saint-Gaudens’s greatest work. In 1897 Saint-Gaudens completed a monument in Boston depicting Robert G. Shaw, colonel of an African American regiment in the Civil War. The statue is remarkable for its expression of movement. Shortly thereafter, Saint-Gaudens left for Paris, where, over the next three years, he prepared his final major public sculpture, the Sherman Monument (1903), which was eventually erected in Grand Army Plaza in New York.
Saint-Gaudens also made many medallions, originally as a diversion from more serious tasks. These works show the influence of Renaissance medals as well as his early cameos. Among them are designs for U.S. coins (the head on the $10 gold piece of 1906 and the $20 gold piece of 1907) and a considerable number of portraits. His autobiography, The Reminiscences of Augustus Saint-Gaudens, was published in 1913.
