Corset,  article of clothing worn to shape or constrict the waist and support the bosom, whether as a foundation garment or as outer decoration. During the early eras of corsetry, corsets—called stays before the 19th century and made stiff with heavy boning—molded a woman’s upper body into a V-shape and flattened and pushed up the breasts. Some were attached to petticoats or could be fastened to them in order to preserve a flat shape at the waist. Young children were also often fitted with corsets or stays in order to ensure straight spines and pleasing body shapes later in life. Later, as fashions changed, corsets became more hourglass-shaped to emphasize the female figure.
The first evidence of corsetlike garments can be found in the art of the Minoan civilization, which depicts women wearing metal plates that slim the waist and accentuate the bust. Waist-shaping garments appeared sporadically in Europe during the Middle Ages, worn by members of both sexes. About the 15th century women began to wear bodices stiffened with paste, known then as a pair of bodys. In the 16th century that type of bodice became a separate article of underclothing, laced together either in front or in back and eventually supported throughout with strips of a firm material—such as wood, bone, or horn—between two layers of fabric. Corsets that were laced up the front were often covered by a decorated panel known as a stomacher that concealed the laces. The corset of 16th-century Spain was supported in the front by a vertically placed wooden or bone rod (or two, if the garment laced in the front) known as a busk, which produced a flat shape, and was reinforced elsewhere with whalebone stays. The busk became a predominant feature of later corsets, despite other changes.
The corset was first associated with the aristocracy but was adopted by bourgeois women by the 18th century. Women of lower classes often made their own corsets from less-expensive cloth, using reeds for support and reinforcement. After the French Revolution the corset went out of fashion because of the ascendancy of Directory and Empire fashions, which were high-waisted; the corset regained its fashionability about 1815. Subsequent corsets of the 19th century were shaped like an hourglass and were reinforced with whalebone and metal.
With the advent of the sewing machine in the mid-19th century, working-class women were able to purchase cheap mass-produced corsets. As fashion dictated dresses to have a flat front and a bustle behind, corsets were made longer to cover the hips. Steam-molding was introduced about that time, in which finished corsets were starched and shaped using steam. Although polemics against tight corsets and their adverse health effects (e.g., stunted muscle development and respiratory problems) were common in literature from the late 17th century onward, corsets continued to be worn. About 1910, when fashion began to emphasize a slender, straight figure, corsets were cut longer so as to cover the thighs.
About the 1920s the natural figure started to make a comeback, and corsets became less popular. Corset designs became more flexible, with less boning. In the late 1930s there was an attempt by designers to bring back the boned corset, but World War II cut short most fashion innovations. By the 1950s the guêpière, also known as a bustier or waspie, became fashionable.
During the 20th century the corset was gradually replaced as everyday wear by the brassiere and girdle, but it remained in use in bridal fashions and costume wear into the 21st century. Corsets and corset-style tops without structural supports retained an amount of popularity as outerwear, especially in alternative fashion, and were sometimes featured in the works of respected fashion designers. Tightly laced corsets also remained popular among those engaged in certain forms of body modification.
