Curtain,  in interior design, decorative fabric commonly hung to regulate the admission of light at windows and to prevent drafts from door or window openings. Curtains, usually of a heavy material, arranged to fall straight in ornamental folds are also called draperies. Portieres are heavy curtains hung in a doorway.
From the evidence of excavations at Olynthus, Pompeii, and Herculaneum, portieres appear to have been used as room dividers in classical antiquity. Mosaics of the Early Christian period (c. 2nd–6th century ad) show curtains suspended from rods spanning arches.
In medieval illuminated manuscripts, curtains are shown knotted or looped up at doorways. Until the end of the Middle Ages, window openings were covered with utilitarian wooden shutters or a heavy cloth. Beds were curtained on all sides and covered with a tester, or canopy. By day, when the beds were used as couches and seats, the curtains were neatly looped up in the form of a bag.
Dutch paintings of the 17th century show simple dwellings in which windows are shaded with half- or full-length curtains, and beds are curtained with plain fabrics, some of them undoubtedly homespun and woven, and probably of wool. In Italy beds, which were placed in alcoves, were furnished with curtains of rich velvet and damask.
In France, during the reign of Louis XIV, much of the ritual and pomp of court society centred around the monarch’s state bedchamber, where the bed furniture included layer upon layer of curtains and valances. During the reign of Louis XV, bed and matching window curtains were designed in a wide variety of fanciful Rococo forms, laden with ribbons, cords, braid, tassels, and bows.
In the early 19th century the Directoire style and the Empire style in France and the Regency style in England drew motifs from ancient works, especially Greek and Egyptian. Growing romanticism led to other new fashions inspired by styles as geographically remote as those of India and the Orient or as remote in time as the Gothic. The tops of single windows were ornamented by carved birds or bunches of grapes that held up the drapery. The bay of several full-length windows was spanned by a stiff valance with separate curtains falling to the floor. Plain, light-coloured silks were preferred, since they could be hung to good effect in swags and loops.
In the Victorian age eclecticism carried curtain design to an extreme. Doors and windows were heavily filtered by portieres and curtains that further confined the already crowded rooms, busy with floral and scroll patterns on the walls, carpets, and upholstery.
The major 20th-century innovation in curtain fabric was the use of synthetics such as fibreglass (for its insulating qualities) and polyester (for its washability). Mechanical systems for drawing and closing curtains simplified their installation and use.
