Dutch ware,   principally tin-enameled earthenware, with some porcelain, manufactured in the Netherlands since the end of the 16th century. The earliest pottery wares were painted in the style of Italian majolica with high-temperature colours and are usually called Netherlands majolica. In the early years of the 17th century, captured cargoes of Chinese porcelain, mostly blue-and-white of the period of the Ming dynasty, were being taken to Holland, where the ware was known as carrack porcelain (kraakporselein). It inspired the production of the tin-enameled wares that became known generically as delft because the industry became concentrated in the town of Delft from the second quarter of that century. The brewing industry was declining, and potters took over the disused breweries, often preserving their original names, such as The Golden Flowerpot and The Three Bells. Large quantities of ware were copied, often slavishly, from blue-painted Chinese porcelain and usually given an additional transparent lead glaze (kwaart) to enhance the resemblance. Dutch subjects (often seascapes and landscapes in large tile panels) were much rarer.
Polychrome wares imitating Chinese famille verte, black ground wares imitating famille noire, and Imari-type wares imitating those of Arita, Japan, appeared soon after. Kakiemon-type wares also exist, but they are very rare. Enamel colours were introduced about 1720, and some imitations of famille rose decorations date from that time, either from the factory or from one of the independent decorating studios that also specialized in enameling white Chinese and Japanese porcelain. Later enameling was in the Rococo style, some of it inspired by Meissen porcelain. Lavish gilding typifies a class of ware often known as delft dorée.
Few figures were made, and those that survive are seldom sophisticated. Small figures of birds and animals, as well as such novelties as shoes, cow-shaped milk jugs, parrots, and violins were popular and are also frequently copied. Several potters, the best known of whom is Ari de Milde, made teapots of red earthenware in imitation of the wine pots of I-hsing. Toward the end of the 18th century several small porcelain factories opened—at Weesp (1764–71), Oude Loosedrecht (1771–84), Amstel (1784–1810), and The Hague (1776–90). Production in these towns was limited and usually derivative. During the 19th century several Dutch factories made reproductions of earlier wares.
