George Hepplewhite,   (died 1786, London), English cabinetmaker and furniture designer whose name is associated with a graceful style of Neoclassicism, a movement he helped to formulate in the decorative arts.
Little is known of Hepplewhite’s life except that he was apprenticed to the English furniture maker Robert Gillow of Lancaster, went to London, and opened a shop there on Redcross Street. Other than his noting on a chair design that it had been “executed with good effect for the Prince of Wales,” there is no other evidence to show that Hepplewhite’s was a fashionable firm; furthermore, the royal accounts have no record of the chair. After his death his estate was administered by his widow, Alice, who carried on the business.
Hepplewhite’s style and reputation rest on his Cabinet-Maker and Upholsterer’s Guide (1788), which contained nearly 300 designs for furniture and other furnishings. The plates in the Guide are unsigned, but 10 designs signed “Hepplewhite” or “Heppelwhite” are included in the Cabinet-Maker’s London Book of Prices (1788). Pieces of furniture based on designs in the Guide are rare, and no piece can definitely be attributed to Hepplewhite’s firm, nor can his personal responsibility for the designs be established. The Guide translated into simple yet elegant terms the more extravagant furniture of the Neoclassical style of the grand designs of Robert Adam.
Simplicity, elegance, and utility characterize the designs in the Guide. Many pieces were intended to be made in inlaid satinwood, others in mahogany or with japanned decoration. Chairs with straight tapered legs have shield-, heart-, and oval-shaped backs, incorporating urns, festoons, cornhusk chains, and other typical Neoclassical motifs. Upholstered settees of serpentine form, window seats with scrolled arms, and small square- and circular-topped inlaid tables and bookcases with delicate tracery in the glass doors also characterize the graceful Hepplewhite style. Three years after the Guide first appeared, Thomas Sheraton, an equally famous English Neoclassical designer, published The Cabinet-Maker and Upholsterers’ Drawing Book, in which he writes slightingly of Hepplewhite in his preface, even though he probably borrowed from the Guide. Both Hepplewhite’s and Sheraton’s designs were interpreted by such eminent American cabinetmakers as Samuel McIntire and Duncan Phyfe.
