Grayson Perry,  (born March 24, 1960, Chelmsford, Essex, England), British potter who embedded in his work images of violence and other disturbing social issues.
Perry was born into a working-class family, and his interest in ceramics was kindled during childhood. By age 13 he had confided his transvestism to his diary. He studied at the Braintree College of Further Education in Essex and at Portsmouth Polytechnic in Hampshire, but it was not until the early 1980s, when he was living in a squatters’ community in London’s Camden Town, that he returned to the serious study of ceramics by way of evening art classes. At the time, he was appearing in performance pieces and art films and nursing his own aspirations as a filmmaker. He disliked the compromising and collaborating that he felt went hand in hand with filmmaking, however, and when in 1984 the first solo exhibition of his ceramic works—all created in his evening classes—sold well, he made pottery his main art form, though he continued to work in other media. From the 1990s Perry also worked in embroidery, creating such pieces as Mother of All Battles (1996), a woman’s folk costume stitched with ethnic symbols and images of weapons and killings, and Claire’s Coming Out Dress (2000). Perry was also the author of a novel, Cycle of Violence (1992).
Perry achieved celebrity status in 2003 when he won the Turner Prize, one of the art world’s premier honours. His receipt of the award strirred some controversy, not only because he was the first potter to win the prize but also because of his tendency to appear in public as a cross-dresser, frequently as his alter ego, Claire, and often accompanied by his wife and daughter. In 2004 Perry mounted a solo exhibition at the Tate St. Ives museum of modern and contemporary art in Cornwall. The exhibition featured his classically shaped vases, the colourful surfaces of which served as a seductive camouflage for inscribed images and messages that were distinctly at odds with their decorative medium. Domestic violence, child abuse, pedophilia, and cultural stereotypes were some of the troubling themes that the artist habitually explored in these inscriptions. Perry acknowledged his exploitation of the decorative appeal of his pots, describing them as a “guerrilla tactic” under the cover of which “a polemic or an ideology” waited to be discovered. I Want to Be an Artist (1996), the first of his vases to be sold at auction, fetched £36,000, more than twice the presale estimate.
In the midst of such attention, Great Britain’s Channel 4 commissioned Perry to make a television documentary about transvestism. The result, Why Men Wear Frocks, aired in 2005. The following year he published an autobiography, Portrait of the Artist as a Young Girl. Perry subsequently mounted solo exhibitions at major museums on several continents, including the Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh (2006), the 21st Century Museum of Contemporary Art in Kanazawa, Japan (2007), and the MUDAM (Musée d’Art Moderne Grand-Duc Jean) in Luxembourg (2008). For The Walthamstow Tapestry (2009), a textile work that scrolled 49 feet (15 metres) across a gallery wall, Perry arranged a series of detailed images—decoratively inspired by traditional Sumatran batiks but replete with references to contemporary consumer culture—into a sweeping narrative of a human life. In 2013 he was named a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE).
