Janet Scudder, original name Netta Deweze Frazee Scudder,  (born October 27, 1869, Terre Haute, Indiana, U.S.—died June 9, 1940, Rockport, Massachusetts), American sculptor remembered for the highly popular fountains she created for many private patrons and public institutions in the early 20th century.
Scudder attended the Cincinnati (Ohio) Academy of Art, where she adopted the first name Janet. She studied drawing, anatomy, and modeling and settled upon wood carving as her principal interest. In 1891 she moved to Chicago, and after brief employment as a wood-carver she became a studio assistant to the sculptor Lorado Taft. She helped Taft produce sculpture for the World’s Columbian Exposition and, in part through him, received commissions to create statues for the Illinois and Indiana buildings at the fair. She studied and worked in Paris with the American sculptor Frederick MacMonnies before settling in New York City, where she shortly thereafter received her first important commission, to create a seal for the New York Bar Association. Other commissions for architectural decoration and portrait medallions followed. She returned to Paris in 1896 and, through MacMonnies, sold several of her medallions to the Luxembourg Museum.
A trip to Florence in 1899–1900, where she first saw works by Donatello and Andrea del Verrocchio, inspired Scudder to begin work on her Frog Fountain (1901). In 1899 she returned to New York, where the architect Stanford White and the Metropolitan Museum of Art bought versions of Frog Fountain. Her graceful, amusing garden sculptures and fountains, with their characteristic chubby, joyous cherubs, became highly popular. Commissions flowed in from John D. Rockefeller and others, and she became one of the most successful American sculptors of the day. She again lived in France from 1909 until World War I, when she returned to the United States and became active in relief work with the Lafayette Fund (which she organized), the Red Cross, and the Young Men’s Christian Association. After the war she returned to her home in Ville d’Avray, near Paris. In 1920 she was elected an associate of the National Academy of Design. An exhibit of her paintings, a medium which she pursued in her later years, was shown in New York in 1933. She left France in 1939 and died in the United States the next year. Her autobiography, Modeling My Life, was published in 1925.
