Japanese pottery,  objects made in Japan from clay and hardened by fire: earthenware, stoneware, and porcelain.
Japan is a well-wooded country, and wood has always been used there for domestic utensils of all kinds, either in a natural state or lacquered. Until recent times, pottery and porcelain were not employed extensively for general domestic use but were reserved for such special purposes as the tea ceremony. In pottery the Japanese especially admire accidental effects that resemble natural forms. Objects that appear misshapen and glazes that exhibit what would usually be regarded as serious imperfections in the West are admired by the Japanese connoisseur. The Japanese potter liked to reveal the impress of the hand that made the object. Marks, such as the ridges left by the fingers in a newly thrown vessel, were frequently accentuated instead of being obliterated, and marks made by tools were often left untouched.
Hand modeling was practiced long after the wheel was known, and asymmetries and irregularities of form were purposely sought. Similar accidental effects were encouraged in glazing: coloured glazes were allowed to run in streaks and were irregularly applied. They were often thick, with many bubbles and with a semifluid or treacly appearance. Crackled glazes and those deeply fissured (the latter called dragon skin or lizard skin) were deliberately induced. Painted decoration, frequently blue, brown, or iron red, is often summary and almost calligraphic in its simplicity. The aim was to give an overall effect that resembled such natural objects as stones, in being largely uncontrived.
From the 15th century onward, the art of the potter was also affected by the elaborate tea ceremony (the chanoyu). In its original form it was probably introduced from China by Chan (Zen) priests, but at the court of the shogun Yoshimasa (1435–90), in Kyōto, it developed into a fixed ceremonial pattern. Possibly the ceremony was first exploited as a means of settling feudal disputes. It is held in a small room or pavilion, usually surrounded by a carefully designed garden. When the guests are summoned, they enter a sparsely furnished room through a very low doorway. The fact that guests must crawl into the room is thought to have served the purpose of preventing them from concealing a sword under their robes.
In a recess called the tokonoma, a picture mounted on brocade or silk is hung, and the guests bow to this in appreciation. The tea master puts a little powdered tea in a bowl and pours on it water that has been heated over a charcoal brazier. The tea is whipped to a froth with a bamboo whisk and then passed from hand to hand. The various utensils—the tea bowl, tea caddy, water container, boxes, plates, and iron tea kettle—have been carefully selected by the tea master and are often of great age. The tea drinking is followed by a discussion and appreciation of the qualities of the utensils. The bowls are valued for their heat-retaining properties and the way in which they fit the hand as well as for their appearance. Sometimes a newly acquired work of art is produced by the host for the delectation of the guests. Since the tea masters were the aesthetic arbiters, their influence on Japanese pottery was profound.
The early history of Japan is considerably more obscure than that of China. The first Japanese pottery belongs to the Jōmon period (dated tentatively as c. 10,500–c. 300 bce). It has a black body, and the decoration is usually an impressed representation of coiled rope or matting (jōmon means “coiled”). Jōmon-shiki (“coiled pottery”) is widely distributed throughout the islands, but complete specimens are very rare. It was followed by Yayoi pottery, specimens of which have been excavated throughout Japan. The body is somewhat finer in quality than Jōmon pottery and is usually red or gray. Decoration is simple, and forms will sometimes show the influence of Korean pottery of the period. It ceased to be produced about the 6th century ce.
Meanwhile, from about the 3rd to the 6th century ce, large tombs were constructed in the form of oval or circular tumuli from whose bases have been recovered the haniwa (“clay circle”) figures of warriors, women, horses, and so forth. They are hollow, and, though vigorously modeled, they are more primitive than analogous tomb figures from China.
In the Asuka or Sueki period (552–710 ce) that followed, wares are much more sophisticated. Unlike the preceding types, they were made with a wheel, and firing took place in a rudimentary kiln at a much higher temperature than previously. Widespread manufacture continued through the Nara period (710–794) and the early part of the following Heian, or Fujiwara, period (794–1185). Some examples have a smear glaze, no doubt at first caused accidentally by wood ashes coming into contact with the surface. Three colours of glaze—green, yellowish brown, and white—were used either alone or in combination and resemble those of Tang earthenware (see Chinese pottery). Pottery of this kind has been found around Ōsaka and Kyōto. Vases, dishes, bowls, and bottles of various descriptions were the principal types of pottery produced during this period.
The influence of Korea and of Tang China is noticeable. Toward the end of the Heian period, contacts with China were severed, and there was a corresponding decline in the art of pottery; even the traditional Sueki ware disappeared.
A revival in the Kamakura period (1192–1333) followed the visit of the potter Katō Shirōzaemon (Tōshirō) to China in 1227, where he learned the secrets of pottery making. He established himself at Seto, Owari (now Aichi prefecture), which speedily became a large centre of manufacture. There were soon about 200 kilns in the vicinity making a variety of wares, some of which were glazed in black in imitation of the Jian ware of China (called temmoku in Japan). The early wares were mainly for ritual purposes, but by the beginning of the Muromachi, or Ashikaga, period (1338–1573) tea bowls, plates, jars, and saucers of domestic utility were also being made. Wares of the Kamakura period are decorated with incised designs or with impressed or applied ornament. The Muromachi wares are much plainer as the result of the growing influence of the tea ceremony, especially the wabi school of the cult, which emphasized rustic simplicity. The wares of both of these periods have a feldspathic glaze, but the Muromachi glaze is more even in quality than the Kamakura, which has a tendency to run in rivulets. A transitional type has a soft-yellowish glaze or a dark brown glaze sometimes called Seto temmoku.
A large number of kilns were in existence, the more important known as the Six Ancient Kilns of Japan. These were Seto; Tokoname (also in Aichi prefecture), which may have exceeded Seto in the size of its production; Bizen (Okayama prefecture), which produced an excellent unglazed stoneware from the Heian period to the 20th century; Tamba (Kyōto prefecture); Shigaraki (Shiga prefecture); and Echizen (Fukui prefecture). The wares of Seto, especially those made for Buddhist ceremonies, were regarded as the finest pottery of this period.
Production was interrupted during the civil wars of the 15th and 16th centuries. Toward the end of the 16th century the Seto kilns were removed for a time to the Gifu prefecture of Mino province, where they received the protection of the feudal baron (daimyo) of Toki. The Mino pottery was founded by Katō Yosabei, whose sons started other potteries in the vicinity, notably that under the aegis of the tea master Furuta Oribe. New kilns were also built elsewhere, and pottery, while retaining its importance in the tea ceremony, became much more widely used for ordinary purposes. The inspiration for most of its shapes and designs came from the Mino region. The later wares of these kilns are much less austere than those attributed to the Muromachi period, since the cult of the tea ceremony, now widespread, had lost something of its earlier simplicity. Characteristic tea ceremony wares of the early years of the 17th century are Shino, which has a thick, crackled glaze and is sometimes summarily painted in blue or brown; yellow Seto (ki-Seto), whose crackled yellow glaze covers a stoneware body; and, at Narumi, in the adjoining Owari region, a ware of the kind associated with Oribe—Oribe had become a generic term for pottery influenced by the tea master of that name—which is glazed in white, straw colour, yellowish green, and pinkish red, with sometimes the addition of slight painting in brown.
Toward the end of the 16th century the tea ceremony was reformed by Sen Rikyū (1521–91), the tea master to the military dictator of Japan, Toyotomi Hideyoshi. Sen Rikyū was principally responsible for the replacement of the hitherto much admired temmoku bowls from China by others patterned after simpler Korean wares; his influence persisted into the 21st century. In the 1590s Hideyoshi twice invaded Korea, and as a result of these wars many Korean potters were taken to Japan, where their influence was considerable.
A tile maker named Ameya, who is said to have been a Korean, introduced a type of ware that was covered with a lead glaze and fired at a comparatively low temperature. His son Tanaka Chōjirō and his family extended this technique to the tea bowl, and about 1588 their wares were brought to the notice of Hideyoshi, who awarded them a gold seal engraved with the word raku (“felicity”). The raku made in Kyōto are among the most famous of all Japanese wares. The shape of the vessels is extremely simple: a wide straight-sided bowl set on a narrow base. At first the glaze was dark brown, but a light orange red was developed later, to be followed in the 17th century by a straw colour. Still later, green and cream and other colours were introduced. Tea bowls attributed to the first Chōjirō are greatly valued in Japan.
The kilns of Karatsu, a district in the north of Hizen province, may have been established by Korean potters, since the influence of Korea is perceptible in some of them. The term Karatsu ware encompasses a great variety of shapes and styles: “undecorated” (muji), “painted” (e), “speckled” (madara), in the Korean style (Chosen), which has a thick opaque glaze, and in the style of Seto, which has a white glaze. The earliest Karatsu ware belongs probably to the end of the 16th century, although it is sometimes awarded a still earlier date. Most surviving examples belong to the 17th century. The most valued pieces are those made for the tea ceremony.
