Japanese garden,  in landscape design, a type of garden whose major design aesthetic is a simple, minimalist natural setting designed to inspire reflection and meditation.
The art of garden making was probably imported into Japan from China or Korea. Records show that the imperial palaces had gardens by the 5th century ce, their chief characteristic being a pond with an islet connected to the shore by bridges—as is shown by later references to these precedents in Emperor Shōmu’s (724–756) three gardens in Nara. During the Heian period (794–1185), when the symmetrical shinden style of architecture prevailed, the main garden was laid out on the southern side of the house. With the change of domestic architecture in the Kamakura period (1192–1333), however, came modifications of the garden. Learned Zen priests, who assiduously studied the art of garden making, gave Buddhistic names to different rocks in the design and linked religio-philosophic principles with landscape lore. Other beliefs further complicated garden design. With the Muromachi period (1338–1573) came popularization of gardens, which were designed to be enjoyed not only as views to contemplate but as microcosms to explore. The subjective mood became dominant and the gardens reflected individuality. People demanded shibumi in their gardens—an unassuming quality in which refinement underlies a commonplace appearance, perceptible only to a cultivated taste. Aesthetic priests, “tea men,” and connoisseurs created new forms of gardens for cha-shitsu, the little pavilions or rooms built for the chanoyu (tea ceremony), and a special style developed which revolutionized Japanese garden art.
The succeeding vogue of designing in three different degrees of elaboration—shin, gyo, and so (“elaborate,” “intermediate,” and “abbreviated”)—was also adopted for gardens. Many splendid gardens were produced in the Momoyama (1574–1600) and Edo (1603–1867) periods. The centre of garden activity gradually shifted, however, from Kyoto to Edo (Tokyo), seat of the Tokugawa shogun. At one stage there was a utilitarian development: a duck pond was added in the Hama detached palace in Tokyo and, in the Koraku-yen at Mito, space was made for the cultivation of reeds for arrow shafts and plums for military supplies. Feudal lords generally had fine gardens in their provincial homes as well. Quite a number of gardens survived the abolition of the feudal system after the Meiji Restoration of 1868, yet many celebrated gardens perished through neglect or were sacrificed to modern progress. The establishment of public parks, which were not unknown even in feudal times, was especially encouraged throughout Japan from 1873. Gardens in Western style came in with other Western modes but made little headway. The great earthquake and fire of 1923 demonstrated a utilitarian value of the Tokyo gardens: tens of thousands found safety in the parks and in large private gardens scattered throughout the city.
Japanese gardens are generally classified according to the nature of the terrain, either tsuki-yama (“artificial hills”) or hira-niwa (“level ground”), each having particular features. Tsuki-yama consists of hills and ponds, and hira-niwa consists of flat ground designed to represent a valley or moor; tsuki-yama may include a portion laid out as hira-niwa. Each type may, furthermore, be treated in any one of the three degrees of elaboration mentioned. Hill gardens as a rule include a stream and a pond of real water, but there is a special variation, the kare-sansui (dried-up landscape) style, in which rocks are composed to suggest a waterfall and its basin and, for a winding stream or a pond, gravel or sand is used to symbolize water or to suggest seasonally dried-up terrain.
There are other styles: sen-tei (“water garden”); rin-sen (“forest and water”); and, in level gardens, bunjin (“literary scholar”), a simple and small style typically integrating bonsai. The tea garden, or roji (“dewy ground or lane”), is another distinct garden style evolved to meet the requirements of the tea ceremony. Genkansaki (“front of entrance”) have always claimed special treatment—a simple curve in the path is used whenever possible, partly to conceal the door to the house and partly to give character to its front aspect.
Japanese gardens are characterized by: the waterfall, of which there are ten or more different arrangements; the spring and stream to which it gives rise; the lake; hills, built up from earth excavated from the basin for the lake; islands; bridges of many varieties; and the natural guardian stones. The selection and effective distribution of the stones are a prime consideration in garden design. After endless experiments and deep pondering, the best and most subtle compositions were handed down by means of drawings. A studied irregularity in the arrangement of stepping stones is a noteworthy feature of the chanoyu garden, where beauty and use are combined.
In modern Japanese gardens, flowers are few and evergreens popular. Simplicity, restraint, and consistency are sought rather than gaiety, showiness, or the obvious variations of the seasons. Evergreen foliage is preferred to the changing aspect of deciduous trees, although maples and a few others are used. As in the case of stones, trees must be distributed in the garden in harmony with their natural origin and habit of growth. Wells, decorative and useful alike, stone water basins in endless variety, stone lanterns and figures, pagodas, arbours, and summer houses are the most characteristic garden furnishings. Together with gateways and fences—particularly the widely varying sode-gaki (“sleeve fences”) attached to the side of a house to screen certain portions—these elements harmonize the natural beauty of the garden with the architectural features of the house.
