Lacquerwork,  certain metallic and wood objects to which coloured and frequently opaque varnishes called lacquer are applied. The word lacquer is derived from lac, a sticky resinous substance that is the basis of some lacquers. But the lacquer of China, Japan, and Korea, which is made from the sap of the tree Rhus vernicifera, should not be confused with other types of lacquer to which the term is generally applied—for instance, the lac of Myanmar (Burma), which is produced by the scale insect Laccifer lacca, and the various solutions of gums or resin in turpentine of which European imitations of Eastern lacquer have been and continue to be concocted.
As stated above, the lacquer of East Asia is made from the sap of Rhus vernicifera; subject to the removal of impurities and excess water, it can be used in its natural state, though it was frequently adulterated. The tree, which is indigenous to China and Korea and has certainly been cultivated in Japan at least since the 6th century ce, is tapped when it is about 10 years old. Lateral incisions are made in the bark, and the running sap is collected during the months of June to September. Branches of a diameter of 1 inch (about 3 cm) or more are also tapped, the bark having first been removed. Smaller branches are cut off and soaked in water for 10 days, and the sap is collected, producing a lacquer (seshime) of particular quality, used for special purposes. These processes kill the tree, but the wood, when of sufficient size, is of some use for carpentry. From the roots five or six shoots spring up, which become available for the production of lacquer after about six years, and the operation can be thus continued for a considerable length of time before the growth is exhausted. Chinese, Korean, and Japanese methods are practically identical in this respect, but the cultivation of the tree has been most systematic in Japan.
The sap is white or grayish in colour and about the consistency of molasses. On exposure to the air it turns yellow-brown and then black. It is strained through hempen cloth to remove physical impurities, after being pounded and stirred in shallow wooden tubs to give it uniform liquidity. It is then slightly heated over a slow fire or in hot sunshine, stirred again to evaporate excess moisture, and stored in airtight vessels.
The basis of lacquerware is almost always wood, although lacquer was also occasionally applied to porcelain, brass, and white metal alloys. In some instances, objects were carved out of solid lacquer. The wood used, generally a sort of pine having a soft and even grain, was worked to an astonishing thinness. The processes that follow are the result of extraordinary qualities of lacquer itself, which, on exposure to air, takes on an extreme but not brittle hardness and is capable of receiving a brilliant polish of such a nature as to rival even the surface of highly glazed porcelain. Moreover, it has the peculiar characteristic of attaining its maximum hardness in the presence of moisture. To secure this result, the Japanese place the object in a damp box or chamber after each application of lacquer to the basic material (wood, etc.). The Chinese were said (in an account of the industry dating from 1621–28) to have used a cave in the ground for this purpose and to place the objects therein at night in order to take advantage of the cool night air. It may, indeed, be said that lacquer dries in a moist atmosphere.
The joiner’s work completed and all knots or projections most carefully smoothed away, cracks and joints are sealed with a mixture of rice paste and seshime lacquer, until an absolutely even surface is obtained. It is then given a thin coat of seshime lacquer to fill up the pores of the wood and to provide a basis for succeeding operations, which may number as many as 20 or 30 or more, of which any one of the following may be taken as typical. On the basis, as above described, is laid a coat of lacquer composition that is allowed to harden and is then ground smooth with whetstone. Next comes a further coat of finer composition, in which is mixed some burnt clay, which is again ground and laid aside to harden for at least 12 hours. On this is fixed a coat of hempen cloth (or paper) by means of an adhesive paste of wheat or rice flour and lacquer, which needs at least 24 hours to dry. The cloth is smoothed with a knife and then receives several successive coats of lacquer composition, each demanding the delay necessary for hardening. On this is laid very hard lacquer, requiring a much longer drying interval, afterward being ground to a fine surface. Succeeding coats of lacquer of varying quality are now laid on, dried, and polished.
This preliminary work, requiring for artistic lacquer at least 18 days, produces the surface on which the artist begins his task of decoration. A large number of processes have been at his command, especially in Japan, but the design was first generally made on paper with lacquer and transferred while still wet or drawn directly with a thin paste of white lead or colour. In carrying it out the artist uses gold or silver dust applied through a quill, a bamboo tube, or, for equal distribution, a sieve. Larger fragments of the precious metals were applied separately by hand, with the aid of a small, pointed tool. In one typical instance approximately 500 squares of thin gold foil were thus inserted within 1 square inch (6 square cm). These processes each entailed prolonged hardening periods and meticulous polishing. Relief was obtained by modeling with a putty consisting of a mixture of lacquer with fine charcoal, white lead, lampblack, etc., camphor being added to make it work easily. Lacquer also was sometimes engraved.
The carved lacquer of China (diaoqi) is particularly noteworthy. In this the lacquer was built up in the method described above, but to a considerable thickness. When several colours were used, successive layers of each colour of uniform thickness were arranged in the order in which they were to predominate. When the whole mass was complete and homogeneous, it was cut back from the surface to expose each colour as required by the design. When the lacquer was cold and hard, the carving was done with a V-shaped tool kept very sharp. The cutting was done with amazing precision—no correction of faults was possible, for each layer had to be exactly and accurately reached and the final result precisely foreseen from the beginning of the work. The red lacquer (tihong), so well known and justly appreciated, was coloured with cinnabar (red mercuric sulfide). Other colours include a deep and a lighter olive green, buff, brown, black, and purple (aubergine).
In Japanese lacquer, the following are the chief processes used: nashiji (pear skin), small flakes of gold or silver sunk to various depths in the lacquer; fundame, fine gold or silver powder worked to a flat, dull surface; hirame, small, irregularly shaped pieces of sheet gold or silver placed on the surface; togidashi, the design built up to the surface in gold, silver, and colours with many coats of lacquer and then polished down to show them; taka-maki-e, decoration in bold relief; hiramaki-e, decoration in low relief: rō-iro, polished black; chinkin-bori, engraved lacquer; kirikane, square dice of sheet gold or silver, inserted separately on the surface; and raden, inlaid shell and metal. From the earliest recorded times shell was used in the adornment of lacquer in China and Korea as well as in Japan, being inlaid on the surface in patterns as well as in small squares like kirikane and dust. For this purpose various shells were used, mother-of-pearl (for larger work), nautilus, pear shell, sea-ear (Haliotes, Japanese Awabi) and Turbo cornutus (Japanese Sazae). For a very charming form, called laque burgauté, the iridescent blue and green shell of the sea-ear was delicately engraved with gold and silver as early as the Ming period (1368–1644). Chinese lacquer was also inlaid with jade, malachite, coral, soapstone, ivory, porcelain, and other substances.
