Opus sectile,  type of mosaic work in which figural patterns are composed of pieces of stone or, sometimes, shell or mother-of-pearl cut in shapes to fit the component parts of the design, thereby differing in approach from the more common type of mosaic in which each shape in the design is composed of many small cubes (tesserae) of stone or glass. Although portable stone mosaic works of similar technique were produced in the Near East as early as about 3000 bc, the term opus sectile properly refers to an art that began in the Hellenistic world, perhaps first in Italy, and continued as a European decorative tradition. Opus sectile first appeared in Rome in Republican times (before the 2nd century bc) as pavement in simple geometrical and floral designs. From the 1st century ad there was also a regular production of small pictures of the opus sectile type.
Both traditions continued as important pavement- and wall-decorating arts throughout the Roman era. A fine example of pictorial opus sectile from the late antique period is a picture composed of coloured marbles of a tiger attacking a calf, from a wall in the Basilica of Junius Bassus, Rome (4th century; Capitoline Museum, Rome). Early Christian churches in Rome and Ravenna were decorated with both types of opus sectile. In medieval Europe the ornamental opus sectile of antiquity evolved into more specialized arts, notably the intricate and severely geometrical Byzantine opus Alexandrinum and its descendants, Roman Cosmati work and other similar Italian arts. Pictorial opus sectile gained great sophistication in the Renaissance with monumental compositions of marble inlay in Italian churches and reached its climax with the Florentine commesso work of the 17th century, in which shaped pieces of highly coloured stone were joined together to form pictures that rival painting in their realism. Geometrical opus sectile continued to be the major form of floor decoration in Italian churches throughout the Middle Ages and Renaissance. 
