Sèvres porcelain,  French hard-paste, or true, porcelain as well as soft-paste porcelain (a porcellaneous material rather than true porcelain) made at the royal factory (now the national porcelain factory) of Sèvres, near Versailles, from 1756 until the present; the industry was located earlier at Vincennes. On the decline of Meissen after 1756 from its supreme position as the arbiter of fashion, Sèvres became the leading porcelain factory in Europe. Perhaps the major factor contributing to its success was the patronage of Louis XV’s mistress Madame de Pompadour. It was through her influence that the move was made from Vincennes to Sèvres, where she had a château, and through her that some of the foremost artists of the time, such as the painter François Boucher and the sculptor Étienne-Maurice Falconet (who directed Sèvres modeling between 1757 and 1766), became involved in the enterprise. It was after her that rose Pompadour was named in 1757; this was one of many new background colours developed at Sèvres, one of which, bleu de roi (c. 1757), has passed into the dictionary as a universal term.
One of the central preoccupations at Sèvres, in which such notable chemists as Jean Hellot were engaged, was the secret of hard-paste porcelain. Soft paste had been made at Vincennes from 1745, but the Sèvres factory did not obtain the secret of hard paste until 1761, when it was bought from Pierre-Antoine Hannong. The necessary raw materials, however, were still lacking in France; and it was not until these were found (1769) at Saint-Yrieix, in the Périgord district, that hard-paste porcelain could be produced. Thereafter a distinction was made in nomenclature between porcelaine de France or vieuse Sèvres (soft paste, or pâte tendre) and porcelaine royale (hard paste, or pâte dure).
Of the many styles and techniques for which Sèvres became famous, a few leading examples may be listed: white figures, either biscuit (unglazed) or rarely glazed, representing Boucher-like cupids, shepherdesses, or nymphs that are nude, draped, or in contemporary dress; vessels decorated with flowers, putti, exotic birds, and marine subjects painted in reserves, or white spaces, on brilliantly coloured grounds, such as pink, turquoise, pea green, jonquil yellow, and royal blue; the frequent embellishment of grounds with various minute patterns in gold, such as partridge’s eye (circles with dots in them), pebble (plain ovals massed together), and fish scales; reserves framed and accentuated by fine gilding in curls, scrolls, and trellis patterns; narrative scenes, from classical mythology and contemporary pastoral life; and jeweled decoration, in which gilt and colours are laid on like encrusted gems. Some dinner services were decorated with naturalistic birds from the famous Natural History of Birds (1771) of Georges-Louis-Leclerc Buffon. Sèvres porcelain went through the gamut of 18th-century styles, including those associated with the reign of Louis XVI (1774–92).
The industry suffered greatly during the French Revolution but revived in the early 19th century under the directorship of Alexandre Brongniart. After the Neoclassical and Egyptian styles of Napoleon’s empire, no one distinctive style was initiated.
