wallpaper,   ornamental and utilitarian covering for walls made from long sheets of paper that have been stenciled, painted, or printed with abstract or narrative designs. Wallpaper developed soon after the introduction of papermaking to Europe during the latter part of the 15th century. Although it is often assumed that the Chinese invented wallpaper, there is no evidence that it was in general use in Asia any earlier than the time of its appearance in Europe. The earliest wallpapers in England and France were hand painted or stenciled. During the 17th century, decorative techniques also included block printing and flocking, a process whereby powdered wool or metallic powders were scattered over paper on which the design had been drawn with a slow-drying adhesive or varnish. The oldest existing example of flocked wallpaper comes from Worcester and was created in approximately 1680.
Contemporary with flock work were painted Chinese papers, which first began to arrive in Europe toward the end of the 17th century. Generally referred to as India papers, they were produced especially for the European market. The absence of repeat, or repetitive design created when single sheets are juxtaposed on the wall, and the studied dissimilarity of detail between one length and another gave them a unique quality that was highly prized. European copies produced by etched plates or woodblocks, with colour applied by hand or stencil, were usually inferior to the originals. Because of their beauty and costliness, a large number of original Chinese papers have been preserved, and fine examples can be seen at Nostell Priory, North Yorkshire, and Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire.
During the 18th century, wallpaper manufacture developed far beyond the expectations of the early makers. From the very beginning, wallpaper had been regarded as a substitute for tapestry, painted cloth, leather, and wood paneling, and the first wallpapers were esteemed because they so cleverly and inexpensively simulated the appearance of more costly hangings. Later designs, however, expressed the decorative possibilities inherent in the medium itself. In France and England new and varied styles became available—chintz patterns, satin grounds, and stripes, to mention but a few—and technical advances were making wallpaper more widely accessible. In 1785 Christophe-Philippe Oberkampf invented the first machine for printing wallpaper, and, shortly thereafter, Louis Robert designed a process for manufacturing endless rolls.
French supremacy in design and execution reached its apex during the early part of the 19th century with the flock papers and distemper-coloured papers of Jean-Baptiste Réveillon and panoramic decorations by Joseph Dufour. By this time French wallpapers used not only paysage (country landscape) designs but also simulated architectural forms, such as moldings, columns, and capitals, and narrative themes that called for special experience in hanging to match the scenes accurately.
Advances in the production and design of English wallpaper reached their zenith in the mid-19th century. Machine-printed wallpaper first appeared in 1840 at a firm of printers in Lancashire and, with the work of William Morris and the Arts and Crafts Movement, created a revolution in wallpaper design. Morris’ designs for the medium, which first appeared in 1862, were characterized by flat, stylized, naturalistic patterns and rich, subdued colours. His work and the progressive designs of Walter Crane coexisted, however, with the more traditional taste expressed in the work of A.W.N. Pugin, Owen Jones, and James Huntington, who designed wallpaper in the Gothic and Rococo styles as late as the 1860s.
For the next 100 years, few advances took place in the wallpaper industry. The 1950s and ’60s, however, brought more developments in wallpaper design and manufacture than any previous period. New processes enabled designers to decorate wallpaper with photogravure, and high-speed techniques were developed for the more traditional screen printing and woodblock methods. The wallpaper industry has kept abreast of modern trends in design, producing papers that range from reproductions of William Morris’ original designs to those reflecting the latest fashions in the visual arts. Improvements in the durability and maintenance of wallpaper have been achieved through the use of plastic coatings. 
