Wig,  manufactured head covering of real or artificial hair worn in the theatre, as personal adornment, disguise, or symbol of office, or for religious reasons. The wearing of wigs dates from the earliest recorded times; it is known, for example, that the ancient Egyptians shaved their heads and wore wigs to protect themselves from the sun and that the Assyrians, Phoenicians, Greeks, and Romans also used artificial hairpieces at times.
It was not until the 16th century, however, that the wig again became a generally acceptable form of adornment or corrective for nature’s defects, as in the case of Queen Elizabeth I. Men’s perukes, or periwigs, for the first time since ancient Egypt, came into widespread use in the 17th century, after Louis XIII began wearing one in 1624. By 1665 the wig industry was established in France by the formation of a wigmakers guild.
The wig became a distinctive class symbol for more than a century. In the 17th century it attained its maximum development, covering the back and shoulders and flowing down the chest. During the same century, women also wore wigs, though less often than did men. Certain professions established specific wigs as part of their official costume; the practice is retained today only in some legal systems, notably that of the United Kingdom. Men’s wigs in various forms were worn throughout the West in the 18th century, until the French and American revolutions swept away these and other symbols of social status.
For several centuries women continued to wear wigs and hairpieces, but only surreptitiously. The popularity of women’s naturally styled wigs increased substantially in the 20th century, especially after the development of wigs made from inexpensive synthetic hairs. As a result, women became more open about the use of wigs as a fashion choice. Wigs also became acceptable head coverings for women in some communities practicing Orthodox Judaism. In Asia, wigs have been used rarely except in the traditional theatre of China and Japan.
