Armenian chant,  vocal music of the Armenian Apostolic Church and the religious poetry that serves as its texts. Armenia was Christianized quite early by missionaries from Syria and Greek-speaking areas of the eastern Mediterranean and accepted Christianity as the state religion about ad 300. The development of a distinctive Armenian liturgy was influenced by various factors. Toward the end of the 4th century, the Armenian church proclaimed its independence from the archbishopric of Caesarea Cappadociae (now Kayseri, Turkey), in Asia Minor. According to tradition, the great Armenian scholar Mesrop Mashtots invented, with the help of others, the Armenian alphabet in 405, and he then carried out important translations of religious literature from Syriac and Greek into Armenian. The introduction of the new alphabet stimulated a flourishing literature, an important part of which was religious poetry. The earliest preserved examples date from the 4th century.
In the 12th century the catholicos (patriarch) Nerses IV Shnorhali (“the Gracious”) is credited with musical reforms of the chant. He is said to have simplified the texts of the religious poetry and the melodies of the chant, bringing it closer to the style of Armenian folk music. Nerses also wrote a number of sharakan (hymns). The final form of the collection of Sharakan, containing nearly 1,200 hymns, was obtained about 1300 and has apparently remained unchanged.
About 1820 an Armenian from Constantinople (now Istanbul), Baba Hampartsoum Limondjian, proposed another reform and modernization of the musical notation along the lines of the contemporary notational reform in the Greek church (which allowed more precise indication of pitch). In its present-day performance, Armenian chant consists of intricate melodies with great rhythmic variety, and the melodies use many intervals not found in European music.
According to a long-standing tradition, the most reliable oral transmission of the chant occurs in the religious capital of Armenia, Ejmiadzin, and in a few isolated monasteries. An important centre for Armenian musical studies is the Armenian Catholic Monastery of San Lazzaro in Venice (founded 1717), where the traditional Armenian melodies are said to be fairly well preserved.
