Arrangement,   in music, traditionally, any adaptation of a composition to fit a medium other than that for which it was originally written, while at the same time retaining the general character of the original. The word was frequently used interchangeably with transcription, although the latter carried the connotation of elaboration of the original, as in the virtuosic piano transcriptions of J.S. Bach’s organ works by Franz Liszt, the Italian composer-pianist Ferruccio Busoni, and others. In later times the definitions were almost reversed, with arrangement connoting musical liberty in elaboration or simplification. In popular music and jazz, the word is often used synonymously with “score.”
Arrangements of vocal compositions were crucial to the early history of instrumental music. Thus, vocal polyphony of the late Middle Ages and the Renaissance, including motets, chansons, and parts of the mass, was intabulated (transcribed so as to suggest finger positions rather than pitches) for the use of keyboard and lute players, permitting them to perform singly music written for several singers.
During the Baroque period (c.1600–1750), interest in arrangement declined, perhaps because of the increased importance of instrumental music and the waning significance of vocal writing. Bach, who arranged many of Antonio Vivaldi’s violin concerti for harpsichord and organ, was a notable exception.
During the 19th century, with its stress on the piano, arrangements again became popular. Liszt transcribed Schubert songs as well as scenes from Wagner’s music dramas. Brahms wrote for orchestra an arrangement of his own Variations on a Theme by Haydn, originally for two pianos, and of Bach’s “Chaconne” from the Partita in D Minor for violin, which he recast as a piano study for the left hand. In the 20th century, Arnold Schoenberg in turn made elaborate orchestral arrangements of music by Bach, Georg Matthias Monn, and Brahms that amount to actual recompositions, quite unlike the popular Bach arrangements by Stokowski, Respighi, and others, which enjoyed a considerable vogue during the pre-World War II era.
Piano arrangements of opera and ballet scores, in particular, have long proven their value in the preparation of performances. Performance editions of problematically notated early scores often carry all the earmarks of highly subjective arrangements.
