Byzantine chant,   monophonic, or unison, liturgical chant of the Greek Orthodox church during the Byzantine Empire (330–1453) and down to the 16th century; in modern Greece the term refers to ecclesiastical music of any period. Although Byzantine music is linked with the spread of Christianity in Greek-speaking areas of the Eastern Roman Empire, it probably derives mostly from Hebrew and early Syrian Christian liturgies (see Syrian chant). Various types of hymns were prominent, among them those called troparion, kontakion, and kanōn (qq.v.). The music is unrelated to that of ancient Greece and Byzantium.
Documents with Byzantine neumatic notation date only from the 10th century. Earlier, there was in use an “ecphonetic” notation based on the accent marks of Greek grammarians from Alexandria, Egypt, giving only a vague direction of upward or downward voice movement; the intoned readings to which the signs were added were learned by oral transmission for centuries.
Byzantine neumatic notation in its earliest stage (Paleo-Byzantine; 10th–12th century) was more specific than the ecphonetic signs but lacked precision in notating rhythms and musical intervals. This imprecision was remedied in Middle Byzantine notation (developed late 12th century), the principles of which are still used in Greek practice. It consists of signs called neumes. Unlike western European neumes, they do not designate pitch; rather, they show the musical interval from the previous tone. The pitch and length of the starting tone were shown by signs called martyriai, abbreviations of well-known melodies that provided an initial intonation.
The notation in manuscripts from the 16th to the early 19th century is usually called Neo-Byzantine because of some stylistic features in music of that period. In the early 19th century the traditional notation was viewed as too complex, and Archbishop Chrysanthos of Madytos introduced a simplified version that spread through printing and is used in all Greek Orthodox liturgical music books.
The melodies were formulaic: a composer usually set a text to a traditional melody, which he then modified and adapted to the needs of the text; some melodic formulas were used exclusively at the beginning of a chant, others at endings, and others in either place. There were also transitional passages, some traditional and others apparently used by individual composers. A few melodic formulas using one basic tone constituted the framework of a mode, or ēchos. Each ēchos had its own formulas, though some formulas occurred in more than one ēchos.
Liturgical books containing texts and music included the Heirmologion (melodies for model stanzas of kanōn hymns); the Sticherarion (hymns proper for each day of the church year); and the psaltikon and asmatikon (solo and choral parts, respectively, for kontakion and some other solo choral chants). In the Akolouthiai, or Anthologion, were ordinary chants for Vespers, Matins, funerals, and the three liturgies (of St. John Chrysostom, St. Basil, and the Preconsecrated Offerings), as well as optional chants, some of which were usable as bridges at any point in the liturgy, usually sung to single syllables or nonsense syllables.
The earliest composers were probably also poets. St. Romanos Melodos (fl. early 6th century) is revered as a singer and as the inventor of the kontakion. John of Damascus (c. 645–749) composed kanōns, and legend credits him with the oktōēchos classification, though the system is documented a century earlier in Syria. The nun Kasia (fl. 9th century) is believed to have composed several hymns; other prominent names are John Koukouzeles, John Glydis, and Xenos Koronis (late 13th–mid-14th century). 
