choir,  body of singers with more than one voice to a part. A mixed choir is normally composed of women and men, whereas a male choir consists either of boys and men or entirely of men. In the United States the term boys’ choir is often applied to a choir in which the treble parts are sung by boys instead of women.
Choirs have taken part in church services from the earliest times, but for many centuries their role was confined to singing plainsong in unison. Such choirs varied considerably in size and style, but the choir of a well-endowed abbey or royal chapel might have 50 or 60 trained voices. In medieval England a system allowing a canon to appoint a substitute led to the formation of self-governing colleges of vicars choral, who were usually ordained deacons or subdeacons. Below them were clerks of the choir, also in minor orders and sometimes called altarists, or secondaries.
In cathedrals, boys were trained by the precentor, or choir director, to take part not only in the singing but also in the liturgy. Boys with intelligence and good voices could progress as far as the rank of vicar choral, and as time went on they enjoyed lodgings and privileges, as well as tuition in subjects other than music.
Apart from plainsong, there was no choral singing in the early church. When polyphony (multipart music) first came into use, its relative complexity demanded soloists as interpreters. About 1430, however, Italian manuscripts began to hint at choral singing of straightforward polyphony with the direction that sections in three parts were to be sung by the chorus, or all voices, in contrast to sections in two parts, marked either unus (one voice to a part) or duo (duet for solo voices). The alternation of soloists and chorus eventually led to the use of two choirs, one on each side of the church or (as at St. Mark’s, Venice) in the galleries, so that psalms, canticles, and even masses could be sung antiphonally (i.e., by contrasting choirs). Music for divided choirs, or cori spezzati, was developed in the early 16th century and reached a peak of excellence in the late 16th- and early 17th-century works of Giovanni Gabrieli.
The growth of secular choirs, sometimes called choruses, coincided largely with the beginnings of opera, in which choruses have generally taken some part. Opera-house choruses normally employ professional singers. An oratorio choir, on the other hand, is part of a different tradition, which stems from the augmented church choirs used to provide choral portions of a given oratorio, whether performed in or out of church. Oratorio choirs thus formed an outlet for amateur singers.
George Frideric Handel presented his oratorios and operas with a choir of medium size, but the Handel Commemoration in 1784 in London called for as large a body of singers as could be conveniently found: 274. This choir, however, was dwarfed by the 2,000 singers who participated in the first Handel Festival at the Crystal Palace, London, in 1857. In later years of this festival the number crept up to well over 3,000. Even the concerts monstres of the French composer Hector Berlioz rarely required a choir of more than 500. Berlioz stated that he had heard at St. Paul’s Cathedral in 1851, at the anniversary meeting of the Charity Children, a choir of 6,500. From meetings such as these, beginning with those of the Three Choirs of Gloucester, Worcester, and Hereford (1724 or perhaps earlier), developed the local choral festivals widely popular in the 20th century. Despite such large assemblages for special events, modern professional recording choirs number about 30.
