Chromaticism,  (from Greek chroma, “colour”) in music, the use of notes foreign to the mode or diatonic scale upon which a composition is based.
Chromatic tones in Western art music are the notes in a composition that are outside the seven-note diatonic (i.e., major and minor) scales and modes. On the piano keyboard, the black keys represent the 5 chromatic tones that do not belong to the diatonic scale of C major; black and white keys together add up to the chromatic scale of 12 tones per octave.
In European medieval and Renaissance music, chromaticism was associated with the practice of musica ficta, which facilitated, and in some instances required, half-tone steps outside the church modes. In the 16th and early 17th centuries, notably in the secular Italian and English madrigal, chromaticism was used to heighten expressiveness; the Italian composer Carlo Gesualdo and some of his contemporaries pushed this tendency to extremes that distorted the perception of modal scale structure.
Melodic use of the chromatic scale became widespread in Baroque instrumental music. At the same time, chromatic tones were systematically incorporated into the diatonic system of harmony and were indicated in the musical text as accidental signs, that is, sharp (♯), flat (♭), or natural (♮) signs for notes that are outside the key. There are five common uses of chromatic tones in tonal harmony.
All of these kinds of chromaticism have been employed in rich variety as expressive and structural means. Chromatic modulation between distantly related keys, an occasional feature in the music of Johann Sebastian Bach, Joseph Haydn, and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, was increasingly used by early Romantic composers, including Franz Schubert and Frédéric Chopin, and became an outstanding aspect of the style of the dramatic composer Richard Wagner. In his opera Tristan und Isolde (1857–59) Wagner developed a continuously chromatic harmonic vocabulary in which the music frequently progressed toward new keys yet repeatedly postponed key-strengthening cadences.
Composers of instrumental music after Wagner, including César Franck, Anton Bruckner, Richard Strauss, and Max Reger, developed these chromatic tendencies to the point of a nearly complete destabilization of tonality. The tonal system was entirely rejected in the atonal music of Arnold Schoenberg, Alban Berg, Anton Webern, and Aleksandr Scriabin at the beginning of the 20th century. In atonality, composers eliminated harmony based on diatonic scales, instead relying on harmony in which any of the 12 pitches could be included.
