Equal temperament,  in music, a tuning system in which the octave is divided into 12 semitones of equal size. Because it enables keyboard instruments to play in all keys with minimal flaws in intonation, equal temperament replaced earlier tuning systems that were based on acoustically pure intervals, that is, intervals that occur naturally in the overtone series. For a more technical explanation of overtones, see sound: Standing waves.
The search for satisfactory tuning systems parallels the development of the Western tonal system, with its reliance on enharmonic equivalence (for example, having the notes F♯ and G♭ sound the same) and multiple major and minor keys. In 1581 Florentine music theorist Vincenzo Galilei (father of the astronomer Galileo) proposed a system of equal intervals for tuning the lute. Chinese prince and musicologist Zhu Zaiyu in 1596 and French philosopher and mathematician Marin Mersenne in 1636, among others, wrote of such a system. The idea of equal temperament had its most effective advocates among German musicians and theorists, beginning with Andreas Werckmeister in the early 18th century. Even before the system was widespread, equal temperament was approximated in various degrees as a practical matter, in the small adjustments made by organ tuners and harpsichordists. Equal temperament tuning was widely adopted in France and Germany by the late 18th century and in England by the 19th. Other systems are discussed in tuning and temperament.
In equal temperament, each semitone is measured at 100 cents (1 cent = 1/1,200 octave); measuring by frequency (vibrational cycles per second), each semitone step increases in frequency by a factor of the 12th root of 2, or about 1.059. The 12th semitone, which completes the octave, therefore has a multiplier of 2; for example, the standard A measures 440 hertz, the octave below 220 hertz, and the octave above 880 hertz. Because equal-tempered tuning is calculated by subdividing the octave, it is called a “divisional” system. Earlier European tuning systems—such as meantone temperament and just intonation—were “cyclic” systems, in which given intervals were calculated by adding together other “pure” intervals. Such systems accumulate intonational differences as they move to more distantly related keys (those with increasing numbers of sharps or flats in the key signature), with the result that keyboard instruments and others with fixed intonation will sound unpleasantly out of tune in those keys. In other words, music that would sound perfectly in tune in C major (with no sharps or flats) would sound wrong if transposed to B major (five sharps) because all of the intervals would actually be different in the two keys. In equal temperament, the perfect fifth, such as C–G, is narrower than the natural, or Pythagorean, fifth by 2 cents, a nearly imperceptible amount. These small intonational defects are equally distributed among the 12 tones of the chromatic scale, and only the octave remains as an acoustically pure interval.
