Fado,  a type of Portuguese singing, traditionally associated with pubs and cafés, that is renowned for its expressive and profoundly melancholic character.
The singer of fado (literally, “fate”) speaks to the often harsh realities of everyday life, sometimes with a sense of resignation, sometimes with the hope of resolution. The music is performed by either a female or a male vocalist, typically to the accompaniment of one or two guitarras (10- or 12-string guitars), one or two violas (6-string guitars), and perhaps also a viola baixo (a small 8-string bass viola). Most of the repertoire follows a duple metre (usually with four beats to a measure), with a text arranged in quatrains or in any of several other common Portuguese poetic forms. Until the mid-20th century many fado performances featured a significant element of improvisation. Inevitably enriched with an array of emotive bodily gestures and facial expressions, fado aims—and indeed, is required—to evoke a penetrating sense of saudade (roughly, “yearning”).
There are two distinct styles of fado, the older of which is associated with the city of Lisbon and the younger with the north-central Portuguese city of Coimbra. The Lisbon style emerged in the first half of the 19th century, following the 1822 return to Portugal of the Portuguese government, which had been removed to Brazil during the Napoleonic Wars. It arose in the city’s Alfama district, a socially and economically marginalized area that was a nexus of Iberian, South American (particularly Brazilian), and African peoples and traditions. A diverse array of dance traditions circulated within this milieu, including the Afro-Brazilian lundum; the Brazilian fado (distinct from the song genre that bears the same name); the fofa, which was common both in Portugal and in Brazil; and the Spanish fandango. Also popular at the time was the modinha, a type of Portuguese and Brazilian art song that often was accompanied by the guitar. The musics of these dance traditions merged with the modinha, ultimately giving birth to fado.
The popularization of fado in the 1830s is widely attributed to Maria Severa, a tavern singer in the Alfama district and the first famous fadista (singer of fado). To the accompaniment of guitars, Severa sang of real-life woes in the harmonically predictable, notably improvisational, and strikingly mournful manner that came to characterize the Lisbon style. The dark shawl that she wore during her performances, moreover, became a standard accessory for subsequent generations of female fadistas.
The second style of fado developed roughly from the 1870s to the 1890s in the university city of Coimbra. In contrast to the Lisbon style, which sprang from a sidelined segment of society, appealed to working-class audiences, and included many female performers, the Coimbra style (also called canção de Coimbra, “songs of Coimbra”) was generally a product and a pastime of the privileged classes, and it was typically performed by men. Cultivated in cafés by college students and university faculty, the new fado drew from the city’s deep literary tradition, as well as from bel canto singing and diverse musical styles brought by students from various regions of Portugal. A further difference between the Coimbra and Lisbon styles was the manner in which they addressed the hardships of everyday life: the fado of Coimbra inspired hope, while that of Lisbon suggested surrender. Other distinctive features of the Coimbra style included a lack of improvisation (performances were solidly rehearsed) and the elevation of the guitarras and violas to a position of prominence from what had been an essentially accompanimental role. Indeed, the Coimbra tradition generated a separate, instrumental repertoire for guitar.
Since the late 19th century both styles of fado have continued to develop, gaining audiences well beyond the tavern and café. In the late 1890s and the early decades of the 20th century fado found a place on the vaudeville stage, and in the 1920s and ’30s Coimbra fadistas Edmundo de Bettancourt and Lucos Junot were instrumental in expanding the music’s listenership. In the late 1930s Alfama native Amália Rodrigues appeared on the scene. Renowned for her passionate performances, Rodrigues pushed the Lisbon style in new directions, incorporating Spanish and Mexican rhythms and tapping contemporary poets for her lyrics. (When she died in 1999, the country honoured her with three days of official mourning.)
Toward the middle of the century, fado took a “folkloric” turn, becoming a self-conscious representative of Portuguese culture. This new role, combined with the growth of the sound-recording industry, contributed both to the professionalization of fado and to the reduction—if not the elimination—of its improvisational elements. In the 1970s José Alfonso pioneered a fado-based fusion music in which he combined fado with rock music, as well as with various folk music traditions, most notably nueva canción (“new song”), a type of political protest music that was popular throughout Latin America at the time.
The late 20th century brought an ebb in fado’s popularity, but by the early 21st century there was renewed interest in the music. Many artists, including Carlos do Carmo, Christina Branco, and Mariza, had begun to expand the traditional guitar accompaniment to include piano, violin, accordion, and other instruments, while other fadistas followed in the footsteps of Alfonso, exploring new ways to blend fado with other popular genres.
