Instrumentation, also called orchestration,  in music, arrangement or composition for instruments. Most authorities make little distinction between the words instrumentation and orchestration. Both deal with musical instruments and their capabilities of producing various timbres or colours. Orchestration is somewhat the narrower term, since it is frequently used to describe the art of instrumentation as related to the symphony orchestra. Instrumentation, therefore, is the art of combining instruments in any sort of musical composition, including such diverse elements as the numerous combinations used in chamber groups, jazz bands, rock ensembles, ensembles employing chorus, symphonic bands, and, of course, the symphony orchestra. Included under this designation are the various instrumental groups that play non-Western music, such as the gamelan orchestras of Bali and Java and the traditional ensembles of India, Africa, East Asia, and the Middle East. (For treatment of the instruments themselves, see the articles musical instrument, percussion instrument, stringed instrument, keyboard instrument, wind instrument, and electronic instrument.)
In Western music there are many standard or traditional groups. Although there is great variability, depending on the composer and the era, a modern symphony orchestra often comprises the following instruments:
1. Woodwinds: three flutes, piccolo, three oboes, English horn (cor anglais), three clarinets, bass clarinet, three bassoons, contrabassoon (double bassoon).
2. Brass: four trumpets, four or five horns, three trombones, tuba.
3. Strings: two harps, first and second violins, violas, violoncellos, double basses.
4. Percussion: four timpani (played by one player), several other instruments (shared by a group of players).
The orchestra has arrived at this complement through centuries of evolution; the present size is needed to perform music from the Baroque, Classical, and Romantic, periods, as well as the varied repertoires that followed.
The various sections, with the exception of percussion, divide themselves in somewhat the same manner as a choir. The woodwinds, for example, divide into flutes (sopranos), oboes (altos), clarinets (tenors), and bassoons (basses), although this distinction must be greatly qualified. Instrumental range is larger than vocal range, and the clarinets of an orchestra may play higher than the flutes in a woodwind passage.
The standard instrumental groups of Western chamber music include the string quartet (two violins, viola, and violoncello), the woodwind quintet (flute, oboe, clarinet, horn, and bassoon), the combinations employed in sonatas (one wind or stringed instrument with piano), and the brass quintet (frequently two trumpets, horn, trombone, and tuba). In addition to these standard groups there are, however, hundreds of other possible combinations.
Other groups that deserve mention are those used in popular music. The dance band, popular in the 1930s and 1940s, consisted of five saxophones, four trumpets, four trombones, double bass, piano, guitar, and drums. The basic rock ensemble consists of two electric guitars, electric bass, electronic keyboard, drums, and frequently one or more singers. The concert band, which is particularly popular in North America, consists of mixed wind and percussion players totalling from about 40 to well beyond 100 players.
The music of the non-Western world is most frequently performed by groups of chamber music size. In this category would fall the music played by the Javanese gamelan orchestra (consisting mainly of tuned gongs and other metal instruments), Japanese gagaku music (performed on flutes, mouth organs, lutes, drums, and gongs), and Chinese music (with a traceable history of about 4,000 years) consisting of sacred, folk, chamber, and operatic music.
The approach to the art of instrumentation is naturally greatly influenced by the type of group for which the composer is writing. A string quartet or a group of brass instruments, for instance, cannot be treated in the same manner as a symphony orchestra. In general, the larger and more diverse the instrumental group, the more colouristic possibilities it presents to the composer. The smaller instrumental groups often have a sound character of their own, and the composer is challenged to find new and interesting ways to deal with this limitation.
The symphony orchestra has had definite traditions in relation to orchestration. The composer of the 18th century was likely to use the orchestral instruments at least part of the time in the following manner: the flutes doubling the same part as the first violins (frequently the melody); the oboes doubling the second violins or the first violins in octaves; the clarinets (by the end of the century) doubling the violas; and the bassoons doubling the violoncellos and double basses. Horns were often used as harmonic “filler” and in conjunction with every section of the orchestra because of their ability to blend easily with both stringed and wind instruments.
These traditional doublings were not so often used in the orchestration of the 19th and 20th centuries because of the great improvement in the making of wind instruments and their consequent ability to function in a solo capacity. Wind instruments became used more and more for colouring; the flutes, for instance, were noted for their bright tone quality and great technical agility, the clarinets for all the aforementioned qualities, and the bassoons for their special tone quality. Brass instruments had to await the development of valves, which increased greatly the musical proficiency of brass players and overcame previous typecasting of these instruments as bugles and hunting horns.
The string quartet has long been considered one of the greatest challenges to the composer because the contrast to be achieved by changing from one type of instrument when writing for a full orchestra is simply not available. The composer has had to rely on varying timbres to be arrived at by different playing techniques, such as pizzicato (plucking the strings), tremolo (the quick reiteration of the same tone), sul ponticello (bowing near the bridge of the instrument), sul tasto (bowing on the fingerboard), the use of harmonics (dividing the string in such a way as to produce a high flutelike tone), col legno (striking the strings with the wood of the bow), and many special bowing techniques.
Special playing techniques also can alter the timbres of wind instruments. For instance, on many, tremolos can be played on two different notes. Some wind instruments—and the flute is particularly agile in this respect—can produce harmonics. Flutter tonguing (produced by a rapid rolling movement of the tongue) is possible on most wind instruments; so are many other tonguing techniques that affect the quality of sound in orchestration.
The string mute is a device that softens the tone of the instrument. Muting is also used by brass instruments, particularly the trumpet and trombone, a development that took place in 20th-century popular music and then came into common use in all types of music. Mutes—of which there are various kinds—provide the trumpet and trombone with a different tone colour. Mutes on woodwind instruments have been experimented with, but the results have not been satisfactory.
