Musica ficta, also called musica falsa,  in medieval music, notes that were not included within the gamut first authorized by the Italian theorist Guido d’Arezzo in the early 11th century. The opposite of musica ficta was musica recta, which included only the recognized notes. The original sense of musica ficta is now used infrequently. The term later came to mean pitch alterations that were necessary in performance but not notated.
Although some medieval sacred music (i.e., Gregorian chant) employed ficta pitches, these were rarely signaled by accidentals (in this case, flats) in the sources. Instead, different strategems were devised in order to recast the music as recta. The use of ficta developed mainly in the realms of secular monophony (i.e., single-line music) and polyphony (i.e., multiple-line music), where such tones are indicated in sources beginning in the 13th century.
There was no obligation on the part of the scribes to use accidentals in order to signal the presence of ficta. The recognition of the stylistic necessity for an alteration of  “wrong” pitches was very often left to the musicianship of the performer. The term musica ficta thus developed a second meaning, namely, the addition by performers of accidentals (i.e., flats, sharps, or natural signs) that are not specified in the notation. Pitch alterations might be desirable for the sake of euphony—for example, to avoid certain diminished or augmented intervals. Alternatively, they might create a more urgent sense of motion by forming less-stable intervals that move satisfyingly (by half-step motion) to more-stable ones. Such relationships later became well established in the major-minor key system of tonality.
The increasing use of chromatic alterations in polyphony made the church modes less distinct and the modal terminology increasingly vague, although vestiges of the system remained through the 16th century and beyond. The modern editors of medieval and Renaissance music do not always agree on particular ficta alterations, which they usually indicate by means of small accidentals placed above the relevant pitches.
