Novelty song,  popular song that is either written and performed as a novelty or that becomes a novelty when removed from its original context. Regardless of which of these two categories applies, the assumption is that the song is popular because of its novelty, because it sounds different from everything else being played on the radio or jukebox. It follows that novelty hits are unique; the second time around, the sound is no longer novel. However, a novelty song can change people’s listening assumptions, and hits that the record industry has treated as novelties have often turned out to be precursors of new musical styles.
Songs written and performed as novelties have usually been comic songs, in a tradition that goes back to British music hall hits such as “Laughing Policeman.” Comic records, such as Bill Buchanan and Dickie Goodman’s “The Flying Saucer” (1956) and Sheb Wooley’s “Purple People Eater” (1958), sold particularly well in the 1950s. Comedians such as Stan Freberg and Peter Sellers were specializing in musical satire and directing their wit at the new music at the time when rock and roll records were first heard.
The market for joke records, however, declined after the 1950s for a variety of reasons. First, in the 1950s there was a perceived children’s music market, the demands of which were met partly by singing cartoon characters. By the end of the decade, children had become, in commercial terms, miniteenagers; since then the appeal of cartoon groups such as the Chipmunks or the Wombles has been limited. Second, the comedy and music scenes diverged as comedians moved from radio to television. There were TV comedies aimed primarily at the youth audience (e.g., Monty Python’s Flying Circus, The Simpsons, Beavis and Butt-head), but the musical output of those programs and their central characters rarely received much airplay or generated many sales. Third, records that parodied rock music lost their bite as rock became the dominant form of popular music. Freberg’s version of Elvis Presley in the 1950s was much sharper than “Weird Al” Yankovic’s version of Michael Jackson in the 1980s because it was much more contemptuous.
Noncomic novelty songs either reflect nonmusical events (the British charts fill up with football-related songs during the World Cup competition, for instance) or show off new instrumental sounds (the Tornadoes’ 1962 hit “Telstar” was the first of many electronic novelties). This is the context in which the second category of novelty song is significant: “exotic” hits cross the world to be heard on Western radio (early examples were the South African song “Tom Hark” in 1957 and the Japanese recording “Sukiyaki” in 1962); and tracks from specialist genres turn out to have unexpected pop appeal (Dave Brubeck’s jazz number “Take Five,”a hit in 1961; Laurie Anderson’s performance art work “O Superman,” in 1981).
Such records are treated as novelties and, in pop terms, remain so—their commercial success leaves no mark on either pop history or the musicians concerned. But there are also songs that are at first treated as novelties and then become normalized. This reflects in part the way in which the media react to any new phenomenon—Presley made to sing to a real hound dog during an early television appearance, for example, or a TV producer’s determination to show Jimi Hendrix using his teeth to play “Hey Joe” on the guitar.  And new musical genres are often best sold to radio and record companies in a simplified comic form, as were ska, disco, and hip-hop, respectively, with Millie Small’s “My Boy Lollipop” (1964), Rick Dees’s “Disco Duck” (1976), and the Sugarhill Gang’s “Rapper’s Delight” (1979). It is also true, however, that records that initially sound peculiar cease to as people learn their language. It is in this way—as an entry point—that novelty songs have played an important role in the history of rock music.
