Old Roman chant,  repertory of liturgical melodies written in Rome between the 11th and the 13th century and discovered about 1890.
The earliest of the five manuscripts containing the chants (three graduals and two antiphonaries) dates from 1071, although the Roman tradition of worship can be traced at least as far back as the 8th century. The relationship between this repertory and the Gregorian poses some complicated and, as yet, unresolved problems. Liturgically, the two traditions are almost identical; the structure of the mass and the office are similar, and the texts given for the various services rarely disagree. It is the musical settings that are obviously different, although, in some cases, the Old Roman melody shares the same general contour of the corresponding Gregorian melody and may even be regarded as a variation of that chant. When the melodies of the Old Roman tradition were first published (Paléographie musicale, 1891), they were described as a deteriorated and distorted Roman version of the Gregorian melodies. Dom Andoyer held an opposite view, however, writing (in 1912) that they were actually older than Gregorian and were simply preserved in the Old Roman tradition. The question was again raised in 1950 by Bruno Stäblein, a German musicologist, who held that the Old Roman tradition was sung at the time of Pope Gregory the Great (reigned 590–604) and was therefore the authentic Gregorian chant, whereas the so-called Gregorian body of song dated from the second half of the 7th century.
According to most recent theories, the two repertories represent variant rites developed in different locales, rather than coming from different historical periods. Helmut Hucke of Frankfurt University maintained that the Old Roman chant was the Roman rendition of Gregorian chant and that the latter originated in the Frankish kingdom with the introduction of the Roman liturgy during the empire of Pippin and Charlemagne. Hucke’s position was supported by the late—and incomplete—adoption of the system of eight psalm tones into Old Roman chant. This system, related directly to the eight church modes, was first demonstrated in the Frankish empire (c. 800) and is considered to be one of the achievements of the Carolingian Renaissance. Thus, it is very probable that the Old Roman tradition, subjected to the powerful spread of Frankish culture, was replaced by Gregorian chant in Rome during the High Middle Ages.
