Russian chant,  monophonic, or unison, chant of the liturgy of the Russian Orthodox church. Musical manuscripts from the 11th to the 13th century suggest that, at first, chanting in Russia almost certainly followed Byzantine melodies, which were adapted to the accentual patterns of the Old Church Slavonic language. Russian manuscripts of this period are the only surviving sources of a highly ornate type of Byzantine chant called kontakion and contain a complex Byzantine musical notation that by then had disappeared in Byzantium. Russian sources may thus be crucial documents for the reconstruction of one branch of Byzantine music and notation.
In the 14th century, musical notation in Russian manuscripts began to change its meaning and form. Scholars usually presume—but this has not been fully proved—that native Russian elements began to enter Russian church music at this time. The first lists of kryuki (“hooks”), or signs, used as musical notation in Russia, were compiled in the late 15th century. The lists show that by then most technical terms were Russian and that Greek terms had begun to disappear. By the 16th century, Russian chant apparently had lost its links with its Byzantine prototypes, and melodies became different in their outlines. An indigenous polyphonic repertoire known as troyestrochnoye peniye (“three-line singing”) arose about this time. It consisted of a traditional chant in the middle voice, accompanied by a newly composed descant and bass. By Western standards, these harmonizations are very dissonant.
In the 17th century, Russian musicians began to emulate music of Western origin, at first through contacts with Ukrainian and Polish models. German influence became prominent in the 19th century, when various composers emulated the Protestant chorale in Russian church music. As a reaction to this trend, early scholars studying the history of Russian church music began to investigate the nearly forgotten traditional melodies that were still used in some monasteries resisting the introduction of polyphonic music. The restoration of Russian chant gained momentum in the early years of the 20th century and is best exemplified in the works of Aleksandr Kastalsky and Pavel Chesnokov, who, although writing for multi-voiced choirs, utilized supposedly traditional melodies and the style Mily Balakirev had developed for harmonizing Russian folk music.
