Tablature,   system of musical notation based on a player’s finger position, as opposed to notes showing rhythm and pitch. Tablatures were used for lute and keyboard music during the Renaissance and Baroque eras.
Lute tablatures were of three main varieties, French, Italian (used also in Spain), and German. The French type, used c. 1500–c. 1800, proved to be the most practical and contained an important repertory of lute music. 
It used a staff of five (after the late 16th century, six) horizontal lines, each of which represented a course of strings. In five-line tablature, the sixth course was printed below the staff. Stylized letters, from b to i or k, indicated which fret the player was to stop to produce the proper note; the letter a indicated plucking an open string. Rhythms were indicated by placing note stems above the staff. The lowest line of tablature represented the lowest pitched string on the lute. Signs such as dots and slurs indicated right-hand fingerings, ornaments, and special effects. For the theorbo, a 17th-century variety of lute, special signs indicated the instrument’s off-the-fingerboard bass strings.
Italian or Spanish tablature (flourished 1500–1650) resembled the French system, using six lines to represent the six courses of strings. Except in the famous lute book of Luis Milán, the lowest line represented the highest pitched string. Numbers, rather than letters, indicated which fret was to be stopped. Rhythms were shown by note stems above the diagram.
Unlike these systems, German lute tablature (flourished 1511–1620) did not provide a diagram of the strings. Instead, it used 54 or more symbols for as many possible junctions of fret and string. The symbols were aligned vertically if more than one fret should be stopped. Note stems above the symbols showed the rhythm.
Keyboard tablatures flourished in Germany c. 1450–c. 1750 and in Spain c. 1550–c. 1680. The German system was a hybrid—the top voice part was shown in ordinary musical notation, the lower parts by the letters of the musical scale (A, B, etc.). Special signs indicated when a note should be sharped (D♯ usually indicating E♭, etc.; but signs for flat notes appeared occasionally) and ornamented. Small note stems, typically joined together to resemble fences, showed rhythm. After c. 1570 the top line also was printed in tablature; this was called the “new German tablature,” as opposed to the “old German tablature,” the hybrid system. Even in the mid-18th century, J.S. Bach used tablature in his Orgelbüchlein (Little Organ Book) when it saved space.
In Spanish keyboard tablature (called cifras, “numbers”), each line of the staff represented a different voice part of the music. In the most commonly used system, numbers from 1 to 7 indicated the notes of the musical scale. Sharps and flats were printed above the number when necessary, and signs showed the octave in which the note occurred. Note stems above the diagram showed rhythm. Other systems numbered all notes from 1 to 42 and all white notes from 1 to 23, sharps and flats showing the black notes.
Other tablatures have been used for bowed instruments, such as the viol; for plucked instruments, such as the cittern, guitar, and zither; and also for non-Western instruments, such as the Japanese koto, a type of zither. Guitar music once employed lute tablature or a simpler notation showing chords; later it used ordinary musical notation. In the 20th century, guitar and ukulele popular music used a tablature in which a grid represented string and fret intersections and dots showed proper finger placement. Tablatures have also occasionally been used to show finger placement on flageolets and recorders. 
