Paleogeography, also spelled palaeogeography,  the ancient geography of Earth’s surface. Earth’s geography is constantly changing: continents move as a result of plate tectonic interactions; mountain ranges are thrust up and erode; and sea levels rise and fall as the volume of the ocean basins change. These geographic changes can be traced through the study of the rock and fossil record, and data can be used to create paleogeographic maps, which illustrate how the continents have moved and how the past locations of mountains, lowlands, shallow seas, and deep ocean basins have changed.
The study of paleogeography has two principal goals. The first is to map the past positions of the continents and ocean basins, and the second is to illustrate Earth’s changing geographic features through time.
The past positions of the continents can be determined by using six major lines of evidence: paleomagnetism, linear magnetic anomalies, hot-spot tracks, paleobiogeography, paleoclimatology, and geologic and tectonic history.
By measuring the remanent magnetic field often preserved in rocks containing iron-bearing minerals, paleomagnetic analysis can determine whether a rock was magnetized near one of Earth’s poles or near the Equator. Iron-bearing minerals forming in igneous rock align themselves with Earth’s magnetic field as the molten rock cools. These minerals also align themselves when they are deposited in sediments, and they retain their orientation as they lithify into sedimentary rock. Lines of force in Earth’s magnetic field are parallel to the planet’s surface at the Equator and are vertical at the poles. Therefore, iron-bearing minerals formed or deposited at low latitudes will be nearly parallel to Earth’s surface, while those at high latitudes will dip steeply. If the rocks are later transported by tectonic processes, their original latitude of deposition can be determined by their orientation. Paleomagnetism provides direct evidence of a continent’s past north-south (latitudinal) position, but it does not constrain its east-west (longitudinal) position.
Earth’s magnetic field has another important property. Like the Sun’s magnetic field, Earth’s magnetic field periodically “flips,” or reverses polarity—that is, the North and South poles switch places. Fluctuations, or anomalies in the intensity of the magnetic field, occur at the boundaries between normally magnetized sea floor and sea floor magnetized in the reversed direction. The age of these magnetic anomalies can be established by using fossil evidence and radiometric age determinations. Because these magnetic anomalies form at oceanic ridges, they tend to be long, linear features (hence the name linear magnetic anomalies) that are symmetrically disposed about ridge axes. The past positions of the continents during the last 150 million years (the maximum age of most of the ocean floor) can be directly reconstructed by superimposing linear magnetic anomalies of the same age, in effect “undoing” the results of sea-floor spreading since that time.
Some of the world’s volcanoes are formed by jets of molten rock that arise at the boundary between Earth’s core and mantle (at a depth of about 2,900 km, or 1,800 miles). These rising plumes, or hot spots, puncture the lithosphere, and, as a tectonic plate moves across the hot spot, a line of islands is generated. The island directly above the hot spot is the youngest, and islands become progressively older with distance from the hot spot. There are more than a dozen well-documented hot-spot tracks. Perhaps the most obvious is the Hawaiian Islands, which trace an east-west arc across the central Pacific Ocean. Hot-spot tracks accurately record plate motions and can be used to determine the past latitudinal and longitudinal position of the continents.
The past distribution of plants and animals can give important clues about the latitudinal position of the continents as well as their relative positions. Cold-water faunas can often be distinguished from warm-water faunas, and ancient floras reflect both paleotemperature and paleorainfall. The diversity of plants and animals tends to increase toward the Equator, and the adaptations of plants (such as smooth-edged leaves in the tropics and serrated-edged leaves in the temperate belts) are often good indicators of the amount of ancient rainfall.
The similarity or dissimilarity of faunas and floras on different continents can also be used to estimate their geographic proximity. In addition, the evolutionary history of groups of plants and animals on different continents can reveal when these continents were connected or isolated from each other. For example, Australia’s unique marsupial fauna is the result of its isolation from the other continents at the time when placental mammals were evolving on the other continents during the early Paleogene Period.
Earth’s climate is primarily a result of the redistribution of the Sun’s energy across the surface of the globe. It is warm near the Equator and cool near the poles. Wetness or rainfall also varies systematically from the Equator to the pole in alternating bands. It is wet near the Equator, dry in the subtropics, wet in the temperate belts, and dry near the poles. Certain kinds of rocks form under specific climatic conditions. For example, coals occur where wet climates once supported lush vegetation; bauxite (the principal ore of aluminum) is formed in warm and wet conditions, evaporites and calcretes require warmth and aridity to form; and tillites are deposited during the movement of glacial ice. The ancient distribution of these and other rock types can indicate how the global climate has changed through time and how the continents have traveled across the climatic belts.
In order to reconstruct the past positions of the continents, it is necessary to understand the evolution of plate tectonic boundaries. Only by understanding the regional geologic and tectonic history of an area can the location and timing of rifting events, subduction activity, continental collision, and other major plate tectonic events be determined.
