James Luther Bevel,  (born Oct. 19, 1936, Itta Bena, Miss., U.S.—died Dec. 19, 2008, Springfield, Va.), American minister and political activist who played a pivotal role in the civil rights movement in the early 1960s.
Although Bevel initially intended to pursue a recording career, he felt called to Christian ministry. He entered the American Baptist Theological Seminary in Nashville in 1957; he graduated and was ordained in 1961. While a seminarian, he participated in two forms of nonviolent protest against institutionalized racial segregation: sit-ins by African American youths at department-store lunch counters in 1960 and the Freedom Rides on bus lines throughout the South in 1961. He subsequently joined the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), serving as project director and becoming one of the most influential advisers to the SCLC’s head, Martin Luther King, Jr. On Bevel’s recommendation, hundreds of youth were mobilized in 1963 in the “children’s crusade” to participate in peaceful antisegregation protests in downtown Birmingham, Ala. The news coverage, which featured children being water-hosed by police and more than 600 youth being arrested, prompted a groundswell of support for the civil rights movement. Bevel was later instrumental in organizing the historic march from Selma to Montgomery, Ala., an event that was credited with helping to usher in the Voting Rights Act (1965).
Bevel was forced from his position in the SCLC after exhibiting erratic behaviour. His contention that convicted assassin James Earl Ray was not guilty of King’s murder embarrassed many in the movement. In subsequent years Bevel continued his political activism. He unsuccessfully ran for Congress in 1984, served as Lyndon LaRouche’s running mate in the 1992 U.S. presidential election, and helped organize the Million Man March in 1995. In 2008 Bevel’s legacy was tarnished when he was found guilty of having engaged in an incestuous relationship with a teenage daughter in the 1990s.
