Adipose tissue, or fatty tissue,  connective tissue consisting mainly of fat cells (adipose cells, or adipocytes), specialized to synthesize and contain large globules of fat, within a structural network of fibres. It is found mainly under the skin but also in deposits between the muscles, in the intestines and in their membrane folds, around the heart, and elsewhere. It is also found in the bone marrow, where it imparts a yellow colour; yellow marrow is most abundant in adults. The fat stored in adipose tissue comes from dietary fats or is produced in the body.
Mammals have two different types of adipose: white adipose tissue and brown adipose tissue. White adipose, the most common type, provides insulation, serves as an energy store for times of starvation or great exertion, and forms pads between organs. When muscles and other tissues need energy, certain hormones bind to adipose cells and trigger the hydrolysis of triacylglycerol, resulting in the release of energy-rich fatty acids and glycerol—a process known as lipolysis. The enzyme responsible for hydrolysis is lipase, which occurs in the blood, certain gastrointestinal juices, and adipose tissue. Lipase is activated by the hormones epinephrine, norepinephrine, glucagon, and adrenocorticotropin, which bind to adipocytes.
White adipose tissue also is a source of a number of different hormones, which serve various roles in metabolism and endocrine function. The adipose-produced hormones adiponectin, leptin, and resistin are involved in energy metabolism, for example, whereas plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 prevents the dissolution of blood clots.
Brown adipose, found mainly in newborn animals, generates heat and actually consumes energy. In humans, the percentage of brown adipose found in the body decreases with age. In other animals, however, particularly those that hibernate (e.g., grizzly bears and black bears), it is found in adults and plays an important role in survival. Species that hibernate experience a drop in body temperature and a slowing of metabolism during winter dormancy, which allows them to conserve energy. Brown adipose, by consuming energy, releases heat, which is vital for awakening and emergence from dormancy. Brown adipose tissue typically is tan to red in colour. Its colour and heat-generating properties are imparted by the abundance of organelles known as mitochondria found in brown fat cells. (Mitochondria are the energy-producing components of cells.)
In humans, the distribution of adipose tissue in the body can vary depending on sex. In general, men accumulate fat around the waist, and women tend to accumulate more fat around the hips than the waist. Geneticists have located distinct regions in the human genome that are associated with fat distribution, and several genes in particular appear to have a greater influence on waist-to-hip ratio in women than in men. Because these genes are involved in regulating the activities of fat cells, knowledge of their precise functions could provide insights into the biological mechanisms underlying obesity, diabetes mellitus, and cardiovascular disease.
