androgen,  any of a group of hormones that primarily influence the growth and development of the male reproductive system. The predominant and most active androgen is testosterone, which is produced by the male testes. The other androgens, which support the functions of testosterone, are produced mainly by the adrenal cortex—the outer portion of the adrenal glands—and only in relatively small quantities.
In males the interstitial cells of Leydig, located in the connective tissue surrounding the sperm-producing tubules of the testes, are responsible for the production and secretion of testosterone. In male animals that breed only seasonally, such as migratory birds and sheep, Leydig cells are prevalent in the testes during the breeding season but diminish considerably in number during the nonbreeding season. The actual secretion of androgens by these cells is controlled by luteinizing hormone (LH) from the pituitary gland.
The adrenal production of androgens is of importance to several physiological processes. Certain adrenal androgens—androstenedione, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA sulfate)—can be converted to testosterone in other tissues.
Only a very small amount of androgen is secreted before puberty. In both girls and boys, puberty is associated with an increase in adrenal androgen production. This “adrenarche” contributes to pubertal maturation, particularly growth of axillary and pubic hair. Androgens also are needed for the development of the male reproductive system. Males that have been castrated prior to adolescence and sexual maturity require injections of testosterone to develop functioning adult reproductive organs. Androgens given to normal males tend to increase the size of the reproductive organs. In contrast, castration performed on males that have already reached maturity causes the organs to shrink and to stop functioning. Androgens also are necessary for the formation of sperm cells and for the maintenance of sexual interest and behaviour.
Other effects of androgens on the male body are diversified. The growth of pubic hair and of facial and chest hair and the regression of scalp hair, or baldness, are influenced by androgens. During adolescence, androgens lengthen and thicken the male vocal cords, causing voice deepening; they also enhance bone growth and increase the number and thickness of muscle fibres in the male body. Other growth patterns that androgens stimulate are kidney weight and size, the increase of protein in bone tissue, the regeneration of red blood cells (erythrocytes), the presence of pigments in the skin, and the increased activity of sweat and sebaceous (oil-producing) glands.
Women produce about one-twelfth as much androgen as men. Androgens are essential precursors of estrogens, and no estrogens can be produced without them. Whether androgens have physiological actions in women is less clear. Some evidence suggests that androgens contribute to bone growth and libido. Mild androgen excess in women results in excess hair growth (hirsutism) that occurs all over the body but is most often noted on the face. With increasing androgen excess, menstrual periods become irregular (oligomenorrhea) and eventually cease (amenorrhea), and women are virilized. The manifestations of virilism include frontal balding, deepening of the voice, acne, clitoral enlargement, and increased muscle mass.
In women about half of the daily production of androgen comes from the ovaries in the form of testosterone and the less active androstenedione. The remainder comes from the adrenal glands, mostly as DHEA and DHEA sulfate, which are converted to androstenedione and testosterone in other tissues. The tissues capable of these conversions include the skin, fat, muscle, and brain. Some of these tissues are also capable of converting androstenedione to the more potent testosterone. Some of the testosterone produced in this way returns to the circulation to act at distant sites, but high concentrations may accumulate in key local areas such as hair follicles.
In women excess production of androgen can occur as a result of adrenal disorders, ovarian disorders, ingestion or injection of androgens, and perhaps disorders of fat or other nonendocrine tissues. The adrenal causes of excess production of androgens are Cushing syndrome, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, and adrenal tumours. Tumours (including cancers) of the interstitial cells and other cells of the ovary are a rare cause of androgen excess in women.
A far more common cause of excess production of androgens in women is polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS; also called Stein-Leventhal syndrome). This syndrome is characterized by excess androgens and the presence of a menstrual disorder. Androgen excess often manifests as hirsutism, with or without increased serum concentrations of one or more androgens. Some women have increased serum androgen concentrations and no hirsutism. A variety of menstrual disorders have been associated with PCOS, including oligomenorrhea, amenorrhea, anovulation, and infertility. An ultrasound may reveal multiple ovarian cysts. Many women with this syndrome are obese. Another characteristic feature of PCOS is tissue resistance to the action of insulin. This is expected in obese women, but it is also present in nonobese women with the syndrome. Insulin resistance leads to an increase in insulin secretion (hyperinsulinemia), which is thought to stimulate ovarian androgen production. Hyperinsulinemia also decreases the production of sex hormone-binding globulin so that more of the testosterone in the serum is free and accessible to the tissues. In addition, the conversion of androgens to estrogens in adipose tissue is increased (particularly in obese women), which leads to a small sustained increase in the secretion of luteinizing hormone and to the suppression of ovulation.
