Asperger syndrome,  a neurobiological disorder characterized by autism-like abnormalities in social interactions but with normal intelligence and language acquisition. The disorder is named for Austrian physician Hans Asperger, who first described the symptoms in 1944 as belonging to a condition he called autistic psychopathy. Today, Asperger syndrome is considered an autism spectrum disorder, a category that includes autism (sometimes called classic autism) and mild autism-like conditions, in which affected persons exhibit some but not all symptoms of autism (previously recognized as pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified, or PDD-NOS).
Asperger syndrome is about three to four times more common in boys than in girls. Symptoms may be apparent after age three, though diagnosis is most frequent in children between ages five and nine. In contrast to patients with autism, individuals with Asperger syndrome usually do not have major cognitive difficulties—their IQ is in the normal or even high range—and they do not exhibit a delay in language acquisition. However, children with Asperger syndrome do display repetitive behaviour patterns similar to those observed in children with autism, and they often avoid eye contact, have poor control over fine motor movements, giving an impression of clumsiness, and have an obsessive interest in a single object, such as a computer or a type of car. This obsession generally manifests as a persistent desire to learn and to speak only about the object. Children with Asperger syndrome may become upset when instructed to focus on a task not related to their obsession and when their day-to-day routines are disrupted even in only minor ways, such as drinking from a cup that differs in colour or texture from the cup the child normally uses. Some individuals with Asperger syndrome also are affected by anxiety and depression in adolescence and adulthood. In many patients symptoms may go unrecognized for years. In the absence of a formal diagnosis, individuals affected by Asperger syndrome may be perceived as simply absentminded, socially and physically awkward, or highly intelligent.
The cause of Asperger syndrome is unclear; however, imaging studies have demonstrated the presence of structural and neuronal abnormalities in certain areas of the brain in Asperger patients. These abnormalities likely contribute to the unusual thinking patterns and behaviours associated with the disorder. Asperger syndrome is best treated through early intervention methods aimed at improving social skills, physical coordination, and communication. Many people affected by Asperger syndrome improve significantly with effective treatment programs. In addition, because people with Asperger syndrome may develop a high level of expertise in a very specific area or about a single device, many are able to find jobs at which they can be successful.
