Basal ganglia,  group of nuclei (clusters of neurons) in the brain that are located deep beneath the cerebral cortex (the highly convoluted outer layer of the brain). The basal ganglia specialize in processing information on movement and in fine-tuning the activity of brain circuits that determine the best possible response in a given situation (e.g., using the hands to catch a ball or using the feet to run). Thus, they play an important role in planning actions that are required to achieve a particular goal, in executing well-practiced habitual actions, and in learning new actions in novel situations.
Although the basal ganglia are a distinct part of the motor system, they appear to work in concert with the pyramidal motor pathway—the path that conducts signals for action directly along nerve tracts that descend from the cerebral cortex to the motor neurons that activate skeletal muscles. The basal ganglia refine action signals from the cortex, thereby ensuring that an appropriate motor plan is communicated to the muscles. Unlike the pyramidal pathway, the basal ganglia process information indirectly in a set of loops, whereby they receive input from the cortex and return it to the cortex via the thalamus. In that way the basal ganglia modify the timing and amount of activity that leaves the cortex and travels down the pyramidal pathway, amplifying activity that leads to a positive outcome and suppressing activity that leads to a deleterious outcome in a particular situation.
Much knowledge about the role of the basal ganglia in brain function has come from the study of disorders that affect the different nuclei. Typically, such disorders lead to difficulty with initiating wanted movements (as generally seen in Parkinson disease) or with suppressing unwanted movements (as seen in Huntington disease).
Anatomically, the basal ganglia consist of parallel complementary pathways that process motor, limbic, sensory, and associative information. The basal ganglia of the motor circuit include the caudate nucleus and putamen (known collectively as the dorsal striatum), the subthalamic nucleus, the globus pallidus externus and internus, and the substantia nigra pars reticulata and pars compacta. The basal ganglia of the limbic circuit, which processes information about motivation and emotion, include the nucleus accumbens (ventral striatum), ventral pallidum, and ventral tegmentum. Sensory information and associative information (which links details about previously unrelated items) are also processed through parallel pathways involving these nuclei, providing input to be integrated into an action plan by the basal ganglia.
The major input nucleus of the basal ganglia is the striatum (collectively including the dorsal and ventral divisions), which receives information from almost all areas of the cortex. The dorsal striatum (upper region of the striatum) receives information from areas below the cortex (e.g., the midbrain) via the thalamus. In the motor circuit the subthalamic nucleus serves as an input nucleus, receiving information from the cortex and thalamus and influencing the conventional route of basal ganglia outflow from the striatum to the output nuclei of the thalamus. The output nuclei of the basal ganglia are the globus pallidus internus and substantia nigra pars reticulata in the motor pathway and the ventral pallidum in the limbic pathway. Information that exits the basal ganglia goes to the thalamus, primarily the ventroanterior and ventromedial motor thalamic nuclei for the motor pathway and the mediodorsal thalamic nucleus for the limbic pathway, and then is sent back to the appropriate part of the cortex.
The majority of basal ganglia nuclei have projection neurons (neurons with axons that extend into adjacent brain areas) that utilize the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). As a result, inhibitory signals form the basis of most communication between nuclei in the basal ganglia. Exceptions include the excitatory glutamate-releasing projections of the subthalamic nucleus and the dopamine-releasing projection neurons from the substantia nigra pars compacta.
The striatum, which serves as a gateway for the regulation of signals through the basal ganglia during the learning of actions and the selection of desirable actions, has the most-complex signaling architecture. In addition to receiving vast external excitatory input from the cortex and thalamus, it also contains several types of interneurons (neurons that connect sensory and motor circuits) and some of the highest levels in the brain of the neurochemicals dopamine and acetylcholine. Collectively, these substances modulate the way in which excitatory inputs are processed and contribute to the final output from the striatum.
In order to execute purposeful movements, a small number of motor plans in the brain need to be promoted and integrated, while others that impair or stop the execution of the desired movement must be suppressed. Action selection is facilitated by the nature of the parallel pathways, the number of neurons involved in the processing of information as it progresses through the basal ganglia, and the manner in which these neurons are arranged. The input and output nuclei generally contain the largest and smallest numbers of neurons, respectively. As information progresses through the basal ganglia, each neuron integrates information that has been transmitted from many other neurons in preceding nuclei; hence, the signal becomes increasingly focused and specific as it passes through the basal ganglia. The process of determining which signals are promoted occurs early in the basal ganglia circuit—at the striatum; the neuromodulator dopamine plays a key role in signal promotion.
Parallel pathways within the basal ganglia circuits facilitate signal promotion and signal inhibition. Neighbouring pathways carrying information about elements of the same desired movement successively amplify the promoted signal as it progresses through the basal ganglia. More often, however, neighbouring pathways act to reduce unwanted signals, ensuring that an accurate, precise, and optimized action plan is developed. In the absence of action selection, all motor plans are promoted and many muscles around the body are activated, leading to a failure to execute desired actions.
