Cell wall,  specialized form of extracellular matrix that surrounds every cell of a plant. The cell wall is responsible for many of the characteristics that distinguish plant cells from animal cells. Although often perceived as an inactive product serving mainly mechanical and structural purposes, the cell wall actually has a multitude of functions upon which plant life depends. Such functions include: (1) providing the living cell with mechanical protection and a chemically buffered environment, (2) providing a porous medium for the circulation and distribution of water, minerals, and other small nutrient molecules, (3) providing rigid building blocks from which stable structures of higher order, such as leaves and stems, can be produced, and (4) providing a storage site of regulatory molecules that sense the presence of pathogenic microbes and control the development of tissues.
Certain prokaryotes, algae, slime molds, water molds, and fungi also have cell walls. Bacterial cell walls are characterized by the presence of peptidoglycan, whereas those of Archaea characteristically lack this chemical. Algal cell walls are similar to those of plants, and many contain specific polysaccharides that are useful for taxonomy. Unlike those of plants and algae, fungal cell walls lack cellulose entirely and contain chitin. The scope of this article is limited to plant cell walls.
All cell walls contain two layers, the middle lamella and the primary cell wall, and many cells produce an additional layer, called the secondary wall. The middle lamella serves as a cementing layer between the primary walls of adjacent cells. The primary wall is the cellulose-containing layer laid down by cells that are dividing and growing. To allow for cell wall expansion during growth, primary walls are thinner and less rigid than those of cells that have stopped growing. A fully grown plant cell may retain its primary cell wall (sometimes thickening it), or it may deposit an additional, rigidifying layer of different composition, which is the secondary cell wall. Secondary cell walls are responsible for most of the plant’s mechanical support as well as the mechanical properties prized in wood. In contrast to the permanent stiffness and load-bearing capacity of thick secondary walls, the thin primary walls are capable of serving a structural, supportive role only when the vacuoles within the cell are filled with water to the point that they exert a turgor pressure against the cell wall. Turgor-induced stiffening of primary walls is analogous to the stiffening of the sides of a pneumatic tire by air pressure. The wilting of flowers and leaves is caused by a loss of turgor pressure, which results in turn from the loss of water from the plant cells.
Although primary and secondary wall layers differ in detailed chemical composition and structural organization, their basic architecture is the same, consisting of cellulose fibres of great tensile strength embedded in a water-saturated matrix of polysaccharides and structural glycoproteins.
Cellulose consists of several thousand glucose molecules linked end to end. The chemical links between the individual glucose subunits give each cellulose molecule a flat ribbonlike structure that allows adjacent molecules to band laterally together into microfibrils with lengths ranging from two to seven micrometres. Cellulose fibrils are synthesized by enzymes floating in the cell membrane and are arranged in a rosette configuration. Each rosette appears capable of “spinning” a microfibril into the cell wall. During this process, as new glucose subunits are added to the growing end of the fibril, the rosette is pushed around the cell on the surface of the cell membrane, and its cellulose fibril becomes wrapped around the protoplast. Thus, each plant cell can be viewed as making its own cellulose fibril cocoon.
The two major classes of cell wall matrix polysaccharides are the hemicelluloses and the pectic polysaccharides, or pectins. Both are synthesized in the Golgi apparatus, brought to the cell surface in small vesicles, and secreted into the cell wall.
Hemicelluloses consist of glucose molecules arranged end to end as in cellulose, with short side chains of xylose and other uncharged sugars attached to one side of the ribbon. The other side of the ribbon binds tightly to the surface of cellulose fibrils, thereby coating the microfibrils with hemicellulose and preventing them from adhering together in an uncontrolled manner. Hemicellulose molecules have been shown to regulate the rate at which primary cell walls expand during growth.
The heterogeneous, branched, and highly hydrated pectic polysaccharides differ from hemicelluloses in important respects. Most notably, they are negatively charged because of galacturonic acid residues, which, together with rhamnose sugar molecules, form the linear backbone of all pectic polysaccharides. The backbone contains stretches of pure galacturonic acid residues interrupted by segments in which galacturonic acid and rhamnose residues alternate; attached to these latter segments are complex, branched sugar side chains. Because of their negative charge, pectic polysaccharides bind tightly to positively charged ions, or cations. In cell walls, calcium ions cross-link the stretches of pure galacturonic acid residues tightly, while leaving the rhamnose-containing segments in a more open, porous configuration. This cross-linking creates the semirigid gel properties characteristic of the cell wall matrix—a process exploited in the preparation of jellied preserves.
