Cell membrane, also called plasma membrane,  thin membrane that surrounds every living cell, delimiting the cell from the environment around it. Enclosed by this cell membrane (also known as the plasma membrane) are the cell’s constituents, often large, water-soluble, highly charged molecules such as proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, and substances involved in cellular metabolism. Outside the cell, in the surrounding water-based environment, are ions, acids, and alkalis that are toxic to the cell, as well as nutrients that the cell must absorb in order to live and grow. The cell membrane, therefore, has two functions: first, to be a barrier keeping the constituents of the cell in and unwanted substances out and, second, to be a gate allowing transport into the cell of essential nutrients and movement from the cell of waste products.
Cell membranes are composed primarily of fatty-acid-based lipids and proteins. Membrane lipids are principally of two types, phospholipids and sterols (generally cholesterol). Both types share the defining characteristic of lipids—they dissolve readily in organic solvents—but in addition they both have a region that is attracted to and soluble in water. This “amphiphilic” property (having a dual attraction; i.e., containing both a lipid-soluble and a water-soluble region) is basic to the role of lipids as building blocks of cellular membranes. Membrane proteins are also of two general types. One type, called the extrinsic proteins, is loosely attached by ionic bonds or calcium bridges to the electrically charged phosphoryl surface of the bilayer. They can also attach to the second type of protein, called the intrinsic proteins. The intrinsic proteins, as their name implies, are firmly embedded within the phospholipid bilayer. In general, membranes actively involved in metabolism contain a higher proportion of protein.
The chemical structure of the cell membrane makes it remarkably flexible, the ideal boundary for rapidly growing and dividing cells. Yet the membrane is also a formidable barrier, allowing some dissolved substances, or solutes, to pass while blocking others. Lipid-soluble molecules and some small molecules can permeate the membrane, but the lipid bilayer effectively repels the many large, water-soluble molecules and electrically charged ions that the cell must import or export in order to live. Transport of these vital substances is carried out by certain classes of intrinsic proteins that form a variety of transport systems: some are open channels, which allow ions to diffuse directly into the cell; others are “facilitators,” which help solutes diffuse past the lipid screen; yet others are “pumps,” which force solutes through the membrane when they are not concentrated enough to diffuse spontaneously. Particles too large to be diffused or pumped are often swallowed or disgorged whole by an opening and closing of the membrane.
In bringing about transmembrane movements of large molecules, the cell membrane itself undergoes concerted movements during which part of the fluid medium outside of the cell is internalized (endocytosis) or part of the cell’s internal medium is externalized (exocytosis). These movements involve a fusion between membrane surfaces, followed by the re-formation of intact membranes.
