conjunctivitis, also called pinkeye,  inflammation of the conjunctiva, the delicate mucous membrane that lines the inner surface of the eyelids and covers the front part of the white of the eye. The inflammation may be caused by a viral or bacterial infection. It can also be caused by a chemical burn or mechanical injury, or it may be part of an allergic reaction. Often both the conjunctiva and the cornea are involved, a condition called keratoconjunctivitis. The symptoms of conjunctivitis vary, but they include light sensitivity, redness, itching, a sensation of sand in the eye, and eye discharge (which can be either watery or thick and coloured).
A variety of viral organisms can give rise to conjunctivitis. Adenoviruses, a group of viruses whose disease-causing members may cause respiratory infections or may survive for long periods in lymphoid tissue (e.g., in the tonsils), may attack the conjunctiva and cornea, causing epidemic keratoconjunctivitis. This condition is highly contagious and is rapidly spread through direct and indirect contact with infected individuals. Typically, a person is contagious for at least a week following onset of symptoms. Treatment is mainly supportive, with emphasis on strict hygiene to minimize spread of the virus. The majority of cases resolve without residual problems. Other viruses, such as those that cause cold sores, chickenpox, and measles, also may invade the conjunctiva. Treatment for these cases may include antiviral drops.
Bacterial invasion of the conjunctiva is less common than viral infection. Infection is through direct contact with an infected person or through a person’s own nasal or sinus mucosa. Eye discharge is generally thick and coloured, as opposed to the watery discharge of viral conjunctivitis. The organisms most commonly responsible for bacterial conjunctivitis in humans are Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Haemophilus influenzae (which may invade the respiratory tract or the brain coverings). Gonococcal conjunctivitis, invasion of the conjunctiva by gonorrhea organisms, was once common among newborn infants, who became infected during delivery. This infection can cause blindness if not treated promptly. It is prevented by routine application of antimicrobials to each eye of an infant after delivery. Gonococcal conjunctivitis can still be transmitted by sexual contact, however, necessitating treatment with systemic and topical medications.
The microorganism Chlamydia trachomatis is responsible for trachoma, a disease in which the conjunctiva and cornea can become scarred, leading to blindness. Trachoma is the leading cause of preventable blindness in the world and is especially prevalent in the Middle East, Asia, and parts of Africa. Inclusion conjunctivitis, so called because of the small bodies that are observed within (“included in”) the infected cells, is also caused by C. trachomatis. This disease occurs in newborns, who become infected when passing through the birth canal, and in sexually active adults, who often simultaneously contract gonorrheal infections. Antibiotic treatment is usually effective.
Conjunctivitis frequently results from an allergic reaction to topical eye medications or to airborne allergens such as hay fever pollen. Prominent symptoms include eyelid swelling, itching, eye redness, and a stringy mucoid discharge. Cool compresses and artificial eye lubrication are of benefit, and many antiallergy medications are available. Vernal conjunctivitis is an allergic inflammation that tends to recur in the conjunctivas of susceptible (usually male) children. There are two types of vernal conjunctivitis. In one, the lining of the upper eyelid is affected, with a characteristic red, pebbled appearance. In the second type, the inflammation is manifested by separate yellowish elevations on the conjunctiva near the cornea. Treatment is similar to other cases of allergic conjunctivitis.
A severe form of conjunctivitis that may culminate in blindness occasionally accompanies erythema multiforme, an eruption on the skin and mucous membranes that sometimes occurs in association with a systemic infection or the use of certain medications.
