Dream,  a hallucinatory experience that occurs during sleep.
Dreaming, a common and distinctive phenomenon of sleep, has throughout human history given rise to myriad beliefs, fears, and conjectures, both imaginative and experimental, regarding its mysterious nature. While any effort toward classification must be subject to inadequacies, beliefs about dreams nonetheless fall into various classifications depending upon whether dreams are held to be reflections of reality, sources of divination, curative experiences, or evidence of unconscious activity.
The manner in which people dream obviously defies direct observation. It has been said that each dream “is a personal document, a letter to oneself” and must be inferred from the observable behaviour of people. Furthermore, observational methods and purposes clearly affect conclusions to be drawn about the inferred dreams. Reports of dreams collected from people after morning awakenings at home tend to exhibit more content of an overt sexual and emotional nature than do those from laboratory subjects. Such experiences as dreaming in colour seldom are spontaneously mentioned but often emerge under careful questioning. Reports of morning dreams are typically richer and more complex than those collected early at night. Immediate recall differs from what is reported after longer periods of wakefulness. In spite of the unique qualities of each person’s dreams, there have been substantial efforts to describe the general characteristics of what people say they have dreamed.
Estimates by individuals of the length of their dreams can vary widely (and by inference, the actual length of the dreams varies widely as well). Spontaneously described dreams among laboratory subjects typically result in short reports; although some may exceed 1,000 words in length, about 90 percent of these reports are fewer than 150 words long. With additional probing, about a third of such reports are longer than 300 words.
Some investigators have been surprised by repeated findings that suggest dreams may be less fantastic or bizarre than generally supposed. One investigator stated that visual dreams are typically faithful to reality—that is, they are representational. To borrow terms from modern art, dreams are rarely described as abstract or surrealist. Except for those that are very short, dreams are reported to take place in ordinary physical settings, with about half of them seeming quite familiar to the dreamer. Only rarely is the setting said to be exotic or peculiar.
Apparently dreams are quite egocentric, with the dreamer perceiving himself as a participant, though the presence of others is typically recalled. Seldom does the person remember an empty, unpopulated dreamworld, and individuals seem to dream roughly two-thirds of the time about people they know. Usually these people are close acquaintances, with family members mentioned in about 20 percent of dream reports. Recollections of notables or weird representations of people are generally rare.
In cases of so-called lucid dreaming, subjects report having been aware that they were dreaming as the dream was taking place. Most lucid dreamers also report having been able to direct or manipulate the dream’s content to some extent. The nature of lucid dreaming and even the coherence of the notion have been disputed, however. Some researchers have suggested that it is a unique state of consciousness that combines elements of wakefulness and ordinary (nonlucid) dreaming.
The typical dream report is of visual imagery; indeed, in the absence of such imagery, the person may describe the phenomenon as thinking rather than “dreaming” while asleep. Rare statements about dreams dominated by auditory experience tend to be made with claims of actually having been awake. It is unusual, however, to hear of dreams without some auditory characteristics. Emotionally bland dreams are common. When dreams do contain emotional overtones, fear and anxiety are most commonly mentioned, followed by anger; pleasant feelings are most often those of friendliness. Reports of overtly erotic dreams, particularly among subjects studied in laboratory settings, are infrequent.
Many individuals report having recurring dreams, or dreams that are repeated over a short or a long period with at most minor variations. Some recurring dreams display common themes, such as being able to fly, being chased, being naked in public, or being late for an exam. Although there is no consensus among experts regarding the causes or interpretation of recurring dreams, many researchers believe that negative recurring dreams may be indicative of the presence of an unresolved conflict in the individual.
Despite their generally representational nature, dreams seem somehow odd or strange. Perhaps this is related to discontinuities in time and purpose. One may suddenly find oneself in a familiar auditorium viewing a fencing match rather than hearing a lecture and abruptly in the “next scene” walking beside a swimming pool. These sudden transitions contribute a feeling of strangeness, which is enhanced by the dreamer’s inability to recall the bulk of his dreams clearly, giving them a dim, mysterious quality.
