Egg,  in biology, the female sex cell, or gamete. In botany, the egg is sometimes called a macrogamete. In zoology, the Latin term for egg, ovum, is frequently used to refer to the single cell, while the word egg may be applied to the entire specialized structure or capsule that consists of the ovum, its various protective membranes, and any accompanying nutritive materials. The human female reproductive cell is also usually called an ovum.
The egg, like the male gamete, bears only a single (haploid) set of chromosomes. The egg, however, is usually larger than its male counterpart because it contains material to nourish the embryo during its early stages of development. In many animal species a large quantity of nutritive material, or yolk, is deposited in the egg, the amount depending on the length of time before the young animal can feed itself or, in the case of mammals, begins to receive nourishment from the maternal circulation. The plant egg is never so disproportionately large, because the developing sporophyte embryo is nourished until self-supporting by the plant on which it is formed (in liverworts, mosses, and ferns by the gametophyte; in seed plants by the sporophyte on which the gametophyte is parasitic).
With the exception of those of some cnidarians (coelenterates), all animal eggs are enclosed by membranes, the innermost of which is called the vitelline membrane. The vitelline membrane is the only membrane in the eggs of various invertebrates—ctenophores, many worms, and echinoderms—and of certain lower chordates. All higher vertebrates and many invertebrates have one or more additional membranes. Insect eggs, for example, are covered by a thick, hard chorion, and the amphibian egg is surrounded by a jelly layer. The bird egg includes the vitelline membrane, the white of the egg, two egg shell membranes, and the outermost membrane, the shell. As pointed out above, this entire structure is commonly referred to as an egg.
Mature eggs remain functional for a relatively short period of time, after which fertilization cannot occur. The eggs of most invertebrates, fish, and amphibians must be fertilized a few minutes after they are shed into the water; an exception is sea urchin eggs, which are viable for about 40 hours after their release. Most other animal eggs have life spans similar to that of the human egg—i.e., 12 to 24 hours. See also ovum.
