Fallopian tube, also called oviduct or uterine tube,  either of a pair of long narrow ducts located in the human female abdominal cavity that transport male sperm cells to the egg, provide a suitable environment for fertilization, and transport the egg from the ovary, where it is produced, to the central channel (lumen) of the uterus.
Each fallopian tube is 10–13 cm (4–5 inches) long and 0.5–1.2 cm (0.2–0.6 inch) in diameter. The channel of the tube is lined with a layer of mucous membrane that has many folds and papillae—small cone-shaped projections of tissue. Over the mucous membrane are three layers of muscle tissue; the innermost layer has spirally arranged fibres, the middle layer has circular fibres, and the outermost sheath has longitudinal fibres that end in many fingerlike branches (fimbriae) near the ovaries, forming a funnel-shaped depository called the infundibulum. The infundibulum catches and channels the released eggs; it is the wide distal (outermost) portion of each fallopian tube. The endings of the fimbriae extend over the ovary; they contract close to the ovary’s surface during ovulation in order to guide the free egg. Leading from the infundibulum is the long central portion of the fallopian tube called the ampulla. The isthmus is a small region, only about 2 cm (0.8 inch) long, that connects the ampulla and infundibulum to the uterus. The final region of the fallopian tube, known as the intramural, or uterine, part, is located in the top portion (fundus) of the uterus; it is a narrow tube continuous with the isthmus, and it leads through the thick uterine wall to the uterine cavity, where fertilized eggs normally attach and develop. The channel of the intramural duct is the narrowest part of the fallopian tube.
The mucous membrane lining the fallopian tube gives off secretions that help to transport the sperm and the egg and to keep them alive. The major constituents of the fluid are calcium, sodium, chloride, glucose (a sugar), proteins, bicarbonates, and lactic acid. The bicarbonates and lactic acid are vital to the sperm’s use of oxygen, and they also help the egg to develop once it is fertilized. Glucose is a nutrient for the egg and sperm, whereas the rest of the chemicals provide an appropriate environment for fertilization to occur.
Besides the cells that secrete fluids, the mucous membrane contains cells that have fine hairlike structures called cilia; the cilia help to move the egg and sperm through the fallopian tubes. Sperm deposited in the female reproductive tract usually reach the infundibulum within a few hours. The egg, whether fertilized or not, takes three to four days to reach the uterine cavity. The swaying motions of the cilia and the rhythmic muscular contractions (peristaltic waves) of the fallopian tube’s wall work together while moving the egg or sperm.
Abnormalities of or damage to the fallopian tubes can affect a woman’s fertility. If the tubes are blocked or damaged, for example, sperm are unable to reach the egg, or the fertilized egg may be prevented from traveling to the uterus. Abnormalities in fallopian tube anatomy and function have various causes, including pelvic infection (e.g., pelvic inflammatory disease), endometriosis, and congenital defects.
