Fertilization,  union of a sperm nucleus, of paternal origin, with an egg nucleus, of maternal origin, to form the primary nucleus of an embryo. In all organisms the essence of fertilization is, in fact, the fusion of the hereditary material of two different sex cells, or gametes, each of which carries half the number of chromosomes typical of the species. The most primitive form of fertilization, found in microorganisms and protozoans, consists of an exchange of genetic material between two cells.
The first significant event in fertilization is the fusion of the membranes of the two gametes, resulting in the formation of a channel that allows the passage of material from one cell to the other. Fertilization in advanced plants is preceded by pollination, during which pollen is transferred to, and establishes contact with, the female gamete or macrospore. Fusion in advanced animals is usually followed by penetration of the egg by a single spermatozoon. The result of fertilization is a cell (zygote) capable of undergoing cell division to form a new individual.
The fusion of two gametes initiates several reactions in the egg. One of these causes a change in the egg membrane(s), so that the attachment of and penetration by more than one spermatozoon cannot occur. In species in which more than one spermatozoon normally enters an egg (polyspermy), only one spermatozoal nucleus actually merges with the egg nucleus. The most important result of fertilization is egg activation, which allows the egg to undergo cell division. Activation, however, does not necessarily require the intervention of a spermatozoon; during parthenogenesis, in which fertilization does not occur, activation of an egg may be accomplished through the intervention of physical and chemical agents. Invertebrates such as aphids, bees, and rotifers normally reproduce by parthenogenesis.
In plants, certain chemicals produced by the egg may attract spermatozoa. In animals, with the possible exception of some cnidarians (coelenterates), it appears likely that contact between eggs and spermatozoa depends on random collisions. On the other hand, the gelatinous coats that surround the eggs of many animals exert a trapping action on spermatozoa, thus increasing the chances for successful sperm-egg interaction.
The eggs of marine invertebrates, especially echinoderms, are classical objects for the study of fertilization. These transparent eggs are valuable for studies observing living cells and for biochemical and molecular investigations because the time of fertilization can be accurately fixed, the development of many eggs occurs at about the same rate under suitable conditions, and large quantities of the eggs are obtainable. The eggs of some teleosts and amphibians also have been used with favourable results.
Maturation is the final step in the production of functional eggs (oogenesis) that can associate with a spermatozoon and develop a reaction that prevents the entry of more than one spermatozoon. In addition, the cytoplasm of a mature egg can support the changes that lead to fusion of spermatozoal and egg nuclei and initiate embryonic development.
Certain components of an egg’s surface, especially the cortical granules, are associated with a mature condition. Cortical granules of sea urchin eggs, aligned beneath the plasma membrane (thin, soft, pliable layer) of mature eggs, have a diameter of 0.8–1.0 micron (0.0008–0.001 millimetre) and are surrounded by a membrane similar in structure to the plasma membrane surrounding the egg. Cortical granules are formed in a cell component known as a Golgi complex, from which they migrate to the surface of the maturing egg.
The surface of a sea urchin egg has the ability to affect the passage of light unequally in different directions; this property, called birefringence, is an indication that the molecules comprising the surface layers are arranged in a definite way. Since birefringence appears as an egg matures, it is likely that the properties of a mature egg membrane are associated with specific molecular arrangements. A mature egg is able to support the formation of a zygote nucleus; i.e., the result of fusion of spermatozoal and egg nuclei. In most eggs the process of reduction of chromosomal number (meiosis) is not completed prior to fertilization. In such cases the fertilizing spermatozoon remains beneath the egg surface until meiosis in the egg has been completed, after which changes and movements that lead to fusion and the formation of a zygote occur.
The surfaces of most animal eggs are surrounded by envelopes, which may be soft gelatinous coats (as in echinoderms and some amphibians) or thick membranes (as in fishes, insects, and mammals). In order to reach the egg surface, therefore, spermatozoa must penetrate these envelopes; indeed, spermatozoa contain enzymes (organic catalysts) that break them down. In some cases (e.g., fishes and insects) there is a channel, or micropyle, in the envelope, through which a spermatozoon can reach the egg.
The jelly coats of echinoderm and amphibian eggs consist of complex carbohydrates called sulfated mucopolysaccharides. The envelope of a mammalian egg is more complex. The egg is surrounded by a thick coat composed of a carbohydrate protein complex called zona pellucida. The zona is surrounded by an outer envelope, the corona radiata, which is many cell layers thick and formed by follicle cells adhering to the oocyte before it leaves the ovarian follicle.
Although it once was postulated that the jelly coat of an echinoderm egg contains a substance (fertilizin) thought to have an important role not only in the establishment of sperm-egg interaction but also in egg activation, fertilizin now has been shown identical with jelly-coat material, rather than a substance continuously secreted from it. Yet there is evidence that the egg envelopes do play a role in fertilization; i.e., contact with the egg coat elicits the acrosome reaction (described below) in spermatozoa.
