Helper T cell, also called CD4+ cell, T helper cell, or helper T lymphocyte,  type of white blood cell that serves as a key mediator of immune function. Helper T cells play a central role in normal immune responses by producing factors that activate virtually all the other immune system cells. These cells include B cells, which produce antibodies needed to fight infection; cytotoxic T cells, which kill cells carrying infectious agents; and macrophages and other effector cells, which attack invading pathogens (disease-causing agents). Helper T cells express a protein called CD4 on their surface. This protein plays a critical role in helper T cell activation by binding class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, which specialize in helping the immune system recognize foreign substances.
Helper T cells are not a uniform group of cells but rather can be divided into two general subpopulations—TH1 and TH2 cells—that have significantly different chemistry and function. These populations can be distinguished by the cytokines (chemical messengers) they secrete. TH1 cells primarily produce the cytokines gamma interferon, tumour necrosis factor-beta, and interleukin-2 (IL-2), while TH2 cells mainly synthesize the interleukins IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-9, IL-10, and IL-13. The main role of the TH1 cells is to stimulate cell-mediated responses (those involving cytotoxic T cells and macrophages), while TH2 cells primarily assist in stimulating B cells to make antibodies.
Helper T cells become activated through a multistep process, which begins with antigen-presenting cells, such as macrophages. These cells ingest an infectious agent or foreign particle, partially degrade it, and export fragments of it—i.e., antigens—to the cell surface. There the particles are presented in association with class II MHC molecules. A receptor on the surface of the helper T cell then binds to the MHC-antigen complex. In the next step, helper T cell activation proceeds in one of two ways: either through stimulation by a cytokine or through a costimulatory reaction between a signaling protein known as B7, found on the surface of the antigen-presenting cell, and the receptor protein CD28, on the surface of the helper T cell.
The overall result of helper-T-cell activation is an increase in the number of helper T cells that recognize a specific antigen, and several T-cell cytokines are produced. The cytokines have other consequences, one of which is that IL-2 allows cytotoxic or regulatory T cells that recognize the same antigen to become activated and to multiply. In the case of B cells, once a helper T cell has been activated by an antigen, it becomes capable of activating a B cell that has already encountered the same antigen. Cytokines secreted by helper T cells can also interact with B cells and provide additional stimulation.
