Immunology,  the scientific study of the body’s resistance to invasion by other organisms (i.e., immunity). In a medical sense, immunology deals with the body’s system of defense against disease-causing microorganisms and with disorders in that system’s functioning. The artificial induction of immunity against disease has been known in the West at least since Edward Jenner used cowpox injections to protect people from smallpox in 1796. But the scientific basis for immunology was not established until a century later, when it was recognized that: (1) proliferating microorganisms in the body cause many infectious diseases and (2) the body has certain chemical and cellular components that recognize and destroy foreign substances (antigens) within the body. This new understanding led to highly successful techniques of immunization that could mobilize and stimulate the body’s natural defenses against infectious disease.
It was only in the 20th century, however, that a comprehensive understanding was gained of the formation, mobilization, action, and interaction of antibodies and antigen-reactive lymphocytes, which are the two main active elements of the immune system. Modern immunology, besides using such basic techniques as vaccination, has become increasingly selective and sophisticated in its manipulation of the body’s immune system through drugs and other agents in efforts to achieve a desired therapeutic goal. Immunologic understanding is crucial to the treatment of allergies, which are themselves hypersensitive reactions by the body’s immune system to the presence of harmless antigens such as pollen grains. Immunosuppressive techniques use drugs to suppress the immune system’s tendency to reject and attack antigenic bone grafts and organ transplants that have been medically introduced into the host tissue. Immunology also encompasses the increasingly important study of autoimmune diseases, in which the body’s immune system attacks some constituent of its own tissues as if it were a foreign body. The study of immune deficiencies has become an area of intensive research since the appearance of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome), a disease that destroys the body’s immune system and for which there is currently no cure.
