immune system,  the complex group of defense responses found in humans and other advanced vertebrates that helps repel disease-causing organisms (pathogens). Immunity from disease is actually conferred by two cooperative defense systems, called nonspecific, innate immunity and specific, acquired immunity. Nonspecific protective mechanisms repel all microorganisms equally, while the specific immune responses are tailored to particular types of invaders. Both systems work together to thwart organisms from entering and proliferating within the body. These immune mechanisms also help eliminate abnormal cells of the body that can develop into cancer.
The following sections provide a detailed explanation of how nonspecific and specific immunity function and how the immune system evolved. For information on how these systems can go awry and give rise to disease, see immune system disorder. For additional information on leukemias, lymphomas, and myelomas, see cancer.
Most microorganisms encountered in daily life are repelled before they cause detectable signs and symptoms of disease. These potential pathogens, which include viruses, bacteria, fungi, protozoans, and worms, are quite diverse, and therefore a nonspecific defense system that diverts all types of this varied microscopic horde equally is quite useful to an organism. The innate immune system provides this kind of nonspecific protection through a number of defense mechanisms, which include physical barriers such as the skin, chemical barriers such as antimicrobial proteins that harm or destroy invaders, and cells that attack foreign cells and body cells harbouring infectious agents. The details of how these mechanisms operate to protect the body are described in the following sections.
The skin and the mucous membrane linings of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary tracts provide the first line of defense against invasion by microbes or parasites.
Human skin has a tough outer layer of cells that produce keratin. This layer of cells, which is constantly renewed from below, serves as a mechanical barrier to infection. In addition, glands in the skin secrete oily substances that include fatty acids, such as oleic acid, that can kill some bacteria; skin glands also secrete lysozyme, an enzyme (also present in tears and saliva) that can break down the outer wall of certain bacteria. Victims of severe burns often fall prey to infections from normally harmless bacteria, illustrating the importance of intact, healthy skin to a healthy immune system.
Like the outer layer of the skin but much softer, the mucous membrane linings of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary tracts provide a mechanical barrier of cells that are constantly being renewed. The lining of the respiratory tract has cells that secrete mucus (phlegm), which traps small particles. Other cells in the wall of the respiratory tract have small hairlike projections called cilia, which steadily beat in a sweeping movement that propels the mucus and any trapped particles up and out of the throat and nose. Also present in the mucus are protective antibodies, which are products of specific immunity. Cells in the lining of the gastrointestinal tract secrete mucus that, in addition to aiding the passage of food, can trap potentially harmful particles or prevent them from attaching to cells that make up the lining of the gut. Protective antibodies are secreted by cells underlying the gastrointestinal lining. Furthermore, the stomach lining secretes hydrochloric acid that is strong enough to kill many microbes.
Some microbes penetrate the body’s protective barriers and enter the internal tissues. There they encounter a variety of chemical substances that may prevent their growth. These substances include chemicals whose protective effects are incidental to their primary function in the body, chemicals whose principal function is to harm or destroy invaders, and chemicals produced by naturally occurring bacteria.
Some of the chemicals involved in normal body processes are not directly involved in defending the body against disease. Nevertheless, they do help repel invaders. For example, chemicals that inhibit the potentially damaging digestive enzymes released from body cells which have died in the natural course of events also can inhibit similar enzymes produced by bacteria, thereby limiting bacterial growth. Another substance that provides protection against microbes incidentally to its primary cellular role is the blood protein transferrin. The normal function of transferrin is to bind molecules of iron that are absorbed into the bloodstream through the gut and to deliver the iron to cells, which require the mineral to grow. The protective benefit transferrin confers results from the fact that bacteria, like cells, need free iron to grow. When bound to transferrin, however, iron is unavailable to the invading microbes, and their growth is stemmed.
A number of proteins contribute directly to the body’s nonspecific defense system by helping to destroy invading microorganisms. One group of such proteins is called complement because it works with other defense mechanisms of the body, complementing their efforts to eradicate invaders. Many microorganisms can activate complement in ways that do not involve specific immunity. Once activated, complement proteins work together to lyse, or break apart, harmful infectious organisms that do not have protective coats. Other microorganisms can evade these mechanisms but fall prey to scavenger cells, which engulf and destroy infectious agents, and to the mechanisms of the specific immune response. Complement cooperates with both nonspecific and specific defense systems.
