Metabolomics,  the study of metabolites, the chemical substances produced as a result of metabolism, which encompasses all the chemical reactions that take place within cells to provide energy for vital processes.
The orderly transformation of small molecules, resulting in the production of metabolites, is essential for an organism’s health. Changes in levels of key metabolites over short periods of time, such as the response of a person’s blood sugar (glucose) to a meal, can profoundly affect health in ways that may not be apparent by studying DNA or proteins alone. Metabolomics is therefore a tool for defining observable molecular characteristics (or molecular phenotypes) that are associated with metabolism. It is especially powerful when coupled with other comprehensive molecular analysis technologies, such as genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics (respectively, the study of an organism’s entire set of genes, RNA molecules [or transcripts], and proteins). Applications of metabolomics focus on medical research, but researchers in other areas, including microbial fermentation, agriculture, and environmental monitoring, are also exploring the field.
Two complementary methods dominate metabolomics: nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and mass spectrometry (MS). NMR is a rapid and reproducible technique that preserves the integrity of metabolites and specimens, allowing them to be investigated subsequently by other means. However, although NMR can yield valuable information on molecular structure, it has limited sensitivity. In addition, NMR produces information on only a relatively small number of metabolites in most biological samples.
Several MS technologies have been deployed for metabolomics and have provided impressive sensitivity and specificity of analyses. MS-based study of lipids (lipidomics) has been an especially fruitful area of medical research. Some MS techniques, however, require extensive sample preparation, and interactions of biologic samples with the working surfaces of the instrument can cause performance to vary from sample to sample if not monitored carefully.
Metabolomics via MS is further complicated by the need to extract metabolites for analysis. Chemical diversity of the metabolome is much greater than that of the genome, the transcriptome, or the proteome, and a protocol that efficiently extracts very hydrophilic substances, such as lactic acid, might poorly recover oily molecules, such as squalene (a cholesterol precursor).
For these reasons, unlike genomics, where standards of practice have been widely accepted and off-the-shelf technologies for DNA sequencing have come into wide use, metabolomics remains the realm of experts who devise their own assays and require expensive instrumentation. In the first decades of the 21st century, worldwide demand for metabolomics analysis far outstripped the capacity of existing laboratories.
Across the “-omics” sciences, analysis and interpretation of data endures as the biggest challenge of all. This is reflected particularly in metabolomics, in which two overarching approaches, targeted and nontargeted, produce different kinds of data.
Targeted metabolomics are focused, such that the analyst queries defined panels of similar biochemicals. Targeted assays can be highly sensitive and specific and reproducibly quantitative, especially when heavy isotopes are used to label substances and instrumental methods are narrowly focused.
Nontargeted approaches, on the other hand, are intended to provide a broad portrait of metabolism. The methods of the nontargeted approach tend to be less rigorously quantitative. This approach is therefore most effectively used for discovery applications, in which one discrete condition is compared against another to identify metabolites that change. One example is the comparison of metabolites in drug-treated cells versus control, or untreated, cells.
Nontargeted metabolomics of human urine can generate massive data sets that include not only classic mammalian metabolites from known biochemical pathways but also food additives, drugs and their metabolites, botanical compounds from the diet, products of fermentation by gut microbes, and substances with unknown identities. Thus, large numbers of molecular variables (p) can be measured in a small number of samples (n), presenting what is known as the high-dimension, low-sample-size dilemma (p>>n), which is common in -omics sciences. Overcoming this problem requires great care in statistical treatment in order to minimize the risk of false discovery. The development of methods for the integration of metabolomic data with data from other -omics platforms has been a goal of some researchers in the field of systems biology.
Mapping results onto known biochemical pathways informs interpretation but can also give a humbling picture of the complexity of real-life metabolic networks. Indeed, many of the metabolites that are measured by metabolomics platforms are influenced by dietary composition, gut microbes, and metabolic pathways that are intrinsic to the organism being studied, creating challenges in understanding underlying mechanisms when those metabolites change in their concentration.
Hippuric acid, an abundant urinary organic acid of humans, illustrates the complexity and challenge of interpreting metabolic data. Microbes resident in the large intestine of the human body help to break down complex aromatic compounds in dietary plant matter, freeing up benzoic acid, which enters the bloodstream. The liver can add the amino acid glycine to benzoic acid to form n-benzoyl glycine, or hippuric acid, which reenters the blood and is absorbed by the kidneys. As a result, the kidneys excrete hundreds of milligrams of hippuric acid into the urine every day.
