Neurotransmitter, also called chemical transmitter or chemical messenger,  any of a group of chemical agents released by neurons (nerve cells) to stimulate neighbouring neurons or muscle or gland cells, thus allowing impulses to be passed from one cell to the next throughout the nervous system.
The following is an overview of neurotransmitter action and types; for more information, see nervous system.
Neurotransmitters are synthesized by neurons and are stored in vesicles, which typically are located in the axon’s terminal end, also known as the presynaptic terminal. The presynaptic terminal is separated from the neuron or muscle or gland cell onto which it impinges by a gap called the synaptic cleft. The synaptic cleft, presynaptic terminal, and receiving dendrite of the next cell together form a junction known as the synapse.
When a nerve impulse arrives at the presynaptic terminal of one neuron, neurotransmitter-filled vesicles migrate through the cytoplasm and fuse with the presynaptic terminal membrane. The neurotransmitter molecules are then released through the presynaptic membrane and into the synaptic cleft. In milliseconds, they travel across the synaptic cleft to the postsynaptic membrane of the adjoining neuron, where they then bind to receptors. Receptor activation results in either the opening or the closing of ion channels in the membrane of the second cell, which alters the cell’s permeability. In many instances, the change in permeability results in depolarization, causing the cell to produce its own action potential, thereby initiating an electrical impulse. In other cases, the change leads to hyperpolarization, which prevents the generation of an action potential by the second cell.
The termination of neurotransmitter activity happens in several different ways. The molecules may diffuse out of the synaptic cleft, away from the receptive cell. They also can be taken back up into the presynaptic terminal via transporter molecules, or they may be metabolized by enzymes in the synaptic cleft.
Different types of neurotransmitters have been identified. Based on chemical and molecular properties, the major classes of neurotransmitters include amino acids, such as glutamate and glycine; monoamines, such as dopamine and norepinephrine; peptides, such as somatostatin and opioids; and purines, such as adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Some gaseous substances, such as nitric oxide, can also act as neurotransmitters, as can endogenous substances known as trace amines, which are related chemically to the monoamines; examples include tryptamine and the phenethylamines.
Acetylcholine, a substance synthesized by neurons, is the primary neurotransmitter of the parasympathetic nervous system, which controls smooth muscle contraction and blood vessel dilation and slows heart rate. The major inhibitory neurotransmitter of the nervous system is GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid), which acts to dampen neuronal activity.
Abnormalities in neurotransmitter release and activity have been linked to various diseases and disorders, particularly neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders. For example, dysfunction of the neurotransmitters dopamine, glutamate, and GABA has been reported in schizophrenia, while reductions in levels and activity of norepinephrine and serotonin have been reported in persons with depression. Decreased levels of dopamine, attributed to the loss of so-called dopaminergic neurons, is a central feature of Parkinson disease.
