Neutrophil,  type of white blood cell (leukocyte) that is characterized histologically by its ability to be stained by neutral dyes and functionally by its role in mediating immune responses against infectious microorganisms. Neutrophils, along with eosinophils and basophils, constitute a group of white blood cells known as granulocytes. The granules of neutrophils typically stain pink or purple-blue following treatment with a dye. About 50 to 80 percent of all the white bloods cells occurring in the human body are neutrophils.
The neutrophils are fairly uniform in size with a diameter between 9 and 15 micrometres. The nucleus consists of two to five lobes joined together by hairlike filaments. Neutrophils move with amoeboid motion. They extend long projections called pseudopodium into which their granules flow; this action is followed by contraction of filaments based in the cytoplasm, which draws the nucleus and rear of the cell forward. In this way neutrophils rapidly advance along a surface. The bone marrow of a normal adult produces about 100 billion neutrophils daily. It takes about one week to form a mature neutrophil from a precursor cell in the marrow; yet, once in the blood, the mature cells live only a few hours or perhaps a little longer after migrating to the tissues. To guard against rapid depletion of the short-lived neutrophil (for example, during infection), the bone marrow holds a large number of them in reserve to be mobilized in response to inflammation or infection.
Within the body the neutrophils migrate to areas of infection or tissue injury. The force of attraction that determines the direction in which neutrophils will move is known as chemotaxis and is attributed to substances liberated at sites of tissue damage. Of the many neutrophils circulating outside the bone marrow, half are in the tissues and half are in the blood vessels; of those in the blood vessels, half are within the mainstream of rapidly circulating blood and the other half move slowly along the inner walls of the blood vessels (marginal pool), ready to enter tissues on receiving a chemotactic signal from them.
Neutrophils are actively phagocytic; they engulf bacteria and other microorganisms and microscopic particles. The granules of the neutrophil are microscopic packets of potent enzymes capable of digesting many types of cellular materials. When a bacterium is engulfed by a neutrophil, it is encased in a vacuole lined by the invaginated membrane. The granules discharge their contents into the vacuole containing the organism. As this occurs, the granules of the neutrophil are depleted (degranulation). A metabolic process within the granules produces hydrogen peroxide and a highly active form of oxygen (superoxide), which destroy the ingested bacteria. Final digestion of the invading organism is accomplished by enzymes.
An abnormally high number of neutrophils circulating in the blood is called neutrophilia. This condition is typically associated with acute inflammation, though it may result from chronic myelogenous leukemia, a cancer of the blood-forming tissues. An abnormally low number of neutrophils is called neutropenia. This condition can be caused by various inherited disorders that affect the immune system as well as by a number of acquired diseases, including certain disorders that arise from exposure to harmful chemicals. Neutropenia significantly increases the risk of life-threatening bacterial infection.
