Ovary,  in zoology, female reproductive organ in which sex cells (eggs, or ova) are produced. The usually paired ovaries of female vertebrates produce both the sex cells and the hormones necessary for reproduction. In some invertebrate groups, such as coelenterates (cnidarians), formation of ovaries is associated with the seasons. Many invertebrates have both ovaries and testes in one animal, and some species undergo sex reversal.
The primary function of the ovaries is to nurture and prepare oocytes (eggs) for the process of ovulation (rupture and release of the mature egg from the ovary). Once an egg is released, it migrates down a fallopian tube to the uterus. While in the fallopian tube, an egg may be penetrated and fertilized by a sperm. If an egg becomes fertilized, it will implant in the wall of the uterus. The processes of ovulation and fertilization are controlled largely by cells in the ovaries that produce and secrete hormones. These hormones also are essential for female sexual development and are necessary to sustain a pregnancy. In humans they also serve to regulate the menstrual cycle (periodic shedding of the uterine lining).
The ovaries of newborns and young girls are a mass of elongated tissue located in the pelvic girdle; as the female reaches adolescence, the ovaries gradually enlarge and change their shape. The adult ovaries are almond-shaped, and their surface is usually uneven and has areas of scar tissue. They are about 4 cm (1.6 inches) long, 2 cm (0.8 inch) wide, and 1.5 cm (0.6 inch) thick; the two ovaries weigh 4–8 grams (0.14–0.3 ounce). The ovaries are held in place by several ligaments (bands of fibrous connective tissue), including the broad ligament, the suspensory ligament, and the ovarian ligament. Each ovary consists of an outer cortex, which contains the follicles, oocytes, and some interstitial cells, and an inner medulla, which contains additional interstitial cells, fibrous tissue, blood vessels, lymphatic ducts, and nerves. (See also human reproductive system.)
The follicles, which are hollow balls of cells, contain immature eggs and are present in the ovaries at birth; there are usually 150,000 to 500,000 follicles at that time. By the beginning of a woman’s reproductive life, the number of immature follicles has fallen to about 34,000, and this number continues to fall thereafter. As a woman ages, the follicles gradually diminish in number until, at menopause and the cessation of reproductive function, the few remaining follicles degenerate. During the active childbearing years, normally between ages 13 and 50, only 300 to 400 of the follicles undergo maturation. At the beginning of each menstrual cycle, known as the early follicular phase, several follicles enlarge and migrate from the cortex toward the outer surface of the ovary. The cells lining the follicle multiply to form a layer known as the zona granulosa, and a cavity forms within this zone. The stromal and interstitial cells that surround the follicle arrange themselves concentrically to form a theca (an enclosing sheath) around the zona granulosa. One or sometimes more of the follicles are selected for further growth and maturation. The mature follicles, known as Graafian follicles, may reach 30 mm (about 1.2 inches) in diameter before they rupture.
The interstitial cells, especially those in the theca, produce mainly the hormones known as androgens. Within the granulosa cells these androgens are converted to estrogens (estradiol and estrone), the major ovarian hormones. The fluid in the cavity bathing the oocyte contains high concentrations of estrogens and other steroid hormones (progesterone and androgens), as well as enzymes and bioactive proteins. This phase of the menstrual cycle, during which follicular development occurs, lasts about two weeks.
At the end of the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle, one or occasionally two (or even more) mature follicles at the surface of the ovary rupture and release the egg. The egg then enters a fallopian tube to be carried to the uterus. After the follicle ruptures, the granulosa and theca cells fill the lumen of the follicle, forming the corpus luteum. The corpus luteum produces large amounts of progesterone for about two weeks. If at the end of that time the egg has not been fertilized, the corpus luteum involutes (becomes smaller) and becomes a whitish scar mass, known as a corpus albicans. As the corpus luteum disappears, progesterone levels fall, and the uterine lining is shed through the process of menstruation, thereby passing the unfertilized egg from the body. However, if fertilization occurs, the corpus luteum continues to produce large amounts of progesterone for several months and will remain in the ovary until the end of the pregnancy. Progesterone helps the fertilized egg to secure itself to the uterus and to develop into an embryo. The processes of follicular development, ovulation, and formation and function of the corpus luteum are controlled by gonadotropins known as follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), both of which are secreted from the pituitary gland.
