Pacemaker,  electronic cardiac-support device that produces rhythmic electrical impulses that take over the regulation of the heartbeat in patients with certain types of heart disease.
A healthy human heart contains its own electrical conducting system capable of controlling both the rate and the order of cardiac contractions. Electrical impulses are generated at the sinoatrial node in the right atrium, one of the two upper chambers of the heart. They then pass through the muscles of both atria to trigger the contraction of those two chambers, which forces blood into the ventricles. The wave of atrial electrical activity activates a second patch of conductive tissue, the atrioventricular node, initiating a second discharge along an assembly of conductive fibres called the bundle of His, which induces the contraction of the ventricles. When electrical conduction through the atrioventricular node or bundle of His is interrupted, the condition is called heart block. An artificial pacemaker may be employed temporarily until normal conduction returns or permanently to overcome the block.
In temporary pacing, a miniature electrode attached to fine wires is introduced into the heart through a vein, usually in the arm. The pacing device, an electric generator, remains outside the body and produces regular pulses of electric charge to maintain the heartbeat. In permanent pacing, the electrode may again be passed into the heart through a vein or it may be surgically implanted on the surface of the heart; in either case the electrode is generally located in the right ventricle. The electric generator is placed just beneath the skin, usually in a surgically created pocket below the collarbone.
The first pacemakers were of a type called asynchronous, or fixed, and they generated regular discharges that overrode the natural pacemaker. The rate of an asynchronous pacemaker may be altered by the physician, but once set it will continue to generate an electric pulse at regular intervals. Most are set at 70 to 75 beats per minute. More-recent devices are synchronous, or demand, pacemakers that trigger heart contractions only when the normal beat is interrupted. Most pacemakers of this type are designed to generate a pulse when the natural heart rate falls below 68 to 72 beats per minute.
Once in place, the electrode and wires of the pacemaker usually require almost no further attention. The power source of the implanted pulse generator, however, requires replacement at regular intervals, generally every four to five years. Most pacemakers use batteries as a power source.
Pacemakers designed to communicate wirelessly, using radio-frequency telemetry-based technology, have enabled physicians to gather information about a patient remotely. The implanted pacemakers transmit information to home monitoring systems and to programming devices used by doctors. As a result, a doctor working in a clinic can collect important information about a patient’s heart function while the patient is at home. This type of wireless device also sends out alert signals to the physician when the patient’s heart rate becomes abnormal.
