prostaglandin,  any of a group of physiologically active substances having diverse hormonelike effects in animals. Prostaglandins were discovered in human semen in 1935 by the Swedish physiologist Ulf von Euler, who named them, thinking that they were secreted by the prostate gland. The understanding of prostaglandins grew in the 1960s and ’70s with the pioneering research of Swedish biochemists Sune K. Bergström and Bengt Ingemar Samuelsson and British biochemist Sir John Robert Vane. The threesome shared the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1982 for their isolation, identification, and analysis of numerous prostaglandins.
The prostaglandins are made up of unsaturated fatty acids that contain a cyclopentane (5-carbon) ring and are derived from the 20-carbon, straight-chain, polyunsaturated fatty acid precursor arachidonic acid.
Arachidonic acid is a key component of phospholipids, which are themselves integral components of cell membranes. In response to many different stimuli, including various hormonal, chemical, or physical agents, a chain of events is set in motion that results in prostaglandin formation and release. These stimuli, either directly or indirectly, result in the activation of an enzyme called phospholipase A2. This enzyme catalyzes the release of arachidonic acid from phospholipid molecules. Depending on the type of stimulus and the enzymes present, arachidonic acid may diverge down one of several possible pathways. One enzyme, lipoxygenase, catalyzes the conversion of arachidonic acid to one of several possible leukotrienes, which are important mediators of the inflammatory process. Another enzyme, cyclooxygenase, catalyzes the conversion of arachidonic acid to one of several possible endoperoxides. The endoperoxides undergo further modifications to form prostaglandins, prostacyclin, and thromboxanes. The thromboxanes and prostacyclin have important functions in the process of blood coagulation.
Prostaglandins have been found in almost every tissue in humans and other animals. Plants synthesize molecules similar in structure to prostaglandins, including jasmonic acid (jasmonate), which regulates processes such as plant reproduction, fruit ripening, and flowering. Prostaglandins are very potent; for example, in humans some affect blood pressure at concentrations as low as 0.1 microgram per kilogram of body weight. The structural differences between prostaglandins account for their different biological activities. Some prostaglandins act in an autocrine fashion, stimulating reactions in the same tissue in which they are synthesized, and others act in a paracrine fashion, stimulating reactions in local tissues near where they are synthesized. In addition, a given prostaglandin may have different and even opposite effects in different tissues. The ability of the same prostaglandin to stimulate a reaction in one tissue and inhibit the same reaction in another tissue is determined by the type of receptor to which the prostaglandin binds.
Most prostaglandins act locally; for instance, they are powerful locally acting vasodilators. Vasodilation occurs when the muscles in the walls of blood vessels relax so that the vessels dilate. This creates less resistance to blood flow and allows blood flow to increase and blood pressure to decrease. An important example of the vasodilatory action of prostaglandins is found in the kidneys, in which widespread vasodilation leads to an increase in the flow of blood to the kidneys and an increase in the excretion of sodium in the urine. Thromboxanes, on the other hand, are powerful vasoconstrictors that cause a decrease in blood flow and an increase in blood pressure.
Thromboxanes and prostacyclins play an important role in the formation of blood clots. The process of clot formation begins with an aggregation of blood platelets. This process is strongly stimulated by thromboxanes and inhibited by prostacyclin. Prostacyclin is synthesized in the walls of blood vessels and serves the physiological function of preventing needless clot formation. In contrast, thromboxanes are synthesized within platelets, and, in response to vessel injury, which causes platelets to adhere to one another and to the walls of blood vessels thromboxanes are released to promote clot formation. Platelet adherence is increased in arteries that are affected by the process of atherosclerosis. In affected vessels the platelets aggregate into a plaque called a thrombus along the interior surface of the vessel wall. A thrombus may partially or completely block (occlude) blood flow through a vessel or may break off from the vessel wall and travel through the bloodstream, at which point it is called an embolus. When an embolus becomes lodged in another vessel where it completely occludes blood flow, it causes an embolism. Thrombi and emboli are the most common causes of heart attack (myocardial infarction). Therapy with daily low doses of aspirin (an inhibitor of cyclooxygenase) has had some success as a preventive measure for people who are at high risk of heart attack.
Prostaglandins play a pivotal role in inflammation, a process characterized by redness (rubor), heat (calor), pain (dolor), and swelling (tumor). The changes associated with inflammation are due to dilation of local blood vessels that permits increased blood flow to the affected area. The blood vessels also become more permeable, leading to the escape of white blood cells (leukocytes) from the blood into the inflamed tissues. Thus, drugs such as aspirin or ibuprofen that inhibit prostaglandin synthesis are effective in suppressing inflammation in patients with inflammatory but noninfectious diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis.
Although prostaglandins were first detected in semen, no clear role in reproduction has been established for them in males. This is not true in women, however. Prostaglandins play a role in ovulation, and they stimulate uterine muscle contraction—a discovery that led to the successful treatment of menstrual cramps (dysmenorrhea) with inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis, such as ibuprofen. Prostaglandins also play a role in inducing labour in pregnant women at term, and they are given to induce therapeutic abortions.
The function of the digestive tract is also affected by prostaglandins, with prostaglandins either stimulating or inhibiting contraction of the smooth muscles of the intestinal walls. In addition, prostaglandins inhibit the secretion of gastric acid, and therefore it is not surprising that drugs such as aspirin that inhibit prostaglandin synthesis may lead to peptic ulcers. Prostaglandin action on the digestive tract may also cause severe watery diarrhea and may mediate the effects of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide in Verner-Morrison syndrome, as well as the effects of cholera toxin.
