Seminal vesicle,   either of two elongated saclike glands that secrete their fluid contents into the ejaculatory ducts of some male mammals.
The two seminal vesicles contribute approximately 60 percent of the fluids passed from the human male during ejaculation (q.v.). In some mammals the capacity of the seminal vesicles is much larger; the boar, for example, may emit up to 50 times as much seminal fluid. Carnivores, marsupials, monotremes, and cetaceans do not have seminal vesicles.
The secretion of the seminal vesicles constitutes the bulk of the seminal fluid (semen). It is a thick fluid that contains the sugar fructose, proteins, citric acid, inorganic phosphorus, potassium, and prostaglandins. Once this fluid joins the sperm in the ejaculatory duct, fructose acts as the main energy source for the sperm outside the body. Prostaglandins are believed to aid fertilization by causing the mucous lining of the cervix to be more receptive to sperm as well as by aiding the movement of the sperm toward the ovum with peristaltic contractions of the uterus and fallopian tubes.
In the sexually mature human male, the seminal vesicles are elongated bodies 5 to 7 cm (2 to 2.75 inches) long and about 2 to 3 cm wide. In each vesicle is a tubule 15 cm long that is highly coiled and convoluted; surrounding this tube is connective tissue (blood and lymphatic vessels, nerve fibres, and supportive tissue). The tubule itself is composed of three layers: the inner lining, a moist and folded mucous membrane; a muscle layer of longitudinal and circular tissue; and a fibrous outside covering of elastic tissue. The mucous membrane secretes the fluids contributed by the seminal vesicles; it is highly folded while the tube is empty and can be distended without injury when its secretions cause it to fill the tubule. During ejaculation, the muscular tissue and elastic fibres contract to empty the vesicle’s contents into the ejaculatory ducts shortly after the vas deferens has emptied the sperm into those ducts.
The size and activity of the seminal vesicles are controlled by hormones. Production of androgen, the major hormone that influences the growth and activity of the seminal vesicles, begins at puberty and starts to decline at about the age of 30. In the absence of this hormone, the seminal vesicles will degenerate (atrophy).
