Swallowing, also called Deglutition,  the act of passing food from the mouth, by way of the pharynx (or throat) and esophagus, to the stomach. Three stages are involved in swallowing food.
The first begins in the mouth. There, food is mixed with saliva for lubrication and placed on the back of the tongue. The mouth closes, and the soft portion of the roof of the mouth (soft palate) rises so that the passageway between the nasal and oral cavities is closed off. The tongue rolls backward, propelling food into the oral pharynx, a chamber behind the mouth that functions to transport food and air.
Once food enters the pharynx, the second stage of swallowing begins. Respiration is temporarily inhibited as the larynx, or voice box, rises to close the glottis (the opening to the air passage). Pressure within the mouth and pharynx pushes food toward the esophagus. At the beginning of the esophagus there is a muscular constrictor, the upper esophageal sphincter, which relaxes and opens when food approaches. Food passes from the pharynx into the esophagus; the upper esophageal sphincter then immediately closes, preventing flow of food back into the mouth.
Once food is in the esophagus, the final phase of swallowing begins. The larynx lowers, the glottis opens, and breathing resumes. From the time food leaves the mouth until it passes the upper sphincter, only about one second of time elapses, during which all these body mechanisms spontaneously occur. After passing the upper sphincter, movements in the esophagus carry food to the stomach. Rhythmic muscular contractions (peristaltic waves) and pressure within the esophagus push the food downward. Folds in the esophageal wall stretch out as materials pass by them and again contract once they have passed. At the lower end of the esophagus, the lower esophageal sphincter relaxes and food enters the stomach; the sphincter then closes again to prevent reflux of gastric juices and food materials.
Swallowing is basically an involuntary reflex; one cannot swallow unless there is saliva or some substance to be swallowed. Initially, food is voluntarily moved to the rear of the oral cavity, but once food reaches the back of the mouth, the reflex to swallow takes over and cannot be retracted.
Swallowing is influenced by bodily position. Liquids swallowed when the body is in an upright or horizontal position flow by gravity rapidly to the stomach; in the head-down position, however, liquids remain at the beginning of the esophagus and several swallows and peristaltic waves may be necessary to evacuate the liquid. If a person swallows food connected to a string with counterweights attached outside of the body, he can only overcome 5 to 10 grams of weight resistance. Dogs can swallow food with a resistance of 50 to 500 grams. Essentially, the swallowing capacity of human beings is much weaker than that of other animals. The temperature of foods also affects a person’s swallowing capacity. Very cold liquids (1° to 3° C, or 34° to 37° F) slow down or completely stop peristaltic movement in the esophagus. In contrast, liquids at high temperature (58°–61° C, or 136°–142° F) increase peristaltic movements.
Afflictions affecting swallowing include paralysis of the pharynx, failure of the esophageal sphincters to open properly, and spastic contractions of the esophageal muscle walls. Any of these may be caused by physical or psychological complications. 
