Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH),  disorder characterized by the excessive excretion of sodium in the urine, thereby causing hyponatremia (decreased sodium concentrations in the blood plasma).
SIADH is caused by excessive unregulated secretion of vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone), a hormone that is released from the posterior pituitary gland via activation of the hypothalamus in response to physiological signals. In this syndrome, vasopressin secretion is inappropriate because it is not stimulated by high serum concentrations of solutes (high osmolality) or by low plasma volume—the factors that normally activate the hypothalamus and thereby trigger pituitary release of the hormone. The excess vasopressin stimulates reabsorption of water by the kidneys, which results in an increase in the volume of extracellular fluid and a decrease in the serum concentrations of sodium, chloride, and other substances. These processes result in the production of concentrated urine and are a reflection of vasopressin activity.
There are no tumours of the posterior pituitary that secrete excess amounts of vasopressin; however, other tumours, particularly those of the lung, may secrete large amounts of vasopressin, causing SIADH. Other causes of excess vasopressin secretion include brain tumours, other central nervous system disorders, adrenocorticotropic hormone deficiency, and several drugs (such as opiates, carbamazepine, and several anticancer drugs). Each of these conditions can result in activation of the hypothalamic-posterior pituitary system and stimulation of vasopressin release independent of the usual regulatory factors.
The onset of symptoms may be acute or chronic, with sudden or gradual loss of appetite, nausea and vomiting, sleepiness, confusion and disorientation, and ultimately seizures, coma, and death. When the onset is very slow, there may be few or even no symptoms.
Initial treatment for SIADH typically involves restriction of water intake and eradication of the underlying cause, if known. Patients with very low serum sodium concentrations can be treated by intravenous administration of concentrated salt solutions along with a diuretic. This allows the serum concentration of solutes to increase and the plasma volume to decrease.
