Tear duct and glands, also called lachrymal, or lacrimal, duct and glands,  structures that produce and distribute the watery component of the tear film. Tears consist of a complex and usually clear fluid that is diffused between the eye and the eyelid. Further components of the tear film include an inner mucous layer produced by specialized conjunctival cells and an outer lipid layer produced by meibomian glands along the eyelid margin. The mucous layer helps the tear film adhere to the eye surface, while the lipid layer serves to reduce tear evaporation. Tears prevent excessive drying of the surfaces of the eye (such as the conjunctiva and cornea), provide some nutrition and oxygen to surface structures, and possess antibacterial properties.
Tears are constantly secreted at a relatively regular rate from satellite (or accessory) lacrimal glands located high in the superior upper lid. Reflex tearing, such as that stimulated by eye irritation, bright lights, or emotional upset, is provided by the main lacrimal glands. Each main lacrimal gland lies in a hollow space in the inner surfaces of the frontal bone, located above and laterally to the eye. Each is about the size and shape of a shelled almond and is divided by a fibrous partition into an upper and a lower portion. Ducts from the gland discharge the tears onto the eye surface through openings, where the conjunctiva lining the upper lid meets the conjunctiva that covers the eyeball (an area called the fornix). Tears leave each eye by way of upper and lower canalicular ducts, which have barely visible openings, called puncta, at the nasal end of the upper and lower lid margins. The canaliculi lead to the lacrimal sac near the inner corner of each eye, which itself empties into the nasolacrimal duct, a tubelike structure that directs tears into the nasal cavity.
Diseases that damage the lacrimal gland, and thus decrease tear secretion, can lead to chronic dry eye, which ultimately can threaten vision. Treatment of chronic dry eye consists of artificial lubrication and, in some cases, mechanical closure of the puncta or surgery to partially close the lids.
