Tissue,  in physiology, a level of organization in multicellular organisms; it consists of a group of structurally and functionally similar cells and their intercellular material.
By definition, tissues are absent from unicellular organisms. Even among the simplest multicellular species, such as sponges, tissues are lacking or are poorly differentiated. But multicellular animals and plants that are more advanced have specialized tissues that can organize and regulate an organism’s response to its environment.
Bryophytes (liverworts, hornworts, and mosses) are nonvascular plants; i.e., they lack vascular tissues (phloem and xylem) as well as true leaves, stems, and roots. Instead bryophytes absorb water and nutrients directly through leaflike and stemlike structures or through cells comprising the gametophyte body.
In vascular plants, such as angiosperms and gymnosperms, cell division takes place almost exclusively in specific tissues known as meristems. Apical meristems, which are located at the tips of shoots and roots in all vascular plants, give rise to three types of primary meristems, which in turn produce the mature primary tissues of the plant. The three kinds of mature tissues are dermal, vascular, and ground tissues. Primary dermal tissues, called epidermis, make up the outer layer of all plant organs (e.g., stems, roots, leaves, flowers). They help deter excess water loss and invasion by insects and microorganisms. The vascular tissues are of two kinds: water-transporting xylem and food-transporting phloem. Primary xylem and phloem are arranged in vascular bundles that run the length of the plant from roots to leaves. The ground tissues, which comprise the remaining plant matter, include various support, storage, and photosynthetic tissues.
Secondary, or lateral, meristems, which are found in all woody plants and in some herbaceous ones, consist of the vascular cambium and the cork cambium. They produce secondary tissues from a ring of vascular cambium in stems and roots. Secondary phloem forms along the outer edge of the cambium ring, and secondary xylem (i.e., wood) forms along the inner edge of the cambium ring. The cork cambium produces a secondary dermal tissue (periderm) that replaces the epidermis along older stems and roots.
Early in the evolutionary history of animals, tissues became aggregated into organs, which themselves became divided into specialized parts. An early scientific classification of tissues divided them on the basis of the organ system of which they formed a part (e.g., nervous tissues). Embryologists have often classified tissues on the basis of their origin in the developing embryo; i.e., ectodermal, endodermal, and mesodermal tissues. Another method classified tissues into four broad groups according to cell composition: epithelial tissues, composed of cells that make up the body’s outer covering and the membranous covering of internal organs, cavities, and canals; endothelial tissues, composed of cells that line the inside of organs; stroma tissues, composed of cells that serve as a matrix in which the other cells are embedded; and connective tissues, a rather amorphous category composed of cells and an extracellular matrix that serve as a connection from one tissue to another.
The most useful of all systems, however, breaks down animal tissues into four classes based on the functions that the tissues perform. The first class includes all those tissues that serve an animal’s needs for growth, repair, and energy; i.e., the assimilation, storage, transport, and excretion of nutrients and waste products. In humans, these tissues include the alimentary (or digestive) tract, kidneys, liver, and lungs. The digestive tract leads (in vertebrates) from the mouth through the pharynx, stomach, and intestines to the anus. In vertebrates and some larger invertebrates, oxygen and the nutrients secured by the alimentary tissues or liberated from storage tissues are transported throughout the body by the blood and lymph, which are themselves considered by many to be tissues. Tissues that secure oxygen and excrete carbon dioxide are extremely variable in the animal kingdom. In many invertebrates, gas exchange takes place through the body wall or external gills, but in species adapted to a terrestrial life, an internal sac capable of expansion and contraction served this purpose, and gradually became more complex over evolutionary time as animals’ demand for oxygen increased.
The second class of tissues consists of those used in coordination. There are basically two types: physical (nervous and sensory tissues), which operate via electrical impulses along nerve fibres; and the chemical (endocrine tissues), which release hormones into the bloodstream. In invertebrates, both physical and chemical coordination are performed by the same tissues, because the nervous tissues also serve as hormone sources. In vertebrates, most endocrine functions are isolated in specialized glands, several of which are derived from nervous tissue.
The basic unit of all nervous tissue is the neuron, aggregations of which are called ganglia. The bundles of axons along which neurons transmit and receive impulses are called nerves. By comparison, chemical control by hormones is much slower and longer-acting. In many invertebrates, chemical stimulators are secreted by the neurons themselves and then move to their site of action along the axon. In higher vertebrates, the principal endocrine tissues are the thyroid, parathyroid, pituitary, and endocrine constituents of the pancreas and adrenal glands.
The third class of tissues includes those contributing to the body’s support and movement. The connective tissues proper surround organs, bones, and muscles, helping to hold them together. Connective tissues proper consist of cells embedded in a matrix composed of an amorphous ground substance and collagen, elastic, and reticular fibres. Tendons and ligaments are examples of extremely strong connective tissues proper. The other major structural tissues are cartilage and bone, which, like connective tissues proper, consist of cells embedded in an intercellular matrix. In cartilage the matrix is firm but rubbery; in bone the matrix is rigid, being impregnated by hard crystals of inorganic salts. Muscle tissue is primarily responsible for movement; it consists of contractile cells. There are two general types of muscle: striated muscle, which moves the skeleton and is under voluntary control; and smooth muscle, which surrounds the walls of many internal organs and cannot normally be controlled voluntarily.
A fourth class of tissues includes reproductive tissues, hemopoietic tissues, and tissue fluids. The most important reproductive tissues are the gonads (ovaries and testes), which produce the gametes (eggs and sperm, respectively). Hemopoietic tissues produce the cellular components of the blood. Among the important tissue fluids are lymph, cerebrospinal fluid, and milk (in mammals).
