Agnes Surriage, Lady Frankland, née Agnes Surriage,  (born spring 1726, Marblehead, Mass. [U.S.]—died April 23, 1783, Chichester, Eng.), American colonial figure whose romantic ascent from humble beginnings to British nobility made her the subject of many fictional accounts.
Agnes Surriage went to work as a maid in a local tavern at an early age. A pretty and charming girl, barefoot and in tattered dress, she attracted the attention of Charles Henry Frankland, the collector of the port of Boston and 10 years her elder, who secured her parents’ permission to take her to Boston and educate her. By 1746, when Frankland succeeded to the baronetcy of Thirsk in the North Riding of Yorkshire, Surriage had become his mistress. Sir Harry, as he was known, bought some 480 acres (195 hectares) in Hopkinton, Massachusetts, built a mansion, and there installed Surriage and a son by a previous liaison. In 1754 he traveled to England to settle a lawsuit concerning the estate and attempted unsuccessfully to have Surriage accepted by his family. Frankland and Surriage then set out on a European tour.
They were in Lisbon, Portugal, on the occasion of the terrible earthquake of November 1, 1755, and Sir Harry was caught outdoors and buried in rubble. Surriage searched for and found him, whereupon, according to the legend handed down later, Sir Harry married her. (There are indications, however, that a marriage may have occurred some months earlier.) They returned to Boston in 1756, and Lady Frankland was easily taken into society, where her charm and kindliness made her a favourite. In 1758–64 they lived in Lisbon, where Sir Harry was British consul general, and from 1764 until his death in 1768 they lived in Bath, England. Lady Frankland then returned to the Hopkinton estate and lived there until the Revolutionary War, when she removed to England.
Her spectacular and romantic rise to riches from the lowliest beginnings long attracted the attention of novelists and poets from Oliver Wendell Holmes to Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch, who kept her story alive in a variety of published works.
