Albert II, prince of Monaco, in full Albert Alexandre Louis Pierre Grimaldi, prince of Monaco,  (born March 14, 1958, Monaco), 32nd hereditary ruler of the principality of Monaco (2005– ). He was the only son of Rainier III, prince of Monaco, and Grace Kelly (Princess Grace of Monaco), a former actress.
Albert attended Amherst College (B.A., 1981) in Massachusetts and briefly served in the French navy. Following his mother’s death in 1982, he became president of the Monaco Red Cross and was later involved with a number of charities and causes. In 2006 he established the Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation, focusing on environmental protection. An avid sportsman, he formed the Monegasque Bobsleigh and Skeleton Federation in 1987 and, as a member of the principality’s bobsled team, was a five-time Olympian. Albert was also active in the International Olympic Committee, holding a number of positions. In 1994 he became chair of Monaco’s Olympic committee.
As his father’s health began to decline in the early 21st century, Albert assumed greater royal responsibilities. In April 2005 Prince Rainier died, and Albert formally assumed the throne on July 12. He did so amid controversy, as days earlier he publicly acknowledged that he had fathered a son out of wedlock. In 2006 Albert publicly acknowledged that he had also fathered a daughter. Those children, however, were barred from inheriting the throne, for a 2002 constitutional amendment required the heir’s parents to be married. Another amendment included female siblings and their legitimate heirs in the line of succession, easing concerns of Monaco’s future in the event that Albert, who had two sisters (Caroline and Stéphanie), did not produce a rightful heir. On July 1, 2011, Albert married Charlene Wittstock, a competitive swimmer from South Africa. The couple had twins, Jacques Honoré Rainier and Gabriella Thérèse Marie, on December 10, 2014. Although Gabriella was born first, Jacques was made crown prince in accordance with Monaco’s rules of succession.
