Alexander, Serbo-Croatian in full Aleksandar Karaðorðevići, Karaðorðevići also spelled Karageorgević, or Karadjordjević,  (born September 29 [October 11, New Style], 1806, Topola, Serbia—died  April 22 [May 4], 1885, Temesvár, Banat, Austria-Hungary), prince of Serbia from 1842 to 1858.
The third son of Karadjordje (Karageorge, or Karaðorðe), who had led the movement to win Serb autonomy from the Ottoman Turks (1804–13), Alexander lived in exile until 1842, when the Skupština (Serb parliament) elected him prince of Serbia. Assuming the throne despite Russian challenges to his election and Turkish refusals to make his office hereditary, Alexander allowed his administration to be dominated by an oligarchy consisting of an elite group of senators. In an effort to modernize the Serb bureaucracy, it attempted to improve the principality’s educational, legal, and judicial systems, as well as to foster the use of money and credit in Serbia’s economy. Although Alexander and his senator-advisers were well intentioned, their innovations, which were quickly undermined by corruption and abuse, stimulated widespread discontent in Serbia’s traditional peasant society. In addition, the new intelligentsia, created to provide trained personnel for the reformed bureaucracy, constituted another centre of opposition that encouraged emulation of western European parliamentary government, rather than the simple adoption of bureaucratic reforms.
Alexander responded to a revolt of the Serbs of south Hungary against the Hungarians in 1848 by refusing to support the revolutionary movement but allowing volunteers to cross the border. He later succumbed to Austrian demands that Serbia refrain from aiding Russia and again maintain neutrality during the Crimean War (1853–56). Thus, he lost the support of the many Serbs who advocated pan-Slavism.
Although he overthrew some of the main oligarchs in 1857, the Skupština, which met the following year, insisted that he abdicate. Alexander reluctantly agreed and spent the remainder of his life in exile.
