Anne-Geneviève de Bourbon-Condé, duchess de  Longueville,  (born Aug. 28, 1619, Vincennes, France—died  April 15, 1679, Paris), French princess remembered for her beauty and amours, her influence during the civil wars of the Fronde, and her final conversion to Jansenism.
Anne-Geneviève de Bourbon-Condé was the only daughter of Henri II de Bourbon, Prince de Condé, and Charlotte de Montmorency. She was born in the prison of Vincennes, into which her father and mother had been thrown for opposition to Marshal d’Ancre, the favourite of Marie de Médicis, who was then regent in the minority of Louis XIII. She was educated with great strictness in the convent of the Carmelites in the Rue Saint-Jacques at Paris. Her early years were clouded by the execution of the Duke de Montmorency, her mother’s only brother, but later her parents made their peace with Cardinal de Richelieu; introduced into society in 1635, she soon became one of the stars of the Hôtel Rambouillet, at that time the centre of all that was learned, witty, and gay in France.
In 1642 she married the Duke de Longueville, governor of Normandy, a widower twice her age. The marriage was not happy.
After Richelieu’s death her father became chief of the council of regency during the minority of Louis XIV, her brother (the Great Condé) won the great victory of Rocroy in 1643, and the duchess became involved in political affairs. About 1646 she fell in love with the Duke de la Rochefoucauld, the author of the Maximes, who made use of her love to obtain influence over her brother and thus win honours for himself. The duchess was the guiding spirit of the uprising known as the first Fronde. She brought over Armand, Prince de Conti (her second brother), and her husband to the frondeurs, but she failed to attract Condé himself, whose loyalty to the court overthrew the first Fronde. The second Fronde was for the most part her work, and in it she played the most prominent part in attracting to the rebels first Condé and later Turenne.
In 1652, the last year of the war, the duchess was accompanied into Guyenne by the Duke de Nemours, and her intimacy with him gave La Rochefoucauld an excuse for abandoning her. Thus abandoned, and in disgrace at court, she betook herself to religion. She lived chiefly in Normandy until 1663, when her husband died and she came to Paris. There she became more and more Jansenist in opinion and became the great protectress of the Jansenists. Her famous letters to the pope are part of the history of Port Royal, and as long as she lived the nuns of Port Royal des Champs were left in safety. Her elder son resigned his title and estates and became a Jesuit under the name of the Abbé d’ Orléans, while the younger, after leading a debauched life, was killed leading the attack in the passage of the Rhine in 1673. As her health failed, the duchess hardly ever left the convent of the Carmelites in which she had been educated.
