Carlos María Isidro de Borbón, conde de Molina, byname Don Carlos,  (born March 29, 1788, Madrid, Spain—died March 10, 1855, Trieste, Austrian Empire [now in Italy]), the first Carlist pretender to the Spanish throne (as Charles V) and the second surviving son of King Charles IV (see Carlism).
Don Carlos was imprisoned in Napoleonic France from 1808 to 1814. During the period of liberal rule (1820–23) he was involved in a number of conspiracies against the regime, and in the decade that followed the restoration of absolutism (1823–33) he participated in plots to impose an implacably hard line on his brother, Ferdinand VII. Ferdinand’s decision to revoke the Salic Law of Succession to allow his infant daughter Isabella to succeed to the throne provoked Don Carlos into open opposition, claiming he was the rightful heir. Because the Spanish liberals supported Isabella’s claim, Don Carlos became the candidate of the clericals, asserting that he represented the true traditions of the monarchy, the church, and regional liberties against the foreign innovations of liberal constitutionalism and centralization.
He went to Portugal in March 1833 to meet his brother-in-law Dom Miguel, the pretender to the Portuguese throne, and, in consequence of the civil war there, was cut off from Spain when Ferdinand VII died in September 1833. Don Carlos could return to Spain, where his supporters proclaimed him king as Charles V, only via England, and it was not until July 1834 that he put himself at the head of his partisans in the Basque provinces. Tomás de Zumalacárregui, his commander in chief, was a general of genius, but Don Carlos’s lack of judgment prevented any early solution to the First Carlist War. After Zumalacárregui’s death in 1835 and the Carlists’ failure to take Bilbao, the initiative passed increasingly to the liberals. When, in August 1839, the Carlist general Rafael Maroto signed the Convention of Vergara, by which the liberals recognized Basque legal privileges, most of the fighting ceased and Don Carlos went into exile. He abdicated his pretensions in 1845, taking the title conde de Molina, in the vain hope that his son Carlos Luis de Borbón might heal the breach within the Bourbon family by marrying Isabella II.
