Catherine, duchess of Cambridge, original name in full Catherine Elizabeth Middleton, byname Kate,  (born January 9, 1982, Reading, Berkshire, England), consort (2011– ) of Prince William, duke of Cambridge and second in line to the British throne.
Catherine was the eldest of three children of Michael and Carole Middleton; her siblings were Philippa (Pippa) and James. Her parents met while working as flight attendants at British Airways, and in 1987 they founded a mail-order business selling supplies for children’s parties. The success of that venture, along with a family inheritance, allowed them to send Catherine to a prep school and then to the prestigious Marlborough College in Wiltshire, England. At Marlborough, Catherine (then called Kate) was known as a serious levelheaded student, excelling in both athletics—she captained the school field hockey team—and academics.
In 2001 Kate went on to the University of St. Andrews in Scotland, where she met Prince William, a fellow first-year art history student who was second in line (after his father, Charles) to the British throne. The two began dating, though their relationship was not made public until they were photographed together vacationing in Switzerland in 2004. Despite the frequent intrusions of the paparazzi, Kate attempted to maintain a private life. After graduating from St. Andrews in 2005, she briefly worked as an accessories buyer for a clothing retailer, and she later assumed various roles at her parents’ company while also performing a host of charity work.
Following several years of intense speculation from the British media about the couple’s marriage plans—during which time Kate was dubbed “Waity Katie”—it was announced in November 2010 that the two had become engaged. In preparation for entry into the royal family, Kate reverted to the more-formal name Catherine. The royal wedding took place on April 29, 2011, at Westminster Abbey in London. She was given the title duchess of Cambridge. The couple’s first son, Prince George Alexander Louis of Cambridge, was born on July 22, 2013, and their daughter, Princess Charlotte Elizabeth Diana of Cambridge, was born on May 2, 2015. Catherine gave birth to a second son, Prince Louis Arthur Charles of Cambridge, on April 23, 2018.
