Crown Princess Mette-Marit, née Mette-Marit Tjessem Høiby,  (born Aug. 19, 1973, Kristiansand, Nor.), Norwegian of middle-class background who, despite intense public scrutiny of what was seen by many as her checkered past, wed Crown Prince Haakon of Norway.
Mette-Marit was the daughter of a journalist and a bank employee. Her parents divorced when she was young, and she lived thereafter with her mother. Mette-Marit was an exchange student in Wangaratta, Victoria, Austl., during six months of her high school years, and she went on to attend the University of Oslo. During that time she experienced what she called a “youth rebellion.”  She had a son, Marius, in 1997, and worked to support herself while raising him as a single mother.
In 1999 she met Crown Prince Haakon  through mutual friends. The two started dating and eventually moved in together. Haakon acknowledged their relationship in May 2000, and their engagement was announced that December. Even in permissive Norway, the prince’s choice of bride—a woman who was not only a commoner but also a single mother—raised eyebrows.
The objection, however, seemed to be less the issue of descent—her son could never be king—than the people with whom the future crown princess had associated in her former life. Less than a week before they married, the crown prince and his bride-to-be held a press conference in which she apologized for her former life and made her statement serve as both a plea and an object lesson. She hoped to curtail future questions about her past and, without admitting she had used drugs, used the occasion to condemn them. Haakon was supportive of her, as were his parents, King Harald V and Queen Sonja. The king did not stand in the way of the marriage, perhaps because he had had to wait nine years before his father, King Olav V, and the Norwegian Parliament approved his marrying commoner Sonja Haraldsen.
Haakon and Mette-Marit were married on Aug. 25, 2001. Mette-Marit continued her studies after her marriage, focusing especially on HIV/AIDS issues; in 2006 she was made a special representative for the Joint United Nations  Programme on HIV/AIDS. She is also a patron of such organizations as the Norwegian Red Cross and the Norwegian Council for Mental Health. The prince and princess have two children, born in 2004 and 2005.
