Floris V, byname Floris The God Of The Commoners,  Dutch Floris Der Keerlen God,  (born July 1254, Leiden, Holland—died  June 27, 1296, Muiderberg), count of Holland (1256–96) and Zeeland, son of the German king William of Holland. Under him the territory of Holland greatly expanded and prospered. Floris succeeded his father as count of Holland when he was less than two years old and did not come of age until 1266.
The county was enlarged by the final subjugation of the West Frisians in 1289 and by the acquisition of Waterland, West Frisia, the diocese of Utrecht, and Gooi and by forcing several feudal lords in the borderlands to recognize Floris as their overlord (Amstel, Woerden). The county became more or less coextensive with the later provinces of North and South Holland. Careful maintenance of waterways and dikes increased the agrarian importance of the country. Before his successes on his frontiers, Floris V had had to suppress a revolt of the peasants in the north of Holland (1273–74).
His active interest in affairs was not limited to the Netherlands. He allied himself closely with Edward I of England in his strife with France and secured from the English king great trading advantages for his people; the staple of wool was placed at Dort (Dordrecht), and the Hollanders and Zeelanders got fishing rights on the English coast. So intimate did their relations become that Floris sent his son John to be educated at the court of Edward with a view to his marriage with an English princess. However, Floris in 1296 transferred his alliance to Philip IV of France, probably at the prompting of his cousin John of Avesnes, count of Hainaut, since John and Philip were both hostile to the count of Flanders, Guy of Dampierre, who was also Floris’ adversary. This tergiversation was the cause of Floris V’s death; discontented nobles, encouraged by the English king, took him prisoner, and, when the peasantry prevented them from taking him to England, killed him in the castle of Muiden. The tragic event has been immortalized in dramas from the pens of some of Holland’s most famous writers.
