Francis (I), original name Francesco de’ Medici,  (born March 25, 1541, Florence—died Oct. 19/20, 1587, Poggio a Caiano, near Florence), second grand duke (granduca) of Tuscany, a tool of the Habsburgs and father of Marie de Médicis, wife of Henry IV of France.
He was appointed head of government in 1564 while his father, Cosimo I, was still alive; and he succeeded his father as grand duke in 1574. The title was not precisely legitimate since it had been bestowed by the pope (1569), but Francis obtained the grand ducal title from the emperor Maximilian II in November 1575. By subservience to the Habsburgs he won recognition of his dynasty’s hereditary right to all his possessions in Tuscany; and he twice refused invitations to stand as a candidate for the Polish crown (1575 and 1587). He sponsored Bernardo Buontalenti’s plan for developing Livorno (1577), which was to make it the greatest Tuscan port; he strengthened the fleet; and he opened several trading posts in the eastern Mediterranean.
A scholar and a keen student of chemistry, mechanics, and ballistics, Francis also continued his family’s patronage of artists (notably Giovanni da Bologna) and was the first to house the Medici collection of paintings in the Uffizi Palace in Florence. His reign was tarnished, however, by domestic scandals: his brother Pietro murdered his own wife, the younger Eleanora de Toledo (night of July 9–10, 1576); his sister Isabella was murdered by her husband Paolo Giordano Orsini, duca di Bracciano (July 10, 1576); and Francis himself largely lives on in the romantic popular memory because of his love affair with Bianca Cappello. While he was still heir presumptive, he had taken this young patrician as his mistress—after she had been abandoned by the lover with whom she had fled from Venice. Nothing could ever deflect Francis from this passion—neither the marriage with Joanna of Austria, nor the reproaches of his family and of the Emperor, nor public censure. When Joanna died, after giving him three children, he married Bianca and had her solemnly crowned in the Palazzo Vecchio. They died of malaria within a few hours of each other in 1587. Popular imagination, however, refused to believe this clinical account of their deaths. It was said that Bianca had prepared a poisoned tart intended for her brother-in-law Ferdinando (the future Ferdinand I), that Francis had eaten some of it by mistake, and that Bianca in desperation then ate some herself in order not to survive her lover and husband.
