Hakushaku Itagaki Taisuke,  (born April 17, 1837, Kōchi, Japan—died  July 11, 1919, Tokyo), founder of Japan’s first political party, the Liberal Party, or Jiyūtō.
Born into a middle-ranking samurai family, Itagaki entered the service of his feudal lord in 1860 and emerged from subsequent factional struggles to become the military commander in Tosa, the large feudal domain controlled by his clansmen. Under Itagaki’s command the troops of Tosa participated in the Meiji Restoration in 1868, which overthrew the Tokugawa shogunate and restored national authority to the emperor. Afterward, he was one of a dozen powerful young leaders on the national scene and served from 1868 to 1873 as an official in the new government. When the majority of the cabinet thwarted his plans for a war against Korea, he resigned and founded a political club (political parties were then unknown in Japan). He denounced the government’s arbitrary stand and called for the formation of a “council chamber chosen by the people” to advise the government.
In 1875 he served briefly in the cabinet but then left again. This time he founded the first nationwide organization with a mass following, the Society of Patriots, but he resisted the desire of radical members of the group to join in the rebellion that was raised in 1877 by dissatisfied samurai. In 1878 Itagaki tried to further his movement by establishing a school devoted to teaching the principles of democratic government. For this action he became known as the Jean-Jacques Rousseau of Japan. The peak of his fame came shortly after, when he organized Japan’s first political party, the Jiyūtō. He was a charismatic leader and a popular speaker. In April 1882, campaigning for the Liberal Party, he was stabbed by an attacker and is reputed to have declared: “Itagaki may die, but liberty, never.”
With the beginning of parliamentary government in 1890, Itagaki, who had been made a count in 1887, served as the symbolic head of his party, which frequently cooperated with Itō Hirobumi, Japan’s first prime minister and one of the more liberal of the government oligarchs. Itagaki and his party felt a responsibility to demonstrate to the West that the Japanese were capable of parliamentary government. After his retirement in 1900, Itagaki wrote position papers and agitated for social reform.
