Henri I de Lorraine, 3e duc de Guise, byname Henry of Guise or The Scarred, French Henri de Guise or le Balafré,  (born December 31, 1550—died December 23, 1588, Blois, France), popular duke of Guise, the acknowledged chief of the Catholic party and the Holy League during the French Wars of Religion.
Henri de Lorraine was 13 years old at the death of his father, François, the 2nd duke (1563), and grew up under the domination of a passionate desire to avenge his father’s death, for which he held the Huguenot admiral Gaspard de Coligny responsible. In 1566 he went to Vienna hoping to gain military experience by fighting the Turks, but the war ended before he could go into action. He returned home to take part in the further wars of religion and performed deeds that were as daring as they were useless. Nevertheless he won the love of the people of Paris.
In 1572 Catherine de Médicis turned to the Guises for help in getting rid of the admiral Gaspard de Coligny, who was pressing the King to adopt policies at variance with her aims. After an attempt on the Admiral’s life had failed, Guise attended the secret meeting (August 23) that planned the Massacre of St. Bartholomew’s Day. On August 24 he personally supervised Coligny’s murder, thereby avenging his father’s death, but otherwise took no part in the massacre and even sheltered about 100 Huguenots in his house. By the following year, he was without a serious rival as head of the Catholic party; Catherine de Médicis came to depend on him to protect her from the intrigues of her son François, duc d’Alençon and later duc d’Anjou, and Henry of Navarre.
At Henry III’s accession (May 1574) the duc de Guise occupied a unique position at court as well as in the affections of the people of Paris. In October 1575 he calmed the anxieties of the Parisians by defeating a German army at Dormans, receiving a wound and scar that won him his father’s nickname of “le Balafré.” Fearing Guise’s growing popularity, Henry III made peace with the Huguenots (May 1576). Guise, angered by what he regarded as a betrayal, formed the Holy League of nobles in defense of the Catholic cause; Henry III countered the move by placing himself at the head of the movement. His relations with Guise deteriorated further after the Peace of Poitiers (September 1577). While the king fell under the spell of new favourites, Guise strengthened the ties which existed for some time between his family and the Spanish monarchy and from 1578 onward had a pension from Philip II of Spain.
In 1584 Henry of Navarre became heir presumptive to the crown, and the League was revived in order to exclude him from the succession. Guise himself became ambitious for the crown. In the War of the Three Henrys he again drove the Germans out of France and, when invited to the capital, ruled there unopposed as a kind of “King of Paris.” On May 12, 1588—the Day of the Barricades—the people rose against Henry III, but instead of seizing the throne, Guise helped to appease the mob, and Henry III was able to escape to Chartres. By the Edict of Union (July) the king surrendered to the League’s demands, and on August 4 Guise was appointed lieutenant general of the kingdom. Soon after, Henry III decided to destroy Guise. On December 23 Guise fell into a carefully laid trap. As he left a Council meeting in answer to a royal summons, he was set upon by the king’s bodyguard and stabbed. His body and that of his brother Louis II, cardinal de Guise, who was murdered the next day, were burned and the ashes thrown in the Loire.
