Henry Wriothesley, 3rd earl of Southampton, in full Henry Wriothesley, 3rd earl of Southampton, Baron Wriothesley of Titchfield,  (born October 6, 1573, Cowdray, Sussex, England—died November 10, 1624, Bergen op Zoom, Netherlands), English nobleman and William Shakespeare’s patron.
Henry Wriothesley succeeded to his father’s earldom in 1581 and became a royal ward under the care of Lord Burghley. Educated at the University of Cambridge and at Gray’s Inn, London, he was 17 years old when he was presented at court, where he was favoured by Queen Elizabeth I and befriended by Robert Devereux, 2nd earl of Essex. Southampton became a munificent patron of writers, including Barnabe Barnes, Thomas Nashe, and Gervase Markham. He is best known, however, as the patron of Shakespeare, who dedicated the poems Venus and Adonis (1593) and The Rape of Lucrece (1594) to him. It has also been argued, albeit inconclusively, that Shakespeare’s sonnets were addressed to him. If so, the earlier sonnets, urging marriage, must have been written before the beginning (in 1595) of Southampton’s intrigue with Elizabeth Vernon, one of the queen’s waiting women, which culminated with their hasty marriage in 1598, incurring the queen’s wrath and leading to their brief imprisonment.
In 1596 and 1597 Southampton accompanied Essex on his expeditions to Cádiz and to the Azores. In 1599 he went to Ireland with Essex, but the queen insisted that Southampton return to London. He was deeply involved in the Essex rebellion (February 1601), on the eve of which he induced players at the Globe Theatre to revive Richard II (a play dealing with the deposition of a king) in order to stir up the populace. He was tried for treason on February 19, 1601; his titles were forfeited and he was condemned to death, but his sentence was commuted to life imprisonment through the intervention of Sir Robert Cecil.
On the accession of James I, Southampton resumed his place at court. He was made a knight of the Garter and captain of the Isle of Wight in 1603 and was restored to the peerage by act of Parliament. In 1603 he entertained Queen Anne with a performance of Shakespeare’s Love’s Labour’s Lost by the Lord Chamberlain’s Men, soon to be known as the King’s Men.
Southampton was an active member of the Virginia and East India companies. He was a volunteer in support of German Protestants in 1614, and in 1617 he proposed fitting out an expedition against the Barbary pirates. He became a privy councillor in 1619 but fell into disgrace through his determined opposition to the royal favourite, the duke of Buckingham. In 1624 he and his elder son volunteered to fight for the United Provinces against Spain, but on landing in the Netherlands they were attacked with fever, and Southampton died a few days after the death of his son.
