Jacoba Of Bavaria, Dutch Jacoba Van Beieren,  French Jacqueline De Bavière,  (born July 25, 1401, Le Quesnoy, Flanders [now in France]—died  Oct. 9, 1436, Teilingen, near Leiden [Netherlands]), duchess of Bavaria, countess of Holland, Zeeland, and Hainaut, whose forced cession of sovereignty in the three counties to Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy, in 1428, consolidated Burgundian dominion in the Low Countries.
Jacoba, the only daughter and heiress of William, count of Zeeland, Holland, and Hainaut, was married in 1415 to John of Touraine, who died two years later. Jacoba’s claim to succeed her father, who also died in 1417, was not recognized by the German king Sigismund, who instead supported her paternal uncle John of Bavaria.
After marrying her cousin, John IV, duke of Brabant, in March 1418, Jacoba fought against John of Bavaria in Holland. Her uncle John the Fearless, duke of Burgundy, settled the dispute in 1419, but John of Bavaria gained control of Holland and Zeeland the following year, when the counties were mortgaged to him by John of Brabant.
Disgusted by her husband’s actions, Jacoba left for Hainaut and, after repudiating her marriage in 1421, went to England, where she was welcomed by Henry V. In 1422 she married Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, whose intrusion into the Low Countries two years later destroyed the English-Burgundian alliance.
Jacoba returned to Hainaut in 1424 with Humphrey and an army, but Humphrey deserted to England in 1425. Jacoba was subsequently interned by her opponent, Philip III the Good, duke of Burgundy, at Ghent.
After Philip had gained possession of Holland and Zeeland (1425), Jacoba escaped and for the next three years contested Philip’s power in the Netherlands. Her hopes dimmed, however, after the pope declared her marriage to Humphrey illegal (Jan. 9, 1428); she made a settlement with Philip on July 3, 1428, in the Treaty of Delft, which maintained Jacoba’s title of countess but transferred administration of her three counties (Holland, Zeeland, and Hainaut) to Philip and stipulated that she was not to marry without his consent.
After Philip had mortgaged the revenues of Holland and Zeeland to three nobles of the Borselen family from Zeeland (1430), Jacoba secretly married one of them—Francis, lord of Zuilen and St. Maartensdijk—probably as part of a plot to overthrow Burgundian sovereignty in Holland. Philip then imprisoned Francis (October 1432) and forced Jacoba to abdicate her countship (1433). She later became duchess in Bavaria and countess of Ostrevant (in Bohemia) and was allowed to remarry Francis in 1434. She died childless.
