Jean de France, duc de Berry,  (born November 30, 1340, Vincennes, France—died June 15, 1416, Paris), third son of King John II the Good of France and a leading patron of the arts; he controlled at least one-third of the territory of France during the middle period of the Hundred Years’ War.
Count of Poitiers from 1356, he was appointed king’s lieutenant (1358) for Auvergne, Languedoc, Périgord, and Poitou while his father was in captivity in England. It was thus that he came to control so much of France, despite the opposition of his brother, the dauphin Charles. Berry and Auvergne, newly raised to the rank of duchies, were granted to him by his father in 1360.
After 1364, during his brother Charles V’s reign, Berry heavily taxed his lands for the defense of the kingdom. His oppressive policies eventually led to a peasants’ revolt (1381–84) after Charles’s death (September 16, 1380). Acting as a member of the regency council of young Charles VI from 1380 to 1388, he shared royal powers while Charles was too young to rule. Berry maintained power by serving on a Council of 12 that he helped create to aid in the administration of France. On the council, Berry worked for peace with England by negotiating with John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, calling for papal mediation, and by helping to postpone an attack on England.
Initially arranging a temporary reconciliation in 1405 between the conflicting factions of John the Fearless, duke of Burgundy, and his own brother Louis, duc d’Orléans, Berry allied himself in 1410 with the Orléanist, later called the Armagnac, faction. After he was attacked by the Burgundians (1412), he resumed his role as mediator in the peace of Auxerre in 1412 and of Pontoise in 1413. Berry also helped deliver Charles VI’s unsuccessful cession plan (the retirement of two rival popes for the election of a single pope) to the antipope Benedict XIII in Avignon.
Throughout his life, Berry had spent lavishly to promote the arts, and at his death there was not enough money to pay for his funeral. He had invested fortunes on the treasures that remain as his monument—paintings, tapestries, jewelry, and illuminated manuscripts (including the world-famous Très riches heures du duc de Berry).
