 John Hamilton, 1st marquess of Hamilton,   (born 1532/35—died  April 12, 1604), Scottish nobleman active in Scottish and English politics and in the unsuccessful negotiations for the release of Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots.
The third son of James Hamilton, 2nd earl of Arran, he was given the abbey of Arbroath in 1551. In politics he was largely under the influence of his unscrupulous younger brother Claud Hamilton, afterward (1587) Baron Paisley (b. September 1543?–d. 1621/22). At first hostile to Mary Stuart, they later became her devoted partisans. Claud met Mary on her escape from Lochleven and escorted her to Hamilton Palace. With others of the Queen’s party they were forfeited by the Parliament and sought their revenge on the regent Moray. Although the Hamiltons disavowed all connection with Moray’s murderer, James Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh, he had been provided with horse and weapons by the abbot of Arbroath, and it was at Hamilton that he sought refuge after the deed. Their uncle, Archbishop John Hamilton, was hanged at Stirling in 1571 for alleged complicity in the murder of Mary’s husband, Lord Darnley, and is said to have admitted that he was a party to the murder of Moray.
At the pacification of Perth in 1573 the Hamiltons abandoned Mary’s cause. On the uncertain evidence extracted from the assassin by torture, the Hamiltons had been credited with a share in the murder of the regent Lennox in 1571. In 1579 proceedings against them for these two crimes were resumed, and when they escaped to England their lands and titles were seized by their enemies. John Hamilton soon dissociated himself from the policy of his brother Claud, who continued to plot for Spanish intervention on behalf of Mary until her death. (He later, in 1590, went mad and was mad at his death.) With other Scottish exiles, John crossed the border in 1585 and marched on Stirling; he was admitted on November 4 and formally reconciled with James VI, with whom he was thenceforward on the friendliest terms. He was created marquess of Hamilton, earl of Arran, and Lord Aven in 1599.
