Miloš, English Milosh, Serbo-Croatian in full Miloš Obrenović,  original name Miloš Teodorović,  (born March 7 [March 18, New Style], 1780, Srednja Dobrinja, Serbia—died  Sept. 14 [Sept. 26], 1860, Topčider, near Belgrade), Serbian peasant revolutionary who became prince of Serbia (1815–39 and 1858–60) and who founded the Obrenović dynasty.
Miloš Teodorović, originally a herdsman, worked for his half brother Milan Obrenović, then joined Karadjordje, who was leading the Serbs in a rebellion against their Ottoman Turkish rulers (1804–13). In 1805 Miloš was appointed a commander in the rebel forces, but after his half brother was killed (1810), possibly by Karadjordje, he took the surname Obrenović and assumed an enmity toward Karadjordje. When Karadjordje fled into Hungary following the collapse of his revolt (1813), Miloš remained in Serbia. The Turks appointed him knez (prince) of three central Serb districts, and he cooperated with them in pacifying the country, even helping in the suppression of a new revolt (1814). But when the Turks began large-scale massacres, Miloš gathered his followers at Takovo, Serbia, and on Palm Sunday (April 1815) began his own revolt, quickly winning a series of military victories. Because the Turks feared that Russia might intervene on the Serbs’ behalf, a peace settlement was soon arranged (December 1815). The Turks recognized Miloš as prince of Serbia, which was granted a large degree of autonomy but remained a part of the Ottoman Empire; they also allowed the Serbs to retain their weapons and to hold their own national assembly, or Skupština.
Miloš, who shortly thereafter ordered that Karadjordje be murdered, consolidated his position and in November 1817 was named the hereditary prince of Serbia by the Skupština. Demonstrating himself to be a patient yet determined diplomat, Miloš then conducted prolonged negotiations with the Turks, who finally recognized Miloš’ position as hereditary and granted full autonomy to the Serb principality (Aug. 28, 1830). Three years later Miloš also acquired possession of the eastern Serb lands that the Turks had originally excluded from his jurisdiction (May 25, 1833).
Despite his diplomatic successes, his achievements in promoting trade, reorganizing the army, and building roads and his agricultural and land-distribution policies favouring peasants with small landholdings, Miloš’ autocratic methods aroused strong opposition. In 1835 he was compelled to grant a constitution; and when Russia and Turkey forced him to repeal it (regarding it as too liberal), the Turkish sultan promulgated another constitution for Serbia in December 1838. In accordance with it, Miloš appointed a council of 17 senators, who immediately demanded his abdication. Naming his son Milan as his successor (June 13, 1839), Miloš Obrenović retired to his estates in Walachia.
Twenty years later the Skupština called on Miloš to return to the throne to replace Alexander Karadjordjević (reigned 1842–58), whom it had deposed in December 1858. Resuming his autocratic methods, Miloš then adopted policies that defied Austria, which had gained a great deal of influence over Serbia during the preceding reign. He also demanded that the Turks again recognize his position as hereditary and reduce their military strength inside Serbia. Before he could accomplish his aims, however, he died.
