Philip, byname Philip the Magnanimous, German Philipp der Grossmütige,  (born November 13, 1504, Marburg, Hesse [Germany]—died March 31, 1567, Kassel), landgrave (Landgraf) of Hesse (1509–67), one of the great figures of German Protestantism, who championed the independence of German princes against the Holy Roman emperor Charles V.
Philip was the son of Landgrave William II, an austere cultivated man and an experienced soldier. He died when Philip was barely five years old. Philip’s mother, Duchess Anna of Mecklenburg, was a passionate, energetic, and ambitious woman. Her relations with her son, however, were cool and were impaired by her second marriage in 1519 and by Philip’s conversion to the doctrines of Martin Luther. As a victim of political forces, he spent a gloomy youth, attaching himself increasingly to his older sister Elizabeth, later duchess of Saxony; throughout his life no one was closer to him than she.
In March 1518 the emperor Maximilian I declared Philip to be of age. While assuming the government in name, he retained his parents’ capable counselors, mostly lawyers by training, who imbued the young man with his parents’ single-minded devotion to the welfare of the state. Philip eventually developed into a self-reliant politician. From his youth, he characteristically thought in terms of the territorial state, an attitude that was to determine his future relations with the Habsburg emperors. He ruled his territory in the spirit of an early enlightened despotism.
The landgraviate of Hesse had suffered greatly during his mother’s regency, but Philip succeeded in bringing order to the confused administration of the state and, through skillful management of alliances, in freeing Hesse from its isolation in foreign affairs. In 1523 Philip, fighting alongside the powerful electors of the Palatinate and of Trier, defeated the rebellious imperial knight Franz von Sickingen. This victory also crushed the remaining opposition of the Hessian nobility and undoubtedly strengthened the young man’s self-confidence.
Two years later, in fact, he scored his first personal triumph when he suppressed the peasant revolt in the neighbouring imperial abbeys of Fulda and Hersfeld. He then advanced into Thuringia and, allied with the elector of Saxony and the dukes of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel and Saxony, defeated Thomas Müntzer, a popular preacher from Mühlhausen/Thüringen, at a battle near Frankenhausen in May 1525. By this victory Philip saved the central German principalities from destruction.
During these years, while the first storm of the Reformation was sweeping through Germany, Luther’s teachings gained a firm hold in many Hessian localities and at the landgrave’s court. It was not until the summer of 1524, however, after making a detailed study of the Bible, the writings of the Church Fathers, and the history of the church, that Philip himself joined Luther. At the same time, orthodox Roman Catholic princes of southern Germany were uniting to make common cause against the ecclesiastical innovations. After the defeat of the peasants this alliance was aimed to bring down the middle and northern German princes as well, in order “to eradicate the damned Lutheran sect, the source of this revolt.”
Philip was deeply convinced that the religious question was at the same time a political one, and he was the first to recognize that freedom for the new faith would be secured only if Protestant sovereigns and towns united for defense. In May 1526 he won over the elector John of Saxony for a defensive alliance, which other northern and eastern German princes then joined. Henceforward, he strove to unite the Protestant estates into a powerful alliance, which would render them unassailable and thus allow them to build their state churches.
Only when the decree of August 1526 of the imperial Diet of Speyer seemed to provide a legal basis for it and when a Hessian “synod” (part church council, part provincial diet) at Homberg had publicly discussed the religious question did Philip carry through the Reformation in his state. The Homberg deliberations led to the Reformatio ecclesiarum Hassiae, unique for its democratic-presbyterian church constitution and the ecclesiastical discipline of the congregations. On Luther’s advice, this reform, conceived by the former Franciscan Franz Lambert, was not carried out. Instead, Hesse became Protestant on the model provided by the electorate of Saxony.
Philip, however, continued to favour the teachings of the southern German and Swiss reformers and consequently resolved to mediate between the Lutherans and the Zwinglians, adherents of the Swiss reformer Huldrych Zwingli. Within one year, 1527, Philip secularized all the monasteries. The new state-church organization was now methodically built up. In order to ensure a new generation of clergy and officials, the landgrave took the educational system in hand and founded the first Protestant university in 1527 at Marburg. On former monastic and church estates, he set up four hospitals for the insane, the first “psychiatric” hospitals known to medical history. Church and school were subordinated to the “common good.”
There arose the Protestant authoritarian state, which considered itself a taskmaster responsible for the religious and moral life of its subjects and dictated their beliefs. Like all his fellow princes, Philip was intolerant, but, in contrast to most, he respected the individual’s freedom of conscience by permitting dissenters to emigrate. He soon showed this attitude in his dealings with the Anabaptists: his purpose was not to punish them as the imperial laws dictated but to convert them by clemency and instruction in doctrine; in this work Martin Bucer, the reformer from Strasbourg, was his helper. They introduced into Hesse in 1539 the rite of confirmation, which became a model for Protestant churches.
