Piers Gaveston, earl of Cornwall,  (born c. 1284—died  June 19, 1312, near Warwick, Warwickshire, Eng.), favourite of the English king Edward II. The king’s inordinate love for him made him rapacious and arrogant and led to his murder by jealous barons.
The son of a Gascon knight, he was brought up at the court of Edward I as foster brother and playmate for his son Edward, the future king. Strong, talented, and ambitious, Gaveston gained great influence over young Edward, and early in 1307 he was banished from England by the king; but he returned after the death of Edward I a few months later (July 1307) and at once became the chief adviser of Edward II. Made Earl of Cornwall, he received both lands and money from the king and added to his wealth and position by marrying Edward’s niece, Margaret, daughter of Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester (d. 1295). He was regent of the kingdom during the king’s short absence in France in 1308 and took a very prominent part at Edward’s coronation in February of that year. These proceedings aroused the anger and jealousy of the barons, and their anger was diminished neither by Gaveston’s superior skill at the tournament nor by his haughty and arrogant behaviour toward themselves. They demanded his banishment; and the king, forced to assent, sent his favourite to Ireland as lieutenant, where he remained for about a year.
After his recall by Edward in July 1309 (an event sanctioned by some of the barons), Gaveston became more insolent than ever, and the old jealousies soon broke out afresh. In 1311 the king was forced to agree to the election of the “Ordainers,” and the Ordinances that they drew up provided, among other things, for the perpetual banishment of his favourite. Gaveston then retired to Flanders but returned secretly to England at the end of 1311. Soon he was publicly restored by Edward, and the barons had taken up arms. Deserted by the king, Gaveston surrendered to Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, at Scarborough in May 1312 and was taken to Deddington in Oxfordshire, where he was seized by Guy de Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick. Conveyed to Warwick Castle, he was beheaded on Blacklow Hill near Warwick. His body was buried with great ceremony in 1315 at King’s Langley, in Hertfordshire, on orders of the king.
