Sophie Dawes, baroness de Feuchères,  (born 1795, St. Helens, Isle of Wight, Eng.—died  Dec. 15, 1840, London), English adventuress, mistress of the last survivor of the princes of Condé.
The daughter of a drunken fisherman named Dawes, she grew up in the workhouse, went up to London as a servant, and became the mistress of the Duke de Bourbon, afterward the ninth Prince de Condé. She was ambitious, and the prince had her well educated not only in modern languages but in Greek and Latin. He took her to Paris and, to prevent scandal and to qualify her to be received at court, had her married in 1818 to Adrien-Victor de Feuchères, a major in the royal guards. The prince provided her dowry and made her husband his aide-de-camp and a baron. The baroness, pretty and clever, became a person of consequence at the court of Louis XVIII.
Feuchères, however, finally discovered the relations between his wife and Condé, who he had been assured was her father; he left her (he obtained a legal separation in 1827) and told the king, who thereupon forbade her appearance at court. Thanks to her influence, however, Condé was induced in 1829 to sign a will bequeathing about 10,000,000 francs to her, and the rest of his estate—more than 66,000,000 francs—to the Duke d’Aumale, fourth son of Louis-Philippe. Again she was in high favour. Charles X received her at court, Talleyrand visited her, her niece married a marquis, and her nephew was made a baron. Condé, wearied by his mistress’s importunities and but half-pleased by the advances made him by the government of July, had made up his mind to leave France secretly. When on Aug. 27, 1830, he was found hanging dead from his window, the baroness was suspected and an inquiry was held, but the evidence of death being the result of criminal means appearing insufficient, she was not prosecuted. Hated as she was alike by legitimists and republicans, she no longer found life in Paris agreeable and returned to London, where she died 10 years later.
