Vasily I, in full Vasily Dmitriyevich,  (born 1371—died  February 1425, Moscow), grand prince of Moscow from 1389 to 1425.
While still a youth, Vasily, who was the eldest son of Grand Prince Dmitry Donskoy (ruled Moscow 1359–89), travelled to the Tatar khan Tokhtamysh (1383) to obtain the Khan’s patent for his father to rule the Russian lands as the grand prince of Vladimir. Diplomatically overcoming the challenge of the prince of Tver, who also sought the patent, Vasily succeeded in his mission. But he was subsequently kept at Tokhtamysh’s court as a hostage until 1386 when, taking advantage of Tokhtamysh’s conflict with his suzerain Timur Lenk (Tamerlane), he escaped and returned to Moscow.
Despite the hostility caused by his flight, in 1388 Vasily led a Muscovite military contingent in Tokhtamysh’s campaign against Timur Lenk in Central Asia; and after returning home he received Tokhtamysh’s patent and succeeded his father as grand prince of Moscow and Vladimir (1389). Embarking on a program of aggrandizement for Moscow, Vasily (with permission from Tokhtamysh) annexed the principalities of Nizhny Novgorod and Murom, thereby increasing Moscow’s control over the central Volga region. His efforts to expand westward, however, brought him into conflict with both Lithuania (with which he had maintained cordial relations, particularly after marrying the Grand Duke’s daughter Sophia in 1390) and Novgorod. Although he temporarily settled the Muscovite–Lithuanian territorial disputes by placing the border between the two states along the Ugra River, his clashes with Novgorod continued intermittently from 1397 to 1417.
Vasily also remained involved in Tatar politics. In 1395 he raised an army to fight Timur Lenk, who had invaded the Russian lands after defeating Tokhtamysh. Timur Lenk retreated before engaging Vasily in battle, and during the next decade the Muscovite Grand Prince was able to make his state effectively independent of Tatar dominance. In 1408, however, Edigü, who had replaced Tokhtamysh and reorganized the Tatar khanate, laid siege to Moscow and compelled Vasily to resume his tribute payments to the Khan and again recognize Tatar suzerainty.
