Vittoria Accoramboni,  (born Feb. 15, 1557, Gubbio, Papal States [Italy]—died  Dec. 22, 1585, Padua, republic of Venice), Italian woman whose life story aroused a great deal of contemporary interest and was later the basis for a play by John Webster, The White Devil (1612), and for a novel by Ludwig Tieck, Vittoria Accorombona (1840).
She was the 10th child in a well-to-do but not illustrious family that hoped to better its position by marrying Vittoria, renowned for her beauty, intelligence, and sweet temper, to an influential man. In 1573 she was married to Francesco Peretti, probably because his uncle, Cardinal di Montalto (Felice Peretti), was regarded as likely to become pope. Through the help of Peretti, Vittoria’s brother Marcello became chamberlain to the powerful Duke di Bracciano (Paolo Giordano Orsini), who was known to have murdered his wife Isabella de’ Medici because of her infidelity. Marcello hoped to get the duke interested in his sister, and, when it became evident that Bracciano was infatuated with her, Marcello—possibly on his own or possibly with the aid of the duke—had Peretti murdered (1581).
Vittoria married Bracciano soon thereafter in a private ceremony, but, because of the opposition of Pope Gregory XIII, Vittoria was imprisoned for a while. She was released, untried, because of public pressure. She and Bracciano were married again and lived in Rome until 1585, when Cardinal di Montalto was elected Pope Sixtus V. Guessing correctly that the pope would seek revenge for the death of his nephew, they found refuge in Salò, in Venetian territory, where Bracciano died in November.
Vittoria left soon afterward for her family home in Padua, where she was met by Ludovico Orsini, Bracciano’s kinsman, who had been sent on behalf of the Orsini family, and especially the duke’s son, to settle some questions about the will. He is believed to have had an intense personal hatred for her, but it was probably because of some disputes over the will that he decided to have her murdered. A few nights later a band of men hired by Ludovico broke into her house and stabbed her to death. He and his accomplices were subsequently executed.
