Willem-Alexander, king of the Netherlands, in full Willem-Alexander Claus George Ferdinand, king of the Netherlands,  (born April 27, 1967, Utrecht, Netherlands), king of the Netherlands from 2013.
Willem-Alexander was the son of then Princess Beatrix and Prince Claus. First in the line of succession since his mother’s accession to the throne on April 30, 1980, he also bore the title of prince of Orange. Prince Willem-Alexander received most of his education in the Netherlands and in 1985 completed an international baccalaureate at Atlantic College, near Llantwit Major, Wales. After military service in the Royal Dutch Navy, he studied history at the University of Leiden from 1987 to 1993. The crown prince was responsible for performing various official duties; he represented the royal family at national and international events, accompanied the queen on state visits, and paid working visits to the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba. He acquainted himself with various government agencies and nongovernmental organizations as well as addressed international conferences on water management, a particular concern of his. Interested in sports, the crown prince’s personal pursuits included tennis, running, skiing, and skating. In 1986 he completed the Elfstedentocht (Eleven-Cities Tour) skating marathon, and in 1992 he ran the New York City Marathon. In 1998 he began a period of service on the International Olympic Committee that would span more than a decade. Also an avid pilot, he flew as a volunteer for charitable organizations in Africa.
On February 2, 2002, Willem-Alexander married Argentine-born Máxima Zorreguieta (thereafter Princess Máxima) in Amsterdam. Their many wedding guests included foreign royals, other friends and family members, and some Dutch political leaders. Security in Amsterdam was tight for fear of international terrorism in the wake of the September 11 attacks, which had taken place in the United States several months before; however, while some acts of peaceful protest occurred in the city, the occasion was a festive one. Thousands of well-wishers celebrated in public, with many displaying items in orange, the royal colour.
The couple’s first child, Princess Catharina-Amalia, was born in December 2003; Princess Alexia followed in June 2005, and Princess Ariane was born in April 2007. In January 2013 Beatrix announced her intention to abdicate, following the precedent set by her predecessors Wilhelmina and Juliana. On April 30, 2013, Beatrix stepped down, and Willem-Alexander was inaugurated as king of the Netherlands. As the first in line to the throne, Princess Catharina-Amalia became princess of Orange.
