Ernst Abbe,  (born January 23, 1840, Eisenach, Grand Duchy of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach [now Germany]—died January 14, 1905, Jena, Germany), physicist whose theoretical and technical innovations in optical theory led to great improvements in microscope design (such as the use of a condenser to provide strong, even illumination, introduced in 1870) and clearer understanding of magnification limits. In 1873 he discovered the optical formula now called the Abbe sine condition, one of the requirements that a lens must satisfy if it is to form a sharp image, free from the blurring or distortion caused by coma and spherical aberration. As head of the Zeiss company, he reorganized the company and created many new benefits for its workers.
In 1863 Abbe joined the University of Jena, rising to professor of physics and mathematics (1870) and director of the astronomical and meteorological observatories (1878). German industrialist Carl Zeiss sought to give the manufacture of optical instruments a sound mathematical and scientific basis rather than having it rely on trial and error, so in 1866 he hired Abbe as research director of the Zeiss optical works. Two years later Abbe invented the apochromatic lens system for microscopes, which eliminates both the primary and the secondary colour distortion of light. Zeiss made Abbe his partner in 1876 and named him his successor. Despite Abbe’s work, he and Zeiss were still dissatisfied with the quality of their glass, but in 1879 German chemist Otto Schott wrote Abbe about a new lithium-based glass he had produced that was ideal for Zeiss’s instruments. In 1884 Schott, Abbe, and Zeiss founded a glassmaking company, Schott and Associates Glass Technology Laboratory, in Jena. Abbe became head of the Zeiss company after Zeiss’s death in 1888.
Abbe was concerned that future owners of Zeiss and Schott would tempted to enrich themselves at the companies’ and employees’ expense, so in 1889 he set up and endowed the Carl Zeiss Foundation to run the two companies. The foundation became the sole owner of Zeiss and of Abbe’s share of Schott in 1891. (Schott transferred his shares to the foundation after his death in 1935.) Abbe published in 1896 the foundation statute, which reorganized the two companies, with management, workmen, and the University of Jena sharing in the profits. The statute instituted many reforms that later became commonplace in Germany such as overtime and sick pay, disability assistance, a minimum wage, and at Zeiss a nine-hour day (which was shortened to eight hours in 1900).
