Al-Hasa, Arabic Al-Aḥsāʾ,  oasis and region in eastern Saudi Arabia. Al-Hasa oasis, the largest oasis in Saudi Arabia, lies about 40 miles (65 km) west of the Persian Gulf. It has about 30,000 acres (12,000 hectares) of palm groves and other crops that are irrigated by the flow of 60 or more artesian springs. Many varieties of dates are grown on the more than three million trees in the oasis. The oasis’s population consists of almost equal proportions of Sunni and Shīʿite Muslims.
The Al-Hasa region derives its name from the oasis at its centre. The region is bounded on the north by Kuwait, on the east by the Persian Gulf, on the south by the desert Rubʿ al-Khali, or Empty Quarter, and on the west by the Dahnā sand belt. The region’s low coastal strip is separated by a thick belt of large sand dunes from the steppe-desert of the interior. Most of the population is congregated in the three largest towns in the area, Al-Hufūf, Al-Dammām, and Al-Mubarraz. The rest of the population is scattered through more than 50 small villages or is nomadic.
Little is known of the early history of the region, but for a number of centuries it enjoyed a status of virtual independence until it was conquered by the Wahhābiyyah, a Muslim puritanical group, in the late 18th century. After the Wahhābiyyah’s defeat in 1818 and until World War I, the region came under a loose Ottoman sovereignty that was interrupted by the periodic return of Wahhābī control. The Wahhābī leader Ibn Saʿūd incorporated Al-Hasa oasis into his expanding principality of Najd before World War I, and the area subsequently became part of the kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
The Al-Hasa region began to be transformed after the discovery of huge petroleum deposits near Al-Dammām in the 1930s. The oil fields were producing more than one million barrels per day by the early 1960s, and the resulting oil wealth transformed Saudi Arabia out of all recognition. The terrain west and north of Al-Hasa oasis continues to constitute the principal petroleum-producing area of the nation. Americans and Europeans employed in the petroleum industry make up a significant portion of the region’s population. A railway and a paved highway link the principal towns in Al-Hasa region with Riyadh.
