American Samoa, officially Territory of American Samoa,  unincorporated territory of the United States consisting of the eastern part of the Samoan archipelago, located in the south-central Pacific Ocean. It lies about 1,600 miles (2,600 km) northeast of New Zealand and 2,200 miles (3,500 km) southwest of the U.S. state of Hawaii.
The territory, which is part of Polynesia, includes the six Samoan islands east of the 171° W meridian. Samoa (formerly Western Samoa), its closest neighbour and a self-governing country, consists of the nine Samoan islands west of the meridian. American Samoa includes the inhabited islands of Tutuila, Tau, Olosega, Ofu, and Aunuu, along with an uninhabited coral atoll named Rose Atoll. Swains Island, an inhabited coral atoll, about 280 miles (450 km) northwest of Tutuila and physiographically separate from the archipelago, was made a part of American Samoa in 1925. The capital of American Samoa is Pago Pago, on Tutuila.
Except for the coral atolls, the islands of American Samoa were formed within the past seven million years by volcanic activity; their interiors are high and rugged. The main island of Tutuila, with an area of 52 square miles (135 square km), rises steeply above deep inlets. The most notable of these inlets is Pago Pago Harbor, which divides the island nearly in two. Tutuila’s highest point is Matafao Peak (2,142 feet [653 metres]). The Manua island group (Tau, Olosega, and Ofu islands), situated about 60 miles (100 km) east of Tutuila, constitutes the second largest island area. Coral reefs are common at the extremities of the islands, particularly Tutuila; some of the reefs form barriers that enclose lagoons.
American Samoa’s climate is tropical, and precipitation is ample. Pago Pago receives about 200 inches (5,000 mm) annually. Most streams carry greater volumes of water in the highlands than near the sea and do not reach the ocean; rather, they filter into the porous basalt rocks. Hence, coastal wells provide much of the water supply. Temperatures are unusually constant; average temperatures range from the high 60s to the low 90s F (about 21 to 32 °C). Average humidity is 80 percent. The moderate southeast trade winds prevail, but severe storms can occur during the wet season, from November to March.
Rainforests with tall ferns and trees cover the mountainous interiors of the islands. Plantations of taro, coconut, and other food crops are located on the coasts. Although the islands are not rich in animal life, some of their bird species—such as the rare tooth-billed pigeon—are unique. Wildlife includes flying foxes (a type of bat), lizards, rats, snakes, and pigs. The islands also have myriad and ubiquitous flying and crawling insects.
The great majority of the population (more than nine-tenths) is ethnically Samoan; there are tiny minorities of Tongan and Filipino origin and of people of mixed ethnicity. The Samoans are a Polynesian people closely related to the native peoples of New Zealand, French Polynesia, Hawaii, and Tonga. The Samoan way of life, or fa‘a Samoa, is communal. The basic unit of social organization is the extended family (aiga). Even after decades of foreign influence, most Samoans are fluent in the Samoan language. Most American Samoans nonetheless also speak English. About half of the population belongs to one of several Protestant denominations, among which the Congregational Christian Church has the largest following. More than one-sixth of the population is Roman Catholic, and slightly less than one-sixth is Mormon.
Pago Pago is the main port and administrative and commercial centre. There is a large proportion of foreign-born residents in American Samoa: more than two-fifths of the people were born outside the territory, largely in Samoa, with smaller proportions from the United States, Tonga, various Asian countries, and other Pacific islands. Additionally, since the mid-20th century many American Samoans have migrated to the United States, with the result that there are more American Samoans abroad than on the islands. The population that remains in American Samoa is concentrated in urban areas; only about one-eighth is rural. The rate of population growth has increased rapidly since the late 20th century, mainly because of high birth rates and low death rates. The population is young, more than a quarter being under the age of 15, and the life expectancy is 75 years of age.
The economy is based on services and manufacturing. The government is the main employer. A large part of the national income comes in the form of grants from the U.S. federal government. Tuna canning (by American-owned canneries) and tourism are major industries. Agriculture is organized on a semicommercial basis for the production of taro, bananas, tropical fruits, and vegetables. Traditional family gardens produce coconuts, breadfruit, and yams. Production nearly meets domestic needs, and the U.S. government has implemented programs to increase production to self-sufficiency levels. The United States and Singapore are the main sources of imports (which include fish destined for the canneries, consumer goods, food, and mineral fuels), although Fiji and New Zealand are also notable exporters of goods to American Samoa. The United States is the primary destination for exports, which consist mostly of canned tuna, along with a small amount of pet food.
A major public works program on American Samoa from the 1970s to the ’90s increased the number of miles of paved roads, mostly on the island of Tutuila. Pago Pago is the only major port. An international airport is located on Tutuila, and smaller airstrips operate on other islands.
