Aruba,  island lying southwest of the Lesser Antilles in the Caribbean Sea, some 50 miles (80 km) northwest of Curaçao and 18 miles (29 km) north of the Venezuelan peninsula of Paraguaná.
Aruba was formerly a part of the Netherlands Antilles. In 1986 it became a separate self-governing part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Tourists flock to Aruba, attracted by its white-sand beaches in the south and west, rugged coastline in the northeast, and desert environment in the interior. The capital is Oranjestad, which also is the main port.
Aruba is 20 miles (32 km) long and 6 miles (10 km) across at its widest point. Generally low in elevation, the island consists largely of igneous rocks overlain by limestone deposits and is fringed with coral reefs. Its highest point is Mount Jamanota, which rises to 620 feet (189 metres) above sea level. Among the isolated steep-sided hills that characterize the landscape is the mountain known as Hooiberg (“Haystack”), which reaches 560 feet (171 metres). In some places immense monolithic boulders of diorite are peculiarly piled on top of one another. Aruba has barren soil with little or no natural irrigation. Most drinking water is obtained by desalinating seawater. The temperature varies little from an annual average of 81 °F (27 °C), and the heat is tempered by northeasterly trade winds. Precipitation is low and variable, usually amounting to about 17 inches (430 mm) per year. The island lies outside the usual path of hurricanes, though one occasionally does reach it. The natural vegetation consists of a variety of drought-resistant cacti, shrubs, and trees.
Most of Aruba’s population is ethnically mixed, including many people of American Indian ancestry, often in combination with Dutch, Spanish, and African heritage. There are few people of predominantly African descent, however, because—unlike most other Caribbean islands—Aruba had few slave-based plantations during colonial times.
The official languages are Dutch and Papiamentu (also spoken in Curaçao and Bonaire), a creole that evolved mainly from Portuguese, Spanish, and Dutch. English and Spanish are also widely used. About three-fourths of the people are Roman Catholic; there are small minorities of Protestants and Jehovah’s Witnesses. The birth and death rates are both relatively low, and the rate of natural increase is less than average for the West Indies. Life expectancy for both men and women is among the highest in the region and is comparable to that in developed countries.
Services form the basis of the Aruban economy. These activities centre primarily on tourism, but offshore banking and other services are also important. Until the end of the 18th century, Aruba was used by the colonial authorities for horse breeding, and local and mainland Indians served as herdsmen. Only from the early 19th century was land sold to individual settlers. Agriculture remained of little importance despite efforts to grow aloe for pharmaceutical products. Gold mining began in 1824 but was discontinued in the early 20th century. Aruba’s economy improved when oil refining started in the 1920s at the port of San Nicolas (Sint Nicolaas); crude oil was imported mainly from Venezuela. The refinery closed in 1985, provoking a serious economic crisis. Arubans responded by aggressively promoting and expanding tourism, including building luxury hotels and casinos, to exploit the idyllic island setting. The refinery reopened in 1990 and resumed full production by 1993, but, after operating at a loss for a number of years, it closed again in 2012.
The economy has been diversified by developing a free-trade zone, a data-processing sector, and international offshore financial services. The island has an international airport and is further linked to the outside world by steamship and cruise ship services. Local currency is the Aruban florin, which is pegged to the U.S. dollar.
A governor, appointed to a six-year term by the Dutch crown, is the formal head of government and representative of the reigning monarch of the Netherlands. Executive authority is vested in a Council of Ministers, headed by a prime minister. The council is responsible to a 21-member unicameral legislature, the Staten (States), elected by universal adult suffrage. The vast majority of the population is literate. Primary and secondary education are free and, since 1999, compulsory from age 4 to 16. Dutch is the main language of instruction, with Papiamentu being used in some primary classrooms. The University of Aruba, a teacher’s college, and a community college provide postsecondary instruction, though most Arubans go abroad for higher education. Health standards on the island are high.
Aruba’s long stretches of white sand and clear waters attract numerous tourists. The Cultural Center in Oranjestad offers concerts, ballet, folkloric presentations, and art exhibits throughout the year. The city also includes historical, archaeological, and numismatic museums. The New Year’s Day festivities and pre-Lenten Carnival in February are especially colourful and popular celebrations.
