Cayman Islands,  island group and overseas territory of the United Kingdom in the Caribbean Sea, comprising the islands of Grand Cayman, Little Cayman, and Cayman Brac, situated about 180 miles (290 km) northwest of Jamaica. The islands are the outcroppings of a submarine mountain range that extends northeastward from Belize to Cuba. The capital is George Town, on Grand Cayman.
The islands are generally low-lying, though Cayman Brac has a central bluff that constitutes 90 percent of its landmass. The coasts are ironshore (limestone fringes with numerous marine fossils) interspersed with sandy beaches and enclosed by coral reefs. Grand Cayman is the largest and most populous island, about 22 miles (35 km) long and 8 miles (13 km) across at its widest, with a total area of 76 square miles (197 square km). It has a 36-square-mile (93-square-km) sound that is a breeding ground for much marine life. Cayman Brac, about 89 miles (143 km) northeast of Grand Cayman, is the next largest island; it is about 12 miles (19 km) long, averages about 1 mile (1.6 km) in width, and has the highest elevation of the group, rising to 140 feet (42 metres) above sea level. Its total area is 14 square miles (36 square km). The smallest of the islands, Little Cayman, lies 5 miles (8 km) west of Cayman Brac; it is 10 miles (16 km) long and has a maximum width of 2 miles (3 km) and a total area of 10 square miles (26 square km). There are no rivers.
The Caymans are located on the boundary between two tectonic plates, one moving eastward and one westward; minor tremors resulting from the movement of the plates are sometimes recorded. In December 2004 an earthquake of greater than usual magnitude was felt on Grand Cayman, although there were no injuries and no damage was caused to property.
A pleasant tropical climate is one of the territory’s main assets, tourism being of primary importance to the economy. Temperatures are moderate throughout the year, averaging about 81 °F (27 °C) annually. The rainy season extends from mid-May through October, and the dry season lasts the balance of the year. The Caymans are cool from November to March, with temperatures ranging 65–75 °F (18–24 °C). Rainfall at George Town averages 60 inches (about 1,500 mm) annually, although the eastern districts of Grand Cayman and the other islands are drier. Hurricanes can occur from June through November.
Mangrove swamps cover nearly one-third of the land area. A variety of commercially useful plants grow on the islands; among them are coconut palms and breadfruit, banana, mango, and citrus fruit trees. There are also thatch palms and some logwood and mahogany trees. The only indigenous mammals are agoutis. There are many reptiles, including green sea turtles, which were noted by Christopher Columbus when he visited the islands. Iguanas, other lizards, and frogs are also common, and the islands are rich in birdlife.
About one-fifth of Caymanians are of European, mainly British, ancestry; another fifth are blacks, the descendants of African slaves; and two-fifths are of mixed African and European ancestry. The remainder of the residents are of other mixed ancestry or are expatriates. English is the official language and the main spoken language, heard in a variety of dialects. Spanish is frequently a second language.
The main population centre is George Town, where more than half the population lives. Grand Cayman has more than four-fifths of the population. The majority of Caymanians are Christian; the chief religious denominations are Church of God, United Church in Jamaica and the Cayman Islands (Presbyterian/Congregational), Baptist, Anglican, Roman Catholic, and Seventh-day Adventist.
The economy depends on banking, tourism, and other services. The Caymans have the highest per capita income in the Caribbean.
The physical beauty and superb climate of the islands have made them a haven for tourists. The government invested heavily in promoting tourism, which increased eightfold between the mid-1970s and the early 1990s. Since then tourism has continued to grow steadily, as the islands have developed a good reputation for diving. Most visitors are from the United States. Airports on Grand Cayman and Cayman Brac and a private airstrip on Little Cayman facilitate tourist traffic. Cruise ships call at Grand Cayman, bringing some one million visitors annually on day trips. In addition, hundreds of thousands of stopover tourists (those who stay one or more nights) visit the islands each year.
International finance has become a major component of the economy. The Cayman Islands are renowned as an offshore banking centre, owing to the absence of direct taxes and to liberal banking laws that generally ensure confidential transactions. Hundreds of banks and trust companies, including most of the world’s 50 largest banks, are registered in the Caymans, making the islands one of the largest financial centres in the world. Revenue paid by registered businesses contributes considerably to the government budget. There is a shortage of labour, and much of the workforce is made up of immigrants on tightly controlled work permits.
The chief occupations on the Cayman Islands are in clerical and service work and in the construction trades. Agriculture occupies only a small number of Caymanians, and most of the islands’ food must be imported. The main crops are citrus fruits and bananas, as well as mangoes, plantains, coconuts, sweet potatoes, yams, and tomatoes. Some livestock is raised, chiefly cattle and poultry. Turtles raised on a government-operated turtle farm provide food, shells, and leather.
Exports are few. The major imports are machinery and transport equipment, other manufactured items, fuels, and foods. The United States is the Caymans’ primary trading partner in both imports and exports; other major sources of imports are Jamaica, the United Kingdom, and Japan. The United Kingdom and Jamaica are the Cayman Islands’ other major export destinations.
