Chapultepec, (Nahuatl: “Hill of the Grasshopper”)  rocky hill about 200 feet (60 metres) high on the western edge of Mexico City that has long played a prominent role in the history of Mexico. The Aztecs fortified the hill but were expelled by neighbouring peoples; after their consolidation of power in the Valley of Mexico about 1325, they built a religious centre and a residence for Aztec rulers on it. After the Spanish conquest (1521), a chapel was built there in 1554; in the 1780s the Spanish viceroys began the construction of a summer palace on the site, which became the home of the National Military Academy in 1841. In the 1860s Mexico’s emperor Maximilian rebuilt the castle; it remained the official residence of the presidents of Mexico until 1940, when it was converted into a museum. Maximilian also beautified the surrounding park, today a principal cultural and recreational centre of the city. Among its features are several museums, including the world-famous Museo Nacional de Antropología, designed by Pedro Ramírez Vázquez and built in 1963–64.
Chapultepec was the scene of the last-ditch Mexican resistance in the war between Mexico and the United States (1846–48). U.S. forces under General Winfield Scott, having seized Veracruz on the Gulf of Mexico, advanced on the capital. Scott defeated the Mexicans at the suburban bridgehead of Churubusco on August 20, 1847, and continued toward Mexico City; in his path was the hill of Chapultepec, with approximately 5,000 defenders, including cadets from Mexico’s military academy. After heavy artillery bombardment on September 12 failed to force their withdrawal, Scott’s forces attacked the next morning. The defenders resisted in fierce hand-to-hand combat before capitulating. Several cadets, known in Mexican history as Los Niños Héroes, were killed, one of them, it is said, by leaping from the castle walls, holding the flag lest it be captured. During the following night, Mexican forces were withdrawn, and Scott entered the city on September 14, thus concluding the significant military operations of the war.
In March 1945 all the countries of the Western Hemisphere, except Argentina, sent representatives to the Chapultepec Conference to discuss hemispheric security. An economic charter for the Americas was adopted, as was the Act of Chapultepec, which pledged the signatory nations to take collective action in the event of aggression from within or outside of the Americas against one of their number.
