Chongming Island, Chinese (Pinyin) Chongming Dao, or (Wade-Giles romanization) Ch’ung-ming Tao,  large island in the mouth of the Yangtze River (Chang Jiang), Shanghai municipality, China. The island has been formed through the accumulation of silt the river has carried down from its middle and upper course. It was first mentioned in the 7th century ad, when it seems to have consisted of three large sandbanks in the estuary. These gradually formed an island, and in the early 10th century a garrison, called Chongming, was established on the western sandbank as an outpost of Haimen county on the north bank of the estuary. In 1222 a salt directorate was established on the island, under the Huaidong salt administration. Under the Yuan (Mongol) dynasty (1279–1368), Chongming was raised to prefectural status in 1348; its administrative seat on the Yaoliu sandbank was transferred in 1352 to the eastern sandbank. With the accession of the Ming dynasty (1368–1644), it was demoted to county status in 1369 and placed under the administration first of Suzhou and after 1497 of Taicang district to the south of the estuary. The island suffered greatly from flooding, and protective dikes had to be built to prevent inundations. By World War II the once-considerable population had dwindled and was barely eking out a living by fishing and cultivating soybeans.
After 1949 a determined effort was made first to repair the sea defenses and plant protective belts of trees and then to restore the island to productivity. Beginning in 1959–60, extensive areas of mudflats were diked, reclaimed, and provided with irrigation and drainage ditches. In order to guard against excessive salinity, the land was first planted with cotton, which is highly resistant to alkaline conditions. After cotton had been grown for several years, the land was used for grain cultivation and for fruits, vegetables, and poultry for the urban market of nearby Shanghai. Similar reclamation work was subsequently carried out on neighbouring mudflats such as the Xin’an, the Baiwan, and the Helong.
