Christmas Island, officially Territory of Christmas Island,  island in the Indian Ocean, about 224 miles (360 km) south of the island of Java and 870 miles (1,400 km) northwest of Australia, that is administered as an external territory of Australia. The island is the summit of an oceanic mountain whose highest point on the island is Murray Hill, rising to 1,184 feet (361 metres) in the western part of the island. The main settlement and chief port is at Flying Fish Cove on the northeastern part of the island.
First sighted in 1615 by Richard Rowe, master of the Thomas, the island was named on Christmas Day 1643 by Captain William Mynors of the British East India Company. In 1887 specimens of soil and rock were collected by the men of HMS Egeria; the British naturalist John Murray analyzed the specimens and found that they were nearly pure phosphate of lime. In 1888 the island was annexed by Great Britain, and the first settlement was established at Flying Fish Cove by George Clunies-Ross of Cocos (Keeling) Islands. A 99-year lease, granted in 1891 to Clunies-Ross and Murray, to mine phosphate and cut timber was transferred six years later to the Christmas Island Phosphate Company, Ltd., which was largely owned by the former lessees. In 1900 Christmas Island was incorporated in the British crown colony of the Straits Settlements with its capital at Singapore. During World War II the island was occupied by the Japanese. In 1948 the governments of New Zealand and Australia acquired the interests and assets of the Christmas Island Phosphate Company, and the British Phosphate Commission managed operations for both governments. In 1958 the island became an Australian territory.
The central plateau of Christmas Island descends in an alternating series of slopes and terraces to abrupt cliffs over 65 feet (20 metres) high along much of the coastline. There are also sand and coral beaches along the coast. Valuable deposits of phosphate occur on the island. There is a tropical rainy season between December and April and little seasonal variation in the average temperature of 81 °F (27 °C). Average annual rainfall is 113 inches (2,670 mm). Tropical rainforest covers most of Christmas Island, and fauna includes large numbers of seabirds, small reptiles, land crabs, and insects. Springs and wells supply fresh water for the island’s residents. Much of the western tip of the island is a national park.
The population includes many ethnic Chinese, a small number of European ancestry, and Malay labourers recruited mainly from Malaysia, Singapore, and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands. Most of the island’s residents traditionally have been employees of the company that mines phosphates (until 1987 owned by the Australian government and since 1990 privately operated). The territory’s economy was long based almost entirely on the mining and extraction of phosphate there for shipment to Australia and New Zealand, but this began to change in the early 1990s. With the recoverable reserves of phosphate nearly exhausted, efforts were turned toward developing tourism. Small-scale subsistence cropping and fishing are practiced, but most food is imported.
The Australian governor-general appoints an administrator of Christmas Island. The administrator has a staff for secretariat, education, postal, police, radio, and harbour duties. A locally elected assembly provides political representation for the islanders. Almost all of the island’s residents are Australian citizens or residents under the statutes of the Christmas Island Act and the Citizenship Act. In 1994 an unofficial referendum, responding in part to Australian plans to abolish the island’s duty-free status, rejected secession but supported strengthened local controls. A small hospital on the island provides for medical and dental care. Primary and secondary education is based on an Australian curriculum. The island has an airfield used for weekly charter flights, roads, and a railway for transporting phosphate from the southern plateau to the port on Flying Fish Cove. In the early 21st century Christmas Island was the site of one of Australia’s controversial Pacific Island detention centres for the offshore processing of Australia-bound asylum seekers. Area 52 square miles (135 square km). Population Territory of Christmas Island, statistical local area, (2016) 1,843.
