Coast, also called shore,  broad area of land that borders the sea.
A brief treatment of coasts follows. For full treatment, see coastal landforms.
The coastlines of the world’s continents measure about 312,000 km (193,000 miles). They have undergone shifts in position over geologic time because of substantial changes in the relative levels of land and sea. Studies of glaciations during the Pleistocene Epoch (2.6 million to 11,700 years ago) indicate that drops in sea level caused by the removal of water from the oceans during glacial advances affected all coastal areas. During the last Pleistocene glacial period, the sea level is thought to have been almost 122 m (400 feet) lower than it is today, resulting in the exposure of large portions of what is now the continental shelf.
Such changes in sea level have also played an important role in shaping the coasts. Glacial ice descending from coastal mountains in Alaska, Norway, and certain other areas excavated deep U-shaped depressions in times of lowered sea level. When the glacial ice melted and the level of the sea rose again, these steep-sided valleys were inundated, forming fjords. Estuaries, formed by the flooding of coastal river valleys, also are found in regions where the sea level has risen significantly.
Other factors that are instrumental in molding the topography of coasts are destructive erosional processes (e.g., wave action and chemical weathering), deposition of rock debris by currents, and tectonic activity that causes an uplifting or sinking of the Earth’s crust. The configuration and distinctive landforms of any given coast result largely from the interaction of these processes and their relative intensity, though the type and structure of the rock material underlying the area also have a bearing. For example, coastal terrains of massive sedimentary rock that have been uplifted by tectonic forces and subjected to intense wave erosion are characterized by steep cliffs extending out into the water. These nearly vertical sea cliffs generally alternate with irregularly shaped bays and narrow inlets. By contrast, wide sandy beaches and relatively smooth plains of unconsolidated sediment prevail in areas of crustal subsidence where deposition is intense. Such coasts are characterized by sandbars paralleling the shoreline, as well as by tidal flats.
