Corsica, French Corse, official name Collectivité Territoriale de Corse,  collectivité territoriale (territorial collectivity) of France and island in the Mediterranean Sea embracing (from 1976) the départements of Haute-Corse and Corse-du-Sud. Corsica is the fourth largest island (after Sicily, Sardinia, and Cyprus) in the Mediterranean. It lies 105 miles (170 km) from southern France and 56 miles (90 km) from northwestern Italy, and it is separated from Sardinia by the 7-mile (11-km) Strait of Bonifacio. Ajaccio is the capital. Although Corsica is still commonly described as one of 22 régions of metropolitan France, its official status was changed in 1991 from région to collectivité territoriale à statut particulier (territorial collectivity with special status). The unique classification provides Corsica greater autonomy than the régions. Area 3,352 square miles (8,681 square km). Pop. (1999) 260,196; (2014 est.) 324,212.
For the most part, the terrain of Corsica is mountainous. About two-thirds of it consists of an ancient crystalline massif that divides the island on a northwest-to-southeast axis. Corsica has a cluster of 20 peaks exceeding 6,500 feet (2,000 metres). Mount Cinto attains an elevation of 8,890 feet (2,710 metres). The mountain silhouettes are very dramatic, and their granite rocks display vivid colours. The mountains descend steeply in parallel ranges to the west, where the coast is cut into steep gulfs and marked by high cliffs and headlands. To the east the mountain massif falls in broken escarpments to extensive alluvial plains bordering a lagoon-indented coast. In the northeast a separate and less-spectacular mountain formation reaches heights not exceeding 5,790 feet (1,765 metres).
Both the eastern and western watersheds are drained by seasonally torrential rivers that rise in the mountainous centre and cleave their way through impressive gorges in their upper reaches. The island’s principal rivers are the Golo, Tavignano, Liamone, Granove, Tarova, and Profiano. A Mediterranean climate prevails on the coasts, where the average temperature is 51 °F (10.5 °C) in winter and 60 °F (15.5 °C) during the rest of the year. It is cooler at higher elevations. The average summer temperature at the southern coastal city of Ajaccio is 70 °F (21 °C). Precipitation is abundant, averaging 35 inches (880 mm) a year, though higher elevations receive somewhat more.
Corsica’s vegetation is luxuriant. Much of the island is covered with a scrubby underbrush, or maquis, that is composed of aromatic shrubs, together with holm oak and cork oak in the south. The flowers of the maquis produce a fragrance that carries far out to sea and has earned for Corsica the name the “Scented Isle.” Chestnut forests occur at slightly higher elevations, while the Corsican, or laricio, pine (Pinus corsicanus) dominates the higher elevations. In all, forests cover about one-fifth of the island.
Bastia and Ajaccio, on the coast, are the largest towns and home to about half of the island’s population. In the early 21st century some four-fifths of Corsica’s population was urban. In northern Corsica the Balagne (once called the “Garden of Corsica”) is also densely populated. In contrast, sparsely populated rural villages, mostly situated at elevations between 650 and 2,600 feet (200 and 800 metres), have experienced much migration to the coast and to continental France. Despite a long history of emigration, there is overall growth in population, though many of the newcomers are retirees, which has led to a progressive aging of the population.
Corsica’s standard of living, particularly in the interior, is lower than that of continental France. The island’s economic life is based primarily on tourism as well as the raising of sheep for ewe’s milk, which is used to make fine-quality cheeses, and the cultivation of citrus fruits, grapes (frequently with the aid of irrigation), and olives. Agriculture has been modernized along the eastern coastal plains. Industrial development is limited and focuses mainly on food processing.
Corsica has outstanding assets in its climate, scenery, and magnificent coastline, all of which promote tourism. The island’s network of paved roads is adequate, and a railway links Ajaccio, Bastia, and Calvi. Corsica is connected by air and sea with continental France.
French, the official language, is spoken by virtually all Corsicans, most of whom also use the Corsican dialect, Corsu, which is akin to Tuscan. The Corsu spoken in Haute-Corse and that spoken in Corse-du-Sud are distinguishable from each other. Roman Catholicism is the dominant religion. Traditional folk music is performed by groups in the towns, and traditional handicrafts have been revived. Corsica also has many museums.
Remains of human occupation dating from at least the 3rd millennium bce are evident in the many dolmens, menhirs, and other megalithic monuments that still stand on the island. The recorded history of Corsica begins about 560 bce, when Greeks from Phocaea in Asia Minor founded the town of Alalia on the east coast. Carthaginian domination followed in the early 3rd century bce, until the whole of the island was conquered by the Romans in a series of campaigns from 259 to 163 bce. Together with Sardinia, Corsica formed a province of the Roman Empire, under which the island’s economy flourished. The Romans also implanted their language, which became the foundation of the present-day Corsican dialect.
A series of invasions and partial occupations by the Vandals, Lombards, and Arabs followed between 450 and 1050 ce, during which time the island’s towns were destroyed, their inhabitants driven inland, and the coastal agricultural lands abandoned. The Byzantine Empire’s nominal suzerainty over Corsica from the mid-6th century was followed by the titular rule of the papacy from the mid-8th century onward.
In 1077 the bishop of Pisa was entrusted by the papacy with the administration of Corsica, and over the next two centuries more than 300 churches were built in Corsica under the Pisans’ direction. Corsica then became a bone of contention between Pisa and Genoa (until 1284) and between Genoa and Aragon (from 1297 to 1434). Bitter struggles between the Genoese and Corsica’s native feudal aristocracy further decimated the population in the period 1434–53, after which Genoa was able to reassert its authority. A brief French occupation (1553–59) and a Corsican nationalist rebellion led by Sampiero Corso ended (1567) in renewed Genoese rule that lasted until 1729. Genoese rule, though by no means the worst in the island’s history, was notorious for its corrupt administration of justice, thereby encouraging Corsicans to resort to the private form of vengeance known as the vendetta.
A rebellion against Genoese rule in 1729 ushered in a period of turbulence and unrest that culminated in the establishment (1755) of a Corsican republic by the nationalist leader Pasquale Paoli. With Genoese control now confined to only a few coastal towns, Paoli organized the rest of Corsica as an independent democratic state and gave it a remarkably liberal constitution. During his 14 years of rule (until 1769), Paoli led the Corsicans in a great regenerative effort, repressing the vendetta, founding a university and printing press, and building a Corsican navy. In 1768, however, the despondent Genoese sold their rights on Corsica to France, and French troops subsequently invaded the island in overwhelming numbers.
Some weeks after Paoli had fled to England, Napoleon Bonaparte was born at Ajaccio on August 15, 1769. Corsica became a province of France that same year. Except for brief periods of occupation by the British (1794–96) and the Italians and Germans (1942–43), Corsica remained a French territory thereafter.
