Cozumel,  island in the Caribbean Sea, about 10 miles (16 km) off the eastern coast of the Yucatán Peninsula, in Quintana Roo estado (state), southeastern Mexico.
Measuring about 29 miles (46 km) from northeast to southwest and averaging 9 miles (14 km) in width, it is the largest of Mexico’s inhabited islands. Geologically similar to the Yucatán, the interior of Cozumel consists of a plain broken by low hills that are only about 50 feet (15 metres) above sea level. Much of the island is covered by scrubby tropical jungle. Poor soils have discouraged agriculture on the island, but traditional crops include tropical fruits, henequen (a fibre crop), corn (maize), and cassava (manioc).
Clear, warm water, spectacular coral reefs, and abundant marine life make Cozumel one of the world’s best scuba-diving destinations as well as a major resort. Indeed, the economy of Cozumel has been based on tourism since the 1970s. In addition to the diving opportunities, other water sports, and fishing, tourists are attracted by Cozumel’s tropical climate, sand beaches, and duty-free port shopping, along with its atmosphere, which is more relaxed than that of nearby Cancún. Substantial resort development on the island’s protected western coast extends both north and south from the island’s main town and commercial centre, San Miguel de Cozumel. Chankanaab National Park, just south of San Miguel, has a museum, botanic garden, and archaeological park. Cruise ships dock regularly at a pier south of San Miguel. Cozumel has regular ferry service from Playa del Carmen and Puerto Morelos. An international airport is located 2 miles (3 km) south of San Miguel.
Cozumel was a commercial and ceremonial centre during the Mayan period (about 250 to 950 ce), and the island has several small archaeological sites. In 1518 Juan de Grijalva led the first Spanish expedition to Cozumel. In 1519 Hernán Cortés used the island as a base for Spanish efforts to conquer the Maya. During most of the Spanish colonial era, Cozumel was only sparsely populated, but trading ships and pirates occasionally sought shelter and replenished supplies on the island, which was protected behind offshore reefs. Area 189 square miles (489 square km). Pop. (2005) 71,401; (2010) 77,236.
