Estuary,  partly enclosed coastal body of water in which river water is mixed with seawater. In a general sense, the estuarine environment is defined by salinity boundaries rather than by geographic boundaries. The term estuary is derived from the Latin words aestus (“the tide”) and aestuo (“boil”), indicating the effect generated when tidal flow and river flow meet.
Estuaries are places where rivers meet the sea and may be defined as areas where salt water is measurably diluted with fresh water. On average, estuaries are biologically more productive than either the adjacent river or the sea, because they have a special kind of water circulation that traps plant nutrients and stimulates primary production. Fresh water, being lighter than salt water, tends to form a distinct layer that floats at the surface of the estuary. At the boundary between fresh and salt water, there is a certain amount of mixing caused by the flow of fresh water over salt and by the ebb and flow of tides. Additional mixing may be caused from time to time by strong winds and by internal waves that are propagated along the interface between fresh and salt water.
Many coastal features that are designated by other names are in fact estuaries. For example, various coastal embayments, such as Chesapeake Bay and Galveston Bay in the United States, also are estuaries, because fresh and salt water undergo considerable mixing. Moreover, most of the world’s submerged fjord systems (such as Scoresby Sund, Greenland) and large semi-enclosed tidal flat regions and coastal marshes (such as the Waddenzee area of The Netherlands) are estuaries. In addition, estuaries include river mouths (as in the case of the Mississippi River, Louisiana), structural basins (San Francisco Bay, California), and the bodies of water behind spits (Hurst Castle spit, England) and barrier beaches (Ninety Mile Beach, Australia). In the case of spits and barrier beaches, the definitions of lagoons and estuaries overlap.
The four basic types of estuaries are (1) the salt wedge estuary, (2) the partially mixed (or slightly stratified) estuary, (3) the vertically homogeneous (or vertically mixed) estuary, and (4) the fjord (or highly stratified estuary).
A salt wedge estuary has minimal mixing, and the salt water forms a wedge, thickest at the seaward end, tapering to a very thin layer at the landward limit. The penetration of this wedge changes with the flow of the river. During flood conditions the wedge will retreat, and during low flows it will extend farther upriver. The mouth of the Mississippi River in the United States is a classic example. The mixing at the boundary between fresh and salt water causes the surface layer to entrain salt water and become more saline as it moves toward the sea. To compensate for the entrained salt water, there is a slow movement of the salt water up the estuary at depth. Because bottom waters are rich in nutrients derived from decomposing plant and animal remains, this circulation has the effect of pumping nutrients into the estuary and stimulating biological production.
Organic and inorganic particles carried by rivers tend to flocculate (aggregate into a mass) and sediment out when they encounter salt water. They sink from the freshwater layer to the salt wedge and are carried upstream. When the organic matter decomposes, it adds still more nutrients to the estuary. The inorganic matter settles on the bottom and provides an enriched sediment for flowering plants adapted to salt water. Between the tide marks, mangrove forests flourish in tropical conditions, and salt marshes form in temperate and subarctic conditions. Below low tide, sea grasses form dense beds on muddy substrates. In areas of an estuary where water movement is vigorous enough to remove sediment, leaving a stony or rocky bottom, rooted plants are replaced by seaweeds. These have a special structure known as a holdfast, which attaches itself to any hard surface. Phytoplankton floating freely in the water benefit from the high level of nutrients, especially near the head of the estuary, and grow rapidly, providing food for the microscopic animals in the water column, the zooplankton. As this community is carried downstream in the surface waters, dead organisms and the fecal pellets of the animals sink toward the bottom and enter the salt wedge to be carried back to the head of the estuary. As they decompose, they add still more nutrients to the water.
In a partially mixed estuary, the vigorous rise and fall of the tide generates strong turbulence and causes partial mixing between the fresh water above and the salt water below. Under these conditions the river flow entrains 10 to 20 or more times its own volume of salt water, and the compensatory landward flow of seawater near the bottom is correspondingly increased. The effect of Earth’s rotation (Coriolis effect) is to cause the surface flow to be stronger on the right-hand side facing seaward in the Northern Hemisphere and on the opposite side in the Southern Hemisphere. The bottom flow is stronger on the opposite side of the estuary.
In a vertically homogeneous estuary the river flow is weak, and the tidal flow is strong. Consequently, no stratification occurs, and salt water may even move up the river channel. Salinity levels are nearly the same from top to bottom at any given place in such estuaries; however, the salinity is lowest where the river enters the estuary and highest near the sea.
The fjord-type estuary was originally formed by a glacier and has a submerged ridge, or sill, near its mouth, composed of glacial deposits. It may be regarded as a partially mixed estuary in which the bottom has been replaced by a basin of undiluted seawater held in place by the sill. When entrainment in river flow causes a strong landward flow at the bottom, water rises over the sill and enters the estuary at intermediate depth, leaving the deep waters undisturbed. Only major intrusions of seawater caused by storms can displace the deep water. Fjords, because of their glacial origin, commonly have steep sides and very little shallow water. Hence, the development of salt marshes or sea grass beds is minimal, but seaweeds colonize the rocky shores.
