glacier,  any large mass of perennial ice that originates on land by the recrystallization of snow or other forms of solid precipitation and that shows evidence of past or present flow.
Exact limits for the terms large, perennial, and flow cannot be set. Except in size, a small snow patch that persists for more than one season is hydrologically indistinguishable from a true glacier. One international group has recommended that all persisting snow and ice masses larger than 0.1 square kilometre (about 0.04 square mile) be counted as glaciers.
Glaciers are classifiable in three main groups: (1) glaciers that extend in continuous sheets, moving outward in all directions, are called ice sheets if they are the size of Antarctica or Greenland and ice caps if they are smaller; (2) glaciers confined within a path that directs the ice movement are called mountain glaciers; and (3) glaciers that spread out on level ground or on the ocean at the foot of glaciated regions are called piedmont glaciers or ice shelves, respectively. Glaciers in the third group are not independent and are treated here in terms of their sources: ice shelves with ice sheets, piedmont glaciers with mountain glaciers. A complex of mountain glaciers burying much of a mountain range is called an ice field.
A most interesting aspect of recent geological time (some 30 million years ago to the present) has been the recurrent expansion and contraction of the world’s ice cover. These glacial fluctuations influenced geological, climatological, and biological environments and affected the evolution and development of early humans. Almost all of Canada, the northern third of the United States, much of Europe, all of Scandinavia, and large parts of northern Siberia were engulfed by ice during the major glacial stages. At times during the Pleistocene Epoch (from 2.6 million to 11,700 years ago), glacial ice covered 30 percent of the world’s land area; at other times the ice cover may have shrunk to less than its present extent. It may not be improper, then, to state that the world is still in an ice age. Because the term glacial generally implies ice-age events or Pleistocene time, in this discussion “glacier” is used as an adjective whenever reference is to ice of the present day.
Glacier ice today stores about three-fourths of all the fresh water in the world. Glacier ice covers about 11 percent of the world’s land area and would cause a world sea-level rise of about 90 metres (300 feet) if all existing ice melted. Glaciers occur in all parts of the world and at almost all latitudes. In Ecuador, Kenya, Uganda, and Irian Jaya (New Guinea), glaciers even occur at or near the Equator, albeit at high altitudes.
The cause of the fluctuation of the world’s glacier cover is still not completely understood. Periodic changes in the heat received from the Sun, caused by fluctuations in the Earth’s orbit, are known to correlate with major fluctuations of ice sheet advance and retreat on long time scales. Large ice sheets themselves, however, contain several “instability mechanisms” that may have contributed to the larger changes in world climate. One of these mechanisms is due to the very high albedo, or reflectivity of dry snow to solar radiation. No other material of widespread distribution on the Earth even approaches the albedo of snow. Thus, as an ice sheet expands it causes an ever larger share of the Sun’s radiation to be reflected back into space, less is absorbed on the Earth, and the world’s climate becomes cooler. Another instability mechanism is implied by the fact that the thicker and more extensive an ice sheet is, the more snowfall it will receive in the form of orographic precipitation (precipitation resulting from the higher altitude of its surface and attendant lower temperature). A third instability mechanism has been suggested by studies of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. Portions of an ice sheet called ice streams may periodically move rapidly outward, perhaps because of the buildup of a thick layer of wet, deformable material under the ice. Although the ultimate causes of ice ages are not known with certainty, scientists agree that the world’s ice cover and climate are in a state of delicate balance.
Only the largest ice masses directly influence global climate, but all ice sheets and glaciers respond to changes in local climate—particularly changes in air temperature or precipitation. The fluctuations of these glaciers in the past can be inferred by features they have left on the landscape. By studying these features, researchers can infer earlier climatic fluctuations.
