H̱ula Valley, Hebrew ʿemeq H̱ula,  valley in upper Galilee, northeastern Israel. The valley occupies most of the course of the Jordan River north of the Sea of Galilee. It is bounded by Dan and the settlement of Maʿyan Barukh (north), the Golan Heights (east), and the Hills of Naphtali (west), and on the south it slopes gradually down to the Sea of Galilee. It is approximately 16 miles (25 km) long, 4 miles (6 km) wide, and covers an area of about 68 square miles (177 square km).
Because of the low natural gradient of the Jordan River, the valley has been a swampy site throughout recorded history. The former Lake H̱ula had an area of about 5.5 square miles (14 square km), and surrounding swamps covered almost 12 square miles (31 square km). These areas were considerably enlarged during the annual winter rains. Down to modern times, the H̱ula was a malarial area, inhabited only by a few Arab villagers. The pioneering Jewish settlement of Yesud ha-Maʿala (founded 1883) was the first effort at modern colonization. The valley was otherwise left desolate until the 1930s; papyrus and water lilies flourished, and the swamps were inhabited by water buffalo, wild boar, and many species of migratory birds.
In 1934 the southern portion of the valley was bought from its Syrian-Arab owners by the Palestine Land Development Company, and later more land was acquired and numerous Jewish communal settlements (kibbutzim) founded. In 1951 the project of draining the H̱ula began, and by 1958 the lake and swamps had disappeared, except for a small section retained as a nature reserve. More than 25 miles (40 km) of drainage and irrigation canals were built, and the basalt dike at the north end of the Sea of Galilee was blasted away to provide a better channel for the Jordan, which was canalized through most of the valley. The work was hindered by armed attacks from adjoining Syria.
The total land area reclaimed or greatly improved, more than 22 square miles (57 square km), provided some of Israel’s richest farmland. It was planted with grains, fodder crops, fruits (especially apples), peanuts (groundnuts), cotton, vegetables, and bulbs for export. At the northwest of the drained area, the planned city of Qiryat Shemona (q.v.) was established to serve as the urban and industrial centre for the region.
By the early 1990s, sinking groundwater levels and other unforeseen environmental consequences of the reclamation project had rendered some farmland unusable and prompted efforts to turn a portion of the H̱ula Valley back into a natural wetland.
