Iwo Jima, official Japanese Iō-tō, also called Iō-jima,  island that is part of the Volcano Islands archipelago, far southern Japan. The island has been widely known as Iwo Jima, its conventional name, since World War II (1939–45). However, Japan officially changed the name to its Japanese form, Iō-tō (Iō Island), in 2007.
Iwo Jima lies in the western Pacific at a point about 760 miles (1,220 km) south-southeast of Tokyo. The island is irregular in shape; it is about 5 miles (8 km) long and ranges from 800 yards to 2.5 miles (730 metres to 4 km) wide. It has an area of about 8 square miles (20 square km). Administratively, it is part of Tokyo metropolis.
Iwo Jima was under Japanese administration until early in 1945, when it became the scene of a fierce battle between Japanese and invading U.S. troops during the last phases of World War II. The island was strategically important because, if captured, it could serve as a base for U.S. fighter planes to accompany U.S. heavy bombers flying to Japan from bases on Saipan, an island 700 miles (1,100 km) farther south that U.S. troops had taken in 1944. Two U.S. Marine divisions landed on Iwo Jima February 19–21, 1945, and were followed by a third later in the month. The island’s Japanese defenders had entrenched themselves so effectively in caves that weeks of preliminary naval and air bombardment failed to appreciably weaken their ability to offer tenacious resistance to the Marines’ amphibious landing. The struggle for possession of the island continued for almost a month before it was officially pronounced captured by the United States. The hardest struggles were for the occupation of a height that U.S. forces labeled Meatgrinder Hill, in the north, and Mount Suribachi, an extinct volcano in the south.
The raising of the American flag over Mount Suribachi (February 23), which was photographed by Joe Rosenthal of the Associated Press, resulted in one of the best-known photographic images of the Pacific war. This picture was widely reprinted, and statues, paintings, and a U.S. postage stamp were based on it. (The photograph actually depicts the second flag raising over Mount Suribachi, after a first flag raised an hour or two earlier had proved too small to be visible to other U.S. troops on the island.)
About 21,000 Japanese troops were killed and some 1,000 captured in the main battle and subsequent operations. U.S. casualties totaled about 28,000, including about 6,800 killed. Iwo Jima and the other Volcano Islands were administered by the United States from 1945 until they were returned to Japan in 1968.
