Java, also spelled Djawa or Jawa,  island of Indonesia lying southeast of Malaysia and Sumatra, south of Borneo (Kalimantan), and west of Bali. Java is home to roughly half of Indonesia’s population and dominates the country politically and economically. The capital of Java and of the country is Jakarta (formerly Batavia), which is also Indonesia’s largest city.
Administratively, Java is composed of three propinsi (or provinsi; provinces)—West Java (Jawa Barat), Central Java (Jawa Tengah), and East Java (Jawa Timur)—as well as Jakarta Raya (Greater Jakarta) daerah khusus lbukota (special capital district) and Yogyakarta daerah istimewa (special district), both of which are administratively considered provinces. Area including nearby islands, 49,976 square miles (129,438 square km). Pop. including nearby islands, (2010) 136,610,590; (2020) 139,686,700.
Java is 661 miles (1,064 km) long from east to west and ranges in width from about 60 miles (100 km) at its centre to more than 100 miles (160 km) near each end. A longitudinal mountain chain, surmounted by many volcanoes, runs east to west along the island’s spine and is flanked by limestone ridges and lowlands. Java is highly volcanic, yet serious eruptions are few; only 35 of its 112 volcanoes are active. In the west the volcanic peaks are clustered together, becoming more widely spaced in the central and eastern parts of the island. The highest volcano is Mount Semeru, at 12,060 feet (3,676 metres). A series of discontinuous plateaus lies south of the volcanic belt and reaches an elevation of about 1,000 feet (300 metres).
Most rivers in Java run northward, since the central mountains that form their watershed lie somewhat closer to the southern than to the northern coast. Some rivers do run southward, however. The largest rivers on the island are the Solo and the Brantas, in Java’s eastern portion. Those and many smaller rivers are a source of water for irrigation but are navigable only in the wet season, and then only by small boats.
Java’s climate is generally hot and humid throughout the year. Maximum temperatures are found in the plains along the northern coast, but in the mountains it is much cooler. The high humidity often makes the climate debilitating. The northwest monsoon season, from November to March, is rainy and cloudy, while the southeast monsoon, from April to October, brings some rain but generally is sunny. Annual rainfall at Jakarta averages about 69 inches (1,760 mm). The average daily maximum temperature at Jakarta is 86 °F (30 °C), and the minimum is 74 °F (23 °C). At Tosari (elevation 5,692 feet [1,735 metres]) in the interior highlands, the highs and lows average 72 °F (22 °C) and 47 °F (8 °C). Java’s soils are very fertile because of periodic enrichment by volcanic ash.
Java’s rich vegetation is southern Asian, with Australian affinities; more than 5,000 species of plants are known. Dense rainforests abound on the damp slopes of the mountains, while thick bamboo woods occur in the west. The island’s fruit trees include banana, mango, and various Asian species. Teak, rasamala, and casuarina trees and bamboo occur in forest stands, together with sago palms and banyan trees. Teakwood is one of Java’s major exports.
Among the island’s fauna are the one-horned rhinoceros and banteng (wild ox), though these species are now restricted to only the more remote areas, notably Ujung Kulon National Park, at the island’s western tip (designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1991); the Javan tiger is now extinct. The island is also home to monkeys, wild pigs, and crocodiles; about 400 species of birds; 100 species of snakes; 500 species of butterflies; and many types of insects.
Java’s inhabitants include three major ethnic groups, the dominant Javanese, the Sundanese, and the Madurese, and by two smaller groups, the Tenggerese and the Badui. The Javanese constitute approximately 70 percent of Java’s population and live primarily in the central and eastern portions of the island. The Sundanese live mainly in the west, while the Madurese live in the east and on Madura Island. All three groups speak Malay languages, and most are Muslims.
Java is one of the world’s most densely populated areas. The island averages more than 2,600 persons per square mile (1,000 per square km) and has the majority of Indonesia’s population on only 7 percent of the total land area of the republic. Java’s rate of population growth has remained quite high; from an estimated 5 million people in 1815, the population had grown to roughly 140 million in the early 21st century. Most of Java’s population remains rural, but its cities have nevertheless grown at a rapid rate. The chief cities are Jakarta, Bandung, Semarang, Surabaya, Surakarta, and Yogyakarta. The rural population density is highest in the south-central plains and the northern plain.
