Korfanty Line,   Polish–German boundary in Upper Silesia, proposed by Wojciech Korfanty. The line was never accepted as the official border but provided a basis for compromise that made the post-World War I Polish state economically viable.
When the Allied powers concluded the Treaty of Versailles with defeated Germany, they provided for a plebiscite in Upper Silesia, which contained a large Polish population, to determine whether that territory should remain a part of Germany or be attached to Poland. The plebiscite was finally held on March 20, 1921, after the Poles in Upper Silesia had staged two armed uprisings (August 1919 and August 1920) and a commission representing the Allies had taken over administrative control of the area from the Germans (February 1920). Of the almost 2,000,000 persons entitled to vote, about 700,000 voted to stay with Germany and 500,000 for unification with Poland; 682 communes declared themselves in favour of joining Poland, and 792 preferred Germany.
The treaty had declared that the commune vote was to be the basis for any division of the area; but after the plebiscite, Germany claimed all of Upper Silesia. In response, Korfanty, who was a native of the region and the Polish representative on the Allied commission, suggested that Poland receive the southeastern portion of Upper Silesia. This area, which included the major mining and industrial region of Upper Silesia, had given 59 percent of its votes for incorporation into Poland, and about three-quarters (673) of its communes also had voted in favour of union with Poland.
The commissioners, however, failed to reach a unanimous decision on the area’s division, and the Poles staged a third uprising (May 2–3, 1921). Led by Korfanty, who had opposed the previous insurrections, they drove the Germans out and occupied almost all the southeastern territory within a few days. The Germans resisted bitterly for six weeks until British troops under the commission’s command brought about a cease-fire. With the commission still unable to reach agreement, the dispute went to the Council of the League of Nations. The compromise accepted by the Allied powers on Oct. 20, 1921, was less favourable to the Poles than was the Korfanty Line. Germany got most of the territory and population of Upper Silesia, but Poland was allotted almost 1,300 square miles (3,400 square km), containing 1,000,000 inhabitants, three-quarters of Upper Silesia’s coal-producing area, and two-thirds of its steelworks. 
