Lésbos, also spelled Lésvos, also called Mitilíni,  largest island after Crete (Modern Greek: Kríti) and Euboea (Évvoia) in the Aegean Sea. It constitutes a dímos (municipality) and a perifereiakí enótita (regional unit) in the North Aegean (Vóreio Aigaío) periféreia (region), eastern Greece. Mytilene (Mitilíni) is the chief town of the island and seat of a Greek Orthodox bishop. Sometimes grouped with the Greek Southern Sporades, Lésbos (the name is pre-Hellenic) was among the earlier sites of Aegean settlement. Lésbos is separated from the Asia Minor coast, to which it is geologically related, by two shallow channels ranging from 6 to 14 miles (10 to 23 km) wide, the Muselim (north) and the Mitil-ini (east), which join at the apex of the triangular island, forming the entrance to the Turkish Gulf of Edremit.
The irregular coast of Lésbos is penetrated by two narrow-mouthed bays, Géras (southeast) and the Gulf of Kallonís (southwest). The island is largely volcanic in the west, and numerous thermal springs indicate the unstable subterranean structure that has caused severe earthquakes throughout history. The principal peak, Mount Lepethymnus (Áyios Ilías), reaches 3,176 feet (968 metres). The original vegetation is well preserved west of the town of Kalloní. The major population centre is around Mytilene on the southeast coast.
Mytilene, the port, was built on an island and later connected to Lésbos by a causeway, forming the two harbours. Lésbos took its name “Pentapolis” from the five cities of Mytilene, Methymna, Antissa, Eresus, and Pyrrha. (Another important city was Arisba, northwest of Kalloní, which was destroyed by an earthquake in the 5th century bce.) Pyrra, which lies in a small valley off the Gulf of Kallonís, suffered from an earthquake about 231 bce. Antissa, on the northwestern coast just north of the present Ándissa, was destroyed by the Romans in 168 bce. Eresus, on the southwest coast, is the birthplace of the 7th-century-bce poet Sappho and the 4th–3rd-century-bce philosopher Theophrastus, Aristotle’s successor. Methymna, on the north coast, has given its pre-Greek name to a town and artists’ colony (formerly Mólivos). Activities long attributed (if not proven) to Sappho and her circle gave the name of her island to female homosexuality, lesbianism.
Lésbos, near the mouth of the Hellespont trade routes (modern Dardanelles), long has had strategic and commercial importance. In 1929–33 the British School excavated Thérmi, north of Mytilene, and Antissa, both important early Bronze Age (c. 3000–2750 bce) towns. Thérmi apparently was settled by Troas, judging from its Troy I-like black pottery. Cycladic influences predominated in Lésbos until 2000 bce, when the island was depopulated.
About 1050 Aetolians migrating to Lésbos made it their chief settlement and Mytilene their capital. The island prospered after Pittacus (c. 650–570) ended civil strife as aisymnētēs (“dictator”). The lyric poetry of Greece owed much to the 7th-century Lésbos-born musician Terpander and the dithyrambist Arion as well as Alcaeus and Sappho.
After a protracted struggle with Athens for Sigeum on the Hellespont (Dardanelles) and a naval defeat, Lésbos in 527 submitted to Persia, being freed only in 479 with the defeat of Persian naval forces. Lésbos then joined the Delian League under Athenian leadership. Early in the Peloponnesian War (431–404 bce), the Mytilene oligarchy forced a revolt that ended (428–427) with Athenian reprisals. Thereafter, Lésbos was repeatedly attacked by the Peloponnesians, falling to Sparta in 405. In 389 Thrasybulus recovered most of the island for Athens; in 377 it joined the Second Athenian League but in 333 served as a base for the Persian admiral Memnon against Alexander the Great of Macedonia and subsequently for other invaders until the Roman Pompey made Mytilene a free city.
As a Byzantine dominion the island flourished; in 809 ce the empress Irene was exiled there. In 821, 881, and 1055, it swayed before Saracen attacks and fell in 1091 to the Seljuq Turks. In 1224 the Byzantine emperors recovered it and in 1354 gave it to a Genoese trading family. After a prosperous century, it came under Turkish domination (1462–1912) and then joined the Greek kingdom (1913).
Lésbos’s fertile plains and valleys produce grapes, cereals, and, the principal product and export, olives. Hides, soap, and tobacco are also produced; sardine fishery is important. Lésbos is handicapped by severe earthquakes such as that which destroyed Mytilene in 1867, and this may partly account for the few ancient remains. Pop. (2001) 90,436; (2011) 86,436.
