Midway Islands,  unincorporated territory of the United States in the central Pacific Ocean, 1,300 miles (2,100 km) northwest of Honolulu. Near the western end of the Hawaiian archipelago, it comprises a coral atoll with a circumference of 15 miles (24 km) enclosing two main islands—Eastern (Green) and Sand islands. Its total land area is 2.4 square miles (6.2 square km). The climate is subtropical, with cool and wet winters and warm and dry summers.
Reported and claimed for the United States in 1859 by Captain N.C. Brooks, the atoll was first called Middlebrooks and then Brooks. The name Midway dates from the islands’ formal annexation by the United States in 1867. In 1903 Pres. Theodore Roosevelt placed the islands under the control of the U.S. Navy. Also in 1903 the atoll became a link in the Hawaii-Guam segment of the first transpacific submarine cable, and a cable station was established on Sand Island. The advent of transpacific aviation gave Midway new importance in 1935 when it was made a regular stop on the route from San Francisco to Manila. In 1940 the U.S. Navy began work on an air and submarine base there.
During World War II the atoll became an important strategic objective for the Japanese. The Battle of Midway—fought northeast of the islands on June 3–6, 1942, and characterized mainly by the actions of carrier-based airplanes—marked the turning point of the war in the Pacific. As a result of the battle, Japan lost most of its best naval pilots and first-line aircaft carriers and, in consequence, its ability to wage an offensive war in the Pacific. After the war, Midway’s importance as a commercial air base diminished rapidly, with the introduction of longer-distance airliners, and regular stops there were eliminated in 1947. However, it remained a vital naval facility during both the Korean and Vietnam wars and was a strategic outpost during the Cold War. The U.S. Navy began reducing its facilities on the islands in 1978, and all remaining military operations were shut down in 1993.
In 1996 the islands were proclaimed Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge; formal transfer of jurisdiction took place in 1997. Indigenous plants include bunchgrass and beach morning glory, but much of the islands’ vegetation is introduced, including such invasive species as ironwood (Casuarina equisetifolia). The abundant birdlife includes numerous nesting seabirds (e.g., albatrosses, shearwaters, and terns) and such introduced species as canaries and mynahs.
