Point Reyes National Seashore,  rugged peninsula extending into the Pacific Ocean northwest of San Francisco, northern California, U.S. It fronts the Pacific Ocean to the west, Drakes Bay to the south, and Tomales Bay to the northeast; the latter bay extends inland about 13 miles (21 km) along the San Andreas Fault zone. The national seashore, authorized in 1962 and established in 1972, covers an area of 111 square miles (288 square km). It is surrounded on the west and south by Gulf of the Farallones National Marine Sanctuary and borders a portion of Golden Gate National Recreation Area to the southeast.
The English explorer Sir Francis Drake landed on the peninsula, then inhabited by Coast Miwok Indians, in 1579; the site was named in 1603 by the Spanish explorer Sebastián Vizcaíno, who sailed past on the day of the Feast of the Three Kings and named it La Punta de los Reyes. Ranching began in the mid-19th century, and dairy farming has continued to the present day; Pierce Point Ranch is preserved as a remnant of 1850s agriculture.
The rocks of the peninsula match those of the Tehachapi Mountains some 300 miles (500 km) to the south, the tectonic forces along the San Andreas Fault line having moved the park’s land northward. Although the site is frequently foggy, a dozen beaches provide vistas of cliffs, dunes, and ocean breakers. Grasslands and wooded ridges of pine, California laurel, and Douglas fir are also part of the landscape. Gray whales can be seen from the Point Reyes Lighthouse on the southwestern tip of the peninsula, while reintroduced Tule elk roam its northern tip. Several other wildlife-viewing areas allow visitors to observe elephant seals, harbour seals, and sea lions; however, the national seashore is most renowned for its bird-watching, which is excellent throughout its area. The seashore’s visitor centres have exhibits devoted to the area’s plants, animals, and marine environment and 16th-century exploration. A bird observatory and research centre is at the southern end of the peninsula.
