Rajgir Hills,  small isolated upland region of central Bihar state, northeastern India. The hills are known for their scenic beauty and as a historical and religious centre for Hindus, Buddhists, and Jains.
The formation, composed of massive quartzites, rises sharply from the South Bihar Plains. The hills extend northeast-southwest for some 40 miles (65 km) in two roughly parallel ridges that enclose a narrow ravine in the northeast that opens gradually toward the southwest. Their summits resemble forested islands in the flat, largely featureless surrounding alluvial lowland. At one point the hills rise to an elevation of 1,272 feet (388 metres) above sea level, but, in general, they seldom exceed 1,000 feet (300 metres).
South of the town of Rajgir, the valley between the parallel ridges contains the site of Rajagriha (“Royal Residence”), said to have been the residence of the legendary Magadha emperor Jarasandha of the Hindu epic Mahabharata. The outer fortifications can be traced on the crests of the hills for more than 25 miles (40 km); they are 17.5 feet (about 5 metres) thick, built of massive undressed stones without mortar. Those ruined walls are generally dated to the 6th century bce, although it is thought that the area was occupied for several centuries prior to that. The remains of New Rajagriha, the reputed capital of King Bimbisara (c. 520–491 bce), lie north of the valley.
In addition to their significance to Hinduism, the Rajgir Hills contain important Buddhist and Jaina pilgrimage sites. They are especially associated with the life of the Buddha Gautama, who often taught there. Chhatagiri is the former Gridhrakuta, or Vulture’s Peak, which was one of his favourite retreats. One of the towers on Baibhar Hill (Vaibharagiri) has been identified as the Pippala stone house in which the Buddha lived. Sattapanni cave, which has been identified with a number of sites on Baibhar Hill and with the Sonbhandar cave at its foot, was the site of the first Buddhist synod (543 bce) to record the tenets of the faith. The Sonbhandar cave is now believed to have been excavated by the Jains in the 3rd or 4th century ce. In the valley’s centre, excavations at the Maniyar Math site have revealed a circular shrine associated with the worship of Mani-naga, a serpent deity of the Mahabharata. Several modern Jaina temples lie on the hills around the valley. There are also hot springs in the valleys, surrounded by Hindu shrines.
