Roanoke Island,  island in Dare county, off the coast of North Carolina, U.S. It lies south of Albemarle Sound, between the Outer Banks and the mainland. The island, 12 miles (19 km) long and an average of 3 miles (5 km) wide, was the site of the first attempted English settlement in North America and the birthplace of Virginia Dare, the first child born of English parents in the New World. The name Roanoke is probably of Algonquian origin signifying “northern people”; it has also been rendered as “place where shell beads are found.”
In 1584 the island was explored by Captains Philip Amadas and Arthur Barlowe, who had been sent there by Sir Walter Raleigh to select a site for an English colony in North America. After two months’ exploration of the North Carolina coast, they returned to England with two Native Americans (Manteo and Wanchese), samples of tobacco and potatoes, and glowing descriptions of the region’s friendly inhabitants and lushness and fertility, prompting Raleigh to attempt colonization. Raleigh first tried to found a colony of 108 settlers under the command of his cousin, Sir Richard Grenville. They sailed from Plymouth, Eng., in April 1585 and reached land in June. After exploring the North Carolina coast, they landed on the north end of Roanoke Island, where they built a fort. Grenville then returned to England to secure more supplies, leaving the colony under the command of Ralph Lane. Faced with dwindling food supplies, a delay in the return of Grenville’s supply ship, and attacks by Native Americans, the colonists soon grew discouraged, and in 1586 the whole group went back to England with Sir Francis Drake (who was returning from attacks on the Spanish West Indies and Florida). Soon after, a supply ship from Raleigh arrived to find the colony empty. Two weeks later Grenville also arrived at Roanoke with supplies; he left 15 men there to hold England’s claim.
Raleigh’s second colony, consisting of about 150 settlers under the command of John White, sailed from Plymouth in May of 1587. They landed at Roanoke Island in July but found the fort razed and the remains of only one of the 15 men. The settlers—who this time included more farmers as well as women and children—built houses and repaired those remaining from the previous colony; Virginia Dare was born on August 18. White soon returned to England to procure more supplies, but the war with Spain prevented him from obtaining a ship with which to relieve the colony. When White did return to Roanoke in August 1590, he found the settlers had disappeared, leaving no clue to their fate except the letters CRO carved on one tree and the word CROATOAN carved on another.
Since 1937 the story has been portrayed near Manteo in an outdoor drama, The Lost Colony, by Paul Green. Fort Raleigh National Historic Site is a restoration of the lost English colony, and the Elizabeth II State Historic Site is a replica of the boat on which the first explorers arrived. Manteo, the Dare county seat, and Wanchese, a fishing village, are also tourist attractions.
