Staten Island,  island and borough, New York City, southeastern New York state, U.S. The island lies in New York Harbor south of Manhattan and between New Jersey and Brooklyn. With several smaller islands it forms Richmond county and the Staten Island borough of New York City. Roughly triangular, the island has about 35 miles (56 km) of waterfront and an area of almost 60 square miles (155 square km). It is connected with Manhattan by the Staten Island Ferry, which carries passengers and automobiles; with New Jersey by several bridges; and with Brooklyn by the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge. The opening of the latter in 1964 spurred considerable development of the island.
Attempted European colonization of the island, which was occupied by Unami Indians of the Delaware tribe, began in 1630 by the Dutch. Indian attacks dispelled permanent settlers until 1661, when the Dutch West India Company granted lands to French Waldenses and Huguenots and a colony was established at Oude Dorp (“Old Town”), a few miles south of The Narrows (the channel separating the island from Brooklyn). The island was named for the Staten-Generaal (“States General”) of the Dutch Republic. Following the acquisition of New Netherland in 1664 by Great Britain, English and Welsh farmers established homes and farms on the island.
The Billopp, or Conference, House in Tottenville was the scene (September 11, 1776) of talks between representatives of the Continental Congress and the British in an unsuccessful attempt at reconciliation during the American Revolution. In 1898 Staten Island, as Richmond, became one of New York City’s boroughs. The borough was renamed Staten Island in 1975.
Staten Island is mostly residential but has some manufacturing; services and trade-related employment are particularly important. It is the seat of Wagner College (founded 1883 in Rochester, moved in 1918) and the College of Staten Island of the City University of New York (1955) and a branch campus of St. John’s University, New York. Points of interest include the Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, Jacques Marchais Center of Tibetan Art, Richmondtown, Staten Island Botanical Garden, Staten Island Zoo, and High Rock Park Nature Conservation Center. Staten Island is the site of the Fresh Kills, the largest garbage disposal site in New York, but also contains the Green Belt, the largest park in the city. Pop. (2000) 443,728; (2008 est.) 487,407.
