Turfan Depression, Chinese (Pinyin) Tulufan Pendi or (Wade-Giles romanization) T’u-lu-f’an P’en-ti, also called Turpan Basin,  deep mountain basin in the Uygur Autonomous Region of Xinjiang, northwestern China. The Turfan Depression is a fault trough, descending ultimately to 508 feet (155 metres) below sea level (the lowest point in China), whereas the neighbouring Tarim River and Lop Nur areas are between 2,000 and 3,000 feet (600 and 900 metres) above sea level. The basin has an area of some 20,000 square miles (50,000 square km).
The basin lies between the Bogda Mountains to the north and the northern section of the Kuruktag range to the south. Within this depression another major fault forms the Qoltag Mountains, which divide the basin into two sections. The northern section forms a zone at the foot of the Bogda range. This area, about 500 feet (150 metres) above sea level, drains into the lower southern depression through steep canyonlike gorges. The lower basin, once the site of a permanent lake, slopes toward the south where there is a salt swamp called Lake Ayding (Aydingkol).
The whole basin is irrigated, either (in the north) using surface water or (in the south) by the Persian technique of using tunnels that tap groundwater from higher areas. The area has great climatic extremes: the average monthly temperature is 14 °F (−10 °C) in January and 90 °F (32 °C) in July. Daily variations from these averages, however, can be enormous. The highest temperature recorded in China, 118 °F (48 °C), was at the city of Turfan (Turpan) in the northern part of the basin, while the lowest recorded temperature, −62 °F (−52 °C), was at Fuyun, not far from Turfan. Precipitation in the depression is scanty, only 0.6–1.2 inches (16–30 mm) per year. The extreme temperatures and windblown sands are major problems for the basin’s inhabitants.
The basin is intensively farmed and is well known for its fruit, particularly grapes and Hami melons. Watermelons, apples, peaches, apricots, nuts, grains (especially wheat), cotton, and silk are also produced. Most of the inhabitants are Uighur Muslims. The Tu-Ha (Turfan-Hami) Oil Field, spreading across the Turfan and nearby (east) Hami basins, produces both petroleum and natural gas and is important to the economic and social development of the region.
The higher northern part of the depression forms long-established natural trade routes, including the fabled Silk Road; these connect in the southeast to the trade route known as the Hexi (Gansu) Corridor. The main centres of population in the depression are the cities of Turfan to the north and Toksun (Tuokexun) at the western end.
