United States Virgin Islands, also called U.S. Virgin Islands,  organized unincorporated island territory of the United States, situated at the eastern end of the Greater Antilles, about 40 miles (64 km) east of Puerto Rico, in the northeastern Caribbean Sea. The territory is geographically part of the Virgin Islands group, which also contains its near neighbour, the British Virgin Islands.
The territory is composed of three large islands—St. Croix, St. John, and St. Thomas—and about 50 small islets and cays. The capital is Charlotte Amalie, on St. Thomas.
For information about regional aspects of the United States Virgin Islands, see Virgin Islands.
Geologically, with the British Virgin Islands, the U.S. Virgin Islands are an extension of the central fault-block mountain ranges of Puerto Rico and are thus part of the Greater Antilles. They are composed of metamorphosed igneous and sedimentary rocks overlain in parts by limestone and alluvium, and they rise off the continental shelf to maximum heights of 1,556 feet (474 metres) at Crown Mountain on St. Thomas, 1,277 feet (389 metres) at Bordeaux Mountain on St. John, and 1,088 feet (332 metres) at Mount Eagle on St. Croix—the largest of the islands, with an area of 84 square miles (218 square km). St. Thomas and St. John are very rugged, but St. Croix’s mountains are confined to the north, with a large rolling-to-level plain opening to the south. All the islands are surrounded by fringing coral reefs, and ancient elevated reefs ring the main islands.
The climate is pleasant, with temperatures at St. Thomas averaging a maximum of about 82 °F (28 °C) during the day in January and 88 °F (31 °C) in July and being tempered throughout the year by northeasterly trade winds. Nighttime minimum temperatures are about 11 °F (6 °C) cooler, and the relative humidity is low for the tropics. Rainfall averages some 45 inches (1,100 mm) annually, with a marked rainy season from September to December. Droughts occur periodically, and hurricanes may strike the islands on rare occasions. Early plantation clearance destroyed the islands’ tropical forest, which is now found only in a few places on St. Thomas and has elsewhere been replaced by secondary woodland and scrub. Island fauna is sparse, save for birds, but the surrounding seas abound in commercial and game species.
About three-fourths of the population is black, and between one-tenth and one-fifth is white. English is the official language, but some French is spoken on St. Thomas, and Spanish is spoken on St. Croix among Puerto Rican immigrants.
The population is predominantly Christian; Protestants constitute about half and Roman Catholics more than one-fourth of those professing a religion. The population increased rapidly in the mid- to late 20th century, primarily because of substantial immigration from the U.S. mainland, the eastern Caribbean, and Puerto Rico.
The infant mortality rate is relatively low for the region, and life expectancy—in years, in the mid-70s for males and the low 80s for females—is about average. Charlotte Amalie, the largest settlement, is the only town with a population of more than 10,000.
The U.S. Virgin Islands economy is based primarily on tourism and other services. The leading sectors in employment are government service; trade, encompassing personal, business, and domestic services including tourism; manufacturing; and finance, real estate, and insurance.
About one-fifth of the total land area is farmland, most of it on St. Croix. In the late 20th century agricultural production underwent a transition from the traditional reliance on sugarcane to more-diversified crops. Fruits (especially mangoes, bananas, papayas, and avocados) and vegetables (notably tomatoes and cucumbers) are the main crops grown. Cattle (ranched on St. Croix), goats, sheep, and pigs are the main livestock. St. Croix produces milk sufficient for island needs. The government has built dams on St. Croix and St. Thomas to improve farmers’ water supply. Only 6 percent of the land is forested, but the government has planted large areas of St. Croix with mahogany and has reforested parts of St. Thomas. A bay forest on St. John supplies leaves for the bay rum industry. Fishing is restricted to supplying local needs and to sportfishing.
The islands have few domestic energy sources and thus have long relied on imported petroleum products to supply most of their needs, especially for electric power generation. To mitigate that problem, the territory made efforts to convert its generators to permit them to utilize propane as well as fuel oils, to increase energy efficiency in the islands, and to develop renewable energy sources. Solar energy plays a small but growing role in the territory’s energy production.
Rum distilling was traditionally the islands’ primary industry, but manufacturing eventually diversified to include petroleum refining, watch assembly, and the manufacture of chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and clothing. Petroleum refining ceased in 2012 with the closure of the HOVENSA plant on St. Croix after more than four decades in operation. The plant had been one of the world’s largest such facilities and had produced most of the islands’ fuel supply. The impact of its closure on the economy included substantial losses of jobs and revenue as well as the loss of its petroleum products. The U.S. government encourages industry by allowing certain manufactures to enter the United States duty-free, and the local government has offered tax incentives.
The adverse effects of the HOVENSA closure extended to the islands’ imports and exports. Before the loss of the refinery, the primary import was crude petroleum (primarily from Venezuela) and the main export was refined petroleum (shipped mainly to the United States). Exports totaled more than four-fifths of imports in value annually. After the closure of the refinery, exports contracted sharply, although losses were later offset by growth in the tourist sector. Other than petroleum, exports include rum, clothing, and watches, and the main imports are foodstuffs and manufactured goods. The major trade partners are China, the United States, and a number of countries of the European Union.
Tourism, based on the pleasant tropical climate, attractive scenery, good fishing, proximity to the U.S. mainland, and free-port status, dominates the economy. Virgin Islands National Park, covering some three-fifths of St. John, and Buck Island Reef National Monument, which includes all of the islet of Buck Island and the waters and coral reef surrounding it, are other major attractions. Souvenir and handicraft industries have developed for the tourist market.
The islands’ extensive road network is mostly paved. St. Croix, St. John, and St. Thomas all have scheduled bus service. Charlotte Amalie, on St. Thomas, and Frederiksted and Limetree Bay, on St. Croix, are deepwater ports. A container port on the southern coast of St. Croix handles most of the islands’ cargo traffic. There is ferry service between the three main islands and to the British Virgin Islands. There are two international airports, on St. Thomas and on St. Croix. Interisland seaplanes serve the islands and Puerto Rico, the British Virgin Islands, and Saint Martin.
