Yucatán Peninsula, Spanish Península de Yucatán,  a northeastern projection of Central America, lying between the Gulf of Mexico to the west and north and the Caribbean Sea to the east. Encompassing some 76,300 square miles (197,600 square km), it includes the Mexican states of Campeche, Quintana Roo, and Yucatán and, in the south, large parts of Belize and Guatemala. The peninsula has a mean breadth of about 200 miles (320 km) and a coastline of about 700 miles (1,100 km).
The coast on the north and west is low, sandy, and semibarren. There are a number of openings through the outer bank upon which several small towns or ports have been built. The eastern coast consists of bluffs, indented with bays and bordered by several islands; the largest and most developed are Cozumel and Isla Mujeres. There is good fishing all along the coasts, and there are many excellent beaches, especially those at Cancún, which has become a major tourist destination and resort area.
The peninsula is almost wholly composed of beds of coralline and porous limestone rocks, forming a low tableland that rises gradually toward the south. It is covered with a layer of thin, dry soil, formed through a slow weathering of the coral rocks. Where the rocky surface is perforated, there are natural sinkholes and caverns, around which the Maya had built their cities and ceremonial centres.
The climate of the northern Yucatán is hot and dry, and the absence of high mountainous ridges to intercept the moisture-bearing clouds from the Atlantic results in a limited rainfall. Toward the south, moisture increases from 18 inches (460 mm) to a maximum of 80 inches (2,000 mm) annually, and the scrub forest gives way to tall trees. Daily high temperatures range from the mid-70s to 100 °F (about 24 to 38 °C), but the heat is modified by ocean winds through the greater part of the year. The dry season lasts from December to May, and the hottest months are May and June. Most of the peninsula receives adequate rainfall throughout the year.
The regions toward western Campeche as well as those in Belize have sufficient rainfall to support forests containing mahogany, sapodilla, vanilla, logwood, and other dyewoods. Logwood forests fringe all the lagoons and many parts of the seaboard. Animal life includes deer, jaguar, wild boar, monkeys, snakes, and iguanas. Bird life abounds, especially turkeys, quails, and parrots.
The population of the Yucatán varies considerably in both density and ethnic composition. Mérida in Yucatán state and its surrounding region is densely populated. The southeastern Mexican state of Quintana Roo is the least populated part of the peninsula. The majority of the population in the Yucatán consists of Maya and mestizos (those of mixed Indian and European ancestry). The three Mexican states in the Yucatán region have a predominantly Maya population. In Belize about one-half of the population is mestizo (defined there as of mixed Mayan and Spanish ancestry), and the remainder is Maya, Creole (English-speaking people of largely African and British ancestry), and others. In Guatemala about two-thirds of the population is mestizo, and the majority of the remainder is Maya.
Corn (maize), sugarcane, tobacco, cotton, coffee, and henequen (for sisal hemp) are cultivated throughout the peninsula. Oil has been discovered in several parts of the Yucatán, and there is a gas field at Xicalango and offshore oil fields near the Bay of Campeche.
Logging and chicle industries are important in Belize. Archaeological sites—including Chichén Itzá and Uxmal (designated UNESCO World Heritage sites in 1988 and 1996, respectively), as well as Tulum in Mexico—and the development of a transportation network have made tourism one of the major economic activities of the peninsula. There is a highway network, and Cancún and other major tourist centres are linked to Mexico City and international destinations by air.
The modern history of the Yucatán, long called Mayapán by the Mexicans, began with the expedition of Francisco Hernández de Córdoba, a Spanish adventurer from Cuba, who discovered the east coast of the Yucatán in February 1517 while on a slave-hunting expedition. In 1518 Juan de Grijalva followed the same route. In 1519 a third expedition, under the conquistador Hernán Cortés, clashed with the inhabitants of Cozumel Island. In 1525 the inland part of the peninsula was traversed by Cortés during an expedition to Honduras.
The conquest of the peninsula was undertaken in 1527 by Francisco de Montejo, who encountered a more vigorous opposition than did Cortés. By 1549 Montejo had succeeded in establishing Spanish rule over barely half the peninsula, but it was never extended farther. At that time, many of the Maya had abandoned their cities and were living in the inland rural areas of the peninsula.
During the colonial period the Yucatán remained a remote and unimportant part of the Viceroyalty of New Spain (centred in Mexico). The Yucatán seceded from Mexico in 1839 and kept its independence until 1843. In 1847 another revolt followed, and the Maya were virtually independent throughout most of the peninsula almost until the beginning of the administration of Porfirio Díaz (1877). In 1910 there was another revolt with some initial successes, after which many of the Maya withdrew to the nearly uninhabited state of Quintana Roo.
Until the 20th century, the Yucatán was more closely connected with Europe and the United States than with the rest of Mexico, and the people of the Yucatán (mainly Maya) have generally eschewed being called “Mexicans.” Not until 1957 was a narrow-gauge railway line to mainland Mexico widened, thus facilitating the movement of heavy freight. Mayan culture and traditions have prevailed into the 21st century in the Yucatán Peninsula.
