Hanford Site, also called (1943–46) Hanford Engineer Works or  (1947–76) Hanford Nuclear Reservation,  large U.S. nuclear site established during World War II for the production of plutonium, some of which was used in the first atomic bomb. It is located in south-central Washington, northwest of Richland, and was originally operated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as a unit of the Manhattan Project and was later administered by civilian government agencies. After ceasing operations in 1990, the Hanford Site became the biggest environmental cleanup job in U.S. history.
The site was chosen, in 1942, for its isolation from heavily populated areas and for the availability, in large quantities, of cooling water from the Columbia River and electric power from the Grand Coulee Dam and Bonneville Dam hydroelectric installations. Two towns, Hanford and White Bluffs, were evacuated, and the Wanapum Native American nation was relocated in the process of site clearance. Hanford Engineer Works, as the 400,000-acre (160,000-hectare) tract was called, was originally managed under contract by the DuPont chemical company. During the war as many as 51,000 people worked at the site.
The water-cooled nuclear reactors at Hanford were larger than any existing reactors and were set far apart from each other to reduce the likelihood that a single accident might shut down the whole operation. Their purpose was to synthesize plutonium from uranium. After undergoing nuclear chain reactions in the reactors, spent uranium was loaded onto railroad cars, stored for cooling, and then moved to a chemical separation plant where the uranium was liquefied and the plutonium recovered. The three original separation plants were called canyons because they were built within long (800 feet [244 metres]) trenches.
The first production reactor, B Reactor, went online in September 1944. The following February the first shipment of plutonium was sent  to Los Alamos, New Mexico, where the atomic bombs were manufactured. Plutonium from Hanford fueled the bomb that was detonated near Alamogordo, New Mexico, on July 16, 1945 (the Trinity test), and the bomb (called Fat Man) that effectively ended the war when it was detonated over Nagasaki, Japan, on August 9. (The Hiroshima bomb was fueled by uranium-235 from the Oak Ridge, Tennessee, nuclear facility.)
In 1946 the Hanford Engineer Works was removed from military control, and General Electric replaced DuPont as the primary contractor. In 1947 the Hanford Nuclear Reservation, as it was then known, came under the jurisdiction of the newly formed Atomic Energy Commission.  Plutonium production ceased briefly after the war but resumed in 1948 as the Cold War intensified. Five more reactors went into service between 1949 and 1955. The ninth and last reactor, N Reactor, became operational in March 1964. Unlike the others, it produced electricity as well as plutonium. The first eight reactors were shut down between 1964 and 1971, but N Reactor remained in use until 1987. The last of the chemical separation plants, PUREX (Plutonium Uranium Extraction Plant), closed in 1990.
Although plutonium-production methods became more efficient over the years, massive quantities of nuclear waste remained at Hanford, much of it in the form of corrosive, physically hot, and dangerously radioactive liquids. Liquid waste was stored on site in 177 underground tanks, the largest of which were 1,000,000 gallons (3,785,000 litres) in capacity. The first to be installed were single-shell tanks, some of which developed leaks over the years. More secure double-shell tanks were installed later. Some liquid waste was dumped directly into the ground. As for solid waste, the most notable form was spent nuclear fuel, more than 2,000 tons of which was stored in corrosion-prone canisters within water-filled basins, some of which were near the Columbia River. Other contaminated solids, ranging from work clothes to rail cars, were typically buried in pits or trenches.
Since 1977 the Hanford Site has been under the control of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). A formal cleanup began in 1989 under the terms of a pact called the Tri-Party Agreement, negotiated by the DOE, the Environmental Protection Agency, and the state of Washington. The scheduled work was extensive. It included cocooning (encasing in steel and concrete) eight of the nine reactors, leaving only the B Reactor building to be maintained as a National Historical Landmark; demolishing most of the other structures; vitrifying (transforming into a glasslike solid) some of the liquid waste; moving the spent solid fuel to a national repository; and treating contaminated groundwater. By the early 21st century much of the work remained uncompleted, and the cleanup was expected to continue into the 2040s.
