Charles A. Dana, in full Charles Anderson Dana,  (born August 8, 1819, Hinsdale, New Hampshire, U.S.—died October 17, 1897, Glen Cove, New York), American journalist who became a national figure as editor of the New York Sun.
In 1839 Dana entered Harvard College (now Harvard University), but poor health and lack of money forced him to leave in 1841. From 1841 to 1846 he lived at the utopian Brook Farm community, where he was one of the trustees, but, when his ideals for social change were unfulfilled, he left it and went to work for the Boston Weekly Chronotype. The next year he joined the staff of the New York Tribune, and in 1848 he wrote letters from Europe on the revolutionary movements of that year. Returning to the Tribune in 1849, he became its managing editor and actively promoted the antislavery cause in the paper. In 1862 his resignation was asked for, apparently because of wide temperamental differences between him and Horace Greeley, the editor-publisher. Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton immediately made him a special investigating agent of the War Department; Dana spent much time at the front and sent Stanton frequent reports. In 1864–65 Dana was second assistant secretary of war.
Dana became editor and part owner of the New York Sun in 1868 and remained in control of it thereafter. Under his control the Sun opposed the impeachment of Pres. Andrew Johnson, supported Ulysses S. Grant for the presidency in 1868, was a sharp critic of Grant as president, and in 1872 took part in the liberal Republican revolt and gave lukewarm support to Greeley’s candidacy. In the presidential election of 1876, the Sun was a strong supporter of the Democrat Samuel J. Tilden; after Rutherford B. Hayes’s inauguration, the paper often referred to him by such epithets as “His Fraudulency the President.”
For two decades after Dana became editor, the Sun was a newspaperman’s newspaper, much admired and imitated. It lived up to its claim that its news was “the freshest and sprightliest current,” and it specialized in the “human interest story,” for which Dana hired bright young men, many fresh from college. Editorially the paper was lively and independent but notoriously inconsistent. Dana swung from the early liberalism evidenced by his Brook Farm connection and his syndicated letters from Europe in 1848 to a later disillusioned conservatism and unswerving support of laissez-faire capitalism. With George Ripley, Dana edited The New American Cyclopaedia (1857–63). He also edited a highly successful American verse anthology, The Household Book of Poetry (1857), and among his books were Recollections of the Civil War (1898) and The Art of Newspaper Making (1895).
