American Negro Theatre (ANT),  African American theatre company that was active in the Harlem district of New York City from 1940 to 1951. It provided professional training and critical exposure to African American actors, actresses, and playwrights by creating and producing plays concerning diverse aspects of African American life.
The American Negro Theatre (ANT) was established by two African Americans, the playwright Abram Hill and the actor Frederick O’Neal. Initially, the ANT held its performances in the basements of the Abyssinian Baptist Church and the 135th Street library. In 1945, however, it moved to a larger space at an Elks lodge on West 126th Street, which was renamed the American Negro Theatre Playhouse.
Soon after its founding, the ANT won attention and praise for its first major production, a staging of Hill’s On Striver’s Row. Between 1940 and 1949 the ANT produced a total of 19 plays, 12 of which were based on original scripts.
The company’s 1944 production of Anna Lucasta, by the white American playwright Philip Yordan, was a hit and was transferred to Broadway, where it had a successful run. That unexpected breakthrough had mixed results for the ANT, however. Some members were unhappy with the amount of royalties the company received from the Broadway production, and actors who had not been chosen to stay with the show on Broadway were bitter. Furthermore, the pressure to repeat the success of Anna Lucasta led the company to concentrate on plays by established white playwrights instead of showcasing the work of African American writers.
Three additional shows originally produced at the ANT went to Broadway, but none was a hit or even a commercial success. Although the ANT had more success with a weekly radio series it also produced, dissension among the group’s members and the erosion of community support led to the company’s decline, and it ceased operation in 1951.
Well-known actors and actresses who worked with the ANT, in some cases starting their theatrical careers there, included Ruby Dee, Sidney Poitier, Harry Belafonte, Alvin Childress, Alice Childress, Hilda Haynes, Earl Hyman, and Clarice Taylor.
