Arthur Freed, original name Arthur Grossman,  (born September 9, 1894, Charleston, S.C., U.S.—died April 12, 1973, Los Angeles, Calif.), American film producer who reshaped the visual style and narrative structure of the musical comedy genre.
Freed attended Phillips Exeter Academy in Exeter, New Hampshire, before embarking on his musical career. He played piano for a Chicago music publisher, worked in vaudeville, and dabbled in songwriting before landing a job as a lyricist for MGM studios in 1928. Teamed with Nacio Herb Brown, he cowrote such movie musical standards as “Singin’ in the Rain,” “Broadway Rhythm,” and “You Are My Lucky Star.”
Freed repeatedly pressed studio production chief Louis B. Mayer for a chance to produce, and in 1938 he was named associate producer of The Wizard of Oz (1939). He then produced a series of “backyard” musicals starring Mickey Rooney and Judy Garland, including Babes in Arms (1939), Strike Up the Band (1940), and Girl Crazy (1943). His production of Meet Me in St. Louis (1944) marked a turning point for Freed. It was the first in a string of influential musicals made with the Technicolor process and big-name casts. From 1944 to 1958, when he made Gigi, his name was synonymous with the musical.
Freed’s major contribution to film history was the big-budget integrated musical, which incorporated songs and production numbers into the narrative. This differs significantly from the backstage musical, in which  production numbers are performed onstage. By contrast, the characters in integrated musicals break into song at any time, expressing their feelings or narrating an event through song and dance. Freed’s integrated musicals include four bona fide classics of the genre: On the Town (1949), An American in Paris (1951), Singin’ in the Rain (1952), and The Band Wagon (1953).
Perhaps Freed’s greatest skill was his keen awareness of talent. Throughout his years at MGM, he built a production unit of trusted cast and crew members—dubbed the “Freed Unit”—which he used repeatedly to make his films and which boasted some of the most durable names in film musicals: directors Vincente Minnelli and Stanley Donen, actors Fred Astaire, Judy Garland, and Gene Kelly, and writers Adolph Green and Betty Comden, among others. Highly respected in the industry, Freed received the Irving G. Thalberg Award (a special Academy Award given for excellence in producing) in 1951 and France’s Legion of Honour in 1967.
