Beppe Grillo, in full Giuseppe Piero Grillo,  (born July 21, 1948, Savignone, Italy), Italian comedian and social critic who cofounded the Five Star Movement, a political party in Italy that espoused a broadly populist, antiestablishment platform.
Grillo grew up in working-class surroundings near the port city of Genoa. Having demonstrated an aptitude for musical and comedic performance at an early age, he began appearing at local nightclubs while he was still a teenager. Grillo studied accounting and began working for his father’s business in 1968, but he left it a short time later to focus on comedy. In 1975 he moved to Milan, and two years later he made his first television appearance, on the variety show Secondo voi. Throughout the late 1970s and early ’80s, he was a staple on Italian television, and he earned accolades for his film debut in Cercasi Gesù (1982; Looking for Jesus).
While politicians had previously been among the targets of Grillo’s caustic wit, in the 1980s he expressed particular scorn for what he decried as scandalous behaviour in the halls of power, culminating in 1986 with his open criticism of Socialist Prime Minister Bettino Craxi. Grillo’s characterization of the Socialists as a party of thieves resulted in his de facto blacklisting from television. Grillo was vindicated, however, when Craxi fled the country under the spectre of corruption charges, on which he was convicted in absentia in 1994.
Having established himself as a national figure, Grillo returned to live performance. He toured Italy, mixing comedy and political commentary, his status undiminished by his absence from television. Grillo’s wide network of fans sent him stories of corporate misconduct, and his training as an accountant uniquely qualified him to assess the exact nature of the misdeeds. He incorporated the details of his investigations into his act, which led prosecutors to solicit his expertise. In 1993 he revealed the existence of a billing scam within the national telephone monopoly. He also told audiences about balance-sheet irregularities at Parmalat in September 2002, more than a year before the food giant admitted that it had falsified assets and concealed losses that totaled more than $10 billion. The company’s collapse was Europe’s largest corporate bankruptcy at that time, and Grillo testified at the subsequent trial.
In 2005 Grillo launched beppegrillo.it, a blog that would serve as the springboard for some of his boldest initiatives. That same year he published the names of Italian parliamentarians who had been convicted of crimes, and in 2006 he solicited thousands of proxy votes from shareholders in Telecom Italia in an effort to fire the company’s board of directors. On September 8, 2007, Grillo organized V-Day (“V” being the first letter of an Italian obscenity that was directed at the political class), a nationwide protest that drew over one million participants. The popular outpouring of condemnation for corrupt practices and of support for Grillo led to the creation of the Five Star Movement in 2009.
As scandals involving Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi continued to unfold and the Italian economy was buffeted by the euro-zone debt crisis, disaffected Italians embraced the charismatic Grillo. He became one of the most popular political figures in Italy, and the Five Star platform—which, among other things, called for term limits and reduced pay for officials, along with improved public access to water, transportation, and the Internet—garnered widespread support. In 2012 Five Star candidates won local elections in Parma and Sicily, and it became clear that the Grillini, as supporters of Grillo styled themselves, were a legitimate political force.
The government of technocratic Prime Minister Mario Monti collapsed in December 2012, and early elections, held in February 2013, placed Grillo and the Five Star Movement at the centre of European politics. Five Star candidates claimed roughly one-fourth of the seats in both houses of Italy’s legislature, making their support virtually essential to the formation of a government. According to Five Star’s bylaws, Grillo himself was forbidden to hold office, because of a conviction for involuntary manslaughter that was the result of a 1980 automobile accident. Nonetheless, he remained the face and soul of the movement, even as he refused to work with a political establishment that he had spent decades ridiculing. The resulting deadlock left Italy without a formal government as party leaders struggled to find common ground. A government was eventually formed under a series of Democratic Party prime ministers, and Grillo remained a highly visible gadfly on behalf of Five Star and its platform.
As Five Star moved into what Grillo described as its “adult phase,” he actively began to distance himself from the movement. In January 2018, just months ahead of a general election, Grillo’s blog stripped virtually all references to the party, and he announced that he was “fed up with opinions.” That election, held on March 4, 2018, saw Five Star capture nearly one-third of the vote, the largest share of any single party.
