Berliner Ensemble,  theatrical company founded in 1949 by the German playwright and poet Bertolt Brecht in East Berlin. The Berliner Ensemble originated as a branch of the Deutsches Theater, where Brecht had directed a production of his Mutter Courage und ihre Kinder (Mother Courage and Her Children) in January 1949. Originally designed as a touring company, the ensemble was composed primarily of younger members of the Deutsches Theater, with Helene Weigel, Brecht’s wife, as its leading actress and codirector. The company devoted itself to works written or adapted by Brecht himself and worked in Brecht’s style of epic theatre, which influenced directors throughout western Europe and the United States. In 1954 the Berliner Ensemble moved to its own theatre, the Theater am Schiffbauerdamm, where it was established as an independent state theatre.
Several tours through Europe, including two visits to Paris, with Mother Courage in 1954 and Der kaukasische Kreidekreis (The Caucasian Chalk Circle) in 1955, brought the Berliner Ensemble international fame and high critical esteem. After Brecht’s death in 1956, Weigel carried on as the company’s director until her death in 1971.
During the 1970s the company persevered despite infighting amongst artistic directors who questioned the validity of Brechtian theatre. Ruth Berghaus succeeded Weigel as ensemble director in 1971; her experimental approach was not well received among company traditionalists, and she was replaced by Manfred Wekwerth in 1977. The company became a public corporation upon the reunification of Germany in 1990 and until 1992 was supported by government subsidies and managed by a team of renowned directors, among them Heiner Müller, who became sole manager and artistic director in 1992 and served in this position until his death in 1995. The company, by that time privately owned, though it continued to receive city subsidies, continued for another four years until it was officially dissolved on August 1, 1999. Reorganized in 2000, the company remained committed to political theatre, but perhaps as more broadly interpreted.
