Bette Midler, in full Bette Davis Midler, byname The Divine Miss M,    (born December 1, 1945, Honolulu, Hawaiian Islands [U.S.]), American actress and singer who was known for her dynamic energy, comedic wit, and campy humour.
Midler was raised in rural Aiea, Oahu, the third of four children of a house painter and his wife. She began singing as a child, and her mother encouraged an interest in theatre. By the time she graduated from high school, Midler had performed in several amateur shows. She studied for a year at the University of Hawaii but dropped out in order to pursue acting. In 1965 she landed her first professional role, a bit part in the film Hawaii (1966). She accompanied the film crew back to Hollywood, where she worked and saved money in order to move to New York City.
In New York Midler gave her first major performance at the La MaMa Experimental Theatre in 1965. The following year she joined the chorus of Broadway’s Fiddler on the Roof, in which she was subsequently given the role of Tzeitel. After leaving the musical in 1970, Midler spent time honing her craft, taking singing and acting lessons, and she began performing at the Continental Baths, a bathhouse catering to gay men. That same year she also made the first of several appearances on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson. It was during her time at the Continental Baths that Midler began to develop her bawdy stage persona, The Divine Miss M, performing songs from a variety of genres and appearing in sometimes outrageous costumes while telling off-colour jokes between songs. Those performances thrust Midler into the spotlight, along with her then-unknown accompanist and music director, Barry Manilow.
In 1972 Midler released her first album, The Divine Miss M, produced by Manilow. The following year she received her first Grammy Award, for best new artist, and in 1974 she was given a special Tony Award for “adding lustre to the Broadway season.” She continued to release songs and albums throughout the 1970s, making frequent appearances on television and performing in nightclubs. In 1979 she appeared in her first starring role on the big screen, playing a rock star loosely based on Janis Joplin in The Rose. The film was a success with critics, and the title song, performed by Midler, earned her a second Grammy Award. Despite the acclaim, Midler was not immediately offered more film roles, and she struggled to establish a film career. After a strenuous concert tour in the early 1980s, she sank into a depression and suffered a nervous breakdown.
  In the mid-1980s Midler turned to comedy, releasing the stand-up comedy album Mud Will Be Flung Tonight! (1985). About the same time, she signed a film contract with Walt Disney Productions’ new Touchstone Pictures, appearing in a series of successful comedies, including Down and Out in Beverly Hills (1986), Ruthless People (1986), and Outrageous Fortune (1987). Taking a break from comedy, in 1988 she starred in the melodrama Beaches, which was produced by a company Midler had cofounded, All Girl Productions. Though the film was met with a lukewarm reception, its song “Wind Beneath My Wings ” (sung by Midler) became a smash hit, topping the Billboard Hot 100; it also won Midler a third Grammy, for record of the year.
  Midler pursued her multifaceted career through the end of the 20th century and into the 21st, continuing to release albums and to act. In 1992 she performed on Johnny Carson’s penultimate episode of The Tonight Show, for which she earned the second of three career Emmy Awards, and from 2000 to 2001 she starred in the TV sitcom Bette, based on her life. Her film credits included For the Boys (1991), Hocus Pocus (1993), The First Wives Club (1996), and The Stepford Wives (2004). She also released the albums Some People’s Lives (1990), which features one of her biggest hits, “From a Distance”; Bette of Roses (1995); and Bette (2000).
In the 2010s Midler returned to Broadway, coproducing the 2011 staging of the glitzy musical Priscilla Queen of the Desert and starring as a larger-than-life talent agent in the solo show I’ll Eat You Last (2013). Midler later earned critical acclaim—including a Tony Award—for her performance in a revival of Hello, Dolly!, which debuted in 2017. In addition, she continued to act onscreen. She starred in the movie Parental Guidance (2012), lent her voice to the animated feature The Addams Family (2019), and appeared on the Netflix series The Politician (2019– ). She portrayed Bella Abzug in Julie Taymor’s The Glorias (2020), about Gloria Steinem. Midler’s albums from this time included It’s the Girls! (2014), a collection of pop classics by such female groups as the Supremes and the Shirelles. In 2012 Midler received a lifetime achievement award from the Songwriters Hall of Fame.
In addition to her career as a performer, Midler was active in various social causes, serving as a spokesperson for AIDS awareness and founding the New York Restoration Project to restore New York parks and community gardens. She also published a memoir, A View from a Broad (1980), and a book for children, The Saga of Baby Divine (1983).
