Bill Hicks, in full William Melvin Hicks,  (born December 16, 1961, Valdosta, Georgia—died February 26, 1994, Little Rock, Arkansas), American stand-up comedian who was considered a “comedian’s comedian” and who was a star in Britain, though he never experienced wide success in the United States during his career in the 1980s and early 1990s. His life was cut short at age 32 by pancreatic cancer, but in death his reputation swelled, and he was revered as one of the most accomplished and complex performers in the history of stand-up comedy, often likened to the ground-breaking Lenny Bruce.
Hicks was the youngest of three children in a devout Southern Baptist family. His father, an executive with General Motors, moved the family to Florida, Alabama, and New Jersey before settling in the well-heeled Memorial section of Houston. There, as teenagers, Hicks and friend Dwight Slade shared an early interest in stand-up comedy. Much influenced by the stand-up routines of Woody Allen, they went to school on the comics whom they watched on The Tonight Show. Styling themselves as Bill & Dwight, Hicks and Slade began working on their own comedy routines. Still in their early teens, in 1976, they successfully auditioned to appear on a local segment of Jerry Lewis’s Muscular Dystrophy Association telethon but were prevented from doing so by Hicks’s parents. At age 15 Hicks began sneaking out of his room at night through a window to appear onstage with Slade at a new comedy club, the Comedy Workshop. A comedic wunderkind, Hicks quickly established himself as an audience favourite in this adult world before his parents once again put a stop to his performing.
He stayed behind in Houston to complete his senior year of high school when his parents relocated to Little Rock, Arkansas. That year he played guitar and sang in Stress, a garage rock band. Unbeknownst to his parents, he also resumed performing stand-up, appearing at the Comix Annex and becoming a member of a coterie of comedians known as the Texas Outlaw Comics, which included rising “scream” comedian Sam Kinison. Upon graduation from high school, Hicks announced that, instead of attending college, he was headed to Los Angeles to pursue a career in comedy. There he performed regularly at the Comedy Store, an influential venue that served as the launchpad for an array of big-name comedians. Trying his hand at acting, he appeared in a pilot for a television series that was not picked up. He also worked with Slade, who had joined him in Los Angeles, on a screenplay, The Suburbs, that gained industry attention but went unproduced.
By 1983 Hicks had returned to Houston. Using the Comix Annex as his base, he became the “king” of the burgeoning local comedy scene that was evolving around the growing circle of Outlaws. He also began performing on the road, mostly in the South. For a time, he was the opening act for Jay Leno, and he made his first appearance on Late Night with David Letterman in 1984. During this time, Hicks began exploring altered states of consciousness—meditating, using sense deprivation tanks, and experimenting with hallucinogenic psilocybin mushrooms. Hicks also began abusing other drugs and alcohol. Drinking and doping initially freed him to creatively express dark impulses that brought new complexity to his comedy, but getting wasted onstage soon became an end in itself, leading to sloppy performances, canceled dates, and deep debt. Hicks’s descent into self-destruction lasted several years.
In 1988, embracing sobriety, Hicks relocated to New York City, beginning a period of intensive travel on the comedy club circuit during which he performed nearly 300 times per year for some five years. The video Sane Man captured two virtuoso performances by Hicks in a club in Austin, Texas, not long after he left Houston. In 1990 he released Dangerous, his first comedy album, to glowing reviews.
Hicks’s sets became increasingly polished and profound, less an act than a testimony to the hard-won truths he felt he had found. Pointedly confrontational, he tackled an array of controversial subjects, including abortion, drugs, pornography, flag burning, religion, and conspiracy theories. He championed authenticity and hilariously debunked mediocrity and contrivance, displaying a special enmity for advertising, marketing, and created need. In the tradition of Lenny Bruce, Mort Sahl, and George Carlin, he punctured the pretension and sanctimonious hypocrisy he found in aspects of formal religion and in intolerant social and political attitudes. But Hicks became more than a satirical social critic. His comedy became ontological. Even as he wrestled with questions on the nature of existence, the road to his conclusions was paved with trenchant comedic observations. Hicks was a master of microphone technique and sound effects, called upon well-defined character voices, and acted brilliantly with facial gestures. He swaggered on the stage, prowled it demonstratively, squatted to address audience members, or flopped suddenly to the floor. He alternated between relaxed banter and impassioned shouts and deftly employed long pauses on the way to killer punch lines.
In 1990 Hicks recorded a set in Chicago for One Night Stand, an HBO special. An electric performance at the Just for Laughs Festival in Montreal in 1990 further enhanced his reputation. Toward the end of the year, he made his first appearance in Britain, where his edgy, ironic critique of the American Dream soon earned him a wider, more devoted audience than he ever attained in the United States. In the U.S.A (which Hicks said stood for the United States of Advertising), he enjoyed a cult audience, a reputation as a critic’s darling, and the respect of his peers as a “comedian’s comedian,” but in Britain he was a rock star who packed large venues. Hicks archly summarized this state of affairs in one of his bits, explaining that he had recently played to 900 “screaming and adoring fans” in a turn-of-the-century theatre in Belfast where Oscar Wilde once performed,
Music was always an important part of Hicks’s life. Entering the stage, dressed in black, to a thunderous rock soundtrack (courtesy of Jimi Hendrix) became a staple of his act, and it was often observed that he brought a “rock and roll” attitude to his comedy. In 1992 he joined friends from his youth to record and release the self-titled rock album Marble Head Johnson, featuring songs written by Hicks.
A year earlier Hicks had released another comedy album, Relentless. In 1993 he toured Australia. Hicks’s career continued to climb, and then in June 1993 he was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer. Having begun chemotherapy, he continued working, limiting knowledge of his diagnosis to a select few. He recorded two more albums, Arizona Bay and Rant in E-Minor, in 1992–93, though they would not be released until 1997. Meanwhile, he became engaged to his new manager, Colleen McGarr, who had booked him into Montreal’s Just for Laughs Festival in 1990.
Over the years, Hicks had become a frequent guest on David Letterman’s TV shows. In October 1993 he made his 12th appearance and was convinced that it had been his best only to learn that his entire performance was to be excised from the aired version of the show because Letterman and his producer were concerned about the controversial nature of Hicks’s subject matter, much of which was religion-based. Hicks was deeply wounded and angered by the incident. In 2009 Letterman, having admitted his mistake in the matter, devoted an episode of his show to Hicks, aired the set in its entirety, and apologized directly to Hicks’s mother on-air. As Hicks grew sicker, he chose to spend the last part of his life with his family in Arkansas. He died in 1994, but his reputation only increased posthumously.
