Bill Maher, byname of William Maher,  (born January 20, 1956, New York, New York, U.S.), American comedian and talk-show host known for his acerbic political commentary.
Maher grew up in River Vale, New Jersey. As a boy, he idolized The Tonight Show host Johnny Carson but hid his aspiration to be a comedian until his junior year studying English at Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, when he first tried his stand-up act in a New York City comedy club. After graduating (B.A., 1978), Maher became a regular in clubs throughout the country. He also made many appearances on The Tonight Show and came to the attention of Steve Allen, who cast him as his sidekick on the cable series Steve Allen’s Music Room. Beginning in 1983, Maher tried acting, appearing in several films and television shows. Maher’s career was jump-started by cohosting Indecision ’92—a program that provided irreverent coverage of the presidential election—for the cable network Comedy Central. His success led to the debut of his own show, Politically Incorrect, in 1993.
Politically Incorrect was an immediate success, at least partly due to Maher’s ability to humorously mediate the discussions between a rotating panel of journalists, entertainers, and politicians. The program proved to be so popular that it moved from Comedy Central to the ABC network in 1997. In 2002 Maher implied that the terrorists responsible for the September 11 attacks were braver than U.S. forces fighting in Afghanistan. The remarks proved highly controversial and led to the cancellation of the show soon thereafter. Although Maher initially tried to explain his comments, he was anything but contrite when he returned to television with Real Time with Bill Maher, which began airing on HBO in February 2003. In 2006 Maher hosted the Internet talk show Amazon Fishbowl with Bill Maher on the Web site Amazon.com. He made frequent appearances on various political talk shows and hosted several stand-up comedy specials on HBO.
Maher’s writings included When You Ride Alone You Ride with Bin Laden (2002), New Rules: Polite Musings from a Timid Observer (2005), and The New New Rules: A Funny Look at How Everybody but Me Has Their Head up Their Ass (2011). Maher, a self-proclaimed “apatheist,” also wrote and produced the irreverent documentary Religulous (2008), in which he interviewed people of various faiths, including Islam, Judaism, and Christianity.
