Bob Fosse, byname of Robert Louis Fosse,  (born June 23, 1927, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.—died September 23, 1987, Washington, D.C.), American dancer, choreographer, and director who revolutionized musicals with his distinct style of dance—including his frequent use of props, signature moves, and provocative steps—and was well known for eschewing light comedic story lines for darker and more-introspective plots. He began on the stage, where he worked on such notable productions as Sweet Charity (1966–67; 1986–87) and Chicago (1975–77), and later had a successful, though brief, film career, which was highlighted by Cabaret (1972).
Fosse, who was the son of a vaudevillian, attended dance schools as a child and began dancing professionally at the age of 13. Following high school, he enlisted in the U.S. Navy and was assigned to an entertainment unit. After his discharge in 1947, he moved to New York, where he studied acting at the American Theatre Wing while dancing as a team with his first wife, Mary Ann Niles, onstage and in such TV shows as Your Hit Parade. After participating in some national tours, he made his Broadway debut in the chorus of Dance Me a Song (1950). In 1952–53 he was the understudy for the title role in Pal Joey and took over the part on tour.
In addition to his stage work, Fosse continued to appear on television, and in 1953 he made his big-screen debut, dancing and singing in the musicals The Affairs of Dobie Gillis, Kiss Me Kate, and Give a Girl a Break. In 1954 he returned to Broadway to choreograph The Pajama Game, which was directed by George Abbott and Jerome Robbins. Fosse earned acclaim—and his first Tony Award—for his clever angular groupings of dancers and fresh stylistically exaggerated staging. He then reteamed with Abbott for Damn Yankees (1955–57), earning another Tony for his choreography; the musical starred Gwen Verdon, who became Fosse’s third wife in 1960. When Abbott and Stanley Donen later adapted the two musicals for the big screen, Fosse served as choreographer.
The musicals helped establish Fosse’s reputation as an inventive choreographer. His dance numbers, many of which were sensual in nature, frequently featured props—notably chairs, canes, and bowler hats—and his signature moves included turned-in knees, the sideways shuffle, rolled shoulders, and the splayed-finger shaking “jazz hand.” Fosse also utilized the spotlight to guide and manipulate audience attention.
In 1959–60 Fosse directed his first Broadway production, Redhead, a murder mystery set in 1880s London; Verdon was cast in the title role and stipulated that Fosse serve as director. The production was a success, and Fosse’s choreography won a Tony. He also received Tonys for his choreography in Little Me (1962–63), which starred Sid Caesar, and Sweet Charity (1966–67), which centred on a hard-luck dime-a-dance hostess (played by Verdon); both were written by Neil Simon. Fosse also helmed the productions—he codirected (with Cy Feuer) Little Me—and when Sweet Charity was acquired for filming by Universal, Fosse was invited to direct (although Verdon was not asked to reprise her role). The film was a box-office disappointment when released in 1969. Many found it overly long and the dramatic scenes lacking. Although several numbers highlighted Fosse’s energetic choreography, many sequences suffered from an in-your-face staging that marked it as the work of a director not yet wholly aware of how stylized theatrical productions need to be muted for film. In addition, Shirley MacLaine earned mixed reviews for her portrayal of the title character.
Fosse’s next film was Cabaret (1972), an ambitious adaptation of the Fred Ebb–John Kander stage success that itself had been based on the nonmusical play I Am a Camera—all of them derived from Christopher Isherwood’s The Berlin Stories. The musical, which was set in 1930s Berlin during Adolf Hitler’s rise to power, starred Liza Minnelli, who was a revelation as the “divinely decadent” Sally Bowles, an ambitious nightclub performer who becomes involved with a British writer (Michael York). Joel Grey was unforgettable as the leering cadaverous master of ceremonies, and the new songs (“Mein Herr” and “The Money Song”) by Ebb and Kander were especially notable. Fosse, however, was clearly the film’s creative centre. Cabaret featured imaginative showstopping numbers and, like most of Fosse’s work, dealt with the seamier side of show business, presenting adult themes rather than the lighthearted romantic fare typically associated with musicals. Fosse’s expressive, sometimes exaggerated use of camera movement, editing, and garish colour and lighting visually accentuates the decay and ugliness of the story. The film won eight Academy Awards, including best director for Fosse. Minnelli and Grey also received Oscars.
Fosse took a break from film for his next projects. He reteamed with Minnelli on the TV special Liza with a Z (1972), which earned him Emmy Awards for direction and choreography; the show itself also garnered an Emmy. In addition, Pippin opened on Broadway in 1972, and the following year Fosse won Tonys for best director (musical) and choreographer for his work on the production, which centred on the young king of Italy and his quest to find meaning in his life. Fosse became the first person to win an Oscar, a Tony, and an Emmy in the same year (1973).
In 1974 Fosse returned to the big screen—and left musicals—with Lenny (1974), a biopic of tragic comic Lenny Bruce, whose controversial routines resulted in charges of obscenity and various arrests. Julian Barry adapted and expanded his own play, and Fosse elected to shoot the film in black and white. But the core of the movie is Dustin Hoffman’s performance, which earned the actor an Oscar nomination. Valerie Perrine was also notable as Honey, Bruce’s stripper wife. However, the unrelenting misery and uncompromising honesty that permeate the acclaimed drama make viewing the film more of a task than a pleasure. The film earned six Oscar nominations, including a nod for best picture. In addition, Fosse was nominated for best director.
Fosse then went back to the stage. In 1975–77 he cowrote (with Ebb), directed, and choreographed Chicago, a musical set in the 1920s about two female murderers (Verdon and Chita Rivera) who manipulate the press to win acquittals. Next was Dancin’ (1978–82), which earned Fosse another Tony for choreography.
Following open-heart surgery, Fosse directed All That Jazz (1979), a self-indulgent though hardly self-serving autobiographical film. In a career-defining performance, Roy Scheider starred as the driven, womanizing, self-destructive director-choreographer. The musical featured notable dance numbers and a strong script, but Fosse frequently interrupted the fast-paced story for hallucinations about death that stretched for unforgivably long stretches. Like a madman showing off his family album, Fosse bared his soul, which is at first fascinating but eventually becomes difficult to watch. The film drew acclaim, and it was nominated for nine Academy Awards, including best picture. Fosse earned Oscar nods for best director and best original screenplay (with Robert Alan Aurthur).
Fosse’s last picture was Star 80 (1983), a biopic of Dorothy Stratten, a Playboy magazine model whose nascent acting career ended when her husband, Paul Snider, brutally murdered her after she left him and began an affair with film director Peter Bogdanovich. Although some argued that Mariel Hemingway was miscast as Stratten, Eric Roberts was riveting as the jealous and manipulative Snider, who feared a return to obscurity after losing Stratten. Although disturbing, Star 80 earned largely positive reviews for its unflinching exploration of the pursuit of fame and the downside of celebrity.
Fosse never directed another feature film, but he continued to work in the theatre. He wrote, directed, and choreographed Big Deal, which debuted on Broadway in 1986. The musical, which was a remake of the Italian spoof Big Deal on Madonna Street (1958), centred on a group of incompetent thieves in 1930s Chicago. For the choreography, Fosse earned his ninth and last Tony. In 1986 he was also involved in a Broadway revival of Sweet Charity. The production moved to Washington, D.C., the following year, and on opening night Fosse suffered a fatal heart attack.
