Bob Newhart, original name George Robert Newhart,  (born September 5, 1929, Oak Park, Illinois, U.S.), American comedian and actor who achieved fame as a stand-up performer and later starred in television sitcoms. He was known for his genial mild-mannered persona and for his skillfully delivered observational humour and understated satire.
Newhart grew up in a middle-class family in the Chicago area. Although he dabbled in theatre in high school, he studied accounting at Loyola University in Chicago, where he received a bachelor’s degree in 1952. After serving as a clerk in the U.S. Army for two years, he returned to his alma mater for law school but left in 1956 without attaining a degree. He subsequently worked a string of jobs, eventually landing a position as a bookkeeper, and acted in a local theatrical stock company on the side.
To alleviate the boredom of his office job, Newhart engaged in humorous telephone conversations with a friend in which he improvised characters. The two proceeded to develop routines in this vein, which they recorded and attempted to sell to radio stations. Although the venture was mostly unsuccessful, Newhart caught the attention of a local disc jockey, who provided him with an opportunity to perform comedic monologues on the radio and helped him land a recording contract with Warner Brothers. On The Button-Down Mind of Bob Newhart (1960), recorded during the first set of nightclub performances Newhart ever gave, he enacted a series of one-sided conversations in which he assumed the role of an earnest straight man in absurd or wildly dramatic scenarios. On the strength of his wry comic imagination and his natural deadpan delivery, the album was a sensation, becoming the first comedy recording to hit number one on the Billboard album chart. It also captured the Grammy Award for album of the year, and Newhart won best new artist.
Newhart soon released two other albums, which also enjoyed robust sales; The Button-Down Mind Strikes Back! (1960) earned a Grammy in the field of comedy performance. In 1961 he parlayed his popularity into a television variety series, The Bob Newhart Show, which earned Emmy and Peabody awards but aired for only one season. While maintaining his comedy career on recordings and in a touring act that consistently sold out theatres, Newhart made frequent guest appearances on television, and he eventually developed a sitcom, also called The Bob Newhart Show (1972–78), in which he starred as a psychologist. The series, which set Newhart’s low-key everyman against an ensemble of lively and colourful characters, was a critical and commercial hit. A similar dramatic formula was employed on his later sitcom Newhart (1982–90), set in a Vermont town full of eccentrics. For his role as an innkeeper, Newhart received three Emmy nominations. Later sitcom efforts—Bob (1992–93) and George & Leo (1997–98)—were less successful. A guest appearance on The Big Bang Theory in 2013, however, won him a long-elusive Emmy Award, and he appeared five more times on the show, through 2018. He later made voice appearances on Young Sheldon. Newhart was inducted into the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences Hall of Fame in 1993.
Beginning with the World War II drama Hell Is for Heroes (1962), Newhart also appeared in several movies during his career. Among his roles were supporting turns in the comedies Hot Millions (1968), Catch-22 (1970), In & Out (1997), and Elf (2003) and a lead performance in the political farce First Family (1980). In addition, he supplied the voice of Bernard the mouse in the animated film The Rescuers (1977) and its 1990 sequel. Newhart received the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor in 2002. A memoir, I Shouldn’t Even Be Doing This!, was published in 2006.
