Burlesque show,   stage entertainment, developed in the United States, that came to be designed for exclusively male patronage, compounded of slapstick sketches, dirty jokes, chorus numbers, and solo dances usually billed as “daring,” or “sensational,” in their female nudity.
Introduced in the United States in 1868 by a company of English chorus girls, Lydia Thompson’s British Blondes, the burlesque show of the 19th century was patterned after the popular minstrel show. It consisted of three parts: first, a series of songs, coarsely humorous sketches or bits, and comic monologues usually by baggy-pants comics; second, the olio, an assortment of variety acts—e.g., acrobats, magicians, and instrumental and vocal soloists; third, chorus numbers and occasionally a take-off, or burlesque, on politics or a current play. The usual finale was a performance by an exotic dancer or a wrestling or boxing match. Burlesque shows, with their show of exposed legs and bawdy and often obscene entertainment, were not considered respectable, and raids by the local police were often prompted by offended citizens.
By the early 20th century two national circuits of burlesque shows, as well as resident companies in New York City, such as Minsky’s at the Winter Garden, were thriving in the United States. W.C. Fields, Al Jolson, Fannie Brice, Bert Lahr, and Phil Silvers were among the comedians who served their apprenticeship before the rowdy burlesque audiences. The addition of striptease dancing, the illogical conclusion of a process that had begun with the belly dancing of Little Egypt at the World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago (1893), established such stars as Ann Corio, Gypsy Rose Lee, Margie Hart, and Georgia Southern. Censorship and “clean-up” policies, and then the competition of motion pictures, led to the decline of burlesque. By the early 1960s few burlesque houses remained, and these usually provided no more than striptease performers, a motion picture, and a comic who told his jokes with an air of defeatism to an audience waiting for the next display of feminine anatomy. By the 1970s, when topless—and bottomless—dancers of both sexes appeared in drinking establishments, American burlesque was virtually dead.
