Buster Keaton, original name Joseph Frank Keaton IV,  (born October 4, 1895, Piqua, Kansas, U.S.—died February 1, 1966, Woodland Hills, California),   American film comedian and director, the “Great Stone Face” of the silent screen, known for his deadpan expression and his imaginative and often elaborate visual comedy.
The son of vaudevillians, Keaton is said to have earned his famous nickname when, at age 18 months, he fell down a staircase; magician Harry Houdini picked up the unhurt infant, turned to the boy’s parents, and chuckled “That’s some ‘buster’ your baby took.” Joe and Myra Keaton added Buster to their vaudeville act when he was three years old. The Three Keatons specialized in knockabout acrobatics, with Joe using little Buster as a “human mop.” Already accustomed to taking pratfalls without suffering injury, Buster learned how to get laughs at a very early age. He also discovered that “the more serious I turned, the bigger laugh I got,” and accordingly adopted his trademark deadpan expression.
Remaining with the family act until age 21, he was hired to appear solo in the Broadway revue The Passing Show of 1917 at a salary of $250 per week. He did not make that engagement, however. Just before rehearsals started, Buster was invited to play a small role in The Butcher Boy (1917), a two-reel comedy film directed by and starring Roscoe (“Fatty”) Arbuckle. Fascinated with the technical aspects and creative possibilities of the movie medium, Keaton went to work for Arbuckle as a supporting player at a weekly salary of $40. He spent the next two years learning every facet of motion-picture comedy, an invaluable training program interrupted only by his military service during World War I. The generous Arbuckle not only bestowed full costar status on Keaton but also welcomed Buster’s participation in the creation of gags and scenarios. In addition, the two codirected The Rough House (1917), a comedy short in which they also starred.
When Arbuckle graduated to feature films, his producer Joseph M. Schenck arranged for Keaton to inherit Fatty’s production staff, and in 1920 Keaton launched his own two-reel series with the brilliant One Week. Three years later Keaton himself moved into starring features with Three Ages (1923). (He had starred in the feature The Saphead [1920], but the film, unlike his subsequent efforts, was neither conceived nor tailored for his talents).
Though he often referred to his film alter ego as “Old Slow Thinker,” Keaton’s screen character possessed remarkable resourcefulness. But he was also a fatalist, resigned to the fact that the world was against him. Wasting no pity on himself, he neither expected nor solicited any sympathy from the audience. Even when his character “won,” he refused to allow himself the luxury of a smile, as if certain that still more trouble lay ahead. Perhaps because Keaton eschewed the pathos of Charlie Chaplin and the ebullient optimism of Harold Lloyd, his silent features never made as much money as those of his two biggest box-office rivals. For the same reasons, however, most of Keaton’s silents have stood the test of time far better than those of his contemporaries. Many of his best gags were as ingenious as they were amusing, encouraging audiences to think as well as grin. He also loved playing tricks with the camera, both obvious (the multiple images in The Playhouse [1921], the chaotic editing in Sherlock, Jr. [1924]) and subtle. Not until long after his heyday was Keaton’s unique contribution to the screen fully appreciated. Notably, his American Civil War comedy, The General (1927), was a financial disappointment when originally released, but today it is regarded as a masterpiece and Keaton’s crowning achievement.
In 1928 Keaton’s production company was signed over to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, the biggest of the Hollywood studios. His first film for that studio was the well-regarded The Cameraman (1928), but before long Keaton was at the mercy of MGM’s army of producers, supervisors, and screenwriters, whose efforts to “improve” his brand of humour virtually destroyed it. Most of his talkies for MGM were burdened with banal story lines, superfluous characters, and tired wisecracks. Even though these films made money, Keaton’s frustration grew, and he soon developed a drinking problem, culminating in his dismissal from MGM in 1933.
Pulling himself out of the doldrums, he spent the next two decades rebuilding his life and reputation, starring in cheap two-reel comedies, playing minor screen roles, touring in summer stock, and working as a comedy writer at his former studio, MGM. A series of live appearances at Paris’s Cirque Medrano beginning in 1947 led to a full-scale comeback and a major renewal of interest in his silent output. Moviegoers were delighted to see the aging comic in brief, sparkling roles as himself in Billy Wilder’s Sunset Boulevard (1950) and as the Chaplin character’s partner in Limelight (1952). Television fans saw Keaton in several weekly series and dozens of commercials.
Toward the end of his life, he had more work than he could handle, showing up in everything from It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World (1963) to Beach Blanket Bingo (1965) to A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum (1966), his last film. In 1959 he was honoured with a special Academy Award. Four months before his death, he received a five-minute standing ovation—the longest ever recorded—at the Venice Film Festival. His autobiography, My Wonderful World of Slapstick (cowritten with Charles Samuels), was published in 1960.
