Chelsea Handler, in full Chelsea Joy Handler,  (born February 25, 1975, Livingston, New Jersey, U.S.), American comedian and author known for her earthy, bawdy style and her late-night talk show, Chelsea Lately (2007–14).
Handler grew up in New Jersey, the youngest of six siblings. As a teen, she competed in the Miss New Jersey pageant, but she did not pursue work in performing until she was 19, when she headed to Los Angeles in hopes of starting an acting career. Eventually, she switched her focus to comedy and began performing stand-up at clubs around the city. This led to a stint on Girls Behaving Badly, a hidden-camera show on the Oxygen network that premiered in 2002. Handler drew fans with her brassy, self-deprecating style and by approaching the topic of sex with an irreverence bordering on crassness. In 2005 she published her first book, My Horizontal Life: A Collection of One-Night Stands, a series of comedic short essays devoted to her dating life.
After making appearances on the E! network and The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, Handler was given her own program on E!, The Chelsea Handler Show. Alternating comedy sketches with segments of Handler’s live stand-up act, the show ran for 12 episodes between April and September 2006. The following year Chelsea Lately premiered on E!. The show featured Handler’s stand-up and a regular roundtable segment featuring guest appearances by other comedians. It was unique among late-night programs in that it specifically courted low-grade celebrities as its guests while also attracting A-list names. After Lately, a sitcom based on the backstage goings-on of the talk show, debuted on E! in 2011.
In 2007 Handler also began appearing opposite Jenny McCarthy and Leah Remini in the online comedy series In the Motherhood (2007–08; later adapted into a short-lived television series [2009] starring different performers). Handler guest starred on numerous television shows, including The Practice, Reno 911!, and The Bernie Mac Show, and she appeared as herself on such programs as The Good Wife. In 2010 she hosted MTV’s Video Music Awards ceremony, following in the footsteps of comedians such as Chris Rock, Jack Black, and Dennis Miller. In 2014 Handler announced that Chelsea Lately would end that year and that she was developing content for Netflix. That project developed into the four-part comedic documentary series Chelsea Does (2016). In each episode, Handler extemporized and conducted interviews about a controversial subject. Later in 2016 she premiered Chelsea, a freewheeling talk show, on Netflix as well; the program ended the following year.
Handler’s second book, Are You There, Vodka? It’s Me, Chelsea (2008) debuted at the top of the New York Times nonfiction best-seller list. It was followed by Chelsea Chelsea Bang Bang (2010) and Lies That Chelsea Handler Told Me (2011), a collection of anecdotes written by her friends and family; both books also hit number one. Handler related her travel mishaps in Uganda Be Kidding Me (2014), also an immediate best seller. Are You There, Chelsea?, an NBC sitcom based on Handler’s books, aired in 2012. Handler served as executive producer for the show and appeared in a supporting role. Her later works included Life Will Be the Death of Me:…and You Too! (2019), which chronicles her “year of self-discovery,” and Hello, Privilege. It’s Me, Chelsea (2019), a documentary exploring the impact of white privilege on culture.
In addition to pursuing her television career, Handler continued to perform as a stand-up comedian. A film of her stand-up show Uganda Be Kidding Me Live (2014) was distributed through Netflix. She also took small roles in movies, including the ribald best friend of Reese Witherspoon’s character in the action comedy This Means War (2012).
