Claque,   (French claquer: “to clap”), organized body of persons who, either for hire or from other motives, band together to applaud or deride a performance and thereby attempt to influence the audience. As an institution, the claque dates from performances at the theatre of Dionysus in ancient Athens. Philemon frequently defeated Menander in the 4th century bc in the comedy competitions, not by virtue of any superiority in his plays but because he swayed the decision of the judges by infiltrating the audience with claques. Under the Roman Empire claques were common in the theatres and law courts; flatterers and legacy hunters would often serve as claqueurs at private performances sponsored by wealthy patrons of the arts. The emperor Nero established a school of applause and was followed on his concert tours by a claque of 5,000 knights and soldiers.
In France during the 18th century, the chevalier Jacques de La Morlière and the poetaster Claude-Joseph Dorat organized claques to support plays by themselves and others. The claque became a permanent institution in the 19th century, and almost every theatre in Paris was forced to submit to its services; the claque leaders, who received monthly payments from the actors and free tickets from the managements, were extremely influential. In addition to the leader, or chef de claque, there were the commissaires, who memorized the better parts of the play and called their neighbours’ attention to them; the rieurs, who laughed loudly during comedies; the chatouilleurs (“the ticklers”), who kept the audience in good humour; the pleureuses, women who wept during melodramas; and the bisseurs, who shouted for encores. Claques have occasionally been employed in England but never with the elaborate organization of the French claques.
The claque in modern times has come to be restricted largely to opera houses, to political rallies, and to radio and television programs on which “canned” (recorded) laughter and applause are used, or studio audiences are advised by placards to laugh or applaud.
