Dai Vernon, original name David Frederick Wingfield Verner, byname the Professor or the Man Who Fooled Houdini,  (born June 11, 1894, Ottawa, Ont., Can.—died Aug. 21, 1992, Los Angeles, Calif., U.S.), Canadian magician and sleight-of-hand artist who was one of the 20th century’s most renowned practitioners of “up-close” magic and card tricks.
Fascinated with magic from age six, he decided to become a professional conjurer while attending the Royal Military College of Canada. When he relocated to New York City, he changed his surname from Verner to Vernon as a nod to the popularity of dancer Vernon Castle and because New Yorkers tended to mispronounce his given name. In response to a typographical error in a newspaper advertisement for his stage act, he also decided to switch his first name from David to Dai. Despite his extreme youth, Vernon quickly gained acceptance among his fellow magicians, largely because of his astonishing versatility in the realm of close-up magic (cups and balls, linking rings, etc.) and card tricks. In 1919 he came up with the Ambitious Card, a manipulation that even the renowned Harry Houdini was unable to figure out. As a result, Vernon achieved worldwide fame as the Man Who Fooled Houdini, billing himself as such for nearly 20 years.
During the height of his popularity as a stage attraction, Vernon performed at private parties for wealthy and influential clients, wrote numerous magazine articles, and turned out several books, among them Select Secrets (1941) and  Malini and His Magic (1962).  He also worked as a silhouette cutter in Atlantic City, N.J., and at other tourist attractions. He took particular pride in the fact that he never copied another magician’s effects, though his own work was extensively imitated by others.
Relocating to the West Coast in the 1960s, Vernon helped establish Hollywood’s Magic Castle, where he spent his final decades as magician in residence. Among those who benefited from the Professor’s guidance and expertise were such celebrated magicians as Ricky Jay and Doug Henning. “If you want to be an artist, you must devote your life to it,” Vernon told his disciples. “Chess, music, anything. After you get so high, you realize if you want to be truly great, you have to give up everything else—you have to dedicate your life to your art.” In addition to his other activities, he wrote a regular column titled “The Vernon Touch” for Genii magazine well into his 90s. The four-volume The Vernon Chronicles (1992) was gleaned from a series of interviews conducted by Richard Buffum in 1965.
