Dave Chappelle, byname of David Khari Webber Chappelle,  (born August 24, 1973, Washington, D.C., U.S.), American comedian and actor who was best known for cocreating, writing, and starring in the groundbreaking television sketch comedy program Chappelle’s Show (2003–06).
Chappelle’s childhood was split between Silver Spring, Maryland, where his mother taught at various local colleges and universities, and Yellow Springs, Ohio, where his father taught at Antioch University. He started performing stand-up comedy in the Washington area at age 14, and, after graduating from the distinguished Duke Ellington School of the Arts in Washington in 1991, he moved to New York City to pursue comedy full-time. Chappelle’s star quickly rose, and he performed on television and played a major supporting role in Mel Brooks’s Robin Hood: Men in Tights (1993) before he turned 20 years old.
Chappelle costarred in the short-lived situation comedy Buddies (1996) and had small roles in the films The Nutty Professor (1996) and Con Air (1997). Half Baked, the offbeat marijuana-themed comedy that he wrote (with Neal Brennan) and in which he starred, was released in 1998. Although the film later developed something of a cult following, it was not a huge box-office success, and Chappelle resumed his career pattern of taking small roles in Hollywood projects while continuing to perform stand-up.
The stand-up stage was where Chappelle first made a significant impact on the cultural landscape. His material often included no-holds-barred takes on race and society, but he was by no means a typical angry comedian in the vein of Lenny Bruce or Bill Hicks, as Chappelle softened his barbs by delivering his jokes in an impish manner and with a wry smile. By the early 21st century he had established himself as one of the most-revered stand-up comedians of his generation, and his first one-hour stand-up special, Dave Chappelle: Killin’ Them Softly, aired in 2000 on HBO.
Chappelle’s stand-up fame helped him strike a deal with the cable channel Comedy Central to produce Chappelle’s Show, which he created with Brennan. The show—which featured Chappelle introducing sketches in front of a live audience and usually ended with a musical performance by a hip-hop or rhythm and blues artist—featured biting political and cultural satire that was leavened by a playful sense of the absurd. Chappelle’s Show produced a number of sketches that became word-of-mouth and viral Internet hits, notably an episode consisting of a series of anecdotes about outlandish musician Rick James, in which Chappelle reenacted the events as James while the real James provided occasional commentary. The first season of the show was released on DVD in 2004 and quickly became the best-selling television program in that format’s history. That year Chappelle also released a second stand-up special, Dave Chappelle: For What It’s Worth.
The success of Chappelle’s Show was a mixed blessing for its star. Whereas the popularity of the show made Chappelle the most famous that he had ever been, he felt pressured by the amount of his time and energy that needed to be dedicated to the show and grew troubled by the production’s behind-the-scenes racial dynamics. In April 2005, nearly one year after signing a $50 million contract with Comedy Central, as he was filming the third season of Chappelle’s Show, he abruptly left the show. Three episodes’ worth of material were cobbled together and broadcast sans Chappelle in his hosting role, bringing the grand total of Chappelle’s Show episodes to just 28, a minuscule number for a program of such influence.
After leaving the show, Chappelle mostly kept out of the public eye for nearly a decade, appearing sporadically to perform stand-up in clubs across the United States and in the documentary Dave Chappelle’s Block Party (2005), which chronicled a free music and comedy concert Chappelle organized in Brooklyn. In 2013 he launched his first national comedy tour since the end of Chappelle’s Show.
Chappelle made a rare film appearance in Spike Lee’s bravura take on gang violence, Chi-Raq (2015). He subsequently hosted Saturday Night Live in 2016 and 2020, and for each episode he won an Emmy Award as outstanding guest actor in a comedy series; both SNL appearances came after a presidential election, and his opening monologues about the vote garnered much attention. The first of several of his comedy routines appeared as specials on Netflix in 2017. One of the shows, Dave Chappelle: Equanimity, won an Emmy for outstanding variety special. In addition, The Age of Spin & Deep in the Heart of Texas (2017) and Sticks & Stones (2019), recordings of three of the specials, received the Grammy Award for best comedy album. Chappelle returned to the big screen with a supporting role in A Star Is Born (2018). In 2019 he made his Broadway debut with Dave Chappelle Live on Broadway, a series of stand-up shows. That year he received the Kennedy Center’s Mark Twain Prize for American Humor.
