David Belasco,  (born July 25, 1853, San Francisco, Calif., U.S.—died  May 14, 1931, New York, N.Y.), American theatrical producer and playwright whose important innovations in the techniques and standards of staging and design were in contrast to the quality of the plays he produced.
As a child actor, Belasco appeared with Charles Kean in Richard III and later played in stock companies touring the mining camps. During this period he served also as secretary to the playwright Dion Boucicault. From 1873 to 1879 he worked in several San Francisco theatres as actor, manager, and play adapter and in the latter year toured in Hearts of Oak, which he cowrote with James A. Herne.
Belasco moved to New York City in 1880, becoming associated there with the Frohmans as manager of the Madison Square Theatre and later of the Lyceum. In 1890 he leased a theatre and became an independent producer. Feeling the pressure of the monopolistic Theatrical Syndicate, he built his own theatre in 1906.
Belasco was the first American producer whose name, regardless of star actor or play, attracted patrons to the theatre. He chose unknown actors and elevated them to stardom. He also preferred playwrights whose success depended upon his collaboration. He gained a reputation for minute attention to detail, sensational realism, lavish settings, astonishing mechanical effects, and experiments in lighting. He maintained a large permanent staff that worked constantly to perfect surprising effects. This work led to the virtual elimination of footlights and to the first lensed spotlights.
As a result, he brought a new standard of production to the American stage. Many critics, however, deplored his theatricalism, his lack of artistic judgment, and his failure to encourage the better dramatists who were then emerging in the United States and Europe.
Belasco claimed to have been connected with the production of 374 plays, most of them written or adapted by himself. His better-known productions include The Heart of Maryland (1895); Madame Butterfly (1900) and The Girl of the Golden West (1905), both turned into the operas by Giacomo Puccini; Du Barry (1901); The Music Master (1904); and Lulu Belle (1926). He also wrote the autobiographical The Theatre Through Its Stage Door (1919). Because of his austere, clericlike dress and personal manner, he came to be known as the “bishop of Broadway.”
