Dill Pickle Club, also spelled Dil Pickle Club,  bohemian club, cabaret, and (from the mid-1920s) speakeasy in Chicago that operated from about 1914 to about 1933 (though sources vary). Its patrons included hoboes, prostitutes, and gangsters as well as leading scholars, literary figures, and social activists, among them writers Sherwood Anderson, Carl Sandburg, Theodore Dreiser, Ben Hecht, Kenneth Rexroth, and Upton Sinclair; activists Emma Goldman and Big Bill Haywood; and attorney Clarence Darrow. The club’s spirit was reflected in its orange alley door and its signage: beneath a sign that read “DANGER” and two arrows pointing to the club’s entrance ran the warning “Step High, Stoop Low, Leave Your Dignity Outside.”
The club’s origins are shrouded in myth, exaggeration, and confusion, much of that provided by its owner, John A. (“Jack”) Jones. A former union organizer for the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), Jones in the early 1910s started a series of weekly forums at the Radical Book Shop, located at 8171/2 North Clark Street in Chicago, to talk about labour issues and other social concerns of the day. By 1917 Jones’s gatherings had exceeded the shop’s capacity, and Jones had relocated to a dilapidated barn at what is now Tooker Place, just off Dearborn Street, in what is today the Near North Side area of Chicago. Soon after the move, a fellow organizer, Jim Larkin, joined him, as did Ben Reitman, an agitator and a medical doctor who served social outcasts and further masterfully engineered the club’s regular coverage in the Chicago Daily News and Chicago Tribune.
By 1917 Jones had assembled the Dill Pickle Artisans as a nonprofit entity for the promotion of arts, crafts, literature, and science. As Jones explained,
The club’s backers had one idea in mind, said Jones:
In a biography of Anderson, Walter B. Rideout described the club’s interior as follows:
In addition to the performance of one-act plays, the club’s programming grew to include poetry readings, dance, opera, and more. Theatre in particular became a staple of the club’s identity as the Dill Pickle Players performed original works by local authors as well as by contemporary playwrights such as Norwegian Henrik Ibsen, American Eugene O’Neill, and Irishman George Bernard Shaw. Jones not only created one of the first theatres of the little theatre movement in the United States but was himself deeply involved in its performances as sometime stagehand, electrician, writer, director, and actor in the club’s productions.
Modernist, Cubist, and other styles of revolutionary art decorated the club’s walls. Life-drawing classes were held there weekly, and on at least one occasion the presence of nude models was highly touted in marketing materials. Occasionally dancers would perform on the club’s stage, and jazz-fueled dances were held Friday and Saturday nights. In addition, the centre sold a small assortment of handicrafts and literature.
During the early years, Jones started a press, which did odd jobs for hire and produced promotional materials such as The Dil Pickler newsletter, the short-lived bulletin The Creative World, and Jones’s technocratic book Tech-Up (1933). The press published a number of artists’ books, including works by Arthur Desmond, Sol Omar, and J. Edgar Miller. Jones was also rumoured to have made unauthorized editions of out-of-print books, printed on yellowed stock.
The club’s irreverent spirit was reflected in its print materials, which were printed on a letterpress. Those handbills, posters, and cards—later acquired by Chicago’s Newberry Library—were raw, crudely designed, and inexpensively reproduced. They sometimes featured woodcuts by Jones or Miller. Many are playful, and some contain deliberate typos and invented words. Regardless of the program’s tone, lectures were often given off-the-wall, sex-themed, Dadaist titles.
The Dill Pickle is best remembered for its regular schedule of lectures and debates. Sundays at the Pickle were considered legendary, drawing all manner of individuals from Bughouse Square, an outdoor soapbox forum located a block away. The diverse clientele brought the soapbox mentality into the club itself. A number of its denizens—with such colourful names as “Statistical Slim” Brundage, “Red” Martha Biegler, Elizabeth Davis (“Queen of the Hoboes”), Bertie (or Birdie) Weber, Harry (“Kill Christ”) Wilson, “Sirfessor” Fred M. Wilkes (“Wilkes Barre” or “Wilkesbarr”), and E.P. (“Triphammer”) Johnson—would dutifully harangue and heckle the speakers.
Admission fees and food sales—of salads, sandwiches, sodas, and (later) bootleg gin—kept the club afloat financially. To get through slow times (but sometimes just for fun), the club also held masquerade balls several times a year and hosted parties for college sororities and fraternities.
The heyday of the Dill Pickle overlapped with—and was a component of—the Chicago literary renaissance, which was, in turn, part of a broader movement in Chicago that combined art, intellectualism, and activism. The heart of that movement was the Towertown district (named for Chicago’s famed Water Tower), which housed many salons, forums, and clubs of a similar nature. Many of those organizations were short-lived, and their names—such as Cheese Box, Fabian Club, Great Dane, and Wind Blew Inn—capture the spirit of the era.
What was occurring in Chicago reflected artistic and intellectual shifts that were taking place throughout the United States, but especially in Manhattan’s Greenwich Village, in the years leading up to World War I and after. Though the degree of communication between Chicago and New York is unclear, the Pickle may have modeled the New York-based Liberal Club, a space that featured an eclectic mix of lectures, one-act plays, visual art, and lively discussions of such topics as feminism, sex, homosexuality, radicalism, labour, and American involvement in the war.
The spirit of Chicago’s bohemianism was somewhat more working-class and openly revolutionary than New York’s. The Dill Pickle artists, writers, intellectuals, and political dissidents embraced the outcast, the hobo, and the tramp—and hence hobohemia came to define the merger of intellectualism with the ethos of the migratory worker. That spirit was evident in the culture of West Madison Street, a haven for flophouses (single-room-occupancy hotels), burlesque theatres, cheap diners, barber colleges, used bookstores, and underclass saloons. Restaurants such as Schlogl’s and Hinky Dink’s served cheap food to “the great unwashed” and others, while magazines such as Chicago Literary Times, Mother Earth, Poetry, and The Rebel Poet provided fodder for daily discussions and debates. In addition, elements of hobo culture—dress, song, language, art, and cuisine—sprung from the tramp districts, train yards, and hobo jungles in and around Chicago had a welcome home at the Pickle.
As the Great Depression set in, the club’s fortunes declined. By the early 1930s, Chicago mobsters had made the Pickle their hangout, often intimidating other customers and creating a nuisance. Regulars also complained that the club was becoming too commercial and was pandering to tourists eager to discover a bohemia that was quickly fading. Rents also skyrocketed as Chicago’s Near North Side witnessed an influx of middle- and upper-middle-class residents. In 1933 the club faced tax difficulties, and that circumstance signaled the beginning of the end, and the club soon closed its doors. Jones made several failed attempts to reopen in other locations, fell on hard times, and died penniless in 1940.
Some historians have cited the era of the Dill Pickle and its hobohemia ethos as a precursor to the spirit of counterculturalism that followed in later decades. With its shared interest in poetry, literature, and radicalism, hobohemia can be seen as an influence on the Beat generation of the 1950s, exemplified by such writing as Jack Kerouac’s novel On the Road (written 1951). The makeshift, participatory nature of the club’s public forums also bears some resemblance to the decentralized art spaces and “do-it-yourself” (DIY) and “maker” movements of the late 20th and early 21st centuries.
In the 1910s and ’20s, bohemian culture was made up largely of the working class but included people from many walks of life. Young, old, rich, poor, conservative, liberal, religious, and agnostic all spoke of their visions and ideas of changing society through public forums, and they were not afraid to gather with their social and cultural counterpoints. That cultural diversity, tolerance, and willingness to consider and debate other points of view are rare in the 21st century. The legacy of the soapbox—the practice of speaking openly on the street—is carried on by only the few and the brave, mostly missionaries or religious zealots who are often unaware of the social history of their practice. Virtual, digital relationships have largely replaced face-to-face conversations, and the airing of one’s ideas before the public, especially before one’s political adversaries, rarely occurs outside the realm of the Internet and television’s carefully produced programming. But for nearly two decades, the Dill Pickle Club served as a prime forum for this vanishing sort of direct, civil community where artists, activists, intellectuals, and “regular Joes” could gather and converse, even argue and agitate, with the single shared goal of contributing to a more-vibrant, informed, and freer society.
