Directing,  the craft of controlling the evolution of a performance out of material composed or assembled by an author. The performance may be live, as in a theatre and in some broadcasts, or it may be recorded, as in motion pictures and the majority of broadcast material. The term is also used in film, television, video, and radio to describe the shaping of material that may not involve actors and may be no more than a collection of visual or aural images.
In the theatre there was for a time a confusion of terminology between British usage and that of the United States. The director (as distinct from an old-time actor organizing rehearsals of a play in which he himself appears) emerged during the 19th century, and, like his actors, he worked for an employer who engaged both on contract. The employer, in Britain, came to be known as the manager, while the person directing the action was known as the producer. In the United States the producer has always been the one who engages the actors and finances the production, while the artist who directs the actors and shapes the performance is known as the director. With the advent of films these terms were applied to the new industry, and the American usage eventually found its way into the London theatre. It has since been absorbed by British broadcasting and British regional theatres as well and is now applied generally, although the original British usage is found in many earlier books.
The role of the director varies a great deal, not only according to the medium in which he works but also according to whether or not he works with actors. There is always common ground between directors of drama, whatever the medium, because their success depends not only upon knowledge of the specialized form but also upon understanding of acting and human nature. Traditionally the director is responsible to the play in the same way a symphony conductor is responsible to the score. In some experimental theatres that responsibility expands to include “devising” not only the performance but also the text of a play, partly through improvisations with the actors, with or without the collaboration of an author. In all directing there is a tension between content and form. Because there are many opportunities for jugglery with technical tricks, directors can be tempted toward virtuosity at the expense of meaning. In the musical theatre, for example, directors may attempt to compensate for a weak script by dazzling the audience with mechanically sophisticated sets and elaborate lighting designs. The justification for such measures is highly debatable; in any event, the value of immediate effect must be balanced against that of enduring significance, for the two are often mutually exclusive.
Outside the Western world, the development of the director’s power originally followed the Western pattern only in the performance of Western or Western-type plays, but, more recently, non-Western directors have come to have an influence on traditional non-Western forms. Indigenous Oriental theatre, as typified by the classical theatre of China and the Nō and Kabuki theatres of Japan, is rooted in tradition; its aim is not discovery but rather the perfect presentation of what was discovered long ago. In China’s Peking opera before the Communist revolution, techniques were handed down from father to son for generations. In the Nō theatre, and to a lesser extent in the Kabuki, the positions of the performers on their acting platforms and the precise timing of their stylized gestures and vocalizations have all been fixed for centuries. In such traditions a director in the Western sense would be superfluous. But the incorporation of modern lighting and film techniques has strengthened the director’s influence generally, as can be seen in the Kabuki theatre, where such widely traveled artists as Ichikawa Ennosuke III have been controversial in Japan for their use of innovative techniques.
The director as a dominant force began to be recognized in the late decades of the 19th century. His function of guiding the actors, however, was probably being regularly practiced as early as the 4th century bc, when the Greek political orator Demosthenes is said to have been given lessons in speech by an actor named Polus. It is a reasonable assumption that, from the beginning of the existence of an acting profession, it became customary for the most experienced performers to give advice and instruction to their less experienced colleagues: actors are seldom as confident as their performances can suggest, and they need repeated confirmation that their abilities approach their self-imposed standards. Such confirmation is likely to be sought from the most respected member of the company. There is a limit, however, to the value of the help given by a fellow actor; the perspective needed to see all the possibilities of performance is usually attainable only from a viewpoint outside the cast. The importance of this perspective is well illustrated in Hamlet’s advice to the players, yet it was well over 200 years after Shakespeare’s death before acting companies officially ceased to direct themselves from within.
As Hamlet’s advice might indicate, however, directorial control has existed in some form in most theatre productions. The German practice of appointing an Intendant to run a theatre company is an early example of the function now referred to in the British theatre as artistic director, combining practical and artistic control over the work of a dramatic company. Goethe, for example, was appointed Intendant of the court theatre at Weimar in 1791; his prime concern was a formal balance of production elements, with emphasis on clarity of diction. So strong was his directorial style that the playwright Heinrich von Kleist blamed him entirely for the disastrous first production of his now classic comedy Der zerbrochene Krug (The Broken Jug) in 1808. It was not until the end of the 19th century that the Goethe-inspired formality of speech made way for greater realism.
In England the first professional director to coordinate the acting, decor, sound effects, and lighting of a production without also performing in it was probably Madame Vestris, who in 1830 controlled the Olympic Theatre in London. At her injunction, the company abandoned certain restrictive traditions of dress that had encouraged staginess and artificiality by inhibiting individuality of characterization. At the same time, she introduced varying degrees of realism into her productions, such as interior settings with real doors and windows (instead of painted ones) and sophisticated stage machinery.
By the 1870s Augustin Daly, although a leading actor in the United States, was also achieving fame for the very personal direction he was giving his company in New York City. Daly’s even more famous successor, David Belasco, started his career as an actor and concentrated on directing and play doctoring after the 1880s. He had a flair for vivid staging and is probably the best known director in American theatre history, but he had little or no influence on acting and left behind him no tradition. It was left to an eccentric amateur in Germany to establish an acting company that was eventually to lead to profound changes in theatrical methods throughout the Western world. The Duke of Saxe-Meiningen’s actors aimed to achieve a psychological depth of characterization that was quite new for playgoers, and the company also paid meticulous attention to detail in their settings and in the way they managed crowd scenes. In their second tour of Russia in 1890 they had a great influence on Konstantin Stanislavsky, who was beginning to think along the same lines. A few years later, Stanislavsky and V.I. Nemirovich-Danchenko, who had by then established the Moscow Art Theatre, learned further from Anton Chekhov, a playwright so concerned with conveying the inner realities of human nature that his works could not be acted successfully except through entirely new directorial methods.
Meanwhile, in Scandinavia, France, England, and Germany there appeared realistic writers whose plays also called for deeper and subtler acting; thus, a “theatre of significance” grew up alongside the “theatre of entertainment” in those countries, leading to the emergence of original and creative directors. Prominent among these were Harley Granville-Barker in England and André Antoine in France. By the turn of the century nearly all professional productions presented in Europe and America were directed by professional directors—though another two decades were to pass before directors were universally acknowledged in theatre programs.
