Don Rickles, in full Donald Jay Rickles,  (born  May 8, 1926, Jackson Heights, Queens, New York, U.S.—died April 6, 2017, Los Angeles, California), American comedian and actor known for a cheerfully belligerent brand of humour that relied heavily on ad-libbed insults and broad cultural stereotypes.
Rickles grew up in Jackson Heights, Queens, New York, the only child of Jewish parents. At age 18 he enlisted in the navy and served in the Philippines during World War II. After being discharged, he studied at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts in New York City, graduating in 1948. Unable to find acting work, Rickles told jokes and did impressions at bingo parlours and at church and synagogue functions while employed at various sales jobs. In 1953 he moved to Los Angeles, where he accepted small parts on television and began performing stand-up comedy at nightclubs. Realizing that his off-the-cuff responses to hecklers drew more laughs than his written jokes, Rickles soon developed an act that in great measure consisted of loudly poking fun at audience members. Although Rickles’s barbs frequently centred on the physical appearance or the racial or ethnic identity of their targets, many audiences were amused by his exuberant and quick-witted delivery and took delight at being insulted.
By the late 1950s Rickles’s act was being championed by such celebrities as Frank Sinatra, whom Rickles had notoriously mocked to his face at a 1957 nightclub performance. In 1959 Rickles started performing regularly in Las Vegas. Meanwhile, he embarked on a film career with a supporting part as a naval officer in the World War II drama Run Silent, Run Deep (1958). He later won roles in the romance The Rat Race (1960) and in several teen-oriented beach movies, such as Bikini Beach (1964). Most audiences, however, were unfamiliar with Rickles’s irascible comedic persona until 1965, when he began appearing as a frequent guest on The Tonight Show. (In his first appearance, he greeted host Johnny Carson by sneering, “Hello, dummy.”) His popularity on that late-night program led to bookings on other talk and variety shows, including The Dean Martin Show. Rickles’s own variety program, The Don Rickles Show (1968–69), lasted only one season, however.
Beginning in the mid-1960s, Rickles made guest appearances on numerous TV sitcoms. He later starred in three: The Don Rickles Show (1972), in which he played an embattled advertising executive; C.P.O. Sharkey (1976–78), which was set among the diverse personnel of a naval training centre; and Daddy Dearest (1993), about a combative father-son relationship. Rickles’s other film credits included the madcap war adventure Kelly’s Heroes (1970), Martin Scorsese’s mob drama Casino (1995), and the Toy Story series of animated films (1995, 1999, and 2010), in which he voiced the character of Mr. Potato Head; archival sound of Rickles’s voice was used for Toy Story 4, which was released in 2019, two years after his death.
Rickles remained best known, however, for his stand-up act, which he performed in Las Vegas and on tour well into his eighties. The comedy albums Hello Dummy! (1968) and Don Rickles Speaks! (1969) showcase Rickles’s freewheeling humour at the height of his fame. In 2007 he released a memoir, Rickles’ Book (written with David Ritz), and was the subject of an HBO documentary, Mr. Warmth: The Don Rickles Project, for which he won an Emmy Award.
