Dorothy Fields,  (born July 15, 1905, Allenhurst, N.J., U.S.—died March 28, 1974, New York, N.Y.), American songwriter who collaborated with a number of Broadway’s top composers during the heyday of American musical theatre, producing the lyrics for many classic shows.
Fields was the daughter of Lew M. Fields of the vaudeville comedy team of Weber and Fields. After graduating from high school in New York City, she taught drama and published a few poems in magazines before she found her career. Her lyrics for Jimmy McHugh’s song “Our American Girl” led to their successful collaboration on Blackbirds of 1928, a lavish Cotton Club show featuring “I Can’t Give You Anything but Love, Baby” and “Diga Diga Doo.”
For International Revue in 1930 Fields and McHugh wrote “On the Sunny Side of the Street” and “Exactly like You,” and for that year’s Vanderbilt Review they wrote “Blue Again.” They wrote songs for the movies Love in the Rough in 1930, Singin’ the Blues and Cuban Love Song in 1931, Dinner at Eight and Clowns in Clover in 1933, and Every Night at Eight (“I’m in the Mood for Love”) and Hooray for Love in 1935, among others. In 1936 they wrote the score for Swingtime, including the songs “A Fine Romance,” “Waltz in Swing Time,” and the Academy Award-winning “The Way You Look Tonight.” Fields also collaborated with her older brother Herbert on a number of screenplays.
Fields worked with such songwriters as Jerome Kern and Cole Porter on music for several movies. In 1945 Herbert and Dorothy Fields wrote the book and Dorothy wrote the lyrics to Sigmund Romberg’s melodies for the very successful Up in Central Park. Their book, Irving Berlin’s music, and Ethel Merman’s performance made Annie Get Your Gun the great Broadway hit of 1946. Most of their Broadway shows also became motion pictures.
In 1951 Fields wrote lyrics to Arthur Schwartz’s music for the Broadway production of A Tree Grows in Brooklyn and collaborated with Schwartz and Harold Arlen on songs for Excuse My Dust and Texas Carnival. In 1954 she and Herbert Fields wrote the book and she wrote the lyrics for By the Beautiful Sea (music by Schwartz), and in 1959, with composer Albert Hague, they produced the hit Redhead. With composer Cy Coleman she produced the hit show Sweet Charity (1965), as well as Seesaw and PIN-UPS (both 1973). Dorothy Fields was elected to the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1971.
