Edward Norton, in full Edward Harrison Norton,  (born August 18, 1969, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.), American actor known for his intense performances and uncompromising approach to his work.
Norton, the son of a high-school English teacher and an attorney, was raised in Columbia, Maryland. He studied history at Yale University (B.A., 1991), in New Haven, Connecticut, before moving to Ōsaka, where he worked briefly as a consultant. He then moved to New York City to pursue a full-time acting career. An audition with writer and producer Edward Albee landed Norton a role in a production of Albee’s Fragments in 1994.
Norton’s film career was launched with his appearance alongside Richard Gere in Primal Fear (1996). His role as a mentally disturbed choirboy charged with the murder of a priest garnered him an Academy Award nomination for best supporting actor. That same year he starred opposite Drew Barrymore in Woody Allen’s romantic comedy Everyone Says I Love You (1996) and appeared with Woody Harrelson in The People vs. Larry Flint (1996).
Norton then starred in two visceral films dealing with the lives of disaffected and culturally isolated young men. In American History X (1998) he portrayed Derek Vinyard, a reformed white supremacist in contemporary California who returns from prison to help shepherd his brother away from racial animosity and violence; he received his second Academy Award nomination for the part. The following year Norton performed alongside Brad Pitt in Fight Club (1999), a film portraying the lives of emotionally empty men who turn to underground combat as an outlet from their homogeneous lives in a materialistic and corporate-dominated society. The two roles cemented Norton’s reputation as a formidable actor able to undertake difficult and culturally sensitive roles.
In 2000 Norton made his directorial debut with Keeping the Faith, a romantic comedy in which two longtime friends, one a priest (played by Norton) and the other a rabbi (Ben Stiller), fall in love with the same woman. Norton later appeared alongside Anthony Hopkins in Red Dragon (2002), a prequel to the 1991 blockbuster Silence of the Lambs, and starred as a convicted drug dealer contemplating his life in the 24-hour period before his incarceration in Spike Lee’s 25th Hour (2002). He returned to the stage in a 2002 production of Lanford Wilson’s Burn This and won an Obie Award for his performance.
In The Illusionist (2006; adapted from the short story “Eisenheim the Illusionist” by Steven Millhauser), Norton portrayed Eisenheim, a magician who uses his skills to beguile the crown prince of Vienna. After starring as Bruce Banner in the superhero film The Hulk (2008), Norton turned in an acclaimed performance in the comedy-thriller Leaves of Grass (2009), playing both a buttoned-down philosophy professor and his hedonistic marijuana-growing twin brother.
Norton later appeared as a devious convict opposite Robert De Niro in the crime drama Stone (2010) and as a 1960s scoutmaster in Wes Anderson’s whimsical Moonrise Kingdom (2012). In the spy thriller The Bourne Legacy (2012), Norton played a nefarious former CIA agent. In 2014 he portrayed a police inspector in Anderson’s stylized caper The Grand Budapest Hotel and an actor in the show business satire Birdman or (The Unexpected Virtue of Ignorance). The latter role earned him an Academy Award nomination for best supporting actor. Norton next appeared in the sentimental Collateral Beauty (2016), playing the coworker of a grieving father. He later lent his voice to a mangy canine in Anderson’s stop-motion animated feature, Isle of Dogs (2018). In 2019 he returned to the director’s chair for Motherless Brooklyn, an adaptation of Jonathan Lethem’s novel about a private detective with Tourette syndrome; Norton also starred in the crime drama and wrote the screenplay.
