Flip Wilson, byname of Clerow Wilson,  (born Dec. 8, 1933, Jersey City, N.J., U.S.—died Nov. 25, 1998, Malibu, Calif.), American comedian whose comedy variety show, The Flip Wilson Show, was one of the first television shows hosted by an African American to be a ratings success. The show ran from 1970 to 1974, reached number two in the Nielsen ratings, and earned two Emmy Awards in 1971.
Wilson was one of many children in a destitute household. He spent much of his early years in reform school and foster homes. In 1950 he entered the air force by lying about his age (he was 16) and soon earned his nickname from the "flipped out" stories, jokes, and colourful dialects that he assumed to entertain his fellow servicemen. After leaving the air force in 1954, he worked as a bellhop at a San Francisco hotel, where he made his comedic debut during the intermission between two nightclub acts. In 1959 a businessman from Miami, Fla., sponsored him for $50 a week, giving Wilson the opportunity to develop his comedy routines, and in the 1960s he became a regular at the Apollo Theatre in Harlem in New York City.
Wilson’s big break in television came in 1965, when Johnny Carson invited him to appear on The Tonight Show. He then went on to perform on other TV shows such as The Ed Sullivan Show and Rowan and Martin’s Laugh-In. His energetic announcement on Laugh-In—"Heah come de judge!"—entered the national lexicon. After hosting a successful television special in the late ’60s, Wilson was catapulted to fame with his own program, The Flip Wilson Show. Wilson’s show was unique in that he used a theatre-in-the-round studio and minimal sets, which emphasized the talents of the performers. He fashioned a comedic style that attempted to deal honestly with social issues and perceptions, though he drew some criticism for relying too heavily on racial stereotypes. Although known for several characters, including Reverend Leroy of the Church of What’s Happenin’ Now and Sonny the White House janitor, Wilson was best known for the character Geraldine Jones, an outspoken working-class black woman with a boyfriend named "Killer." Jones made famous such one-liners as "When you’re hot, you’re hot; when you’re not, you’re not!"; "What you see is what you get!"; and "The Devil made me do it." After the variety show ended, Wilson withdrew to private life, appearing occasionally in films or on television. His subsequent television series People Are Funny (1984) and Charlie and Co. (1985–86) were both short-lived. Throughout his career he also made numerous comedy recordings, most notably The Devil Made Me Buy This Dress (1970), for which he won a Grammy Award.
