Gene Kelly, in full Eugene Curran Kelly,  (born August 23, 1912, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, U.S.—died February 2, 1996, Beverly Hills, California), American dancer, actor, choreographer, and motion-picture director whose athletic style of dancing, combined with classical ballet technique, transformed the movie musical and did much to change the American public’s conception of male dancers.
One of five children born to a record company sales executive and a former actress, Kelly dreamed of becoming a professional athlete but was redirected into dancing by his mother. He studied ballet and other dance forms. Kelly majored in journalism at Pennsylvania State College (now University) and economics at the University of Pittsburgh (A.B., 1933), but the allure of performing proved too strong to resist. He toured in vaudeville with his brother Fred (later a prolific stage and television director), and for several years he ran a successful dancing school in Pittsburgh.
In 1938 he moved to New York City and won a role as a chorus member in Cole Porter’s Leave It to Me, figuring prominently in star Mary Martin’s showstopping number “My Heart Belongs to Daddy.” The following year he was cast in the flashy role of Harry the Hoofer in William Saroyan’s Pulitzer Prize-winning play The Time of Your Life, and in 1940 he achieved stardom with his likeable interpretation of the raffish protagonist in the Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart musical drama Pal Joey. On seeing the play, film producer David O. Selznick offered Kelly a Hollywood contract, and Kelly accepted, doing so because Selznick did not require a screen test of him. Before leaving New York in 1941, Kelly choreographed the hit musical Best Foot Forward (1941).
Kelly made his film debut opposite Judy Garland in For Me and My Gal (1942), immediately endearing himself to moviegoers with his carefree acting and spontaneous athletic dancing style. It was not until he was loaned to Columbia Pictures to costar in the Rita Hayworth musical Cover Girl (1944) that he was able to bring his own special artistic vision to the big screen. Before Kelly’s arrival, the movie musical had been divided into essentially two basic styles: the splashy, impersonal, girl-filled extravaganzas of Busby Berkeley and the intimate personality vehicles of Fred Astaire. Kelly adroitly bridged the gap between Berkeley’s cinematic pyrotechnics and Astaire’s straightforward theatrical approach with Cover Girl’s “Alter Ego” number, in which, with the aid of meticulously timed special-effects work, he performed a two-man “challenge dance” with himself. He introduced another innovation in Anchors Aweigh (1945), when he danced with an animated-cartoon mouse (Jerry, of the Tom and Jerry cartoons), and in The Pirate (1948) he staged the first of his many filmed ballets, boldly blending solo dancing, mass movement, offbeat camera angles, and vibrant colours to tell a story in purely visual terms. Kelly also performed several dramatic roles during that period, most notably as D’Artagnan in the swashbuckler The Three Musketeers (1948).
On the Town (1949), codirected by Kelly and his longtime assistant Stanley Donen, further transcended the limits of the Hollywood soundstage with an unforgettable opening musical number filmed entirely on location in the streets of New York City.
Kelly surpassed that triumph two years later with the Academy Award-winning An American in Paris (1951). Climaxed by a spectacular 13-minute ballet that incorporated visual motifs of French Post-Impressionism, the film was singled out by critics and filmgoers alike as Kelly’s masterpiece. Since the mid-1970s, however, its reputation has been eclipsed by Singin’ in the Rain (1952), a witty and upbeat spoof of Hollywood during the talkie revolution. With its perfectly balanced mixture of singing, dancing, comedy, and romance, Singin’ in the Rain is now widely regarded as the greatest film musical ever made. His next released musical, Brigadoon (1954), directed by Vincente Minnelli and based on the Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe Broadway hit, was not a critical or commercial success. Kelly’s decision to drop Agnes de Mille’s stage choreography for new staging of his own designed for the wide-screen Cinemascope format proved particularly controversial.
Kelly subsequently codirected with Donen and starred in It’s Always Fair Weather (1955), a loose follow-up to On the Town, which showcased Kelly’s creative choreography for Cinemascope. Equally praiseworthy (though a flop with the public) was his first solo directorial effort, the wordless concert feature Invitation to the Dance (filmed in 1952, released in 1956). But as the 1950s wore on, the movie musical genre fell victim to mounting production costs and diminishing box-office returns. Consequently, Kelly’s film career lost much of its momentum, though he made several credible dramatic appearances in such films as Crest of the Wave (1954).
After turning in a fine dramatic performance in Inherit the Wind (1960), Kelly directed Gigot (1962), a heart-tugging story filmed in Paris and starring Jackie Gleason as a mute man who takes a waif under his wing. Kelly also directed the comedy A Guide for the Married Man (1967), which starred Walter Matthau as the title character being tutored on how to efficiently cheat on his wife. That same year Kelly returned to France to play an American piano player in Jacques Demy’s tribute to Hollywood musicals Les Demoiselles de Rochefort (1967; The Young Girls of Rochefort).
Hello, Dolly! (1969) was Kelly’s adaptation of the Broadway hit starring Barbra Streisand, Matthau, and Louis Armstrong. The western comedy The Cheyenne Social Club (1970) starred Henry Fonda and James Stewart as two cowboys who unwittingly inherit management of a brothel. Kelly’s final directing credit was as codirector (with Jack Haley, Jr.) of That’s Entertainment, Part 2 (1976), the follow-up to the 1974 original’s compilation of highlights from MGM musicals. He hosted the film with onetime costar Astaire.
Kelly’s final film as an actor was the cult favourite Xanadu (1980), a musical starring pop sensation Olivia Newton-John. Before retiring, his last roles were in the television miniseries North and South (1985) and Sins (1986).
During the last three decades of his life, Kelly received dozens of awards and honours, among them the French Legion of Honour for his choreography of the Paris Opéra Ballet “Pas de Deux” (1960) and a Life Achievement Award from the American Film Institute.
