Helen Tamiris, original name Helen Becker,  (born April 24, 1905, New York, N.Y., U.S.—died  Aug. 4, 1966, New York City), American choreographer, modern dancer, and teacher, one of the first to make use of jazz, African American spirituals, and social-protest themes in her work.
Helen Becker began her dance studies with Irene Lewisohn in freestyle movement. Later, trained in ballet by Michel Fokine and at the Metropolitan Opera Ballet School, she danced for three seasons with the Metropolitan Opera Ballet Company. By that time she had adopted the stage name Tamiris. She later toured South America with an Italian company. Dissatisfied with traditional ballet technique, she studied briefly at the Isadora Duncan School in New York City but disliked its emphasis on purely personal expression and lyrical movement. She began to develop her own approach and in 1927 made her concert debut. She toured Europe in 1928 and in 1930 founded her own company and school, which she directed until 1945. She also organized the Dance Repertory Theatre (1930–32), which produced concerts jointly with such modern dance choreographers as Martha Graham, Doris Humphrey, and Charles Weidman. She encouraged the inclusion of dance in the WPA Federal Theatre Project and served as principal choreographer from 1937 to 1939.
Tamiris, believing that each dance must create its own expressive means, did not develop an individual style or technique. Her works were often described, however, as vigorous and exuberant, and they frequently made use of American themes (as in Bayou Ballads and Liberty Song). Many of the approximately 135 dances she choreographed between 1930 and 1945 reflected her concern for social and political problems. Her best-known concert piece, How Long Brethren (1937), depicted the despair of unemployed Southern blacks and was danced to Lawrence Gellert’s “Negro Songs of Protest” sung by an African American chorus.
As a choreographer for musical plays (1945–57), Tamiris excelled at creating clever characterizations and evoking the spirit of U.S. regions and periods. Annie Get Your Gun (1946), Touch and Go (1949), for which she won the Antoinette Perry Award for choreography, and Plain and Fancy (1955) were among the many musical plays for which she created the dances. She returned to concert modern dance with additional use of American themes, notably in Dance for Walt Whitman (1958), and in 1960 formed the Tamiris–Nagrin Dance Company with her partner and husband, the dancer Daniel Nagrin.
