Hugh Jackman, in full Hugh Michael Jackman,  (born October 12, 1968, Sydney, Australia), Australian performer who was considered a “triple threat”—a successful actor, dancer, and singer. He was perhaps best known for his action movies and stage musicals.
Jackman grew up in Sydney, and he made his acting debut as King Arthur in a production of Camelot when he was just five years old. After graduating in 1991 from the University of Technology, Sydney, with a degree in communications, Jackman began working temporary jobs to pay for classes at the Actors Centre Australia. Though offered a role in the long-running television soap opera Neighbours, Jackman chose to further refine his acting skills at the Western Australian Academy of Performing Arts in suburban Perth. Shortly after graduating from there in 1994, he landed a role in the 10-part TV prison drama Correlli (1995). Cast as an inmate who begins a dangerous flirtation with his psychologist (played by Deborra-Lee Furness), Jackman won fans as attractive bad boy Kevin Jones. Jackman and Furness continued their relationship offscreen, and the two were married in 1996. That same year he took to the stage, scoring the lead in the Australian premiere of Andrew Lloyd Webber’s musical adaptation of Billy Wilder’s noir classic Sunset Boulevard. That performance led Jackman to London’s Royal National Theatre, where he won the role of Curly in a revival of Rodgers and Hammerstein’s Oklahoma! (1998). The sold-out run set box-office records.
Jackman next turned to film, making his Hollywood debut in X-Men (2000), in which his portrayal of the tortured antihero Wolverine established him as a bankable action star. He demonstrated his range with a pair of romantic comedies, Someone like You (2001) and Kate & Leopold (2001), before once again unsheathing Wolverine’s trademark razor claws in X2 (2003). Jackman made his Broadway debut in 2003 as singer-songwriter Peter Allen in the biographical musical The Boy from Oz. For American filmgoers who were unfamiliar with his work in Oklahoma!, Jackman’s flamboyantly spot-on performance was a revelation, and it won him a Tony Award in 2004. His other Broadway credits included A Steady Rain (2009) and The River (2014–15). In addition, he hosted the Tony Awards show in 2003–05.
An established star both in Hollywood and on Broadway, Jackman returned to the big screen with the ambitious science-fiction romance The Fountain (2006) and the dramatic thriller The Prestige (2006) as well as X-Men: The Last Stand (2006). In 2008 he starred opposite Nicole Kidman in Baz Luhrmann’s lush historical epic Australia. While the film itself met with mixed reviews, Jackman’s performance was widely praised. As host of the Academy Awards ceremony in 2009, he showcased his skills as a premier song-and-dance man. Later that year he reprised his role as Wolverine in the prequel X-Men Origins: Wolverine and adopted the speech and mannerisms of an aging Chicago police officer to star opposite Daniel Craig in the Broadway play A Steady Rain.
In the sports-action film Real Steel (2011), Jackman portrayed a promoter in the futuristic milieu of robot boxing. He continued to entertain live audiences with a hugely popular one-man concert show, Hugh Jackman, Back on Broadway (2011). He took a supporting role in the film Butter (2011), a political satire centred on a Midwestern butter-sculpting contest, and he provided the voice of an Australian-accented Easter Bunny in the animated Rise of the Guardians (2012). Jackman’s performance in a 2012 film adaptation of the stage musical Les Misérables, as the fugitive hero Jean Valjean, earned him a Golden Globe Award. The Wolverine, which told of his superhero character’s exploits in Japan, followed in 2013. That year he also starred as the father of a missing girl in Prisoners.
In 2014 Jackman appeared as Wolverine again in X-Men: Days of Future Past and trod the Broadway boards in the moody relationship drama The River. He then played a robotics engineer hell-bent on ensuring the success of his law-enforcement robot in the thriller Chappie and portrayed a pirate in the children’s adventure Pan (both 2015), the latter of which purported to trace the origins of J.M. Barrie’s character Peter Pan. He costarred as a ski-jumping coach in the inspirational film Eddie the Eagle (2016), about the performance of unlikely British skier Michael (“Eddie”) Edwards at the Calgary 1988 Olympic Winter Games.
In 2017 Jackman starred in Logan, the 10th film in which he appeared as Wolverine, and later that year he portrayed P.T. Barnum in the musical The Greatest Showman. He then starred in The Front Runner (2018), the true story of former U.S. senator Gary Hart, whose 1988 presidential bid ended amid news reports alleging that he was having an extramarital affair. In 2019 Jackman voiced a British adventurer in the stop-motion animated film Missing Link and starred in Bad Education, a dramedy based on the true story of a school district superintendent involved in an embezzlement scheme. That year he also staged a world tour (titled The Man. The Music. The Show.), which featured singing, dancing, and storytelling.
In 2012 Jackman received a special Tony Award for his varied contributions to the Broadway community.
