Ida Kaminska,  (born Sept. 4, 1899, Odessa, Ukraine, Russian Empire [now in Ukraine]—died  May 21, 1980, New York, N.Y., U.S.), Polish-born Yiddish performer and theatre manager who achieved international stature.
The daughter of the well-known Yiddish actors Abraham Isaac and Ester Rachel Kaminski, she appeared for the first time onstage at age five. Her true debut was in Warsaw (1916) with the theatre company named for her father. She played many leads in Warsaw (1916–19), toured Russia for three years (1919–21), and returned to Warsaw to found her own Ida Kaminska Theatre, where she starred in productions that she adapted and directed. She spent the years during World War II acting in the Soviet Union and then returned to her homeland to found the Jewish State Theatre of Poland (1945), which received official recognition and financial aid from the state until she abandoned Poland for the United States in 1968. Her best-known stage performance was the title role in Mirele Efros by Jacob Gordin in a version she adapted and directed. She portrayed this role at home and on tour in western Europe and the United States with her Jewish State Theatre (1967) and revived the character once again when she was in the United States as a private citizen (1969). Other particularly notable roles included Nora in Henrik Ibsen’s A Doll’s House, Laurenzia in Lope de Vega’s Fuente Ovejuna, and the title role in Bertolt Brecht’s Mother Courage and Her Children. She also had great success in her own stage adaptation of The Brothers Karamazov.
Kaminska’s film credits, while not extensive, are noteworthy. She made Polish films infrequently, starting in 1913, and her A Vilna Legend (silent, 1924) and Without a Home (1939) were especially well received. The height of her film career was her appearance in the Czech film The Shop on Main Street (1965), for which she was nominated for an Academy Award in the United States. In 1973 Kaminska published her autobiography in English, My Life, My Theatre. Disappointed in her attempts to establish a Yiddish repertory theatre in the United States, she went to Israel.
