Jacques Tati, byname of Jacques Tatischeff,  (born October 9, 1908, Le Pecq, France—died November 5, 1982, Paris), French filmmaker and actor who gained renown for his comic films that portrayed people in conflict with the mechanized modern world. He wrote and starred in all six of the feature films that he directed; in four of them he played the role of Monsieur Hulot, a lanky pipe-smoking fellow with a quizzical innocent nature. He was regarded as among the most innovative and influential comic filmmakers of the 20th century.
After a stint as a semi-professional rugby player, Tati began a career as a music-hall entertainer in the 1930s, doing pantomimes of athletes and occasionally performing in movies. During World War II he served with the French army.
An important early effort at directing for Tati was the short film L’Ecole des factuers (1947; The School for Postmen), which was later expanded into his first feature, Jour de fête (1948; The Big Day), a comic sketch of a postman who tries to introduce efficiency into his provincial post office. His next film, Les Vacances de Monsieur Hulot (1953; Mr. Hulot’s Holiday), introduced his signature character and presented a satiric look at life in a middle-class seaside resort. The film gained international attention. His subsequent film, Mon oncle (1958), in which Monsieur Hulot contends with modern technology, won the Academy Award for best foreign film. Playtime (1967) focused on the dehumanizing effects of modern architecture in office buildings, airports, and other structures. Tati built an enormous set at great expense for the movie, and he never recouped his losses. Trafic (1971; Traffic) marked the final appearance of Monsieur Hulot. Parade (1974), made for television, essentially shows the viewer a circus for which Tati acts as ringmaster.
Tati’s films forsake traditional narrative in favour of vignettes that use sight gags, timing, mannerisms, and physical action to reveal the humour and texture of modern living. He typically set the camera at a distance from the action and used numerous long shots to show Monsieur Hulot moving through the larger society and, at the same time, to invite the viewer to explore the frame of the film for the visual and aural variety within. Les Vacances de Monsieur Hulot and Playtime are widely regarded as Tati’s masterpieces. In 2010 a screenplay by Tati, unproduced during his life, was adapted into the animated film L’Illusionniste (The Illusionist).
