Jamie Foxx, original name Eric Marlon Bishop,  (born December 13, 1967, Terrell, Texas, U.S.), American comedian, musician, and actor, who became known for his impersonations on the television sketch-comedy show In Living Color and later proved himself a versatile film actor, especially noted for his Academy Award-winning portrayal of Ray Charles in Ray (2004).
Bishop’s parents separated soon after his birth, and he was adopted by his maternal grandparents. He began playing piano about age five and became keenly interested in music, later earning a scholarship to United States International University (later Alliant International University) in San Diego to study classical piano and music theory. While attending school, Bishop began performing at local comedy clubs. At open-mike nights he delighted audiences with his bitingly funny impersonations of former U.S. president Ronald Reagan, boxer Mike Tyson, and comedian Bill Cosby. Discovering that it was easier for women to get stage time at open-mike nights, Bishop adopted the gender-neutral name of Jamie Foxx. In 1991 Foxx won the Bay Area Black Comedy Competition, which led to an audition for the Fox television network’s hit show In Living Color. His impersonations and his drag character Wanda, an ugly, sexually aggressive woman, impressed the show’s creator and star, Keenen Ivory Wayans, and earned Foxx a job as a regular. At that time Foxx also had a recurring role on the sitcom Roc.
Foxx’s success on television led to new opportunities in music, television, and film. In 1994 he released his debut album, Peep This, which he also produced and composed. Two years later he landed his own television sitcom, The Jamie Foxx Show, which lasted five seasons. Foxx’s first feature role in a movie was in the sex comedy Booty Call (1997), but his breakthrough performance came in Any Given Sunday (1999), in which Foxx played a young quarterback who is outwardly cocky but terrified of failure. That performance, along with his role as cornerman Drew (“Bundini”) Brown in the biopic Ali (2001), showed that Foxx’s acting abilities extended well beyond simple comedic impersonations.
In 2005 Foxx collected a best actor Academy Award for his riveting performance of soul singer Ray Charles in Ray. He not only mastered Charles’s physical mannerisms but also captured the blind singer’s warmth, determination, and recklessness. That year Foxx was also nominated for an Oscar for best supporting actor for his role in the thriller Collateral (2004), in which he appeared as a taxi driver abducted by a professional killer (played by Tom Cruise). Foxx released his second album, Unpredictable, in 2005, and it quickly rose to the top of the Billboard album chart. He also sang on Kanye West’s hit single “Gold Digger” (2005).
Foxx maintained his acting career with such movies as Jarhead (2005), a film set during the Persian Gulf War, and the musical Dreamgirls (2006), in which he starred as a record executive opposite Eddie Murphy and Beyoncé. In 2009 Foxx had lead roles in The Soloist, as a homeless man who was once a musical prodigy, and in the thriller Law Abiding Citizen. He subsequently gave supporting performances in the comedies Valentine’s Day (2010), Due Date (2010), and Horrible Bosses (2011). He lent his voice to a canary in the computer-animated children’s comedies Rio (2011) and Rio 2 (2014).
In Quentin Tarantino’s Django Unchained (2012), a fantasia set in the antebellum American South, Foxx starred as a freed slave attempting to rescue his wife from a cruel plantation owner. He then played a U.S. president imperiled by a terrorist attack in the action entertainment White House Down (2013) and the villain Electro in The Amazing Spider-Man 2 (2014). Foxx next portrayed a New York City mayoral candidate who takes a shine to the titular orphan in a remake (2014) of the classic musical Annie (1976). His film credits from 2017 included Sleepless, in which he played an undercover police officer whose teenaged son is kidnapped by gangsters, and Baby Driver, an action comedy about bank robbers.
Foxx then assumed the role of Little John in an action-packed retelling of Robin Hood (2018). His credits from 2019 included the TV special Live in Front of a Studio Audience: Norman Lear’s All in the Family and The Jeffersons, in which he played George Jefferson, and the film drama Just Mercy. The following year he starred in the Netflix action movie Project Power, which centres on a drug that temporarily gives users special powers. Foxx then voiced a jazz musician in the Pixar animated film Soul (2020). In the TV sitcom Dad Stop Embarrassing Me! (2021– ) he played a single father of a teenager; he also cocreated and cowrote the show.
Foxx’s third studio album, Intuition (2008), featured the single “Blame It,” a Grammy Award-winning collaboration with vocalist and producer T-Pain. His later albums included Best Night of My Life (2010) and Hollywood: A Story of a Dozen Roses (2015).
