Jay Leno, byname of James Douglas Muir Leno,  (born April 28, 1950, New Rochelle, New York, U.S.), American comedian and writer who became host of The Tonight Show (1992–2009, 2010–14).
Leno was raised in Andover, Massachusetts. While attending Emerson College in Boston, where he graduated (1972) with a degree in speech therapy, he worked as a stand-up comic in nightclubs. After moving to Los Angeles, he served as the opening act for such entertainers as Johnny Mathis and Tom Jones. Leno debuted on NBC’s The Tonight Show in 1977 and became Johnny Carson’s permanent guest host 10 years later. In 1992 NBC chose Leno over David Letterman to replace the retiring Carson. The selection spawned a rivalry between The Tonight Show and CBS’s Late Show with David Letterman, which competed in the same time slot.
Despite the controversy, Leno soon earned a reputation for his cordial, easygoing manner, strong work ethic, and knack for connecting with his audience. He gave The Tonight Show a trendy, casual image, with edgier musical acts and new comedy segments, including “Jaywalking,” in which people on the street were asked basic questions that they often answered incorrectly, and “Headlines,” which showcased funny newspaper headlines from around the country. Under Leno’s leadership, the program garnered four Emmy Awards (1995–97; 1999), and Leno was awarded numerous accolades, including a star on Hollywood’s Walk of Fame in 2000. By 2008 the show was attracting more than five million nightly viewers, nearly one and a half times as many as its nearest rival, the Late Show.
On May 29, 2009, Leno made what was then thought to be his final appearance as host of The Tonight Show; he was replaced by Conan O’Brien, who had hosted a talk show that aired on NBC in the following time slot. In September Leno began hosting The Jay Leno Show, a prime-time hour-long program that aired Monday through Friday. The show, however, failed to catch on with viewers, and in January 2010 it was canceled; the last episode aired in February. Later in January it was announced that Leno would replace O’Brien as host of The Tonight Show, which had struggled in the ratings following Leno’s departure. He returned to the program in March, and the ratings soon rebounded. In February 2014 Leno stepped down as host; Jimmy Fallon succeeded him.
Early in his career, Leno had worked as a writer (1974) for the television situation comedy Good Times and occasionally took acting jobs on sitcoms, such as Laverne & Shirley and Alice. Films in which he appeared included American Hot Wax (1978), Collision Course (1989), and The Flintstones (1994). Leno also provided the voice for characters based on himself in animated TV shows, such as The Simpsons, South Park, and Family Guy, and movies, notably Cars (2006). In addition, he played a car mechanic as a cast member of the sitcom Last Man Standing (2015–21).
In addition to his comic fame, Leno was recognized as an automotive authority, in part because of his massive collection of rare and expensive cars. He wrote a column, “Jay Leno’s Garage,” for Popular Mechanics magazine and contributed to several books, including John Lamm’s Velocity: Supercar Revolution (2006), Steve Lehto’s Chrysler’s Turbine Car: The Rise and Fall of Detroit’s Coolest Creation (2010), and Phil Berg’s Ultimate Garages III (2011). His column was adapted into an Internet series for NBC.com and was later turned into a television show on the network CNBC (Jay Leno’s Garage [2015– ]).
Leno’s anecdotal memoir, Leading with My Chin, appeared in 1996. Two books written for children, If Roast Beef Could Fly and How to Be the Funniest Kid in the Whole Wide World (or Just in Your Class), followed in 2004 and 2005, respectively.
