Jerry Seinfeld, byname of Jerome Allen Seinfeld,  (born April 29, 1954, Brooklyn, New York, U.S.), American comedian whose television show Seinfeld (1989–98) was a landmark of American popular culture in the late 20th century.
Seinfeld’s interest in comedy was sparked at an early age through the influence of his father, a sign maker who was also a closet comedian. By age eight Seinfeld was putting himself through a rigorous comic training, watching television day and night to study the techniques of comedians. Over the years, he developed a unique style of comedy that centred on his wry observations on life’s mundanities. He made his stand-up debut in 1976 and worked his way to an appearance on The Tonight Show in 1981, which gave Seinfeld his first national exposure. By the late 1980s he was one of the highest-profile stand-up comedians in the United States.
In 1988 Seinfeld was asked to develop a sitcom with NBC. He teamed with friend and fellow comedian Larry David to create Seinfeld, which was first broadcast the following year. Produced and sometimes cowritten by Seinfeld, the quirky and widely watched show emphasized loosely structured stories, seemingly insignificant subject matter, and a buddy system of comedy in which the Jerry character often played a straight man to his three tightly wound screwball friends. The show reached unprecedented levels of popular and critical acclaim, and many of its catchphrases and plot elements became part of the cultural lexicon. Seinfeld ran for nine seasons and was still the highest-rated show in the United States when its final episode aired in 1998.
Seinfeld’s later television credits included appearances as himself on David’s comedy series Curb Your Enthusiasm, and the Seinfeld cast reunited for several episodes of that program in 2009. The following year The Marriage Ref, which Seinfeld created and produced, premiered. The reality series featured celebrity guests who mediated arguments between married couples. It ran for two seasons before being canceled.
Seinfeld returned to stand-up comedy in the late 1990s, embarking on multiple national tours of comedy clubs and theatres; his routines were documented in such films as Comedian (2002), Jerry Before Seinfeld (2017), and Jerry Seinfeld: 23 Hours to Kill (2020). He wrote SeinLanguage (1993), a best-selling book of humorous observations; the children’s book Halloween (2002); and Is This Anything? (2020), a collection of the comedic material he created throughout his career. In 2007 he provided the voice of the lead character in the animated Bee Movie, which he also cowrote. Seinfeld hosted the popular Web series Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee (2012– ), in which he talked with various comedians.
