Jesuit drama,  program of theatre developed for educational and propagandist purposes in the colleges of the Society of Jesus during the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries. Cultivated as a medium for disseminating Roman Catholic doctrine, drama flourished in the Jesuit schools for more than 200 years, evolving from modest student exercises to elaborate productions that often rivaled the contemporary public stage in polish and technical skill.
The earliest recorded performance of a Jesuit play was in 1551, at the newly founded Collegio Mamertino at Messina, in Sicily. In less than 20 years, plays were being performed at more than a dozen of the new Jesuit colleges springing up in cities across the Continent, including Rome, Sevilla (Seville), Córdoba, Innsbruck, Munich, and Vienna. By the mid-17th century there were nearly 300 Jesuit colleges in Europe, and in almost every one at least one play was given each year.
Originally plays were to be pious in nature, expressing true religious and moral doctrines; they were to be acted in Latin, decorously, and with little elaboration; and no female characters or costumes were to appear. All these rules were relaxed or revised as Jesuit drama evolved. Favourite subjects came from biblical histories, the lives of saints and martyrs, and incidents in the life of Christ, but Jesuit playwrights also drew upon material from pagan mythology, ancient history, and contemporary events, all reinterpreted in terms of Catholic doctrine. Dramas were frequently performed in the national languages or with vernacular prologues that explained the Latin text. Jesuit plays became increasingly elaborate, and their stagecraft kept pace with all the newest technical developments of European theatre.
Music was an important element in most of the plays, ranging from simple songs to works that called for a large orchestra and chorus. The elaborate musical productions of Austria and southern Germany reflected the influence of Italian opera as well as the long tradition of music in the church. The colleges of France even included ballet in their performances.
The extravagance and luxury of many of the Jesuit productions came under heavy attack. Many of the productions were enormously expensive, and it was charged that students in some colleges did little more than prepare and perform plays. Opponents of the Jesuit order seized upon such charges and made them part of the wave of anti-Jesuit feeling that grew in the mid-18th century. Dramatic performances were prohibited or limited in many areas, and they ceased altogether in 1773, when the Society of Jesus was temporarily suppressed.
