Joan Rivers, original name Joan Alexandra Molinsky,  (born June 8, 1933, Brooklyn, New York, U.S.—died September 4, 2014, New York, New York), American entertainer who launched her career in show business in the 1960s as a raspy-voiced no-holds-barred nightclub and television comic and who was especially known for skewering both herself and celebrities.
After graduating from Barnard College, Rivers joined (1961) the Chicago comedy troupe Second City and performed in nightclubs. Her big break came in 1965, when she was a guest on Johnny Carson’s The Tonight Show. Her popular performance led to numerous return visits, and from 1983 to 1986 she was a frequent guest host on the show. During that time Rivers—whose acerbic jokes were often preceded by the catchphrase “Can we talk?”—was also a headliner in Las Vegas and a sought-after guest on other TV shows. Though expected to succeed Carson, Rivers was lured by Rupert Murdoch, who had purchased the Fox TV channel, to host the short-lived The Late Show Starring Joan Rivers (1986–87); the move ignited a feud with Carson, who never spoke to her again. Three months after she was fired by Fox, Rivers’s husband, TV producer Edgar Rosenberg, committed suicide.
Rivers subsequently reinvented herself as a writer, producer, and entrepreneur and launched a TV talk show, The Joan Rivers Show (1989–93; also the name of her radio program [1997–2002]). In the mid-1990s Rivers and her daughter, Melissa, became fixtures on the E! Entertainment cable network, interviewing celebrities and commenting (often disparagingly) on their appearance and ensembles worn during their red-carpet entrances to such events as the Grammys, Golden Globes, and Academy Award ceremonies. In 2010 she became the star of the E! show Fashion Police, a program that critiqued the stars’ wardrobes, and the following year she and her daughter appeared on another reality program, Joan and Melissa: Joan Knows Best?
Rivers’s acting credits included television movies and series, and she provided voices for characters in such films as Spaceballs (1987) and the animated Shrek 2 (2004). Her life and career are chronicled in the documentary Joan Rivers: A Piece of Work (2010), the title of which was partly a reference to her numerous cosmetic surgeries. Rivers also authored a number of books, including the autobiographies Enter Talking (1986) and Still Talking (1991), both cowritten with Richard Meryman, and the comedic work I Hate Everyone…Starting with Me (2012).
