Kathy Griffin, in full Kathleen Mary Griffin,  (born November 4, 1960, Oak Park, Illinois, U.S.), American comedian and actress known for her lacerating observations about celebrity culture.
Griffin was the youngest of five children born to a stereo store manager and a hospital administrator. Growing up in Chicago’s suburbs, she evidenced an early desire for the spotlight, appearing in school productions and, eventually, a commercial. At age 18 she moved with her retired parents to Los Angeles, hoping to launch a show business career. She enrolled at the Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute and took classes with the Groundlings, an improvisational sketch comedy troupe. She became part of the Groundlings’ regular cast in 1985. Friends soon coaxed her into trying stand-up comedy.
After struggling with the structured punch-line format of stand-up at the time, Griffin emerged as one of the most prominent voices in a nascent alternative comedy scene that eschewed traditional one-liners in favour of a free-form confessional style. In the early 1990s she began appearing in UnCabaret, a comedy show created to highlight humour that did not traffic in misogyny, homophobia, and racism. In 1992 Griffin established Hot Cup O’ Talk with friends Margaret Cho and Janeane Garofalo. The weekly comedy night at the Groundlings’ theatre featured a rotating cast who shared amusing experiences and traded entertainment-industry war stories. Griffin also guest starred on television shows such as The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air and ER before landing the role of Vicki, the sardonic sidekick to Brooke Shields’s ingenue on the comedy series Suddenly Susan (1996–2000). Her profile was further raised with an appearance on the HBO Comedy Half-Hour in 1996 and, two years later, in a stand-alone comedy special on HBO, Hot Cup of Talk.
Griffin made several forays into reality television, notably Kathy’s So-Called Reality (2001), an MTV series in which she commented on reality television moments. Her provocative remarks led to frequent talk-show appearances and television hosting duties as well. Some, however, found her unfiltered style offensive. In 2005 Griffin was fired from her position as a red-carpet commentator by the E! Entertainment Television channel after jokingly telling performers arriving at the Golden Globe Award ceremony that a prominent child star had entered drug rehabilitation. That year Griffin debuted My Life on the D-List, a tongue-in-cheek reality series that documented her life at the fringes of Hollywood. The series, which aired until 2010, earned two Emmy Awards (2007, 2008) for outstanding reality program. My Life on the D-List was hosted on the Bravo network, which also aired many of Griffin’s profanity-laden stand-up specials.
Her blistering critiques of celebrity behaviour and her wryly confiding anecdotes about her ascent to fame earned her a dedicated following among women and gay men. Her recorded specials included Kathy Griffin…Is Not Nicole Kidman (2005), Kathy Griffin: Everybody Can Suck It (2007), Kathy Griffin: She’ll Cut a Bitch (2009), Kathy Griffin: Gurrl Down (2011), Kathy Griffin: Calm Down Gurrl (2013)—the recording of which earned a 2014 Grammy Award for best comedy album—and Kathy Griffin: Record Breaker (2013). In 2013 she attained the Guinness World Records title for most televised stand-up specials with the premiere of her 20th show.
In 2007 Griffin began hosting the New Year’s Eve broadcast on CNN with journalist Anderson Cooper. She later hosted the panel chat show Kathy (2012–13), and in 2015 she replaced Joan Rivers—her friend and mentor—on Fashion Police following Rivers’s death the previous year. Griffin left the show after only seven episodes, however, claiming that it was not a good fit for her improvisational style.
Griffin’s career suffered a setback in 2017 when she was photographed holding a bloodied mask of U.S. Pres. Donald Trump. Amid the resulting backlash, she lost comedy gigs and was fired from CNN’s New Year’s Eve special. In addition, she was reportedly questioned by the U.S. Secret Service. Although Griffin initially apologized, she later stated that she was “no longer sorry” and that “the whole thing got so blown out of proportion.” In October 2017 she launched the Laugh Your Head Off World Tour, and the following year she earned praise for her portrayal of Trump adviser Kellyanne Conway on the comedy series The President Show. The Trump controversy and Griffin’s comeback are the focus of the concert film Kathy Griffin: A Hell of a Story (2019).
Griffin was a vocal supporter of gay rights, women’s rights, and the military. Her autobiography, Official Book Club Selection: A Memoir According to Kathy Griffin, was published in 2009. In 2021 Griffin announced that she had been diagnosed with stage 1 lung cancer.
