Laura Keene, original name Mary Moss,  (born c. 1826, London, Eng.—died Nov. 4, 1873, Montclair, N.J., U.S.), actress and the first notable female theatre manager in the United States.
Mary Moss, as her name is believed to have been originally, grew up in obscurity. She turned to the stage to support herself and made her London debut in The Lady of Lyons in October 1851 under the name Laura Keene. The next year she joined the theatrical company of Madame Vestris, with whom she soon gained a wide reputation in comedies and extravaganzas. In 1852 Keene traveled to New York City to appear with James W. Wallack’s company. Her American debut was a great success, but she soon left Wallack to appear under her own management at the Charles Street Theatre in Baltimore, Maryland (1853), and in 1854 in San Francisco. After an unsuccessful Australian tour with Edwin Booth she returned to San Francisco, where she reigned supreme in the theatre and tried her hand also at management and production with the staging of a number of popular and tastefully conceived extravaganzas.
In 1855 Keene returned to New York City to play at the Metropolitan Theatre, which she renamed Laura Keene’s Varieties Theatre. The next year she moved to the newly constructed Laura Keene’s Theatre. For eight years she was a major theatrical producer, and her company included such eminent figures as Joseph Jefferson, Dion Boucicault, and Edward H. Sothern. One of her greatest successes was the production of Our American Cousin, which premiered in the United States in October 1858 and had a record run in New York City. It was during Keene’s appearance in that play at Ford’s Theatre, Washington, D.C., in April 1865 that President Abraham Lincoln was assassinated (and it was she who recognized the assassin as John Wilkes Booth).
After giving up her theatre in May 1863, Keene continued to act, write, and lecture. From 1869 to 1870 she attempted a comeback as manager of the Chestnut Street Theatre in Philadelphia; lacking fresh material and caught by changing tastes in entertainment, she faded from public notice. In 1872 she helped found and edit The Fine Arts, a short-lived monthly magazine.
