Liza Minnelli, in full Liza May Minnelli,  (born March 12, 1946, Hollywood, California, U.S.), American actress and singer perhaps best known for her role as Sally Bowles in Bob Fosse’s classic musical film Cabaret (1972).
Minnelli was the daughter of film director Vincente Minnelli and iconic entertainer Judy Garland. Initially she set her sights on a career as an ice-skater, but in 1963 she won a supporting role in the Off-Broadway revival of the 1941 musical Best Foot Forward. Her success in that role brought her appearances on a number of television shows, including The Ed Sullivan Show and The Tonight Show, and brought her to the attention of a wider public.
In 1965, at age 19, Minnelli starred as the title character in Flora, the Red Menace, the first musical by the songwriting team of John Kander and Fred Ebb. The show ran for only 87 performances, but Minnelli’s performance won her a Tony Award for best actress in a musical, and she remained the youngest winner of this award into the 21st century. Her association with Kander and Ebb had begun in 1964, when she was preparing to make her first recording, and the duo would supply Minnelli with all of her best-known arrangements and special material for the next 40 years.
Within two months of the closing of Flora, Minnelli began her first solo tour. Like her mother, she drew a strong audience response, and her own comfort with the concert stage was equally clear. She rejected initial overtures to act in movies but finally accepted a small role as Albert Finney’s secretary in Charlie Bubbles (1968). The following year, for her performance in The Sterile Cuckoo (1969), she received her first Oscar nomination (for best actress). She starred in Tell Me That You Love Me, Junie Moon (1970) before achieving her greatest screen success in Cabaret (1972). The musical, derived from John Van Druten’s play I Am a Camera (itself taken from Christopher Isherwood’s 1939 collection of stories Goodbye to Berlin), featured lyrics and music by Kander and Ebb. As the “divinely decadent” Sally Bowles, Minnelli created a sensation. She became the first performer to appear on the covers of the newsmagazines Time and Newsweek in the same week. In 1973 she won both the Academy Award for best actress for her role in Cabaret and an Emmy Award for her performance as the star of the previous TV season’s spectacular Liza with a “Z”.
At this point in her career, Minnelli was deemed one of only two “bankable” female movie stars in Hollywood (the other being Barbra Streisand), but she returned to live concert work, including a Tony-winning engagement at the Winter Garden Theatre on Broadway. When she did return to film acting, the projects did not prove to match her earlier success. The huge budget demands for Lucky Lady (1975) cut deeply into profits, and A Matter of Time (1976)—the last movie directed by her father—fell victim to studio tampering. Her last film of this period was Martin Scorsese’s brilliant homage to the big band music of the 1940s, New York, New York (1977). Although it lost money at the box office, the film did provide Minnelli with two trademark songs, “Theme from New York, New York” and “But the World Goes ’Round.” Though her following films were mostly less than memorable, Minnelli scored a hit as Dudley Moore’s true love in the blockbuster comedy Arthur (1981).
Minnelli’s return to Broadway for the 1977–78 season in the Kander-Ebb musical The Act brought her a third Tony Award. After appearing in the musical Victor/Victoria (1995–97), she reunited with Ebb for Minnelli on Minnelli (1999–2000). Her Broadway show Liza’s at the Palace… (2008–09) won the Tony Award for best special theatrical event.
During this time Minnelli continued to record, and her notable albums included Results (1989), Gently (1996), and Liza’s Back (2002). The latter is a taped performance of a concert held after her recovery from various health issues. Confessions was released in 2010. In addition, Minnelli occasionally appeared on film and television. She notably had a recurring role on the TV series Arrested Development.
