Louisa Lane Drew, née Louisa Lane,  (born Jan. 10, 1820, London, Eng.—died Aug. 31, 1897, Larchmont, N.Y., U.S.), noted American actress and manager of Mrs. John Drew’s Arch Street Theatre company in Philadelphia, which was one of the finest in American theatre history.
Louisa Lane was the daughter of actors and at an early age began playing child parts. In June 1827 she arrived in New York with her widowed mother, and three months later she made her American debut at the Walnut Street Theatre in Philadelphia as the Duke of York in Richard III with Junius Brutus Booth. She later appeared with Edwin Forrest in a Baltimore, Maryland, production of William Tell and in March 1828 made her New York debut in The Spoiled Child at the Bowery Theatre.
Lane’s career as a highly popular child actress ended in the early 1830s, and after a brief retirement she joined the stock company of the Bowery Theatre in 1833. She learned so well from her adult apprenticeship that in 1838 she was engaged by the Walnut Street Theatre at the unprecedented salary of $20 weekly. Over the next 12 years she toured constantly and with great success. She was twice married in that time; in July 1850 she was married a third time, to John Drew, also an actor. Their three children, Louisa, John, Jr., and Georgiana (later the wife of Maurice Barrymore), were all to carry on the family theatrical tradition. For 11 years John and Louisa Drew continued to tour, together and separately.
In 1853 John Drew became part lessee of the Arch Street Theatre in Philadelphia, but he was an indifferent manager and often absented himself for extensive tours. In 1861 the theatre’s owner prevailed upon Louisa Drew to assume the management, and it was reopened as Mrs. John Drew’s Arch Street Theatre. For 31 years she remained as manager. She quickly built up one of the most brilliant repertory companies in the history of the American stage. It lasted until 1878, when the company was disbanded and the theatre given over to touring companies.
During the early years of the resident company, Drew appeared with it regularly in the roles she was best known for—Lady Teazle, Peg Woffington, Lydia Languish, and most memorably Mrs. Malaprop. She also often played “breeches” roles—e.g., Romeo, Mark Antony, and other male Shakespearean roles. No one was more knowledgeable than she about the traditional repertory and stage business, and her exacting standards were legendary. In 1880 she played Mrs. Malaprop in Joseph Jefferson’s touring production of The Rivals. In 1892 she gave up management of her theatre and moved to New York. She made a few appearances after that, including Jefferson’s all-star revival of The Rivals, with Julia Marlowe and others, in 1896, and then settled in Larchmont, New York. Her Autobiographical Sketch of Mrs. John Drew was published posthumously in 1899.
