Mary Martin, in full Mary Virginia Martin,  (born December 1, 1913, Weatherford, Texas, U.S.—died November 3, 1990, Rancho Mirage, California), American singer and actress best known for her work in Broadway musicals.
Martin attended private schools and for a year the University of Texas. After a brief first marriage (1930–35), she opened a dance school in her hometown of Weatherford, Texas, that proved a remarkable success. Late in the decade she ventured to Hollywood, where her initial attempts as a singer and actress were unsuccessful. Finally, however, on the strength of her singing in an amateur show at the Trocadero Club, she was advised to go to New York City.
Martin was given a small part in Leave It to Me, a Cole Porter musical, in November 1938 and wowed the audience with her steamy rendition of “My Heart Belongs to Daddy.” A hit engagement at the Rainbow Room followed, and she then returned to Hollywood to appear in a series of movies, including The Great Victor Herbert (1939), Birth of the Blues (1941), and Star-Spangled Rhythm (1942). In 1943 she returned to Broadway in the musical One Touch of Venus, with book by S.J. Perelman and Ogden Nash, music by Kurt Weill, and choreography by Agnes de Mille. According to many critics, the show was a huge success largely owing to Martin’s performance, and the Broadway run and subsequent tour kept her busy into 1945. Her performance won her a New York Drama Critics’ Circle Award. In 1946 she appeared in Night and Day, a film biography of Cole Porter. In the same year she appeared on Broadway in Lute Song and made her London debut in Noël Coward’s Pacific 1860. From 1947 to 1948 she toured in Annie Get Your Gun, for which she won a special Tony Award.
In 1948 Martin created the role of Nellie Forbush in the Broadway musical South Pacific, which firmly established her career and brought her another New York Drama Critics’ Circle Award. She continued to appear in a variety of shows, notably in the title role of Peter Pan (1954), for which she won a Tony Award. Her performance in The Sound of Music (1959) won her another Tony.
Martin also became a popular television star, especially for her much admired Peter Pan, which was first broadcast in 1955 and won her an Emmy Award. She also recorded albums of Broadway show tunes and other music. Her autobiography, My Heart Belongs, was published in 1976. Her son, Larry Hagman, became a successful television actor.
