May Irwin, original name Ada Campbell,  (born June 27, 1862, Whitby, Canada West [now Ontario, Can.]—died Oct. 22, 1938, New York, N.Y., U.S.), Canadian-born American comedian and music-hall performer who popularized such songs as “After the Ball” and “A Hot Time in the Old Town.”
Ada Campbell was introduced to the theatrical world in 1875, after her father’s death had left the family in poverty. Her mother got her and her elder sister Georgia an engagement in a Rochester, New York, variety theatre. In December 1875 they made their first professional appearance at the Adelphi Theatre in Buffalo, where they were billed as the Irwin Sisters. A Midwestern tour under their stage names, May and Flo Irwin, was followed by a New York City debut in January 1877. In October of that year they began a run at Tony Pastor’s New York Music Hall. After six years of vaudeville and burlesque with Pastor’s company, May Irwin left in 1883 to join Augustin Daly’s stock company—then featuring Ada Rehan and John Drew—and made her first appearance on the theatrical stage in December in Arthur Wing Pinero’s Girls and Boys. For Daly she appeared in The Magistrate, A Night Off, The Recruiting Officer, and other pieces and made her London debut in August 1884 in Dollars and Sense.
By 1887 Irwin had decided that she preferred the free-and-easy world of vaudeville to repertory work, and in that year she signed with the Howard Athenaeum of Boston. She toured with that troupe for two years, and in 1889–90 she toured in the popular City Directory. She returned to the legitimate stage in 1893 in Charles Frohman’s His Wedding Day. In the afterpiece, The Poet and the Puppets, a burlesque on Lady Windermere’s Fan, she was a hit singing “After the Ball.” Later in the year she appeared in A Country Sport, the first of a series of full-length farces in which she had her greatest success. The Widow Jones (1895) provided a brief scene for Thomas A. Edison’s Vitascope cinema projector in which Irwin and her leading man, John Rice, shared a prolonged kiss; The Kiss (1896), one of the earliest commercially distributed films, was denounced from pulpits across the country. In Courted into Court (1896), she sang “Mister Johnson, Turn Me Loose” and introduced “A Hot Time in the Old Town.”
In 1897 Irwin began appearing under her own management. Her good humour, wit, and buxom figure made her one of the most popular performers over the next 20 years. She was briefly master of ceremonies for a small revue, The ’49ers, in 1922 and then retired to her farm in Clayton, New York.
