Mbongeni Ngema,  (born 1955, Verulam, S.Af.), South African playwright, composer, choreographer, and theatrical director known largely for plays that reflect the spirit of black South Africans under apartheid.
Ngema, an ethnic Zulu, worked as a manual labourer and guitarist before he began acting in local theatre groups in the late 1970s. With actor Percy Mtwa he wrote the satirical play Woza Albert! (1981), which imagines that the second coming of Jesus Christ takes place in South Africa. The government first tries to exploit him and then banishes him to a notorious prison for blacks. Ngema’s next show, the musical Asinamali! (1983), deals with police violence, forced separations from families, and constricting racist laws as experienced by five prisoners. Soon after the play opened, police raided a performance and arrested Ngema’s actors. Despite its serious theme, Asinamali! is filled with music and comedy.
The success of both productions in the United States paved the way for Ngema’s international triumph with the musical Sarafina! (1987). The title character is a black teenager who at first wants to become a superstar. Instead, inspired by a teacher, she becomes a revolutionary in the 1976 student uprisings in Soweto. Ngema and Hugh Masekela wrote the score, which features mbaqanga, the fusion of traditional South African music with modern American gospel, jazz, and rock. In 1990 a violent strike by South African railway workers inspired Ngema to write the musical Township Fever.
The election of Nelson Mandela as president of South Africa in 1994 prompted Ngema to write Mama! The Musical of Freedom, in the following year. Based on Ngema’s experiences with Committed Artists, a theatre troupe he founded in Johannesburg in 1983, Mama!—through its joyous songs and exuberant dance—tells the story of the youngsters who joined the troupe. The determined title character was based on Mandela’s wife, Winnie, who had helped Committed Artists. Among Ngema’s other works are a movie adaptation of Sarafina! (1992), choir direction for the animated feature The Lion King (1994), and the play The House of Shaka (2005).
