Michel Saint-Denis, byname Jacques Duchesne,  (born Sept. 13, 1897, Beauvais, France—died July 31, 1971, London, Eng.), French director, producer, teacher, and theatrical innovator who was influential in the development of the British theatre for 40 years.
Nephew of the famed French theatrical pioneer actor-director Jacques Copeau, Saint-Denis worked with Copeau for 10 years at the Théâtre du Vieux-Colombier in Paris and later in Burgundy, where they founded the theatre workshop Les Copiaux. Saint-Denis organized an outgrowth of that company, La Compagnie des Quinze, which reopened the Vieux-Colombier with André Obey’s Noé (“Noah”) in 1931 and went on to produce several other highly acclaimed productions that eventually toured England.
John Gielgud, Sir Bronson Albery, and Tyrone Guthrie convinced him to establish an English training school, the London Theatre Studio (1935), which was active until the beginning of World War II. During the same period, he directed The Witch of Edmonton, Macbeth with Laurence Olivier, and The Three Sisters, all commended for their style and teamwork. His work was interrupted by World War II, during which he served in France and England as a liaison officer. He broadcast for the British Broadcasting Company (BBC) (1940–44) and was appointed director of the BBC’s French section. Saint-Denis became general director of the Old Vic Theatre Centre and School in 1945 and produced that company’s Oedipus Rex, starring Laurence Olivier and Ralph Richardson.
In 1951 he resigned from the Old Vic and returned to France to head the Centre Dramatique de l’Est. After 1957 he became active as a consultant, first to the Lincoln Center Repertory Company and the Juilliard School of Music’s drama division (New York City, 1959) and then to the Canadian National Theatre School (1960). After serving as codirector of the Royal Shakespeare Company with Peter Hall from 1961 to 1966, he served as consultant-director until his death at age 73. His Theatre: The Rediscovery of Style was published in 1960 and Training for the Theatre: Premises and Promises appeared posthumously in 1982.
