Milton Berle, original name Milton Berlinger,  (born July 12, 1908, New York, New York, U.S.—died March 27, 2002, Los Angeles, California), American comedian who, as a popular entertainer in the early days of television in the United States, came to be known as “Mr. Television.”
Berle first appeared on the vaudeville stage at age 10. With his mother’s encouragement, he continued in vaudeville throughout his youth, and he also acted in more than 50 silent films. He attended a school for professional children and soon began to perform as a master of ceremonies, and in the legitimate theatre as a comedian. He was known for blatantly borrowing jokes and comic routines from other comedians. For a decade after 1939 Berle worked chiefly in nightclubs, at the same time vainly attempting to gain a radio audience. None of his radio programs lasted more than a year. He continued to appear in motion pictures, making 19 between 1937 and 1968, including Let’s Make Love (1960) and It’s a Mad Mad Mad Mad World (1963).
Berle’s type of comedy—rapid delivery accompanied by slapstick and facial contortions—and his willingness to elicit laughter at any cost seemed to suit a visual medium. Eventually he achieved national recognition and great popularity when he entered television. His hugely successful Texaco Star Theater (1948–54) was credited with popularizing the new medium in the United States; the variety show, noted for its unpredictable live performances, led to a dramatic increase in the number of television sets purchased. Especially popular were skits in which Berle dressed in women’s clothing. “Uncle Miltie,” as he became known, worked regularly on television until 1966 and was among the first inductees into the Television Academy Hall of Fame in 1984. A frequent performer at charity benefits, Berle was a popular host of celebrity roasts in his later years. He was often seen smoking a cigar, which became a trademark. His books include Out of My Trunk (1945), Milton Berle: An Autobiography (1974), and B.S. I Love You: Sixty Funny Years with the Famous and the Infamous (1988).
