Mohini attam, (Malayalam: “dance of the enchantress”) also spelled mohiniattam or mohiniyattam,  semiclassical dance form from the state of Kerala, southwestern India. The dance is performed by women in honour of the Hindu god Vishnu in his incarnation as the enchantress Mohini. According to Hindu mythology, Vishnu took the form of Mohini to distract the demon Bhasmasura while the gods took the elixir of immortality from churning of the celestial oceans and thus saved the universe from destruction. The myth of Mohini forms the core of any mohini attam performance.
Mohini attam projects the essence of feminine grace—a quality known in the context of dance as lasya—through delicate footsteps, undulating body movements, and subtle yet poignant facial expressions. Mohini attam performances are also notable for their shringara (erotic) depictions of divine love. Traditionally, the dance was performed solo, but in the 21st century it may also be performed in groups.
Music for mohini attam is provided by a Karnatak (South Indian) classical music ensemble. Historically, the ensemble included a toppi maddalam (barrel drum) and a vina (long-necked lute). In contemporary practice, however, the toppi maddalam is replaced by a mridangam (double-headed drum); a violin substitutes for the vina; the ensemble includes a vocalist; and dancers often also sing. The language of the song texts is Manipravala, a literary mixture of Malayalam and Sanskrit.
Although the earliest mention of mohini attam occurs in a 16th-century legal treatise, the dance form did not begin to take solid shape until the 18th century. After a subsequent decline in popularity, mohini attam was revived in the mid-19th century by Swati Thirunal, the king of Travancore. By the turn of the 20th century, the dance had again fallen into disfavour, its erotic elements perceived to provoke moral impropriety. In 1930 poet Vallathol Narayana Menon renewed interest in mohini attam by including it in the program of his Kerala Kalamandalam, an institution dedicated to the promotion and propagation of the classical arts of Kerala. Since that time, the dance not only has been the subject of scholarly research but has also been incorporated into the curricula of other arts schools and universities across India.
