Moms Mabley, byname of Jackie Mabley, original name Loretta Mary Aiken,  (born March 19, 1894, Brevard, North Carolina, U.S.—died May 23, 1975, White Plains, New York), American comedian who was one of the most successful black vaudeville performers. She modeled her stage persona largely on her grandmother, who had been a slave. Wise, clever, and often ribald, Mabley dressed in frumpy clothes and used her deep voice and elastic face (and, in later years, her toothlessness) to great effect.
Loretta Aiken was one of 12 children. Her father died when she was 11 years old. By age 15 she had borne two children. To escape a despised stepfather, she moved to Cleveland, Ohio. There she was first exposed to performers and their lives, and she soon chose show business as a career and entered the “chitlin circuit” of venues that catered to African American audiences. After a brother objected to her career choice, she took a stage name, borrowing that of a boyfriend and fellow entertainer, Jack Mabley. She is said to have been given the nickname Moms because of her compassion for other performers. Discovered by the vaudeville team known as Butterbeans and Susie, she went to New York City with them and made her debut at Connie’s Inn. She later performed in such noted venues as Harlem’s Cotton Club. She was the first female comedian to appear at the Apollo Theater, and she became a regular there, appearing more often than any other act in that theatre’s history.
Mabley, for many years the only female African American comic, was sometimes underestimated because of her standard jokes about old men and her use of sexual innuendo. Nonetheless, she possessed great comic timing and a remarkable ability to ad lib. She was also a sly and astute social commentator, as she revealed in comments such as “There ain’t nothing wrong with young people. Jus’ quit lyin’ to ’em.” In addition to live stand-up comedy, Mabley appeared in a number of films—including Boarding House Blues (1948) and Amazing Grace (1974)—and on television programs such as The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour. Several of her comedy performances were recorded live, including Moms Mabley, the Funniest Woman in the World (1960), her first of some two dozen comedy albums.
