P.T. Barnum, in full Phineas Taylor Barnum,  (born July 5, 1810, Bethel, Connecticut, U.S.—died April 7, 1891, Bridgeport, Connecticut), American showman who employed sensational forms of presentation and publicity to popularize such amusements as the public museum, the musical concert, and the three-ring circus. In partnership with James A. Bailey, he made the American circus a popular and gigantic spectacle, the so-called Greatest Show on Earth.
Barnum was 15 years old when his father died, and the support of his mother and his five sisters and brothers fell largely upon his shoulders. After holding a variety of jobs, he became publisher of a Danbury, Connecticut, weekly newspaper, Herald of Freedom. Arrested three times for libel, he enjoyed his first taste of notoriety.
In 1829, at age 19, Barnum married a 21-year-old Bethel woman, Charity Hallett, who was to bear him four daughters. In 1834 he moved to New York City, where he found his vocation as a showman one year later when he successfully presented Joice Heth, a wizened Black woman whom he advertised as the 161-year-old nurse to Gen. George Washington. On her death, however, the story was exposed as a hoax.
Casting about for a legitimate undertaking, Barnum outmaneuvered wealthier bidders to acquire John Scudder’s American Museum, in New York City, a five-story marble structure filled with stuffed animals, waxwork figures, and similar conventional exhibits. The new owner rapidly transformed the museum into a carnival of human curiosities, dramatic theatricals, beauty contests, and other sensational attractions. Although driven at the outset of his career by a desire for wealth and fame, Barnum may have been basically motivated by less selfish reasons. “This is a trading world,” he wrote, “and men, women, and children, who cannot live on gravity alone, need something to satisfy their gayer, lighter moods and hours, and he who ministers to this want is in a business established by the Author of our nature.” Playing upon the public’s interest in the unusual and bizarre, Barnum scoured the world for curiosities, living or dead, genuine or fake. By means of outrageous stunts, repetitive advertising, and exaggerated publicity, Barnum excited international attention and made his showcase of wonders a landmark.
Between 1842, when he took over the American Museum, and 1868, when he gave it up after fires twice had all but destroyed it, Barnum’s gaudy showmanship enticed 82 million visitors—among them Henry and William James, Charles Dickens, and Edward VII, then prince of Wales—into his halls and to his other enterprises.
Barnum’s first successful exhibit in the museum was the Feejee Mermaid, which had a seemingly human head topping the finned body of a fish and was, of course, found later to be a fake. Among the genuine curiosities were Chang and Eng, Siamese twins connected by a ligament below their breastbones. It was, however, Charles Stratton, a man only 25 inches (65 cm) tall who was discovered by Barnum, that proved to be his most profitable exhibit. Ballyhooing Stratton as General Tom Thumb, Barnum sold 20 million tickets to the museum. After being received by U.S. Pres. Abraham Lincoln, Barnum and Tom Thumb enjoyed a triumphal tour abroad, during which the latter gave a command performance before Queen Victoria.
Eager to change his image from promoter of human curiosities to impresario of artistic attractions, Barnum risked his entire fortune by importing Jenny Lind, a Swedish soprano whom he had never seen or heard and who was almost unknown in the United States. Dubbing Lind “The Swedish Nightingale,” Barnum mounted the most massive publicity campaign he had ever attempted. Lind’s opening night in New York City, before a capacity audience of 5,000, and her nine months of concerts across the United States earned immense sums.
At the peak of his career, Barnum’s own appearance was nearly as familiar to the public as the exhibits he promoted. An impressive figure 6 feet 2 inches (1.88 metres) tall, semibald, with blue eyes, a bulbous nose, and a potbelly, he called himself the “Prince of Humbugs.” He dwelt in a three-story Oriental mansion, named Iranistan, on a 17-acre (7-hectare) estate in Bridgeport, Connecticut, where he played host to such notables as Mark Twain, Horace Greeley, and Matthew Arnold. Close friends regarded him as good-natured, thoughtful, and kind, as well as parsimonious and egotistical.
His avocations were politics and writing. After serving two terms in the Connecticut state legislature, he was elected mayor of Bridgeport, in which post he fought prostitution and union discrimination against Blacks. In 1855 he published his autobiography, The Life of P.T. Barnum, Written by Himself; and because he frankly revealed some of the deceits he had employed, he was harshly taken to task by the majority of critics. Stung, Barnum continually modified the book in many revised versions, which, he claimed, sold a total of 1,000,000 copies. By 1884, eager more for publicity than for profit, Barnum placed his autobiography in the public domain, allowing anyone to print and sell it without copyright infringement. Though the cynicism “There’s a sucker born every minute” has long been attributed to Barnum, there is no proof that he ever wrote or spoke these words.
Barnum’s family life was not entirely happy. One daughter died in childhood; another was dropped from his will for committing adultery. Disappointed because he had no male heir, Barnum left a sizable bequest to a grandson on the condition that he agree to use Barnum as part of his name. After 44 years of marriage, Charity Barnum died in 1873. The following year, Barnum, who was then 64, took the 24-year-old Nancy Fish, the daughter of a British admirer, for his second wife.
Although his name has been popularly linked with the circus, Barnum did not, in fact, become a circus showman until he was past age 60. Barnum did not invent the modern circus, but, in partnership with the retiring, efficient Bailey, he did give the American spectacle its gigantic size, its most memorable attractions, and its widest popularity, attempting to make it what he called “the greatest show on earth.” Barnum capped his circus career by purchasing a six-and-a-half-ton elephant named Jumbo, who quickly earned back his purchase price during his first season under the big top.
In his 81st year Barnum fell gravely ill. At his request, a New York newspaper published his obituary in advance so that he might enjoy it. Two weeks later, after inquiring about the box-office receipts of the circus, Barnum died in his Connecticut mansion. The Times of London echoed the world press in its final tribute: “He created the métier of showman on a grandiose scale.…He early realized that essential feature of a modern democracy, its readiness to be led to what will amuse and instruct it.…His name is a proverb already, and a proverb it will continue.”
