Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus, formerly Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Combined Shows, byname The Greatest Show on Earth,  American circus that was the best-known traveling circus in the United States in the 20th and early 21st centuries. It ceased operations in 2017.
Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus had its roots in Dan Castello’s Great Circus & Egyptian Caravan, which was founded in Delavan, Wisconsin, in 1867 by two veteran circus men, Dan Castello and William Cameron Coup. Featuring eight camels that had belonged to the U.S. Army’s experimental Camel Corps, Castello and Coup’s circus toured the Upper Midwest, both overland and by boat. It also traveled west by train shortly after the completion of the transcontinental railroad in 1869. In 1870 Castello and Coup persuaded renowned impresario P.T. Barnum to join their venture, which reemerged in Brooklyn, New York, on April 10, 1871, as P.T. Barnum’s Grand Traveling Museum, Menagerie, Caravan and Hippodrome. Barnum, then age 60 and one of the most famous people in the United States, had already earned a considerable reputation by satisfying the public’s hunger for spectacle with his American Museum in New York City, which presented all manner of human and animal curiosities, mixing exoticized reality with fantastic fabrications.
Coup contributed to the growth of their circus and circuses in general by designing a railcar and method of end-loading that increased the efficiency of transporting circuses by railroad. His railroad flatcars were joined by “crossover” metal plates, and a pulley-and-rope system allowed fully loaded circus wagons to be rolled on and off the train with unprecedented ease. By 1872 the Barnum circus, branded the “The Greatest Show on Earth,” had been redesigned to travel by train. Coup also introduced the use of specially chartered “excursion trains” that brought people from small towns in the surrounding area to the sites of the circus on performance days. Coup and Castello parted ways with Barnum in 1875 and started a new entrancement, the Centennial Circus, in 1876.
On a parallel track, in the early 1870s, James A. Bailey became a partner in the circus of which James E. Cooper was the principal owner. From 1876 to 1878 Cooper, Bailey and Co.’s Great International Circus traveled abroad, from Australia to South America and on to Great Britain, before returning to the United States and expanding its operations to include the Great London Circus and Sanger’s Royal British Menagerie. Thereafter, Cooper and Bailey’s circus often performed as the Great London Circus & Grand International Allied Shows, combined with Sanger’s Royal British Menagerie. In the process, it became a rival of Barnum’s circus, with which it agreed in 1880 to join forces, combining shows in 1881 and ultimately adopting the name Barnum & Bailey Circus.
In 1882 Barnum purchased Jumbo, an enormously popular elephant at the London Zoo, and transported him to the United States, where the larger-than-average elephant—called by Barnum “the largest elephant ever seen”—became the star attraction of Barnum’s circus. In May 1884 Barnum engineered a bounty of publicity for the circus by parading Jumbo, 20 other elephants, and 17 camels across the recently constructed Brooklyn Bridge to prove its structural integrity. When Barnum died in 1891, his widow sold her interest in the circus to Bailey, who began a five-year tour of Europe with the circus in 1897. By the end of the century, the Barnum & Bailey Circus featured five performance rings and more than 1,000 employees and traveled in some 85 railroad cars.
Meanwhile, elsewhere in Wisconsin, “the cradle of circuses,” five siblings of German-French heritage, the Rüngeling (later Ringling) brothers (Albert, Otto, Alfred, Charles, and John), were in the process of founding their own circus in Baraboo. Beginning as a song-and-dance troupe in 1882, it grew into a one-ring circus by 1884 and added its first elephant in 1888. After taking the show—the Ringling Bros. United Monster Shows, Great Double Circus, Royal European Menagerie, Museum, Caravan, and Congress of Trained Animals—on the road in horse-drawn wagons, the Ringlings began transporting their circus by railroad in 1890, making it possible for them to take a larger production on longer tours. In 1895, as the rivalry grew between the Ringling brothers’ circus and Barnum and Bailey’s circus, the two organizations agreed to divide the market geographically.
