Robin Williams, in full Robin McLaurin Williams,  (born July 21, 1951, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.—died August 11, 2014, Tiburon, California), American comedian and actor known for his manic stand-up routines and his diverse film performances. He won an Academy Award for his role in Good Will Hunting (1997).
Williams’s father, Robert, was an executive for the Ford Motor Company, and his mother was a former fashion model. He early learned to use humour to entertain classmates and was a fan of comedian Jonathan Winters. When he was 16, his father retired, and the family moved to the San Francisco area. Williams studied political science at Claremont Men’s College (now Claremont McKenna College), where he began taking courses in improvisation. He then attended the College of Marin to study acting but later received a scholarship to study at the Juilliard School in New York City. Williams eventually moved back to California, where he began appearing in comedy clubs in the early 1970s.
By the mid-1970s Williams was guest starring on several television shows, including The Richard Pryor Show and Laugh-In. After guest appearances as the alien Mork on Happy Days, Williams was given his own show, Mork & Mindy (1978–82). The series offered Williams the opportunity to transfer the enthusiasm of his stand-up performances to the small screen and provided an outlet for his prolific improvisational talents. Mork & Mindy proved an immense success and was instrumental in launching Williams’s film career.
Williams’s early movie appearances included leads in Popeye (1980) and The World According to Garp (1982), but his first major role came with Good Morning, Vietnam (1987), in which he portrayed the irreverent military disc jockey Adrian Cronauer. The role earned Williams his first Academy Award nomination. His second came soon after for his performance as an inspirational English teacher at a preparatory school in Dead Poets Society (1989). In the early 1990s he lent his talents to a number of successful family-oriented films, including Mrs. Doubtfire (1993), in which he played a divorced man who impersonates a female nanny in order to be close to his children, and the animated feature Aladdin (1992), in which he voiced a frenetic genie.
While undoubtedly a successful comedic actor, Williams was equally adept at more-sober roles. He played a distressed former professor in The Fisher King (1991) and a psychiatrist who mentors a troubled but mathematically gifted young man (played by Matt Damon) in Good Will Hunting (1997). Both films earned Williams Academy Award nominations, and for Good Will Hunting he finally received an Oscar.
As his career progressed, Williams continued to take both comedic and serious roles. He starred as a doctor who attempts to heal his patients with laughter in Patch Adams (1998) and portrayed a psychotic photo-lab technician who stalks a suburban family in One Hour Photo (2002). A 2002 stand-up performance led to the hugely successful Robin Williams: Live on Broadway (2002), which was released as both an album and a video. He later portrayed Teddy Roosevelt in the comedy Night at the Museum (2006) and two sequels (2009, 2014). He provided voices for the animated films Happy Feet (2006) and Happy Feet Two (2011). Williams was sidelined with heart problems in early 2009, but he returned to work shortly thereafter, promoting his films and resuming his Weapons of Self-Destruction comedy tour. Later that year he starred in the family comedy Old Dogs.
In 2011 Williams—who had appeared in a 1988 Off-Broadway production of Samuel Beckett’s Waiting for Godot—made his Broadway acting debut in Bengal Tiger at the Baghdad Zoo, a surreal comic drama set during the Iraq War. In 2013 he returned to movies, portraying a priest in the star-studded farce The Big Wedding and U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower in Lee Daniels’ The Butler. The TV series The Crazy Ones, in which he played the head of an ad agency, premiered later that year; it was canceled in 2014. Williams then portrayed a man who attempts to reconcile with friends and family following a terminal diagnosis in the comedy The Angriest Man in Brooklyn (2014). Boulevard (2014), in which he played a closeted gay man who befriends a male prostitute, was released after his death.
Williams was active with a number of charities, including Comic Relief and the Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation, an organization founded by the late Superman star that is dedicated to curing spinal cord injury. Through his work with the United Service Organizations, Inc. (USO), he was also a frequent performer for American troops stationed abroad. In 2014 Williams died by suicide.
