Rosie O’Donnell, byname of Roseanne O’Donnell,  (born March 21, 1962, Commack, New York, U.S.), American actress of film, television, and stage who was perhaps best known for her hosting duties on the talk shows The Rosie O’Donnell Show (1996–2002) and The View (2006–07; 2014–15).
O’Donnell was 10 years old when her mother died, and she used humour to deal with her emotions. Throughout her youth her sense of humour also gained her popularity, and she was elected homecoming queen, senior class president, and prom queen while in high school. In 1980 O’Donnell was a prelaw student at Dickinson College, Carlisle, Pennsylvania, and a year later she studied drama at Boston University. During this time she sporadically toured comedy clubs throughout the United States, and she eventually left college in order to develop her professional stand-up comedy career. After touring in less-than-extravagant circumstances, she finally earned enough as a five-time comedy champion on the television show Star Search to pursue a movie career in Los Angeles.
In 1992 O’Donnell made her film debut in A League of Their Own, a comedy about a women’s baseball league in the early 1940s. Commonly cast as the comic sidekick or best friend, she appeared in such films as Sleepless in Seattle (1993), Another Stakeout (1993), and The Flintstones (1994), the movie version of the classic cartoon. In her first starring role she attempted to broaden her image by playing a policewoman-turned-leather-clad-dominatrix in Exit to Eden (1994), but the movie and O’Donnell’s performance were generally panned by critics. She then moved to the New York City stage and achieved critical acclaim as Rizzo in the Broadway revival of Grease! in 1994. Soon afterward she returned to film, again as the comical confidante, in Now and Then (1995) and Beautiful Girls (1996).
In June 1996 O’Donnell’s celebrity-studded talk-variety program, The Rosie O’Donnell Show, debuted and immediately earned high ratings. She endeared herself to audiences with her frankness, neighbourly chatter, and unabashed love for popular culture, namely television theme songs, commercial jingles, and actor Tom Cruise. O’Donnell capped her show’s first season with an Emmy Award for best talk-show host. Capitalizing on her popularity, O’Donnell in 2000 partnered with the publishing company Gruner & Jahr USA on the magazine Rosie’s McCall’s (also called Rosie); disagreements over content—O’Donnell wanted Rosie to focus more on real-life problems—resulted in her leaving the magazine in 2002. That year O’Donnell also revealed she was gay.
After her talk show ended in 2002, O’Donnell took minor roles in several television series, including Queer as Folk, and in the made-for-TV movie Riding the Bus with My Sister (2005). In September 2006 she joined the cast of The View, a daytime talk show. Her brief tenure attracted controversy and some of the show’s highest ratings. O’Donnell, who was a vocal liberal, frequently argued with the conservative Elisabeth Hasselbeck over the administration of Pres. George W. Bush and the Iraq War. In addition, O’Donnell had a well-publicized tiff with American businessman (and later U.S president) Donald Trump. In May 2007 she left The View.
O’Donnell continued to appear on television. She landed recurring roles on Nip/Tuck, a drama that centred on plastic surgeons, and on other series, including The Fosters, Mom, and SMILF. The special Rosie Live, a one-hour variety show, aired in 2008, and the following year she starred as a psychiatrist in the television movie America. O’Donnell later hosted The Rosie Show (2011–12), a talk show that aired on the Oprah Winfrey Network (OWN). She returned to cohost The View for one season (2014–15). In 2016 she appeared in the TV movie Hairspray Live!, which was based on a Broadway musical. Four years later O’Donnell played a social worker in the miniseries I Know This Much Is True, an adaptation of Wally Lamb’s 1998 novel.
O’Donnell was active in the gay rights movement, and in 2004 she helped organize R Family Vacations, which offered cruises for gay and lesbian families; a documentary of the first cruise, All Aboard! Rosie’s Family Cruise, aired on HBO in 2006. Her books included the memoirs Find Me (2002) and Celebrity Detox (2007).
