Rouben Mamoulian,  (born October 8, 1897, Tiflis, Georgia, Russian Empire [now Tbilisi, Georgia]—died December 4, 1987, Los Angeles, California, U.S.), Georgian-born American theatrical and motion-picture director noted for his contribution to the development of cinematic art at the beginning of the sound era. His achievements included the skillful blending of music and sound effects with an imaginative visual rhythm. Dividing his professional life between Hollywood and the theatre, Mamoulian directed only 17 films between 1929, when he made Applause, and 1957, when he returned from a long hiatus to make Silk Stockings, yet his limited body of work was so stylish, deft, and imaginative that he left an indelible mark on film history. In between he enjoyed an active career as one of Broadway’s leading directors.
Mamoulian grew up in an ethnic Armenian family in imperial Russian Georgia. His father was a banker, and his mother was active in the theatre. While studying criminal law at the University of Moscow, he became involved in the theatre, training at the Moscow Art Theatre under Yevgeny Bagrationovich Vakhtangov, a disciple of Konstantin Stanislavsky. In 1918 Mamoulian founded a drama studio in Tiflis (now Tbilisi). In 1920 he toured with the Russian Repertory Company to England, where he remained in order to escape the Soviet regime and to study drama at the University of London. He began directing English stage productions in 1922 and then immigrated to the United States in 1923, where for several years he directed grand operas and operettas at the Eastman Theatre in Rochester, New York.
During the late 1920s Mamoulian taught and directed at the Theatre Guild in New York City and made a deep impression on American theatre with his production of Dorothy and Dubose Heyward’s Porgy (1927), which featured an all-black cast. Mamoulian would again direct that material in its incarnation as George Gershwin’s opera Porgy and Bess (1935).
While remaining a busy stage director during the late 1920s, Mamoulian directed the early sound film Applause (1929) at Paramount’s Astoria Studio in Queens. For Applause, he mounted wheels on the soundproof booth in which the camera was enclosed, thereby freeing it to move, an innovation that brought him quick recognition. Applause also offered one of the few major film performances by the great torch singer Helen Morgan, who played a burlesque star beset by love, alcohol, and family problems.
Mamoulian’s first motion picture after he relocated to Hollywood was City Streets (1931), one of the better early gangster films. Although it was not as celebrated as Little Caesar (1931), The Public Enemy (1931), and Scarface: The Shame of a Nation (1932), City Streets is arguably more visually sophisticated than any of them. Written by Dashiell Hammett, it featured rising star Gary Cooper as a carnival worker who falls for a racketeer’s daughter (Sylvia Sidney).
Even more impressive was Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (1931), the first sound version of the classic story by Robert Louis Stevenson, and many critics consider it to be Mamoulian’s masterpiece. He received particular praise for the scenes in which Fredric March underwent the transformation between the title characters, accomplished through the director’s innovative use of makeup and lighting filters. March won the Academy Award for best actor (sharing it with Wallace Beery for his performance in King Vidor’s The Champ).
Mamoulian’s next effort, Love Me Tonight (1932), has come to be regarded as one of the most accomplished of the early musicals. It starred Maurice Chevalier and Jeanette MacDonald, featured a delightfully sardonic performance by Myrna Loy, and was grounded in strong songs by Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart, but it was Mamoulian’s seamless blending of songs and action that sets the film apart.
The Song of Songs (1933), Mamoulian’s last film for Paramount as a producer-director, offered a strong performance by Marlene Dietrich but was dismissed by a number of critics as a trite melodrama. Mamoulian had more luck for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) with another of the era’s iconic female stars, Greta Garbo, who contributed an acting tour de force at the centre of Queen Christina (1933), a biography of a 17th-century Swedish monarch. Although We Live Again (1934) was a generally undistinguished adaptation of Leo Tolstoy’s novel Resurrection (1899), Mamoulian had a much firmer grasp on William Makepeace Thackeray’s comedy of manners Vanity Fair (1847–48), which he brought to the screen as Becky Sharp (1935). That film also had the distinction of being the first Technicolor feature release.
Having left Hollywood to win acclaim with his staging of Porgy and Bess (1935) on Broadway, Mamoulian returned with the whimsical comedy The Gay Desperado (1936) and then turned to High, Wide, and Handsome (1937), a musical, with songs by Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein, that was set in the oil fields of 19th-century Pennsylvania. Neither of those films was very well received, nor was Golden Boy (1939), Mamoulian’s adaptation of Clifford Odets’s proletarian drama of the same name, which had been a smash for the Group Theatre in 1937. William Holden (in his screen debut) starred in it as a boxing violinist torn between the inimical demands of his two careers and his love interest (Barbara Stanwyck).
Mamoulian brought his talents to Twentieth Century-Fox and returned to form with The Mark of Zorro (1940), a classic swashbuckler with assured performances by Tyrone Power, Linda Darnell, and Basil Rathbone. Equally distinguished was Blood and Sand (1941), which reunited Power and Darnell and added Rita Hayworth. Mamoulian stylishly conveyed the drama and pageantry of the bullring in that story of the rise and fall of a bullfighter based on a novel by Vicente Blasco Ibáñez. Visually, the film is one Mamoulian’s most painterly, as it recalls the works of the Spanish masters, especially El Greco. His third effort for Fox was the less successful Rings on Her Fingers (1942), a romantic comedy with Henry Fonda and Gene Tierney. Mamoulian’s next film was Laura (1944), but he was pulled off the project by Fox mogul Daryl F. Zanuck and replaced as director by Otto Preminger.
Seemingly soured on Hollywood by his experience with Laura, Mamoulian returned to Broadway, where he directed the enormous hit musicals Oklahoma! (1943) and Carousel (1945). He made just two more films, both for MGM: Summer Holiday (1948), a musical reworking of Eugene O’Neill’s play Ah, Wilderness!, and Silk Stockings (1957), a musical version (with music and lyrics by Cole Porter) of Ernst Lubitsch’s  Ninotchka (1939) starring Fred Astaire and Cyd Charisse. In between he shot some new scenes for the American release of Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger’s 1952 The Wild Heart (1952).
Mamoulian was slated to direct the film version of Porgy and Bess in 1958, but he was replaced again by Preminger. He had also begun directing Cleopatra (1963) for Fox when Zanuck fired him yet again, after just six days of shooting, replacing him with Joseph L. Mankiewicz. Mamoulian had never been very tolerant of creative interference, and the studios apparently had finally grown tired of battling with him. It was his last involvement with a Hollywood film, but his contributions to the American cinema proved to be enduring.
