Scene shifting,  in theatre, method of indicating a change of locale during the course of a play.
In Greek and Roman theatre the action was performed in front of a conventional backdrop—representing a temple in Greek theatre and houses or a temple in Roman theatre. Changes of scene were indicated by the movement of actors to a different area of the backdrop. Periaktoi, triangular prisms with a different scene painted on each side, were also used by both the Greeks and the Romans. These were revolved during the play to indicate the change of scene. In medieval European theatre, mansions, or small booths, each representing a different locale, were arranged around the playing area. The actors indicated a change of scene by moving from one mansion to another. The use of mansions and periaktoi persisted in Western theatre until the development of angled wings (painted side panels) and perspective scenery in 16th-century Italy. Scene changes were effected either by moving new wings around those that were already in place or by quickly pulling a painted canvas around the angled wing.
The principles of perspective drawing that had been established in Europe at the beginning of the Italian Renaissance allowed the use of sets of flat wings, placed parallel to the front of the stage. They were probably first used by Giovanni Battista Aleotti in Ferrara, Italy, in 1606. A series of flats, set in grooves on the stage floor, was set up at each wing position; at the scene change, those visible in the last scene (i.e., those in front) were simultaneously pulled out of sight backstage. From 1641 Giacomo Torelli developed and refined the chariot-and-pole, or carriage-and-frame, method of scene shifting. This was a mechanization of the groove system that allowed one person to change all the wings simultaneously. The flat wings were connected by means of a pole, which ran through slots in the stage floor, to “chariots” that moved on rails parallel to the front of the stage. When the chariots ran to the centre of the stage, the flats were pulled onstage; a reverse movement pulled them off. The mechanics allowed all the wings to be changed by pulling a single winch. The chariot-and-pole system was quickly adopted throughout Europe and remained the standard method of changing scenes in the West until the late 19th century. Only England, the Netherlands, and the United States continued to use the groove method.
As the demand grew for more scenic realism in Western theatre, the use of three-dimensional furnishings and box sets forced scene changes to take place behind the drop curtain between acts. For shifting heavy three-dimensional settings, a revolving stage was developed in 1896 at the Residenztheater in Munich and was soon widely adopted. Other mechanical devices for shifting three-dimensional settings were developed during the early 1900s. During the second half of the 20th century, preferences for simplified staging in Europe and North America generally reduced the use of these devices.
