Shabana Rehman,  (born 1976, Karachi, Pak.), Pakistani-born Norwegian performer and comedian who courted controversy with her satirical reflections on Islam and the cultural divide that set apart Norway’s Muslim community.
Shortly after she was born, Rehman’s family relocated to Oslo. She was raised in Holmlia, a multicultural Oslo neighbourhood, and as a youth her parents took her to the local mosque. Rehman later attended university, where she studied ethics and media.
In 1999, after a friend invited Rehman to help write material for a stand-up routine, Rehman herself decided to try performing. Her act eventually developed into a popular comedy show entitled “Skiing Across Greenland,” a reference to a legendary feat by Norwegian hero Fridtjof Nansen as well as a pun on “Greenland,” which was the name of an immigrant section of Oslo. The act opened with Rehman arriving on stage wearing a burka, the full-length, concealing garment worn by some conservative Muslim women. After a few jokes about her attire (she suggested it was excellent for “scaring away children”), Rehman discarded the burka to reveal a red cocktail dress. She continued to jab at what she perceived as the backwardness of conservative Muslims and the regrettable tolerance of these practices by moderates. Her cutting wit was not reserved only for Muslims, however. She had much to say about the Norwegians and their shortcomings in dealing with the country’s growing immigrant population. In addition to her stand-up act, Rehman regularly appeared on Norwegian television and wrote a column for the liberal Oslo newspaper Dagbladet. In spite of the fact that they were sometimes the subjects of her jokes, her parents and seven siblings remained supportive of Rehman’s comedy career.
Although she became the target of hate mail and death threats, Rehman continued her outspoken cultural commentary. In 2003 she posed nude for a national magazine, her body painted like the Norwegian flag; the image was juxtaposed with another that featured Rehman in traditional Pakistani attire. It was an act that annoyed some members of both the Muslim and Norwegian communities. For Rehman, however, the meaning of the photo was to communicate that the right to determine her outward identity was hers alone: “I wanted to make it clear that even as a Muslim woman I am free to dispose of my body as I wish. I also wanted to demonstrate to Norwegians that you can be Scandinavian even if you were born in the Punjab.”
In April 2004 Rehman courted further controversy when she physically lifted Mullah Krekar, the former leader of the militant fundamentalist group Ansar al-Islam and then a resident of Norway, at an appearance at an Oslo nightclub. Rehman asked if the Muslim cleric, who was promoting his memoir, would participate in a test to see if he had really adapted to liberal Norwegian society. When he agreed, Rehman proceeded to wrap her arms around the mullah’s thighs and lift him into the air. While many laughed at the test, the stunned Krekar expressed his humiliation and outrage and made a hasty exit. The news of the incident filled the Norwegian papers and soon made its way throughout the globe.
