Stephen Colbert, in full Stephen Tyrone Colbert,  (born May 13, 1964, Washington, D.C., U.S.), American actor and comedian who was best known as the host of The Colbert Report (2005–14), an ironic send-up of television news programs, and The Late Show with Stephen Colbert (2015– ).
After graduating with a theatre degree (1986) from Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois, Colbert joined the Second City comedy improv troupe in Chicago. There he met Amy Sedaris and Paul Dinello, with whom he created the award-winning sketch show Exit 57 (1995–96) and the bizarre sitcom Strangers with Candy (1999–2000), both on the Comedy Central cable network. Colbert worked on several other television projects before joining in 1997 Comedy Central’s The Daily Show, which was hosted by Jon Stewart. For eight years he was a correspondent and writer on the news parody, where he became a fan favourite for such segments as “This Week in God,” a look at religious issues in the news, and “Even Stephven,” a mock debate between Colbert and fellow correspondent Steve Carell.
In 2005 Colbert became the host of his own spin-off show, The Colbert Report, and took on the guise of a self-important conservative commentator, a persona meant to parody certain cable-news personalities, most notably Bill O’Reilly. During his first show Colbert coined the word truthiness to express a kind of unchanging “truth” derived from a gut feeling rather than from any known facts. (Truthiness was named the Word of the Year in 2005 by the American Dialect Society.) The neologism became the organizing principle for the show, where Colbert’s rants about political and cultural issues and his expressions of personal idiosyncrasies (such as an unyielding hatred of bears) were treated with the same amount of seriousness. The Colbert Report earned various honours, including Emmy Awards for outstanding writing (2008, 2010, 2013–14) and outstanding variety series (2013–14) and a Peabody Award (2008).
In April 2006 Colbert blurred the line between entertainment and political critique in a very public forum when he was the featured speaker at the White House Correspondents’ Association dinner—an annual event that traditionally featured good-natured ribbing between the president and the press. He performed in character, lampooning George W. Bush’s administration and the mainstream media with a degree of harshness (or candour, depending on one’s political leanings) not common to the event. The resulting publicity raised Colbert’s national profile and helped turn him into something of a political tastemaker for many young liberals.
Colbert was also notable for other moments when his character entered into “real world” events. The egotistical host would often call upon his dedicated fans—whom he dubbed the “Colbert Nation”—to vote for him as a write-in candidate in various online public polls, which resulted in Colbert’s winning the naming competitions for, among others, a bridge in Budapest and a node on the International Space Station (amid public outcry, his name was disqualified in both instances). In 2009 he organized a fund-raising effort by the Colbert Nation to sponsor the U.S. speed-skating team during the 2010 Olympic Winter Games in Vancouver.
On October 30, 2010, Colbert and Stewart hosted the Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear at the Mall in Washington, D.C. More than 200,000 people attended the nationally televised rally, which was a satirical response to the “Restoring Honor” rally held by conservative media personality Glenn Beck the previous August. Although it was primarily sardonic in nature, Colbert and Stewart’s rally was also a genuine appeal to civility in political discourse.
In 2011 Colbert made another audacious foray into the political realm when he founded the political action committee (PAC) “Americans for a Better Tomorrow, Tomorrow.” The PAC was what is commonly known as a “Super PAC,” an organization that—in the wake of the U.S. Supreme Court’s 2010 Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission decision—can accept unlimited contributions from individuals, corporations, or labour unions, which can then be spent on political causes, though the money cannot be given directly to political candidates or parties. Colbert used the donations received by his Super PAC to purchase mock television advertisements during the 2012 presidential campaign. In January 2012 he briefly handed over control of his Super PAC to Stewart in order to pave the way for a short-lived potential presidential run, as a candidate’s business partner may legally run a Super PAC. Many media observers and political activists hailed Colbert for highlighting the murky details of campaign-finance rules through his continued promotion of the Super PAC on The Colbert Report.
In addition to his acting credits, Colbert provided vocal talent for various projects, including Saturday Night Live’s “TV Funhouse” cartoon and the animated films Monsters vs. Aliens (2009) and Mr. Peabody & Sherman (2014). He coauthored Wigfield (2003) with Sedaris and Dinello and starred with them in a feature film adaptation of Strangers with Candy (2005). In 2007 Colbert published I Am America (And So Can You!), in which he used his television-pundit persona to comment on—and frequently deride—various aspects of American society, including religion, the media, higher education, and dating. In 2012 he published the picture book I Am a Pole (And So Can You!)—which, although described as a children’s book, was for adults—and America Again: Re-becoming the Greatness We Never Weren’t.
In 2014 Colbert was named to succeed David Letterman as host of the CBS late-night talk show the Late Show; Letterman had announced that he intended to retire from the program in 2015. In anticipation of the move, The Colbert Report ended in December 2014. The Late Show with Stephen Colbert premiered in September 2015, and it initially struggled in the ratings. However, in 2017 Colbert seemed to hit his stride, and the show’s viewership dramatically grew. Some believe the increase in popularity was partially because of his pointed criticisms of Pres. Donald Trump’s administration. That year Colbert hosted the Emmy Awards ceremony.
