Stephen Foster, in full Stephen Collins Foster,  (born July 4, 1826, Lawrenceville [now part of Pittsburgh], Pennsylvania., U.S.—died  January 13, 1864, New York, New York), American composer whose popular minstrel songs and sentimental ballads achieved for him an honoured place in the music of the United States.
Foster grew up on the urban edge of the Western frontier. Although formally untutored in music, he had a natural musical bent and began to write songs as a young boy. He absorbed musical influences from the popular, sentimental songs sung by his sisters; from Black church services he attended with the family’s servant Olivia Pise; from popular minstrel show songs; and from songs sung by Black labourers at the Pittsburgh warehouse where he worked for a time.
In 1842 he published his song “Open Thy Lattice, Love.” In 1846 he went to Cincinnati as a bookkeeper, returning to Pittsburgh in 1850 to marry Jane McDowell, a physician’s daughter. In 1848 he sold his song “Oh! Susanna” for $100; together with his “Old Uncle Ned” it brought the publisher about $10,000. In 1849 Foster entered into a contract with Firth, Pond & Co., the New York publishers to whom he had previously given the rights for “Nelly Was a Lady.” He was commissioned to write songs for Edwin P. Christy’s minstrel show. The most famous, “Old Folks at Home” (1851), also called “Swanee River,” appeared originally under Christy’s name; Foster’s name appeared on the song after 1879. In 1852 he made his only visit to the South.
Although he stated that his ambition was to become “the best Ethiopian [i.e., Negro minstrel] song writer,” he vacillated between composing minstrel songs (for which he is largely remembered) and songs in the sentimental “respectable” style then popular. He was never a sharp entrepreneur for his talents, and in 1857, in financial difficulties, he sold all rights to his future songs to his publishers for about $1,900. The profits from his songs went largely to performers and publishers.
In 1860, already struggling with sinking morale and alcoholism, he moved to New York City. His songs after that date are largely sentimental songs such as “Poor Drooping Maiden.” His wife left him in 1861, except for a brief reconciliation in 1862. He spent the rest of his life in debt.
He left about 200 songs, for most of which he wrote the words as well as the music. They include “Camptown Races,” “Nelly Bly,” “My Old Kentucky Home,” “Massa’s in de Cold, Cold Ground,” “Old Dog Tray,” “Old Black Joe,” “Jeanie with the Light Brown Hair,” and “Beautiful Dreamer.”
