Theatricalism,  in 20th-century Western theatre, the general movement away from the dominant turn-of-the-century techniques of naturalism in acting, staging, and playwriting; it was especially directed against the illusion of reality that was the highest achievement of the naturalist theatre.
In the theatricalists’ view, to turn one’s back on naturalism was to draw inspiration from the spirit of the theatre itself. The then-current picture-frame stage called for passivity of response in audiences and their separation from the actors, lest the spell of illusion be broken. The theatricalists, on the contrary, favoured a platform projecting into the physical space of the audience in order to put the actor in direct, alert contact with the spectators and remove the psychological barriers between them. The theatricalists accepted the obvious truth that the playgoers were in a theatre and that actors were on a stage, carrying out dramatic action with the help of settings that were obviously scenic constructions illuminated by stage lights. They believed that the abolition of barriers between actors and audience was reestablishing full dramatic communication between them. In theatricalist stagings the spectators were expected to accept the frank scenic artifices and conventions laid before them.
Theatricalism attracted designers such as Gordon Craig in England and Robert Edmond Jones and Norman Bel Geddes in the United States. It appealed to such directors as Max Reinhardt and Leopold Jessner in Germany, Jacques Copeau, Louis Jouvet, Aurélien Lugné-Poë, Charles Dullin, Gaston Baty, and Georges Pitoëff in France, and Vsevolod Meyerhold, Aleksandr Tairov, and Yevgeny Vakhtangov in the Soviet Union. Its greatest theorist is the German playwright Bertolt Brecht.
Even after the extreme stylization of acting and staging found in the Expressionist, Dadaist, and Surrealist drama of the early part of the century had subsided, theatricalism’s frank acceptance of dramatic artifices remained a permanent part of the modern theatre. A basically naturalistic play—e.g., Arthur Miller’s Death of a Salesman (1949)—alternated scenes of strict realism with scenes of fantasy and was staged in an obviously unrealistic setting.
