Ventriloquism,   the art of “throwing” the voice, i.e., speaking in such a manner that the sound seems to come from a distance or from a source other than the speaker. At the same time, the voice is disguised (partly by its heightened pitch), adding to the effect. The art of ventriloquism was formerly supposed to result from a peculiar use of the stomach during inhalation—hence the name, from Latin venter and loqui, “belly-speaking.” In fact, the words are formed in the normal manner, but the breath is allowed to escape slowly, the tones being muffled by narrowing the glottis and the mouth being opened as little as possible, while the tongue is retracted and only its tip moves. This pressure on the vocal cords diffuses the sound; the greater the pressure, the greater the illusion of distance.
A figure, or dummy, is commonly used by the ventriloquist to assist in the deception. The ventriloquist animates the dummy by moving its mouth while his own lips remain still, thereby completing the illusion that the voice is the dummy’s, not his. When not using a dummy, the ventriloquist employs pantomime to direct the attention of his listeners to the location or object from which the sound presumably emanates.
Ventriloquism is of ancient origin. Traces of the art are found in Egyptian and Hebrew archaeology. Eurycles of Athens was the most celebrated of Greek ventriloquists, who were called, after him, eurycleides, as well as engastrimanteis (“belly prophets”). Many peoples are adepts in ventriloquism—e.g., Zulus, Maoris, and Eskimo. The first known ventriloquist as such was Louis Brabant, valet to the French king Francis I in the 16th century. Henry King, called the King’s Whisperer, had the same function for the English king Charles I in the first half of the 17th century. The technique was perfected in the 18th century. It is also well known in India and China. In Europe and the United States, ventriloquism holds a place in popular entertainment. Notable ventriloquists have included Edgar Bergen in the United States and Robert Lamouret in France.
