Western theatre,  history of the Western theatre from its origins in pre-Classical antiquity to the present.
For a discussion of drama as a literary form, see dramatic literature and the articles on individual national literatures. For detailed information on the arts of theatrical performance and stagecraft, see theatre, directing, acting, and theatrical production.
Notwithstanding its great diversity of styles, forms, themes, and functions, the theatre of today has its roots in a basic impulse to embody expression mimetically. Theatre is a social art based on explorations of the cycles of nature, the progression from birth to death, and the forces that compel our behaviour.
The lack of documentary evidence makes it impossible to determine exactly how theatre began, though it is generally believed to have evolved from religious rituals. It is difficult to decide at which point ritual became theatre. Important clues as to the nature of theatre in prehistoric times can, however, be found by examining the many patterns of drama and ritual that exist throughout the world today.
The most widely held theory about the origins of theatre is that it evolved from rituals created to act out natural events symbolically, thereby bringing them down to human scale and making the unknown more easily accessible. Individuals would express themselves through rhythmic movement using some kind of adornment to enhance the expressive range of the body. The earliest known evidence of this is in the cave paintings and engravings at Les Trois Frères in southern France. Dating from the Late Paleolithic Period (about 40,000–10,000 bce), these ancient manifestations of art depict half-human, half-animal figures in animated poses. The figures appear to be dancers wearing the heads and skins of animals, suggesting the early use of mask and costume. Certainly the mask has been one of the most potent means of transcending one’s own being or of representing other planes of existence, and in many parts of the world it holds great power and fascination to this day.
As part of these rituals, the natural elements were given personalities, which were in turn abstracted as spirits and gods. By wearing masks and moving in certain patterns, individuals could impersonate these deities. Sacred dances were performed to influence the course of nature—to bring rain, to facilitate a good harvest or a hunt, and to drive out evil. But one of the most important patterns was the enactment of the cycle of the seasons, dramatized by a battle in which winter gave way to spring. This ceremony involved a year-king figure who was ritually killed and supplanted by a new king. At first this was probably a human sacrifice of propitiation; later the killing was mimed. In a further development of this theme, as part of other rituals, the two kings were reduced to a single figure who underwent a process of repeated death and resurrection. This interpretation is used to explain the mock battles in such folk traditions as the European mumming plays or the multiple deaths and rebirths of such figures as the Padstow Horse in Cornwall, England.
A second theory proposes that theatre evolved from shamanistic rituals that manifested a supernatural presence to the audience, as opposed to giving a symbolic representation of it. In this case the shaman, as actor/priest, was able to fall into a trance and become a medium with the other world. The shaman was believed to travel in the spirit world or to actually be possessed by spirits. One of the main activities of shamanism, which is still practiced today, is the exorcism of evil spirits; this can often involve trance dances in which the shaman performs acrobatics, juggling, or vigorous dancing for long periods, demanding a facility and stamina that seemingly would not normally be possible. Fire-walking, fire-eating, and other acts of apparent self-torture, performed while in a trance, are taken as further demonstrations of the supernatural. They represent the opposite pole from illusionism, in which such acts are achieved by trickery. Sometimes puppets are used by shamans as manifestations of supernatural forces in the giving of divinations or oracles. Masks also are an important part of shamanism: it is believed that by putting on a mask the dancer becomes possessed by the spirit represented and takes on the functions of that spirit. The use of body paint and elaborate costumes helps further in the personification of the spirit or demon.
These ritual elements gave rise to an archetypal genre known as the demon play, a primitive dance drama in which the force of good exorcises the force of evil. The demon play is still performed in various guises in parts of Asia. An interesting component, which also occurs in later Western theatre, is the use of clowns—often deformed—to parody the more serious figures.
Shamanism emphasizes the special skills that actors have traditionally developed and that set them apart from the rest of society. It also shows the way the actor’s techniques can help to transport the audience’s imagination beyond the actual space where the performance takes place. The “nature worship” theory expresses the idea that disguise is one of the fundamental aspects of the actor’s art. Indeed, when an individual addressing a gathering modifies the manner, voice, or appearance of an expression, the event becomes theatrical rather than actual. This also conforms to Aristotle’s definition of theatre as “an imitation of an action”—i.e., not the action itself. Shamanism, on the other hand, is not an imitation but a direct manifestation.
In cultures where the ritual elements of theatre have remained intact—in South India and Bali, for example—the performances of plays and dance dramas have acquired an aura of deep respect and almost awesome power over their audience. However, where the ritual has continued in empty form long after the full significance of its content has been lost, as in modern performances of mumming plays or the Padstow Horse, it becomes little more than a quaint entertainment. The development of Western theatre lies between these two extremes and polarizes into its two primary types of experience—tragedy and comedy.
In ancient Egypt, religious ritual moved toward a more explicitly theatrical enactment. The pantheon of animal-headed gods and the stories of the soul’s journey after death into the other world provided rich material for ceremonies and rituals. Priests were thought to have impersonated the deities by wearing stylized masks and reciting hymns and prayers; carvings depicting masked dancers, dated at 3500 bce, have been found in Egypt.
The so-called Pyramid Texts have been assembled from fragments of prayers found carved on the walls of royal tombs of the Old Kingdom (c. 2686–c. 2160 bce). The most important of these involved the god Osiris. He was the subject of what was known as the Abydos passion play, a yearly ritual performed from the period of the Old Kingdom until about 400 ce. The Abydos passion play depicts the slaying of Osiris and his followers by his brother Seth, the enactment of which apparently resulted in many real deaths. The figure of Osiris, symbolically represented in the play, is then torn to pieces by Seth, after which his remains are gathered by his wife Isis and son Horus, who subsequently restore him to life. The play thus follows the pattern of birth, death, and resurrection, and it also echoes the cycle of the seasons.
Ritual dramas like this were performed to ensure the fertility of women, cattle, and crops and to invest the spirit of the community and its leaders with vitality for the new year. Myths relating to Osiris and Horus were especially important because the pharaoh, while alive, was believed to be an incarnation of Horus, and, after his death, he was believed to be Osiris. By the time the Greek historian Herodotus saw the Abydos passion play on a visit to Egypt in 450 bce, he could record that there was also a tradition of popular drama that used comic elements (e.g., Horus, born as a baby but growing to enormous size and developing a voracious appetite), though it still confined itself to religious themes.
During the 19th century, investigators discovered another text preserved on papyrus scrolls. Known as the Book of the Dead (from about 1800 bce), it reads very much like an oratorio. Although there is no evidence that it was actually performed, the ritual is full of theatrical elements. It describes the journey of a soul, brought after death by the jackal-headed god Anubis into the Hall of Truth, where the dead man’s heart is weighed against a feather. If the heart, made light by goodness, does not outweigh the feather, then the soul is brought before Osiris and granted immortality.
