Albert Lasker,  (born May 1, 1880, Freiburg, Ger.—died May 30, 1952, New York, N.Y., U.S.), American advertising executive and philanthropist who is credited with being the founder of modern advertising because he insisted that advertising copy actively sell rather that simply inform.
Lasker was brought to the United States from Germany in his infancy and graduated from high school in Galveston, Texas. In 1898 he went to Chicago to work for the Lord & Thomas advertising agency as an office boy. When Lasker started in advertising, agencies were chiefly responsible for taking copy that clients had already prepared and placing it in various publications. Lasker seized on the newer ideal of advertising that was emerging—that it should seek not merely to passively inform the public about a particular product but rather to actively sell that product by changing people’s attitudes through the use of images, slogans, endorsements, and other sales techniques. By putting to work his definition of advertising as “salesmanship in print,” Lasker quickly rose through the company ranks, becoming head copywriter in 1905 and sole owner of the agency in 1912. His agency’s campaigns revolutionized the industry while making Lord & Thomas the biggest advertising agency in the world. Among their successes were the “Oranges for health, California for wealth” campaign, which popularized both orange juice and the state of California, and “The grains that are shot from guns” campaign for Quaker puffed cereals.
Lasker introduced such products as sanitary napkins (Kotex in 1921) and facial tissues (Kleenex in 1924) to the public. He broke down the taboo against women’s smoking with his advertisement of “Reach for a Lucky instead of a sweet,” showing actresses and female opera stars smoking Lucky Strike cigarettes. The slogan made Lucky Strike one of America’s best-selling cigarette brands.
The high-pressure world of advertising took a heavy toll on Lasker, however. During his career he suffered three nervous breakdowns, and in 1942 he finally decided to dissolve the agency that had placed $750,000,000 in ads while under his direction in order to devote himself fully to his philanthropies. Lord & Thomas was then reorganized as Foote, Cone, and Belding.
In 1942 Lasker and his third wife, Mary Lasker (née Woodard), set up a foundation, the Albert and Mary Lasker Foundation, to distribute medical research grants and awards. Mary Lasker, an art dealer, carried on his philanthropies in medicine and public health after her husband’s death.
