Aldemir Bendine,  (born December 10, 1963, Paraguaçu Paulista, São Paulo state, Brazil),  Brazilian business executive who served as CEO of Banco do Brasil (2009–15) and later of Petrobras (2015–16).
Bendine began his association with the government-owned Banco do Brasil in 1978, when he began an internship at that bank at the age of 14. He later earned a bachelor’s degree in business management from the Faculty of Accounting Sciences of Itapetininga and a master’s degree in business administration from the Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro. Before becoming (2006) a member of the executive board of Banco do Brasil, Bendine held a number of managerial posts at the bank, including branch manager, executive manager of the department of cards in the retail-banking office, and vice president of retail and distribution. He was named CEO of Banco do Brasil in April 2009. He also served on the boards of several other companies and professional associations.
As the head of Banco do Brasil, Bendine was noted for his global outlook as he sought to increase the bank’s dealings in international markets. Under his leadership, Banco do Brasil in 2010 acquired a controlling interest in Argentina’s fourth largest private bank, Banco Patagonia. That same year Banco do Brasil also expanded its operations into Africa, where it purchased stakes in several financial institutions based there. In addition, Bendine was instrumental in helping the Brazilian government further its economic agenda by spearheading efforts to lower interest rates and significantly expand credit.
In February 2015 Bendine replaced Maria das Graças Silva Foster as the CEO of the Brazilian state-run oil and gas concern Petrobras, one of the world’s largest oil and gas companies. The appointment followed the abrupt resignation of Foster and other top Petrobras officials amid a massive corruption scandal. A wide-ranging federal investigation (known as Lava Jato [“Car Wash”]) alleged that Petrobras executives and dozens of Brazilian politicians—most of them members of the ruling Workers’ Party (Partido dos Trabalhadores; PT) and its allies—had received millions of dollars in bribes and kickback payments for contracts with Petrobras, principally from large construction firms. Bendine, who claimed no affiliation with the PT or any other political party but was widely viewed as a loyalist of Brazilian Pres. Dilma Rousseff’s administration, was given the leadership of the energy giant despite having no experience in the sector. He faced the daunting task of leading a turnaround of a company not only beset by scandal but also laden with debt and hindered by declining international oil prices.
Bendine’s tenure at Petrobas was short-lived. He resigned in May 2016, several weeks after Rousseff was suspended from office amid corruption allegations. The following year he was charged with various crimes in connection to bribes allegedly received from Odebrecht, a Brazilian construction company. Bendine was convicted of corruption and money laundering in 2018, and he was sentenced to 11 years in prison. In 2019, however, the country’s highest court overturned his conviction.
