Alexander Majors,  (born October 4, 1814, Simpson county, Kentucky, U.S.—died January 14, 1900, Chicago, Illinois), American businessman and coproprietor of Russell, Majors and Waddell, the most prominent freight, mail, and passenger transportation company in the United States in the mid-19th century. The company founded and operated the Pony Express (1860–61).
Majors grew up on the Missouri frontier in a one-window log cabin built by his father. Almost from its arrival in Missouri in 1820, his devout, hardworking settler family was beset with calamity, including a crop-destroying plague of grasshoppers and a devastating tornado. When Majors was age 12, his mother died from injuries suffered in a wagon accident; at age 13 he was left in charge of the family farm while his father made an ultimately fruitless journey to the Rocky Mountains to prospect for silver.
Having married in 1834 and worked a small farm, Majors volunteered to fight in the Mexican-American War in 1846 and was wounded. After the war, in addition to tending his own crops, he began hauling neighbours’ crops to market in Independence, Missouri, and trading with Native Americans. With five wagons and 78 head of oxen purchased via a loan, he entered the freight business full-time, winning a contract in 1848 
to haul supplies from Independence to Santa Fe, New Mexico Territory, a dangerous 1,600-mile (2,500-km) round-trip trek through hostile Indian territory that Majors’s party made in a record 92 days, earning a profit of $1,500.
Deeply religious, Majors rested on the Sabbath, an uncommon habit among hard-driving wagon bosses. He even handed out small leather-bound Bibles to his employees, and he wrote out a pledge, similar to the one riders of the Pony Express would have to take, that each employee had to recite:
Majors’s freight company continued to grow, and by the mid-1850s he had earned a reputation as one of the most reliable freighters in the West. Ultimately he joined forces in 1854 with William Russell and William Waddell to form Russell, Majors and Waddell. At home on the prairie and skilled in the handling of horses, oxen, and heavy wagons, Majors was the firm’s on-site foreman when it mounted its Pony Express venture.
When the Pony Express ended, Majors sold everything he owned to pay his creditors and then established a small freighting company that was undone by bad weather. Later he tried prospecting for silver, also without success. In the early 1890s Buffalo Bill Cody arranged for dime novelist Prentiss Ingraham to help Majors write his autobiography, Seventy Years on the Frontier (1893).
