Angela Ahrendts,  (born June 12, 1960, New Palestine, Indiana, U.S.), American business executive who held high-level positions at a number of fashion companies—notably Burberry Group PLC, where she served as CEO (2006–14)—before becoming vice president of retail and online stores (2014–19) at computer giant Apple Inc.
After graduating (1981) from Ball State University with a degree in marketing and merchandising, Ahrendts moved to New York City. She had long dreamed of working in the fashion industry, and in 1989 she was named president of Donna Karan International. After honing her skills in merchandising and licensing at that luxury brand, Ahrendts took her talents to accessories firm Henri Bendel (1996–98) and then to Liz Claiborne, Inc. (later Fifth & Pacific Companies, Inc., and then Kate Spade & Co.), where in 2002 she was named executive vice president.
When Ahrendts became CEO at Burberry in 2006, the somewhat-stodgy 150-year-old outerwear company was seeking to evolve into a modern international label with a wide range of clothing lines. She advanced the adoption of digital technology at Burberry, improving the customer experience on the company’s Web site and raising the firm’s profile with video runway shows and a greater use of social-media sites. She also opened new retail outlets in underserved but potentially lucrative markets such as China, Latin America, and the Middle East; encouraged expansion into the fragrance and beauty business; and introduced the use of Apple iPad tablets in Burberry’s stores to enable the staff to provide high-end retail customers with more-efficient, personalized service. Ahrendts reportedly tripled corporate revenue while making the company a global luxury brand.
In 2013 it was announced that Ahrendts would join Apple as its senior vice president of retail and online stores. Although the news came as a surprise to most observers in both the technology and the fashion industries, she had a proven ability to improve what she called “the customer journey” in high-end retail fashion. Ahrendts formally took up her post at Apple in 2014. Much of her focus was on the company’s retail stores, which she sought to redesign as “town squares.” In addition, she introduced “Today at Apple,” in-store courses. In February 2019 it was announced that Ahrendts was leaving in April. The news was unexpected, and it came as Apple faced declining iPhone sales.
