Barry Diller,  (born February 2, 1942, San Francisco, California, U.S.), American media executive who served as CEO of numerous companies, most notably Twentieth Century-Fox (1984–92), where he created the Fox Network, and IAC/InterActiveCorp (2003–10), an Internet venture.
Diller dropped out of the University of California, Los Angeles, and in 1961 he took a job as a mail clerk at the William Morris Agency. In 1966 he began working as a programming assistant at the American Broadcasting Company, where he rose in the ranks to become a vice president of the company. There he gained acclaim for his successful programming innovations such as the TV miniseries—notably Roots—and the made-for-TV movie of the week. In 1974 he moved to Paramount Pictures, where he served as chairman and chief executive. Under his leadership Paramount became the most successful of the Hollywood studios in the late 1970s and the early ’80s, producing such movies as Saturday Night Fever and Raiders of the Lost Ark and the popular television series Cheers. In 1985 he became chairman and chief executive of Twentieth Century-Fox and later, under new owner Rupert Murdoch, was given the job of creating a fourth television network. With programs such as Married…with Children and The Simpsons delivered by satellite to a hastily assembled group of affiliates, the Fox Network succeeded against all odds.
In 1992 Diller left Fox and purchased QVC, a home-shopping cable network. Two years later he was defeated in his attempt to buy his old employer, which had been renamed Paramount Communications. In the same year, QVC and CBS announced a merger, but it was quickly squelched by QVC investors. Diller then sold QVC and started on a series of acquisitions and mergers. In 1995 he bought Silver King Communications, Inc., a 1992 spin-off of the Home Shopping Network (HSN), which included a number of local television stations. By the end of the year, Diller had become the chairman and CEO of the corporation, which acquired HSN in 1996. He subsequently merged both Silver King and HSN with the newly acquired Savoy Pictures Entertainment, Inc., to form HSN, Inc. Following the completion of his acquisition of the two cable networks USA Network and the Sci-Fi Channel (now Syfy)—through which he acquired assets of the production company Universal Television and gained partial ownership of the international ticket retailer Ticketmaster—HSN, Inc., was renamed USA Networks, Inc. (USAI), in 1998. Diller subsequently merged the company’s online division, Ticketmaster Online, with the online city guide CitySearch to form Ticketmaster Online–CitySearch, Inc. In 1999 he acquired the independent-film studios October Films and Gramercy Pictures, which he merged to form USA Films (which later became Focus Features).
By the turn of the century, Diller had created a vast multimedia empire by consolidating his acquisitions. From 2002 to 2003 he served as the interim cochairman and CEO of the Paris-based media conglomerate Vivendi Universal, S.A. USAI partnered with Vivendi in the creation of an American subsidiary called Vivendi Universal Entertainment LLLP; USAI in 2003 became the interactive-commerce company InterActiveCorp. The following year USAI became IAC/InterActiveCorp, which operated such Web sites as Ask.com and the online dating service Match.com. In 2010 Diller stepped down as CEO, though he continued as chairman.
