Carly Fiorina, née Cara Carleton Sneed,  (born September 6, 1954, Austin, Texas, U.S.), American business executive who, as CEO (1999–2005) of Hewlett-Packard Company, was the first woman to head a company listed on the Dow Jones Industrial Average. She sought the Republican Party nomination for president in 2016.
She was the daughter of Joseph Sneed, a judge and law professor, and Madelon Sneed, an artist. Her family moved often, and she attended school in Ghana, the United Kingdom, and the U.S. states of North Carolina and California. After graduating from Stanford University in 1976 with a bachelor’s degree in medieval history and philosophy, she attended law school at the University of California, Los Angeles, but dropped out after only one semester. She later studied at the University of Maryland, College Park (M.B.A., 1980), and at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Sloan School of Management (M.S., 1989).
At age 25 she started in an entry-level position at AT&T Corporation. Within 10 years she was named the company’s first female officer, and at age 40 she became head of AT&T’s North American operations. (She later married Frank Fiorina, an AT&T executive.) She engineered the successful spin-off of AT&T’s research division as Lucent Technologies, Inc., in 1996. Two years later she was promoted to president of Lucent’s Global Service Provider Business, in charge of sales to the world’s largest telecommunications companies.
In 1999 Hewlett-Packard Company (HP) announced that she would become its new CEO—the first outsider to lead HP in its 60-year history. Fiorina encountered some resistance from employees as she updated the “HP Way” of working—a traditional, consensus-based system that she felt had become slow and bureaucratic. Her plan to merge HP, then the second largest computer company in the United States, with Compaq Computer Corporation, then the third largest, was contested by Walter Hewlett and David Packard, the sons of HP’s cofounders. Fiorina prevailed, however, winning the support of shareholders by a slim margin of 51.4 percent of the votes cast. In 2002 the two firms merged, retaining the Hewlett-Packard name. The deal, however, failed to generate the expected profits, and in 2005 Fiorina was forced to resign as CEO.
After leaving HP, Fiorina published an autobiography, Tough Choices, in 2006. She served as a commentator for Fox News and as a consultant to the 2008 U.S. presidential campaign of Sen. John McCain. In November 2009 Fiorina announced that she was running for the U.S. Senate, and she secured the nomination with a commanding victory in the Republican primary in June 2010. In the general election, however, she was defeated by Barbara Boxer. Fiorina remained politically active, notably founding (2014) the Unlocking Potential Project, a political action committee dedicated to recruiting female voters, and served as its chairman.
In May 2015 Fiorina announced that she was entering the U.S. presidential election race of 2016. That month she also published Rising to the Challenge: My Leadership Journey. Fiorina gained momentum in the race after a strong debate performance in August 2015, but she was unable to maintain support amid a crowded field of Republican candidates. After disappointing finishes in both the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary, she suspended her campaign in February 2016. The following month Fiorina, who was a vocal critic of front-runner Donald Trump, endorsed Ted Cruz. In late April Cruz announced that, should he be named the party’s nominee, Fiorina would be his running mate. However, he dropped out of the race a week later.
