César Ritz,  (born Feb. 23, 1850, Niederwald, Switz.—died  Oct. 26, 1918, Küssnacht, near Lucerne), founder of the Paris hotel that made his name a synonym for elegance and luxury.
In order to learn the restaurant business, Ritz got a job at the finest restaurant in Paris, the Voisin, until the Siege of Paris of 1870 caused shortages of food and fuel and put an end to Voisin’s business. After the Franco-German War, Ritz worked as maitre d’hotel in the Hotel Splendide in Paris, where he again came in contact with the celebrated and the wealthy. He served as a guide to continental taste for such Americans as Cornelius Vanderbilt and J.P. Morgan, who came to Paris in the 1870s.
When fashionable society moved on, Ritz decided to move with them. For the next few years, he worked in hotels in resort areas throughout Europe. From 1877 to 1887, Ritz managed the summer season at the luxurious Grand Hotel National in Lucerne, Switz. He was also general manager of the Grand Hotel in Monte Carlo, where he met the great chef Auguste Escoffier.
Together they opened a restaurant in Baden-Baden in 1887. Impressed by a party at their restaurant, Richard D’Oyly Carte invited Ritz to manage the newly opened Savoy in London. Ritz and Escoffier made London, as banker Otto Kahn put it, “a place worth living in.” Ritz converted London society to the practice of dining out. His customers at the Savoy urged him to open a hotel in Paris. With a loan from Marnier La Postelle (who was grateful to Ritz for suggesting the name Grande Marnier for the liqueur that he had invented) Ritz purchased a mansion in Paris and spent two years supervising the furnishing of its 210 rooms. The Ritz Hotel opened in 1898 to a crowd of diners.
By this time, Ritz had a controlling interest in nine other restaurants and hotels including the Carlton in London.
In June 1902, Ritz suffered a nervous collapse. Although he took some part in planning the London Ritz, opened in 1905, he was never able to return to managing the business. He died an invalid after 16 years of illness. His eventual successor was his son Charles.
