Charles E. Merrill, in full Charles Edward Merrill,  (born Oct. 19, 1885, Green Cove Springs, Fla., U.S.—died  Oct. 6, 1956, Southampton, N.Y.), American investment banker who guided his company through a series of mergers that resulted in the creation of the brokerage firm of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Inc., the largest in the United States. Merrill was also the father of James Merrill, one of the most distinguished American poets of the late 20th century.
After a series of jobs as a reporter, baseball player, and businessman, Merrill joined the commercial-paper house of George H. Burr & Company in New York City in 1911. He organized a bond department there, joined Eastman Dillon & Co. for one year, and in 1914 began his own investment-banking firm of Merrill, Lynch & Company, in partnership with Edmund C. Lynch. Merrill served as its director until his death.
With the successful underwriting of a $1,250,000 stock offering prior to World War I, Merrill Lynch earned a positive reputation and became the brokerage house for some of the largest chain-store securities, including S.S. Kresge Co., J.C. Penney Co., Safeway Stores, and First National Stores. Merrill himself played an important role in 1926 in the creation of Safeway Stores, Inc., under whose auspices he founded Family Circle Magazine six years later. Foreseeing the impending stock-market crash, Merrill advised his firm’s clients to lighten their stock holdings in 1928. Many of them did and cut their losses.
In 1930 the company left the brokerage field, concentrating instead on underwriting and investment banking; but it returned to brokerage in 1940, with amalgamations that resulted the following year in a change of company name to Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Beane. (It became Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith after Merrill’s death.) One of the greatest contributions of Merrill Lynch was introducing stocks and bonds as an investment option to America’s growing middle class. At Merrill’s death in 1956, his firm boasted 115 offices in the United States.
