Daniel Vasella, in full Daniel Lucius Vasella,  (born August 15, 1953, Fribourg, Switzerland), Swiss doctor and businessman who served as chairman (1999–2013) and CEO (1996–2010) of the pharmaceutical company Novartis.
Vasella received an M.D. degree in 1980 from the University of Bern, Switzerland. For the next four years, he held residencies at various hospitals in Bern and Zürich before serving (1984–88) as the attendant physician at C.L. Lory-Haus at Bern University Hospital. He left medicine in 1988 and joined the marketing department of Sandoz Pharmaceuticals Corp. in New Jersey, the U.S.-based division of Sandoz Pharma Ltd. The following year Vasella graduated from Harvard Business School, and he moved up quickly in the marketing and sales department at Sandoz to become department head of special-product marketing. He was appointed assistant vice president in 1992 and became head of the corporate-marketing department the following year. In 1994 Vasella returned to Switzerland and accepted the position of head of the worldwide development office at Sandoz’s headquarters in Basel. He was named CEO of Sandoz the following year.
Early in 1996 Vasella was named CEO of the newly formed Swiss pharmaceutical giant Novartis, which was established as a result of the largest merger ever in the pharmaceutical industry. The combined company united industry giants Sandoz Ltd. and Ciba-Geigy Ltd., two Swiss-based health care groups, in a $29 billion merger that made Novartis second in size and influence only to Britain’s Glaxo Wellcome, the world’s largest pharmaceutical concern. As CEO, Vasella was responsible for coordinating the integration of the Sandoz and Ciba-Geigy product lines. He assumed a joint leadership role with Novartis chairman Alex Krauer, who had served as chairman of Ciba-Geigy. The two were responsible for overseeing the company’s overall development and direction, and Vasella also served as head of the company’s executive committee. After Krauer retired in 1999, Vasella was appointed chairman of Novartis. In 2003 he published the book Magic Cancer Bullet: How a Tiny Orange Pill Is Rewriting Medical History (reissued in 2004), written with Robert Slater, in which he discussed Novartis’s breakthrough cancer drug Gleevec, also known as Glivec. In 2010 Vasella stepped down as CEO, and three years later he retired as chairman.
Vasella also joined the boards of PepsiCo, Inc. (2002), and XBiotech (2014). The recipient of numerous honours, in 2003 he received Harvard Business School’s Alumni Achievement Award and the CancerCare Human Services Award.
