Donna Shalala, in full Donna Edna Shalala,  (born February 14, 1941, Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.), American educator, administrator, and public official who was secretary of health and human services (1993–2001) under U.S. Pres. Bill Clinton and who later served in the U.S. House of Representatives (2019–21).
Shalala attended Western College in Oxford, Ohio, earning a B.A. in 1962. After graduation she spent two years in the Peace Corps in Iran. Upon her return, she entered Syracuse University, where she earned a master’s degree in social science in 1968 and a Ph.D. in 1970. She spent the next nine years teaching political science and education at the university level at Bernard Baruch College (part of the City University of New York [CUNY]) and at Columbia University’s Teachers College.
In 1975, while still teaching, she served as the director and treasurer of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, credited with helping rescue New York City from near bankruptcy. From 1977 to 1980, during the administration of Pres. Jimmy Carter, Shalala worked as the assistant secretary for policy research and development at the Department of Housing and Urban Development in Washington, D.C. In this position, she worked primarily on women’s issues—setting up shelters, establishing mortgage credits, and pressing for antidiscrimination measures.
In 1980 she became president of CUNY’s Hunter College. There she added to her reputation as a committed feminist by overseeing dramatic increases in the percentages of female and minority faculty and administrators. In 1988 she became the chancellor of the University of Wisconsin at Madison, one of the largest universities in the United States. Confronted by a campus afflicted with racial tension, she instituted the “Madison Plan,” which increased recruitment of minority students and faculty and reflected her commitment to a “multiethnic, multiracial, multicultural” academic environment.
A dynamic leader and a strong advocate, Shalala was selected to be secretary of health and human services in 1993. Her main objectives in her new position included revising the financial structure of the country’s health-care system, implementing a nationwide immunization plan, combating tobacco use among children and teens, and continuing and expanding AIDS research. She also worked with Vice President Al Gore to increase organ donation.
Following her eight-year stint under Clinton, Shalala returned to education, serving as president of the University of Miami (2001–15). In 2007 U.S. Pres. George W. Bush appointed Shalala and Bob Dole to head a commission investigating the problems at Walter Reed Army Medical Center. The following year Shalala received the Presidential Medal of Freedom. In 2018 she launched a bid for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives, running in Florida’s 27th district. She was elected later that year and took office in January 2019. In December 2019 Shalala voted to impeach Pres. Donald Trump, who was accused of withholding aid to Ukraine in order to pressure the country into opening a corruption investigation into Joe Biden, a political rival; Trump was later acquitted by the Senate.
Shalala ran for reelection in 2020 but was defeated. She left office the following year.
