Frank Ernest Gannett,  (born September 15, 1876, Bristol, New York, U.S.—died December 3, 1957, Rochester, New York), American publisher who established a major chain of daily newspapers in small and medium-sized U.S. cities. During his career Gannett bought many newspapers and often merged them, creating one paper from two or more.
Gannett was reared in rural upstate New York, where his father was a farmer who later came to own several hotels. Frank attended Cornell University, where he worked on the school newspaper and was the campus correspondent for the Ithaca Journal (which he later owned) and the Syracuse Herald. Gannett graduated from Cornell in 1898, and in 1900 the Ithaca Journal hired him as city editor. He soon became managing editor and business manager, then moved through a variety of other editorial jobs with various newspapers until 1906. In that year he bought a half interest in the Elmira (New York) Gazette, his first publishing venture. In 1907 Gannett merged the Gazette with the Elmira Star, creating the Star-Gazette, eliminating competition, and setting a pattern for future acquisitions. In the next two decades Gannett acquired various newspapers in medium-sized cities in New York state; his strategy was to pursue the profitable advertising and expandable circulations presented by one-newspaper towns and cities, rather than trying to obtain possession of a single large, prestigious big-city newspaper.
Becoming interested in radio, Gannett in 1922 backed Lawrence G. Hickson’s purchase of station WHQ in Rochester, New York, the first link in a Gannett broadcasting chain. By 1954 he owned 22 newspapers as well as four radio and three television stations. In general, Gannett gave the editors of his papers control over editorial policy, but he would not permit them to accept liquor advertisements. By the late 1970s and through the end of the 20th century, the Gannett Company, Inc., was the United States’ largest newspaper chain in terms of the number of different newspapers published and total circulation.
