Freda Ehmann, née Freda Loeber,  (born August 18, 1839, Neideruff, Germany—died November 12, 1932, Piedmont, California, U.S.), German businesswoman known as the “mother of the California ripe olive industry” for her contributions to the olive industry in the late 19th century.
Ehmann made her mark late in life. At age 56 she was poor and recently widowed. Her only asset was a 20-acre (8-hectare) orchard of olive trees that she owned with her son, Edwin, near Oroville, California. Olives had been introduced to California by Franciscan missionaries in the mid-1700s and flourished in the Mediterranean-like climate of California’s great Central Valley. No one in the olive business had managed to generate a product that would not spoil in a short period of time. Working with Eugene Hilgard at the University of California, Berkeley, Ehmann developed the process of curing ripe (black) olives to effectively preserve them in cans.
Ehmann traveled throughout Canada and the United States, particularly Pennsylvania and New York, obtaining contracts for her product. In 1898 she started the Ehmann Olive Company in Oroville. It was a family affair, with her son in charge of marketing and selling and her son-in-law, Charles Bolles, helping her with production. By 1904 they were distributing olives nationally.
Ehmann was a fair and generous employer. During a time when foreign workers were violently discriminated against, she provided work for many Asian immigrants and paid them the same wage as their American counterparts. Women were also looked after and provided with special amenities. Active in woman suffrage, she was admired by Susan B. Anthony and Carrie Chapman Catt.
Ehmann’s efforts helped the California olive industry prosper into more than 35,000 acres (14,000 hectares) of orchards producing in excess of 100,000 tons of olives tended by some 1,200 growers. The Ehmann home, known as the House the Olives Built, was constructed in 1911; in the 21st century it served as the headquarters of the Butte County Historical Society in Oroville.
