Frederick W. Smith, in full Frederick Wallace Smith, byname Fred Smith,  (born August 11, 1944, Marks, Mississippi, U.S.), American business executive who founded (1971) Federal Express (later called FedEx), one of the largest express-delivery companies in the world.
Smith’s father was a successful businessman who founded Dixie Greyhound Lines, among other ventures. As a child, the younger Smith suffered from Legg-Calvé-Perthes syndrome, a potentially crippling disease. He eventually recovered, and, while a teenager, he learned to pilot airplanes. He later studied economics at Yale University, where he wrote a paper about overnight delivery services. After graduating in 1966, Smith served two tours with the U.S. Marines during the Vietnam War. By the time he was discharged in 1970, Smith had received two Purple Hearts and attained the rank of captain.
In 1971 Smith became the founding president of Federal Express, an express-delivery service that he envisioned as an integrated system of airplanes and trucks. It became operational two years later, with night flights from Memphis, its base, to 25 U.S. cities. Federal Express initially struggled—largely due to rising fuel costs—and it lost nearly $30 million in its first 26 months. Smith reportedly kept the business afloat with money he won playing blackjack in Las Vegas. The venture ultimately turned around, recording a profit in 1976. Smith took Federal Express public two years later.
Under Smith’s direction—he held various positions within the business—Federal Express began offering intercontinental services in 1984, and by the early 21st century the company operated in some 220 countries. Its numerous innovations included the introduction of drop boxes (1975) and the online tracking of packages (1994). In addition, Smith oversaw the acquisition of Kinko’s (2004), which eventually became FedEx Office, and the rebranding of the company as FedEx (2000). His various strategies helped make FedEx and its parent company, FedEx Corporation, worth more than $40 billion by 2016.
