Fremont Lawson, in full Victor Fremont Lawson, Fremont also spelled Freemont,  (born September 9, 1850, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.—died August 19, 1925, Chicago), newspaper editor and publisher, one of the first in the United States to assign correspondents to live and gather news in major cities outside the country. Before this innovation (1898) American newspapers relied on dispatches from British or other foreign sources. He also led the successful effort of Western publishers to rescue the Associated Press (AP) from a combine that leaked its news to the rival United Press (UP).
Already the owner of a Norwegian-language paper in Chicago, Lawson in 1876 bought an interest in the Chicago Daily News, which had been founded in 1875 by Melville Elijah Stone (1848–1929) as the first one-cent newspaper in the Midwest. Under Lawson’s business management the circulation of the Daily News increased markedly within a year. In 1881 Lawson and Stone started a morning edition that later (1883) was called the Chicago Record. After numerous mergers and variations in name, it was known as the Record-Herald when Lawson sold his interest (1914) and as Chicago’s American when it ceased publication (1969). Lawson retained proprietorship of the Daily News until his death.
Lawson’s active interest in the AP began with concern over delayed and inconsistent New York financial reports reaching Chicago newspapers. Investigation led him to discover that the majority owners of the profit-making UP were in de facto control of AP, a nonprofit cooperative. He rallied Western newspapers against collusive Eastern publishers in a successful and sweeping reorganization of AP that began the agency’s climb to dominance. Lawson was a director of AP (1893–1925) and its president (1894–1900) while Stone was its manager. His advocacy of a U.S. postal savings bank caused him to be called the father of the law that established it (1910). Lawson was also a leading benefactor of the Congregational church and the Young Men’s Christian Association.
