George Speight,  (born 1957?, Naivicula, Fiji), Fijian businessman who was convicted of treason and sentenced to life in prison for leading a coup against the government in 2000.
Speight’s mother was an ethnic Fijian, and his father was a well-to-do farmer of Fijian-European descent who later became a member of Parliament. Speight studied marketing in Australia and later earned bachelor’s and master’s degrees in business in the United States, from Andrews University in Berrien Springs, Mich. After completing his education, he worked in Australia as a marketer for an insurance company and as a computer salesman.
Speight returned to Fiji in 1996, at a time when his father was a senior member in the government. Largely through his father’s influence, he became chairman of Fiji Pine, Ltd., and Fiji Hardwood Corp., Ltd.—two companies engaged in Fiji’s lucrative timber business. In May 1999 the government was defeated in the election that brought ethnic Indian Mahendra Chaudhry and his Fiji Labour Party to power. With his father out of office, Speight lost much of his political clout and, partly as a result, was fired as chairman of the two timber companies in 1999. He also lost his job as a local managing director of the insurance brokering firm Heath Fiji, Ltd., having been blamed for financial irregularities at the company.
Declaring that he was defending the rights of ethnic Fijians against the increasing power of the country’s ethnic Indian minority, George Speight led a small group of armed men to the Parliament complex in Suva, the capital, on May 19, 2000, and took Prime Minister Chaudhry and about 40 other legislators hostage. Speight and his followers then demanded that Fiji’s constitution be replaced so that ethnic Indians would be excluded from government, amnesty would be granted to those who had participated in the coup, and he and his supporters would have a voice in choosing the new government. All these conditions were met on July 9 under the terms of an amnesty accord reached between Fiji’s military and the rebels, who carried through on their promise to release the hostages. On July 26, however, Speight was arrested and taken into custody. The amnesty agreement was later declared invalid because the military commander had signed “under duress.”
Soon after Speight was arrested, his supporters created incidents of civil disorder in many parts of Fiji and clashed with the army. After complaining that he and others had been assaulted by soldiers while in custody, Speight pleaded not guilty to charges of unlawful assembly and failing to disarm. In August Speight and 16 of his followers were also charged with treason.
While he was being held in prison, Speight was elected to Parliament in September 2001 but was dismissed that December because of his inability to attend in person. In February 2002 Speight was convicted of treason and sentenced to death; the sentence was later commuted to life in prison.
