Guy Laliberté,  (born September 2, 1959, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada), French Canadian performer and entrepreneur who cofounded (1984) the acrobatic troupe Cirque du Soleil, which became a hugely profitable entertainment company.
Laliberté left Canada at age 18 to hitchhike across Europe, where he earned money playing his accordion and met street performers who taught him the arts of fire eating and stilt walking. After returning to Quebec, he joined a group of performers formed by Gilles Ste-Croix in Baie-Saint-Paul, and in 1982 Laliberté helped organize an international festival for street performers in the town. The success of this and subsequent festivals prompted Laliberté to seek a grant to create the Cirque du Soleil (“Circus of the Sun”) as part of Quebec’s 450th anniversary celebration in 1984. The circus struggled initially (the tent collapsed on the first day) but soon hit its stride and was ultimately a financial success.
Inspired by this success, Laliberté and his band of kindred spirits determined to keep the Cirque du Soleil operating. He cultivated both public and private investors who were taken by the group’s originality and determination, and in 1985 Cirque du Soleil began touring North America. The success of the company grew rapidly, and by the early 1990s it was mounting productions in Europe and Asia. In 1993 the troupe debuted its first permanent show, Mystère, at the Treasure Island casino in Las Vegas. Laliberté later opened other permanent shows in Las Vegas as well as at various other locations, including Walt Disney World in Orlando, Florida, and the Tokyo Disney Resort.
Each of Cirque du Soleil’s productions was unique, but all of them shared the core elements of Laliberté’s distinctive vision of a circus. There were no animal acts or star performers, and there was no talking. Instead, the shows were built around an imaginative fusion of varied acrobatic and artistic disciplines culled from around the world. The shows were known for their musical scores, which were rooted in global popular music; simple but engaging plot lines; fantastic costumes and special effects; and, above all, spellbinding feats of physical daring. For example, O, the celebrated production at Las Vegas’s Bellagio casino, was performed in, on, and above a large pool of water; KÀ was the fiery adventure of a set of twins that drew heavily upon the martial arts; and the touring production Corteo was a festive parade that also examined the contradictions embodied by the character of the clown. In 2015 investors acquired a majority stake in Cirque du Soleil, with Laliberté retaining a minority interest. However, he continued to serve as creative advisor.
In 2009 Laliberté was a space tourist aboard the Russian spacecraft Soyuz TMA-16, which visited the International Space Station. He was also a noted poker player. The recipient of numerous honours, he was awarded the National Order of Quebec (1997) in recognition of his contribution to Quebec’s culture.
