Hosain Rahman,  (born September 9, 1976, Covina, California, U.S.), American entrepreneur who was perhaps best known as the CEO (1999–2017) and cofounder of the wearable technology company Aliph (also known as Jawbone).
Rahman was the son of Pakistani immigrants who worked as oil-services consultants in Los Angeles. After he graduated (1999) from Stanford University with a degree in mechanical engineering, he founded AliphCom, Inc. (later renamed Aliph, Inc.), with Alexander Asseily, a British-born fellow Stanford graduate who later returned to England. Together they endeavoured to create useful devices that combined technological innovation with stylish design. Some of their earliest work on military-grade noise-canceling technology was funded by the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA).
In 2004 Jawbone, as the company was most commonly called, released its first headset, a Bluetooth-driven device created by chief designer Yves Béhar to hang on the wearer’s ear and communicate with the wearer’s mobile phone. Over the next five years, the product made Jawbone into a profitable company, and the headset was displayed as an artistic work in museums worldwide. During the financial crisis of 2008–09, however, Rahman was forced to lay off about one-third of the staff. This event, combined with a growing backlash against such devices by consumers and the technology industry, compelled Rahman and his staff to develop newer products.
Rahman in 2010 introduced Jawbone’s first nonheadset product, Jambox—a small lightweight wireless speaker designed to amplify music from a smartphone, laptop, iPad tablet, or other wireless device. Jambox, which came in several sizes and colours, was designed to replace plug-in audio docks (devices with built-in speakers that make a direct physical connection to smartphones and other music players).
In November 2011 Jawbone released UP—a computerized bracelet and mobile application that was designed to track and log its wearer’s movements, sleep cycles, and food intake. Many early adopters of the device reported that their units turned off without explanation, and Jawbone’s inability to quickly diagnose the problem (later identified as a broken capacitor that interfered with the device’s battery) threatened to alienate the company’s current and future customers as well as its investors. Rahman defused the situation by writing a letter that offered customers with broken UP devices full refunds and offered customers with working units the option of using them for free. The letter and its guarantee so impressed Jawbone’s investors that a few days after the letter’s release, the company received tens of millions of dollars to help fix the problem. UP was rereleased in November 2012 and soon became a leader in the activity-tracker industry.
In 2014 Jawbone was valued at more than $3 billion, but it subsequently struggled, especially as rival products entered the marketplace. Despite Rahman’s efforts to save the floundering company, Jawbone began liquidating its assets in 2017. Having received some $900 million from investors during its operation, Jawbone was one of the largest venture-backed companies to fail. However, later in 2017 Rahman, who had been involved in the acquisition of Jawbone’s health assets, founded Jawbone Health. He stated that the venture would be a subscription service that monitors users’ health for early detection of problems.
