Howard Stringer, in full Sir Howard Stringer,  (born February 19, 1942, Cardiff, Wales), Welsh-born American  business executive who became the first non-Japanese chairman and CEO (2005–12) of the technology and entertainment corporation Sony.
In 1965, shortly after receiving a master’s degree in modern history from Merton College, Oxford, Stringer moved to the United States. He found a job in the television industry answering telephones at CBS for the Ed Sullivan Show in New York City. Six weeks after he started work, Stringer was drafted into the U.S. Army to fight in the Vietnam War. He declined to use his foreign nationality to avoid the draft and won five medals during his tour of duty.
When Stringer completed his military service in 1967, he returned to CBS and remained there until 1995. For most of that time, he worked for CBS News, and between 1974 and 1976 he won nine Emmy Awards as a writer, director, and executive producer. He became president of CBS in 1988 and proceeded to turn the company’s fortunes around. Among his successes was the hiring away of late-night talk-show host David Letterman from NBC in 1993. In 1995 Stringer left CBS to become chairman and CEO of TELE-TV, the media and technology giant made up of three of the largest telephone companies in the United States.
Stringer joined Sony in 1997 as president of the company’s American subsidiary. In his new role, he reversed the corporation’s unprofitable entertainment operations and made several successful acquisitions, including the highly profitable Spider-Man franchise and the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer library of classic films. Stringer was also able to bring a fresh strategy to Sony’s music division, which he steered into a merger with Bertelsmann, a major media company based in Germany. Stringer’s successes prompted Sony to appoint him chairman and CEO in 2005, and in 2009 he became president. The corporation subsequently struggled, however, posting record losses that were, in part, attributed to a decline in its key consumer-electronics division. In 2012 Stringer stepped down from his various posts and was elected chairman of the board of directors. He resigned from the company in 2013.
Aside from his business endeavours, Stringer served on the boards of charitable organizations, museums, and art centres. He also was the recipient of many awards, including several honorary doctorates. Though he became a U.S. citizen in 1985, Stringer received an honorary British knighthood in 1999.
