I. Michael Heyman, in full Ira Michael Heyman,  (born May 30, 1930, New York, New York, U.S.—died November 19, 2011, Berkeley, California), American scholar known for his academic career at the University of California at Berkeley and for spearheading the digitization of the archives of the Smithsonian Institution during his tenure as secretary (CEO).
Despite Heyman’s early interest in science—he qualified to enter the exclusive Bronx High School of Science but transferred to a private school so that he could play football and basketball—he studied government at Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire, receiving a B.A. in 1951. After serving as a U.S. Marine Corps officer during the Korean War, he entered Yale University Law School, where he became editor of the Yale Law Journal. He graduated in 1956, and from 1958 to 1959 he served as chief law clerk for Chief Justice Earl Warren.
Heyman began his teaching career at the University of California at Berkeley as an acting professor of law in 1959 and became a full professor in 1961 and a professor of law and city and regional planning in 1966. He served as chancellor of the university from 1980 to 1990, during which time he restructured and revitalized the biosciences programs. While at that post, he also became a successful fund-raiser and helped supervise the university museums.
Throughout his career Heyman involved himself in a wide range of issues by both serving on and chairing numerous committees dealing with civil rights, land use, and environmental concerns. From 1993 to 1994 he was deputy assistant secretary for policy at the U.S. Department of the Interior, acting as counselor to Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt on such issues as the Endangered Species Act. He also served on the Smithsonian’s Board of Regents from 1990 to 1994, an involvement that thoroughly acquainted him with the institution.
In 1994 Heyman became the secretary of the Smithsonian Institution (founded 1846), a complex of museums and galleries, several research centres, and the National Zoological Park, most of which are located in Washington, D.C. Heyman’s main task as secretary was the digitization of the Smithsonian’s rich collection of information to make it readily accessible. He retired from the position in 1999. The following year he became the interim director of the Center for Studies in Higher Education at Berkeley, a position he held to 2002.
