Ingvar Kamprad,  (born March 30, 1926, Småland province, Sweden—died January 27, 2018, Småland), Swedish entrepreneur who in 1943 founded IKEA, the world’s largest furniture retailer in the early 21st century.
Kamprad displayed entrepreneurial skills as a boy when he began selling matches to neighbours. In 1943, at age 17, he founded a company called IKEA, the name of which was based on his own initials and on the first letters of the farm (Elmtaryd) and the village (Agunnaryd) where he grew up. He initially sold such items as picture frames, jewelry, and nylon stockings over the telephone; as the business grew, he started distributing catalogs. In 1948 Kamprad began selling inexpensive furniture, and the new merchandise proved to be so popular that in 1951 IKEA began to offer only home furnishings. Two years later he opened a showroom in Almhult, Sweden. IKEA’s low prices angered competitors, and they pressured Swedish suppliers to boycott the company. Kamprad responded by having IKEA design its own merchandise and by contracting with foreign businesses for materials.
In 1956 Kamprad introduced to IKEA’s inventory flat-boxed furniture that was designed to be assembled at home. This proved to be the company’s breakthrough. The new items decreased shipping and labour costs dramatically and allowed customers to easily transport the merchandise home. The compact size of the packaged merchandise also meant that items could be stocked at the sales location instead of in a warehouse, and in 1958 the first IKEA retail outlet opened. IKEA stores followed, first in several countries in western Europe and later in other regions. Over the next 50 years, nearly 300 IKEA stores opened around the world. The distinctive stores—each one highlighted by a vibrant blue and yellow roof—typically had more than 80,000 items in stock and also featured children’s play areas and Swedish restaurants.
In 2000 IKEA began selling merchandise on the Internet, and the company expanded rapidly. By 2003 it was so popular that its catalog had the world’s largest annual print run, and by 2009 the catalog was being issued in more than two dozen languages. IKEA’s phenomenal success made Kamprad one of the richest men in the world in the early 21st century. He wrote (with Bertil Torekull) Historien om IKEA (1998; Leading by Design: The IKEA Story). The book included autobiographical information about Kamprad, notably his involvement with Nazi and fascist groups in the 1940s, for which he publicly apologized.
