Irving Thalberg, in full Irving Grant Thalberg,  (born May 30, 1899, Brooklyn, New York, U.S.—died September 14, 1936, Santa Monica, California), American film executive called the “boy wonder of Hollywood” who, as the production manager of MGM, was largely responsible for that studio’s prestigious reputation.
Born of German immigrant parents, Thalberg suffered from a weak heart and was plagued with health problems all his life. Told by doctors he wouldn’t live past 30, the frail but highly intelligent and ambitious Thalberg lived and worked with an extraordinary intensity. He graduated from high school and worked for two years in the New York offices of Universal Pictures before going to Hollywood as the secretary to the company president, Carl Laemmle. At age 21 Thalberg became Universal’s studio manager.
When MGM was formed four years later, he was hired as the head of production with full authority to reedit any film. He shrewdly ascertained public taste and tightly controlled the studio’s output by supervising the selection of scripts, their revision, and the final editing of the films. The literary flavour of MGM’s products, e.g., The Barretts of Wimpole Street (1934), Mutiny on the Bounty (1935), Romeo and Juliet (1936), and Camille (1937), stemmed mainly from Thalberg’s influence. With Naughty Marietta (1935) he initiated a long series of successful musicals starring Jeanette MacDonald and Nelson Eddy. About the same time, he helped revive the Marx Brothers’ careers by producing two of their best comedies, A Night at the Opera (1935) and A Day at the Races (1937). Thalberg also acted as a liaison between the businessmen who controlled MGM’s finances and the studio’s directors. He supported the star system and discovered and developed many of MGM’s popular screen personalities, including his wife, actress Norma Shearer, whose career Thalberg directed.
Though he was a polite boss who commanded great respect throughout Hollywood, Thalberg was at the same time a driven businessman and a tough taskmaster. He had famous clashes with studio moguls Laemmle, Louis B. Mayer, and Sam Goldwyn and with director Erich von Stroheim. Some have claimed that the autocratic hero of F. Scott Fitzgerald’s final novel The Last Tycoon was based on Thalberg. Quoted as saying “Credit you give yourself is not worth having,” the modest Thalberg would not allow his name to appear on any of the films he produced. After his sudden death from pneumonia at age 37, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, of which Thalberg was a founder, established the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award, given for excellence in production.
