J. Edgar Thomson,  (born Feb. 10, 1808, Springfield Township, Pa., U.S.—died May 27, 1874, Philadelphia), American civil engineer and president of the Pennsylvania Railroad Company who consolidated a network of railroad lines from Philadelphia to various cities in the Midwest and the South, extending as far as Chicago and Norfolk, Va.
Thomson joined the Pennsylvania engineer corps at 19. At that time, the corps was surveying the best course for a rail line from Philadelphia to Columbia. In 1830, he became head of the engineering division for the Camden & Amboy Railroad in New Jersey. From 1832 to 1847, he was chief engineer for the Georgia Railroad, which constructed an Atlanta-to-Augusta line, the longest line built by one company up to that time.
In 1846, the Pennsylvania Railroad was chartered to build a railroad system that would allow Pennsylvania to compete with New York and other eastern states in operating trade lines to the west. Hired as chief engineer of the railroad in 1847, he was president by 1852 and held that position until his death. By careful choice of the route and the location of the Horseshoe Curve, Thomson completed a through line that crossed the Alleghenies and the Appalachians without using inclined grades. The line’s Philadelphia-to-Pittsburgh service began in February 1854.
In the next 20 years, Thomson extended the line west, creating the Pennsylvania Company in 1870–71 to lease and develop systems from Pittsburgh to Chicago. He also pushed east and south, leasing the lines of the United Companies of New Jersey in 1871 and acquiring an interest in the Southern Railway Security Company in 1873. To establish Philadelphia as a centre for transatlantic trade, he helped found the American Steamship Company in 1870.
In addition to vastly expanding the Pennsylvania Railroad’s lines, Thomson introduced a number of improvements to the railway industry, including a system for handling passenger baggage and the use of steel rather than iron rails.
