J. Howard Pew, in full John Howard Pew,  (born January 27, 1882, Bradford, Pennsylvania, U.S.—died November 27, 1971, Ardmore, Pennsylvania), American industrialist who expanded, with his brother Joseph N. Pew, Jr., the Sun Oil Company (founded by his father; now called Sunoco) by introducing new refining, marketing, and distribution techniques.
Beginning in 1886, Pew’s father, Joseph Newton Pew, Sr. (1848–1912), piped and refined oil in Pennsylvania and Ohio. When oil was discovered near Beaumont, Texas, in 1901, he bought some wells and built a pipeline to the nearby Neches River, whence the oil could be shipped to his huge new refinery at Marcus Hook, Pennsylvania, for processing. He consolidated his oil-producing holdings in Ohio, Illinois, West Virginia, and Texas in the new Sun Oil Company and was its president from 1901 until his death.
J. Howard Pew joined the company in 1901, was president in 1912–47, and thereafter was a director. He developed a way of making lubricants out of asphaltic Texas oil. Under his leadership, Sun was the first (in 1927) to use pipes heated with mercury vapour rather than with fire to separate lubricants and the first (in 1937) to use Eugene Houdry’s catalytic-cracking process, instead of thermal cracking, to make its gasoline.
In 1916 Pew and his younger brother founded a shipbuilding company that produced oil tankers for Sun and its competitors. Sun’s shipyard used welding instead of riveting to build ships, thereby saving substantially on the amount of steel required per ship. During World War II, Sun pioneered in developing and refining aviation fuels and lubricants. In 1942 the company also adapted the Houdry process to the production of synthetic rubber. In 1948 J. Howard Pew, along with his brother J.N. Pew, Jr., and their two sisters, established the Pew Charitable Trusts, a group of philanthropic foundations that support social needs around the world. One such funded project is the Pew Research Center, a nonpartisan opinion research group that focuses on issues of the press, public policy, and politics.
