James Murdoch, in full James Rupert Jacob Murdoch,  (born December 13, 1972, London, England), British businessman who held various positions at News Corporation, a global media empire founded by his father, Rupert Murdoch. After News Corporation split into two separate conglomerates in 2013, he served as CEO (2015–19) of 21st Century Fox.
James Murdoch was the fourth of Rupert’s six children. He attended Harvard University but dropped out in 1995 to develop a record label, Rawkus Records. He joined News Corporation when it bought Rawkus the following year. In the years that followed, he was one of three Murdoch children who were given responsibility for building parts of the group; the others were his elder siblings, Lachlan and Elisabeth.
In 2000 the younger Murdoch was appointed CEO of Star Television, an Asian satellite service. He revived its fortunes by investing heavily in India. Three years later he became CEO of British Sky Broadcasting (BSkyB), a multinational satellite television company in which News Corporation held a 39 percent stake, and he quickly overcame accusations of inexperience and nepotism to build its revenue base and profitability in Britain, Italy, and Germany. In 2007 Murdoch became nonexecutive chairman of BSkyB and chairman of News Corporation subsidiary News International (NI) when his father gave him wider responsibility for developing media business across Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. By that time Lachlan had left the group and Elisabeth had taken a reduced role, which made James their father’s likely successor.
At the start of July 2011, Murdoch was within days of consolidating his position as his father’s heir apparent, and official British approval was expected for a bid by News Corporation to increase its stake in BSkyB to 100 percent. Then, on July 4, news emerged that a decade earlier News of the World—a Sunday newspaper owned by NI and one of the largest-circulation newspapers in the English-speaking world—had been involved in extensive phone hacking. Within days the police revealed that some thousands of phones had been targeted by, or on behalf of, News of the World, and the scandal mushroomed. The newspaper ceased publication on July 10, 2011, and several days later News Corporation announced that it was dropping its takeover bid of BSkyB.
Murdoch insisted throughout, most notably in July and November 2011 when he gave evidence to a committee of British MPs, that he had devoted his efforts to cleaning up NI, that he had not been involved in the company when the hacking occurred, and that he had ordered full cooperation with the police. He rejected claims that he had known in 2008 that hacking was widespread and was therefore involved in covering up the scandal for three years. In late July 2011 the board of BSkyB voted unanimously to confirm him as chairman of the company.
However, Murdoch continued to face scrutiny and criticism, especially after the discovery in early 2012 of an e-mail to him dated June 2008 that revealed extensive phone hacking at News of the World. Murdoch claimed that, although he had received the e-mail, he had not read it in full before his copy was deleted in early 2011, just prior to the beginning of a police investigation. In February 2012 Murdoch resigned as chairman of NI, and in April he stepped down as chairman of BSkyB (later renamed Sky). He continued as News Corporation’s deputy chief operating officer.
In June 2013 News Corporation split its publishing and television/film holdings. Its publishing division was reconstituted as News Corporation (usually referred to as News Corp). Its television and film holdings became the much-larger and more-profitable conglomerate 21st Century Fox. Murdoch served on the boards of News Corp and 21st Century Fox and stepped into an executive role at 21st Century Fox, becoming its co-chief operating officer in March 2014 and CEO in July 2015. Over the objections of shareholders, he was re-elected chairman of Sky in 2017. However, he left that post the following year when Comcast acquired majority control of Sky. In 2019 the Disney Company purchased most of 21st Century Fox’s holdings, and the remaining assets were reorganized as Fox Corporation, though Murdoch had no position in the newly formed business. Instead, he founded Lupa Systems, an investment firm. In 2020 Murdoch resigned from the board of News Corp, stating that it was “due to disagreements over certain editorial content published by the Company’s news outlets and certain other strategic decisions.” He later accused News Corp of spreading “disinformation” through such properties as Fox News.
