Jørgen Vig Knudstorp,  (born November 21, 1968, Fredericia, Denmark), Danish business executive who was CEO (2004–16) and executive chairman (2017– ) of the LEGO Group. He was credited with turning around the Danish toy maker.
Knudstorp’s original ambition was to become a teacher, and he taught kindergarten for 18 months following his graduation (1987) from the Fredericia Gymnasium. He later attended Århus University, where he eventually earned master’s (1995) and Ph.D. (1998) degrees in economics and served as a lecturer. After a three-year stint (1998–2000) with the management consulting firm McKinsey & Co., he was hired as director of strategic development at LEGO, the Danish toy maker of plastic building blocks. By 2003 he was the company’s senior vice president of corporate affairs. When Knudstorp was named CEO in September 2004, he became the first person from outside the family of LEGO Group founder Ole Kirk Christiansen (or Kristiansen) to hold that position.
Moving quickly to save a company that in 2003 had suffered losses of more than $300 million, Knudstorp implemented aggressive cost-cutting measures and shed underperforming businesses, most notably selling control of the company’s four LEGOLAND theme parks for nearly $460 million. He sharply reduced the development time for new products and—in a highly popular move—involved LEGO’s many devoted adult fans in creative decisions through workshops in which new designs were discussed.  LEGO’s expansion into feature films also proved lucrative, with The LEGO Movie (2014) grossing some $470 million worldwide. The movie’s success helped LEGO surpass Mattel, Inc., as the largest toy maker in the world, though the two companies subsequently competed for the distinction.
In 2016 Knudstorp stepped down as CEO to become executive chairman of the newly formed LEGO Brand Group, which would “facilitate the owner governance of all LEGO brand related activities.” The following year he also became executive chairman of LEGO.
