Joseph N. Pew, Jr., in full Joseph Newton Pew, Jr., also called J.N. Pew, Jr.,  (born  Nov. 12, 1886, Pittsburgh, Pa., U.S.—died  April 9, 1963, Philadelphia, Pa.),  American industrialist who helped run, along with his brother J. Howard Pew, the Sun Oil Company (started by his father; now called Sunoco) and became an influential member of the U.S. Republican Party.
Pew’s father, Joseph Newton Pew, Sr. (1848–1912), began refining oil in Pennsylvania and Ohio in 1886. In 1901 oil was found near Beaumont, Texas, where he purchased wells and built a pipeline that ran to the nearby Neches River, from which oil could be transported to his new refinery at Marcus Hook, Pa. The new Sun Oil Company was created after he consolidated various oil holdings, and the elder Pew served as its president until his death in 1912.
J.N. Pew, Jr., joined his father’s company in 1908. He persuaded the company to lay gasoline pipelines from the Marcus Hook refinery to distribution points in Ohio, New York, and New Jersey and then negotiated with 1,000 landholders in four states for permission to cross their property. In 1916 Pew and his brother J. Howard, who had become Sun Oil’s president in 1912, expanded into the shipbuilding business. Their shipyard created oil tankers for both Sun and its competitors and utilized welding rather than riveting in order to greatly reduce the amount of steel needed to produce each ship.
In 1933–34 Pew went to Washington, D.C., to fight the New Deal petroleum code, which he believed would lead to price-fixing. The experience was the beginning of his involvement with the Republican Party. Besides contributing large sums of money to the party, he purchased trade publications and magazines, including Farm Journal, to sway the public to his way of thinking. He also wielded considerable influence in shaping several Republican Party platforms. In 1948 J.N. Pew, Jr., helped to found, along with his brother and their sisters, the Pew Charitable Trusts, a group of philanthropic foundations that support social needs around the world. Among the foundation’s funded projects is the Pew Research Center, a nonpartisan opinion research group that focuses on issues of the press, public policy, and politics.
