Kate Gleason,  (born Nov. 25, 1865, Rochester, N.Y., U.S.—died Jan. 9, 1933, Rochester),  American businesswoman whose resourceful management skills were largely responsible for the success of her family’s machine-tool business and that of other companies and institutions.
Gleason began helping out in her father’s toolmaking business when she was 11 years old. She briefly attended Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, in 1884 and 1888. Returning to her father’s business, she became secretary and treasurer of the firm in 1890. Her position made her the firm’s chief sales representative as well, and she was evidently the first woman to travel in such a line of goods. Her representation of the firm in the United States and Europe helped bolster its profits and made possible an expansion of the factory.
A much greater expansion followed the company’s response to the rapidly growing demand for beveled gears for the automobile industry in the early years of the new century. Since 1874 Gleason’s father had been perfecting a machine to cut beveled gears, formerly produced by inexact handwork. The new process, together with Kate Gleason’s effective promotion, put the Gleason firm solidly in the forefront of a vital segment of the machine-tool business. So strongly was she identified with the Gleason bevel-gear planer that she was credited by many (including Henry Ford) with having invented it, and she was awarded memberships in the Verein Deutscher Ingenieure in 1913 and the American Society of Mechanical Engineers in 1914, in both cases as the first woman ever so honoured.
After resigning her position with her father’s company in 1913, Gleason engaged in a variety of enterprises. In 1914 she was appointed receiver for another machine-tool firm in East Rochester, which she quickly restored to solvency. During 1917–19 she acted as interim wartime president of the First National Bank of East Rochester. To ameliorate the depressed condition of East Rochester, she undertook a number of projects to stimulate the economy of the city, the largest of which was an innovative housing development. By means of standardized plans and mainly unskilled workers, 100 six-room cement houses were built. This experiment in mass production in housing led to her becoming the only woman member of the American Concrete Institute. In the years immediately following World War I, Gleason also invested much time and money in the restoration of the French village of Septmonts, notably its 12th-century castle tower. In the early 1920s she began developing a resort complex at Beaufort, South Carolina, and later in the decade she began a development in Sausalito, California. She died in 1933, leaving an estate of nearly $1.5 million to various charities.
