Kawamoto Nobuhiko,  (born March 3, 1936, Tokyo, Japan), Japanese business executive who, as president of Honda Motor Company, Ltd. (1990–98), oversaw that company’s spectacular growth during the 1990s.
Kawamoto developed a passion for cars early in life, and as an engineering student at Tōhoku University in Sendai he organized a club that fixed up automobiles left behind by U.S. occupation forces. Kawamoto idolized legendary industrialist Honda Soichiro for his maverick spirit and interest in racing cars, and he went to work for the research-and-development wing of the Honda Motor Company, Ltd., after earning a master’s degree in 1963. He quickly gained a reputation as a talented engineer, excelling as a designer of Honda’s racing-car engines. Kawamoto became a director of Honda in 1981, a senior managing director in 1989, and president in 1990.
As president, Kawamoto eschewed traditional consensus-style management and held himself accountable for the decisions he made. Though he often came across as abrasive and admittedly preferred tinkering with car engines to thinking about running a company, he showed an undoubtedly keen sense for business. After the burst of Japan’s vulnerable asset-inflated “bubble” economy in the early 1990s, Kawamoto decided to place more emphasis on marketing.
When Kawamoto visited Honda Soichiro a few months before Honda’s death in 1991, the elder man gave Kawamoto his blessing to restructure the company in response to the changing times. Kawamoto took this to heart and immediately set about not only reviving a slumping corporate giant but radically transforming its management structure. With a hands-on, dictatorial style that differed sharply from that of his predecessors, Kawamoto forced engineers to heed marketing studies and cut new-car development costs. He also frequently bypassed top executives to communicate directly with employees at all levels of the company.
The results were spectacular. Net profit for 1996 zoomed to a record $1.78 billion. In 1997 Honda passed Mitsubishi Motors Corp. to become the third-leading automaker in Japan, and the following year the company’s sales in the United States, buoyed by sporty new models, topped one million units for the first time. Nevertheless, Kawamoto was pushed out of Honda’s leadership position and into retirement in 1998. Later that year he was named a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire.
