Kenneth Chenault, in full Kenneth Irvine Chenault,  (born June 2, 1951, Mineola, New York, U.S.), American businessman and one of the first African Americans to become the chief executive officer (CEO) of a Fortune 500 firm, the American Express Company; he served as its CEO from 2001 to 2018.
The son of a dentist and a dental hygienist, Chenault grew up on Long Island and attended the alternative Waldorf School, where he developed his first leadership skills as senior class president and as a captain of sports teams. He studied history at Bowdoin College (B.A., 1973) and attended Harvard University Law School (J.D., 1976). After working for a law firm and a management consultancy, Chenault eventually accepted a job in 1981 with American Express.
In his early years with the company, Chenault revived its Merchandise Services division by replacing cheap goods with finer offerings such as durable luggage and personal accessories. He rose through American Express’s ranks at a time when employee diversity was of negligible concern. As a firm with more than 100 years of history, American Express risked relying too heavily on its past success and was slow to engage its competitors, but Chenault implemented strategies that revived the firm in an era of cutthroat competition among credit- and charge-card issuers. By the time of his appointment as chief operating officer and president in 1997, it was evident that Chenault would likely be chosen as American Express’s next CEO, which he was in 2001.
One of his first challenges as CEO involved guiding the company through a recovery from the September 11 attacks in 2001, in which American Express lost 11 employees and suffered damage to its headquarters. The company’s travel business slowed in the aftermath, causing American Express to respond with new offerings such as small business services—evidence that, under Chenault’s direction, a company formerly known for patrician operating principles was now innovating and building competitive strongholds in new and established markets.
To further increase American Express’s market share and profitability, Chenault led the company’s campaign to build links with banks by allowing them to issue credit cards through American Express. This effort led to legal disputes with the banking associations of rival credit-card companies MasterCard International, Inc. (now MasterCard Worldwide) and Visa USA (now Visa, Inc.), which prohibited their member banks from issuing cards through rival companies. In 2003, however, a federal appeals court upheld a lower court ruling that required MasterCard and Visa to eliminate their prohibitory rules. Chenault subsequently secured partnerships with more than 85 banks in more than 90 countries by 2005.
In 2008, amid a global credit crisis and a worldwide economic slowdown, the U.S. Federal Reserve System approved American Express’s application to become a licensed bank holding company. It was thereby enabled to receive emergency financing through the Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP)—a program created under the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 that allowed the Treasury secretary to purchase troubled assets from banks in order to restore stability and liquidity to U.S. credit markets.
While Chenault drew praise for guiding American Express through the crisis, the company subsequently faced declining revenue amid increased competition and the end of partnerships with Costco Wholesale Corporation and JetBlue in 2015. After overseeing various initiatives that helped restore investors’ confidence, Chenault announced in 2017 that he was stepping down as CEO. He left the following year and subsequently became chairman and managing director of General Catalyst Partners, a venture capital firm. In addition, he joined the boards of a number of companies.
