Naomi Klein,  (born May 8, 1970, Montreal, Quebec, Canada), Canadian author and activist whose debut book, No Logo (2000), made her one of the most prominent voices in the antiglobalization movement.
Klein was born to a politically active family. Her grandfather, an animator for Disney, was fired and blacklisted for attempting to organize a labour union. Her parents moved to Canada from the United States to protest the Vietnam War, and her mother, Bonnie, directed the feminist antipornography documentary Not a Love Story (1981). Klein studied philosophy and literature at the University of Toronto but left before completing her degree and took a job at the Toronto newspaper The Globe and Mail.
In 2000 Klein published No Logo, an analysis of the marketing and branding practices of global corporations. It examined the ways in which contemporary capitalism sought to reframe individuals’ consciousnesses along branded lines. No Logo was translated into dozens of languages, and it made Klein into an international media star. She followed with Fences and Windows (2002), a volume of essays on antiglobalization topics that ranged from World Trade Organization protests to a study of the Zapatista uprising in Chiapas, Mexico.
With her husband, director Avi Lewis, Klein wrote and coproduced The Take (2004), a documentary about the occupation of a closed auto-parts plant by Argentine workers. Klein’s The Shock Doctrine (2007) was a scathing critique of neoliberalism—particularly of Milton Friedman’s “Chicago school” of economics. The book examined what Klein termed “disaster capitalism,” a form of extreme capitalism that advocated privatization and deregulation in the wake of war or natural catastrophe. The Shock Doctrine was adapted as a feature-length documentary film by director Michael Winterbottom in 2009.
In This Changes Everything (2014), Klein iterated the inherent conflicts between unchecked capitalist enterprise and the mitigation of global warming; a documentary based on the book and directed by Lewis was released in 2015. No Is Not Enough: Resisting Trump’s Shock Politics and Winning the World We Need (2017) was written in response to the administration of U.S. Pres. Donald Trump. Klein’s later books included The Battle for Paradise: Puerto Rico Takes on the Disaster Capitalists (2018), which focused on the struggle over the island’s recovery following Hurricane Maria. In the essay collection On Fire: The (Burning) Case for a Green New Deal (2019), she continued to address the climate crisis.
Klein’s work appeared in publications such as The Globe and Mail, The Guardian, and The Nation.
