Louis Schweitzer,  (born July 8, 1942, Geneva, Switz.), French government official and automotive executive who rose to the post of chairman and chief executive officer of Renault in the 1990s.
Schweitzer was educated mainly in France and graduated in 1970 from the École Nationale d’Administration, one of the country’s prestigious grandes écoles, which produce the majority of France’s government and corporate leaders. Following his graduation Schweitzer began a career in government, gaining a reputation for efficiency and honesty. By the 1980s he was a high-level government administrator, holding important positions in the Ministry of the Budget and in the Ministry of Industry and Research. He had also become a leading adviser to Laurent Fabius, then a rising Socialist Party political figure.
In 1984, when Fabius became prime minister, Schweitzer was named his chief of staff, a position he held until Fabius’s resignation in 1986. Schweitzer left government service that same year, taking a position with French automobile-making giant Renault as vice president for finance and planning. His rise through the ranks of the corporate world was as rapid and assured as his ascent in government. He was Renault’s chief financial officer by 1988, executive vice president by the following year, and president and chief operating officer by 1990. In 1992 he was made chairman and chief executive officer.
Schweitzer inherited a troubled company. Outdated manufacturing facilities, increased competition, and reduced consumer demand had cut into Renault’s profits, which plummeted 41 percent in 1995 alone. In February 1997 Renault announced plans to close a plant in Vilvoorde, Belg., and to eliminate more than 3,000 jobs. Thrust into the public eye, Schweitzer was vilified by those who saw his actions as an expression of the human cost of unrestrained capitalism and praised by others for making difficult choices in an effort to increase the company’s competitiveness. Indeed, Schweitzer justified the closing of the Belgian plant as a hard but necessary bid to restore Renault’s competitiveness. He also stated that Renault expected to cut some 2,700 jobs in France. Some observers felt that the government, fearful of a political backlash from French voters frightened for their jobs, would use Schweitzer’s actions as justification to return to the interventionist policies of the past. In the end, however, the situation was defused and some jobs were saved.
Schweitzer was appointed president of Renault’s management board in 2002. He retired from that position and the posts of CEO and chairman in 2005, becoming the company’s nonexecutive chairman. He also served pharmaceutical company AstraZeneca in that capacity and was the director of environmental services provider Veolia Environnement ADS.
