Marjorie Scardino, in full Dame Marjorie Morris Scardino,  (born January 25, 1947, Flagstaff, Arizona, U.S.), American-born British businesswoman who was the chief executive officer (CEO) of the British media firm Pearson PLC from 1997 to 2012.
She studied French and psychology at Baylor University, Waco, Texas (B.A., 1969), and, following a stint as an Associated Press editor, she completed legal studies at the University of San Francisco (Juris Doctor, 1975). While she was working as the managing partner (1976–85) of a Savannah, Georgia, law firm, she and her husband, Albert Scardino, launched and published a weekly newspaper, The Georgia Gazette, which succeeded editorially under Albert’s direction. Financially, however, the paper failed. Marjorie, who served as its publisher, later said that The Georgia Gazette’s business losses taught her more than any success could have.
Marjorie Scardino joined the firm she later headed by way of the New York offices of The Economist magazine, which was half owned by Pearson. As president (1985–93) of the Economist Newspaper Group, Inc., she more than doubled its North American circulation. Upon assuming the position of CEO of the Economist Group in 1993, she moved to the magazine’s London headquarters and branched into businesses such as financial research services and sector analyses.
By 1996 Pearson had become a £2.25 billion (about $3.5 billion) media firm hobbled by far-flung interests. Scardino was named CEO in 1997, making her the first woman to head an FTSE 100 company. (FTSE, which became an independent company, got its name from its origins as a joint venture between the Financial Times [FT] newspaper and the London Stock Exchange.) She swiftly charted new directions by selling peripheral businesses such as Mindscape, a money-losing technology company; Tussaud’s, famous for waxworks; and Lazard, an investment firm. Nicknamed “Marj in Charge,” she made a big bet on educational publishing by purchasing Simon & Schuster’s educational businesses in 1998. Despite missteps, such as overinvesting in online education, Scardino organized Pearson into three key divisions: consumer publishing, financial publishing, and Pearson Education—one of the world’s largest educational firms.
In 2003 Scardino received a £273,000 (about $452,000) bonus, which attracted criticism from many investors and media watchers who noted Pearson’s £25 million (about $40 million) losses in 2002. Many cited the previous year when she had waived her bonus following Pearson’s 2001 loss of £436 million (about $633 million). Scardino’s critics pointed to declining advertising revenues at the FT, the firm’s leading publication, but Scardino spurned recommendations to sell the FT, insisting it would not be sold during a downturn. Indeed, profits at the FT increased sizably in the following years.  In 2012 Scardino stepped down from her post as CEO of Pearson, and the following year she joined the board of directors of Twitter, Inc.; she left the board in 2018.
Scardino’s contributions to the British media were recognized when she was named Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in February 2002, one month after she had adopted British citizenship.
