Mark Carney, in full Mark Joseph Carney,  (born March 16, 1965, Fort Smith, Northwest Territories, Canada), Canadian economist who served as governor of the Bank of Canada (BOC; 2008–13) and as head of the Bank of England (BOE; 2013–20).
Carney, who grew up in Canada, earned a bachelor’s degree (1988) from Harvard University, where his interest in economics was kindled by the lectures of another Canadian-born economist, John Kenneth Galbraith. He then studied economics at the University of Oxford (M.Phil., 1993; D.Phil., 1995). Prior to and following his studies at Oxford, Carney worked for Goldman Sachs, rising to become managing director of investment banking. While at Goldman Sachs he helped postapartheid South Africa gain access to international bond markets and advised Russia as it navigated a financial crisis in 1998.
Carney was transferred to Canada in 2000. Three years later he was appointed deputy governor of the BOC. In 2004 he was seconded to the Department of Finance, where he implemented a policy to tax income trusts at the source. He returned to the BOC in November 2007 and took over as governor in February 2008. Unlike most other central bankers, Carney took immediate action during the 2008 financial crisis, reducing interest rates (by 0.5 percentage point) months before most other countries followed suit. In April 2009 he went further and promised to hold rates down for at least 12 more months in order to support the credit markets and sustain business confidence. As a result, Canada and its banks suffered less than the other Group of 7 countries, and Canada was able to return to prerecession levels of output and employment earlier than other countries in the G7.
Carney’s success, combined with his relative youth and accessibility to the media, made him something of a star in the normally staid world of central banks. He acquired international responsibilities, including the post of chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial System at the Bank for International Settlements and chairman of the Financial Stability Board, based in Switzerland. U.K. Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne stunned most observers in November 2012 when he declared that Carney would succeed Mervyn King as BOE governor, marking the first time that a non-Briton was appointed to the position. The announcement, however, was generally well received.
Carney faced numerous challenges in the post, taking over just as the United Kingdom’s economy was showing signs of sustained recovery from the recession that had started in 2008. Carney quickly adopted the “forward guidance” strategy that he had applied in Canada—giving the markets notice of the BOE’s plans by affirming that, barring unforeseen circumstances, the BOE’s very low interest rates would be maintained until unemployment in the United Kingdom fell from about 8 percent to below 7 percent. However, when unemployment dropped below 7 percent sooner than expected, there was concern about rising interest rates, leading Carney to announce that such increases would be limited. He later had to contend with the economic turmoil that ensued following the United Kingdom’s decision in 2016 to leave the European Union (“Brexit”). Carney stepped down as governor of the BOE when his term ended in 2020.
