Mark Thompson,  (born July 31, 1957, London, England), British business executive who served as director general of the BBC (2004–12) before becoming president and CEO of The New York Times Co. (2012–20).
Thompson attended Stonyhurst College, a prestigious Jesuit Roman Catholic school in Lancashire. After graduating (1979) from Merton College, Oxford, he joined the BBC as a production trainee. For the next 33 years he worked solely in broadcasting. By the age of 30 he had become editor of BBC television’s flagship nightly Nine O’Clock News. He went on to become one of the BBC’s most senior managers, rising to controller of the BBC2 channel in 1996 and to director of national and regional broadcasting in 1999.
In 2002 Thompson left the BBC to become chief executive of Channel 4, an independently run, publicly owned TV corporation, which, unlike the BBC, was funded by advertising. When he took over, Channel 4 was losing money; two years later it was profitable, partly because he mixed popular reality shows with the channel’s more traditional upmarket dramas, news, and documentaries.
In 2004 Thompson returned to the BBC as its director general. He immediately streamlined the management and later faced changes to the licensing fees that largely financed the BBC. Traditionally, the fee had increased slightly faster than inflation, to keep pace with the rising costs of broadcasting and the expanding range of BBC services. During Thompson’s tenure, however, the fee was first pegged to inflation and then frozen in 2010 for the next several years. This required the BBC to sharply cut its budget, though Thompson was widely credited with negotiating a deal that prevented far deeper cuts to BBC income. Thompson was also credited with enhancing the BBC’s reputation for quality broadcasting and expanding its reach through digital technology. Of particular note, Thompson oversaw the development of BBC iPlayer, a service that allowed people to access BBC programs via the Internet at a time of their choosing.
After leaving the BBC in 2012, Thompson joined The New York Times Co. as CEO and president. Although his selection surprised many—he was not a newspaper journalist and had never worked in the private sector—his ability to develop new technology was seen as highly advantageous as the company faced financial stringency and rapidly changing audience habits. Under his oversight, the company experienced a dramatic turnaround, backed by a dramatic increase in online subscriptions as it adopted a digital-centric focus. Thompson stepped down in 2020, and the following year he became chairman of the board of directors at Ancestry, a genealogy company.
