Mary Wells Lawrence, née Mary Georgene Berg,  (born May 25, 1928, Youngstown, Ohio, U.S.), American businesswoman who made a mark in advertising during an age when men dominated the field. She cofounded the Wells Rich Greene (WRG) advertising agency, which became noted for its campaigns for Alka Seltzer (“Plop, Plop, Fizz, Fizz”), the Ford Motor Company (“Quality Is Job One”), and New York City (“I Love [represented by a heart icon] New York”).
At age 18 she attended the Carnegie Institute of Technology in Pittsburgh. In 1949 she married Bert Wells (later divorced), and three years later she moved to New York City. After a stint as fashion advertising manager for Macy’s department store, Wells joined the advertising agency of McCann-Erickson, Inc., where she worked from 1953 to 1956. She then moved to Doyle Dane Bernbach, where she became copy chief and vice president in 1963. In 1964 she became a senior partner at Jack Tinker & Partners, an agency noted for its creativity. There her imagination and drive flourished. She began working with copywriter Richard Rich and artist Stewart Greene, and the trio developed a number of memorable campaigns, including the “End of the Plain Plane” for Braniff, which revamped the airline company’s image.
Early in 1966 Wells left Tinker and with her two coworkers established WRG. They immediately captured the Braniff account, and many other large accounts quickly followed. (In 1967 Wells wed Braniff’s president, Harding Lawrence; the marriage ended with his death in 2002.) As a leader in humorous and creative advertising, the agency became one of Madison Avenue’s premier ad companies. Lawrence served as chairman of the board and chief executive officer, and, when WRG went public in 1968, she became the first female CEO of a company traded on the New York Stock Exchange; the agency returned to private ownership in 1977.
Lawrence battled uterine and breast cancer in 1980 and 1984, respectively. After nearly 40 years in the advertising business, she retired in 1990 when WRG merged with the French agency BDDP; Wells Rich Greene BDDP closed in 1998.
In 1971 Lawrence was named Advertising Woman of the Year by the American Advertising Federation, and in 1999 she was inducted into the American Advertising Hall of Fame. Her autobiography, A Big Life (in Advertising), was published in 2002.
