Meg Whitman, in full Margaret Whitman,  (born August 4, 1956, Spring Harbor, New York, U.S.), American business executive and politician who served as president and CEO of eBay (1998–2008), an online auction company, and later of the technology company Hewlett Packard (2011–15). After the latter restructured, she served as CEO of Hewlett Packard Enterprise (2015–18).
Whitman was born and raised on Long Island, New York. She earned an undergraduate degree in economics from Princeton University in 1977 and a master’s degree in business administration from Harvard University in 1979. From 1979 to 1981 she worked in brand management for Procter & Gamble in Cincinnati, Ohio. After moving with her husband to California in 1981, she joined the consulting firm Bain & Co. as a vice president and remained there until 1989. From 1989 to 1992 Whitman served as senior vice president of marketing at the consumer products division of the Walt Disney Co., where she played a major role in Disney’s acquisition of Discover magazine. In 1992 she moved to Boston, where she became president of the children’s shoe manufacturer Stride Rite. Leaving Stride Rite in 1995, she accepted an offer to become CEO of Florists Transworld Delivery (FTD), a federation of commercial florists. There Whitman encountered opposition from staff members and member florists, who strongly objected to FTD’s transformation into a privately held firm. She resigned from FTD in 1997 and became general manager of the Playskool division of the toy and game manufacturer Hasbro.
In 1998, when a corporate headhunter first approached her to lead the online auction company eBay, Whitman was not interested. A visit to eBay’s headquarters and the testimonies of many enthusiastic users impressed her, however, and she accepted the offer to become the company’s president and CEO. One of Whitman’s first responsibilities in her new position was to prepare the company for its initial public offering (IPO) in September 1998. She brightened the design of eBay’s Web pages and walled off all firearm and pornography auctions into separate age-restricted sites; eBay later banned auctions of firearms and prohibited sales of tobacco, drugs, alcohol, animals, and body parts.
Whitman was described as “relentlessly optimistic,” and those who worked with her said that her ability to stay focused and positive set her apart from most executives. Over the next few years, eBay continued to flourish under her leadership. When many Internet ventures had either failed or were struggling to survive, she managed to elevate the status of eBay from a small business employing a few dozen people to a major corporation employing some 15,000 and bringing in billions of dollars in revenue. Whitman retired from eBay in 2008.
Whitman, a Republican, served as a national cochair of Sen. John McCain’s presidential campaign in 2008. The following year she announced that she was running for governor of California. After spending a record-breaking $81 million on her primary campaign, she secured the Republican gubernatorial nomination in June 2010. In the November general election, however, she was defeated by Jerry Brown.
In early 2011 Whitman became a member of Hewlett-Packard’s board of directors. Later that year she was named president and CEO of the technology company. In 2015 she oversaw its split into two separate entities: HP Inc., which handled personal computers and printers, and Hewlett Packard Enterprise. Whitman became CEO of the latter, but in November 2017 it was announced that she would step down early the following year. She subsequently agreed to become CEO of NewTV (later named Quibi), a media start-up that focused on short-form videos for mobile devices; it was created by Jeffrey Katzenberg. The app was launched in April 2020. It struggled, however, and in October it was announced that Quibi was ceasing operations.
Whitman wrote (with Joan O’C. Hamilton) The Power of Many: Values for Success in Business and in Life (2010).
