Michael Dell,  (born February 23, 1965, Houston, Texas, U.S.), American entrepreneur, businessman, and author, known as the founder and CEO of Dell Inc., one of the world’s leading sellers of personal computers (PCs). In 2016 he became CEO of the newly formed parent company, Dell Technologies.
As a student of the University of Texas at Austin, Dell started his computer business (originally called PCs Limited) in 1984 with $1,000 in start-up capital. By the second half of his freshman year, Dell had sold $80,000 worth of computers. He dropped out of college at age 19 to run his company full-time, eventually going public in 1988. PCs Limited later became the Dell Computer Corporation and ultimately Dell Inc., when the product line expanded to include more than personal computers.
Dell’s business philosophy was to gain PC market share through a combination of cutting costs, reducing delivery time, and providing excellent customer service. To do so, he hired experienced executives, both to fill jobs in the company and to act as personal mentors, and he emphasized direct sales outside the usual retail outlets. In 1992 Dell became the youngest CEO in history to have his firm enter Fortune magazine’s list of the top 500 corporations. In his book Direct from Dell: Strategies That Revolutionized an Industry (1999), Dell outlined the story of the company’s development and provided strategies applicable to all businesses.
In 2004 Dell stepped down as CEO of the company, but he remained chairman of the board. He served on the Foundation Board of the World Economic Forum and the executive committee of the International Business Council. He also was on the U.S. President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology and sat on the governing board of the Indian School of Business in Hyderabad.
After experiencing setbacks in 2006—including a 4.1-million-unit recall and an overhaul of the customer service division struggling with complaints—Dell Inc., lost the title of world’s largest PC manufacturer to Hewlett-Packard. In response, Dell was reinstated as CEO in 2007 to oversee Dell 2.0, a far-reaching revamp of the company as he moved the focus from PCs to corporate software and services as well as other electronic devices. The company continued to struggle, however, and in 2013 Dell announced plans to buy out investors and take the company private. A heated battle with shareholders, led by Carl Icahn, ensued over the price of stock. Dell and the investment firm Silver Lake Partners ultimately purchased (2013) the computer company for nearly $25 billion. In 2016 he oversaw what was then the largest tech deal as Dell acquired the computer-storage corporation EMC for some $67 billion. The public parent company Dell Technologies was formed, with Dell as CEO.
In 1999 Dell and his wife, Susan, formed the Michael & Susan Dell Foundation to manage the investments and philanthropic efforts of the Dell family. Through the foundation, Dell used some of his personal wealth to help children around the world by focusing on health, education, safety, youth development, and early childhood care. The foundation, which by 2005 had an endowment of more than $1 billion, gave millions of dollars to help victims of the 2004 tsunami in southern Asia. In 2006 it donated $50 million to the University of Texas at Austin.
