Rebiya Kadeer,  (born November 15, 1946, Xinjiang, China), Uighur entrepreneur and human rights activist. A longtime advocate of greater autonomy for China’s Uighurs (a Turkic Muslim population that accounts for a slim majority of the population of the Uygur Autonomous Region of Xinjiang of western China), she was nominated for the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize.
Kadeer was born near the Altai Mountains of far northwestern China, where her father worked as a gold miner. She married at the age of 15 and subsequently helped support her growing family by sewing undergarments and shoes and selling them on the black market. At age 28 her marriage ended in divorce and, motivated by her separation from her six children, Kadeer founded a laundry business out of her new home, intending to earn the means to support them. The venture quickly thrived, and after several months she closed the business and invested some of her earnings into trading commodities, modestly at first, eventually on larger and larger a scale. In July 1978 she married Sidik Rouzi, an intellectual and activist who had been jailed for leading a Uighur resistance movement against the Chinese authorities in the late 1960s.
Kadeer continued to develop her trading enterprise, and in the 1980s she expanded her interests into real estate. In March 1987 she opened a women’s bazaar in Ürümqi, the capital of Xinjiang, followed in the 1990s by a department store and an accompanying apartment complex. Soon she had expanded her operations to include subsidiaries throughout Central Asia, and by 1993 she had become the wealthiest woman in China. Kadeer was lauded by the Chinese government as an example of Uighur success and was appointed to influential organizations and committees, including the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference and the National People’s Congress. In 1995 she served as a delegate to the United Nations Conference on Women, held in Beijing.
Long concerned with aiding and advancing her people, Kadeer capitalized on her business ventures as an opportunity to employ and mentor Uighur individuals. She identified the importance of literacy programs and saw to the establishment of a school on the fifth floor of her department store in Ürümqi. To promote multilingualism, she opened foreign-language schools in Kashgar, Hotan, and Aksu.
Kadeer also used her financial means and social stature to advance a political campaign on behalf of the Uighur population. When meeting with Chinese officials, she seized the opportunity to speak about the conditions in Xinjiang and about the difficulties experienced by Uighurs there. She also took advantage of a speaking engagement before the National People’s Congress, departing from her officially approved speech to give an assessment of various business, health, and human rights hardships encountered by the Uighurs. Her actions attracted negative attention, and she was stripped of her government-issued appointments, and her passport was confiscated. In August 1999 she was detained en route to a meeting with a congressional delegation from the United States and was imprisoned. In March 2000 she was convicted of endangering national security by furnishing state intelligence abroad; Kadeer argued that the documents in question—readily available newspaper clippings that she had intended to forward to her husband, who by then was living in exile in the United States—hardly constituted state secrets. During her imprisonment she was honoured by a number of international organizations: in 2004 she was awarded the Rafto Prize for Human Rights by Norway, and in early 2005 she was nominated for the 2006 Nobel Prize for Peace. Although she was sentenced to eight years in prison, pressure from the international community helped to achieve a reduced sentence, and she was freed in March 2005.
After her release Kadeer left China for the United States, where she continued her vocal campaign for human rights and Uighur self-determination. Although Kadeer lived in exile, Chinese authorities continued to regard her activities as a threat, and she and her associates were the subjects of pressure and intimidation within the United States. In early 2006 an unidentified driver rammed a van into Kadeer’s car as she paused at an intersection in Virginia; traced by its license plate, the vehicle was linked to the Chinese embassy. Pressure was likewise applied to her children in China.
When ethnic conflict broke out in Ürümqi on July 5, 2009, Chinese authorities blamed Kadeer for fomenting the unrest from abroad, a charge she denied. Thought to have been sparked by the killing of two Uighurs at a factory in southern China in June, the violence resulted in the deaths of more than 150 people and the arrests of hundreds more.
The 10 Conditions of Love (2009) is a documentary about Kadeer.
