Robert Torrens,  (born 1780, Hervey Hill, County Derry, Ireland—died May 27, 1864, London, England), British economist, soldier, politician, and promoter of schemes for the colonization of Australia.
Torrens joined the Royal Marines in 1796 and achieved the rank of first lieutenant a year later; by the time of his retirement (1834) he was probably a brevet lieutenant colonel, though not all historical sources agree on that rank. Wounded while commanding the defense of the island of Anholt (1811), Torrens began studying economics during the course of the siege. Once home, he was elected to the British House of Commons for various constituencies (1826–35), served as chairman of the South Australian Colonization Commissioners (1835), and was a major shareholder in the newspaper Globe and Traveller. He was also a founding member of the influential Political Economy Club.
Torrens was best known as an economics writer. Initially he supported the case for paper money, but later he became a major spokesman for the currency school led by David Ricardo. This monetary approach, which basically incorporated the beliefs of the bullionists, advocated a gold standard with strict regulation of the amount of currency any bank could issue. It was based on the theory that prices will be restrained when the supply of money is controlled.
As a result, Torrens became one of the most able defenders of the Bank Act of 1844, which rigidly controlled the amount of currency allowed to circulate. He also made original contributions to international trade theories such as comparative cost (advantage to a country that can produce a good more cheaply than another country—a condition that leads to specialization) and to the principle of reciprocal demand (a focused look at the ways comparative advantage affects the terms of trade between countries). Regarding imports of goods, he showed that in some circumstances a country can improve its terms of trade by imposing a tariff. Highly regarded among the classical economists, Torrens influenced a significant amount of legislation dealing with economic policy.
