Robert Nardelli, in full Robert Louis Nardelli,  (born May 17, 1948, Old Forge, Pennsylvania, U.S.), American businessman who served as CEO of Home Depot (2000–07) and Chrysler (2007–09).
Nardelli served in the Reserve Officers Training Corp while earning a B.S. (1971) in business. After graduation he joined General Electric (GE), where his father had worked as an engineer and middle manager. While working at GE, Nardelli earned an M.B.A. (1975) from the University of Louisville, in Kentucky. By 1988 he had become a company vice president, but when GE failed to move him into a general management position, he left to take a position as a division leader with Case Equipment Co. He returned to GE as the head (1991–92) of its appliance-manufacturing subsidiary in Canada and then held the top jobs at GE Transportation Systems (1992–95) and GE Power Systems (1995–2000); under his leadership GE Power Systems’ sales grew from $5 billion to $20 billion.
Although it appeared Nardelli had become a leading contender for the job that he had spent his career pursuing—the CEO of GE—he was passed over for that job in November 2000. Within one week he was offered the CEO position at the home-improvement superstore Home Depot—a company growing so rapidly that its board of directors welcomed the structure and fiscal discipline that the GE alumnus would bring. Nardelli reduced costs, revamped purchasing systems, upgraded communications and information-technology infrastructure, and opened numerous stores. He lacked a background in retail management, however, and some of his initiatives drove customers away. Rivals cut into Home Depot’s market share, and as the company’s competitors increased in value, Home Depot’s value sank. Nardelli became increasingly unpopular, and in 2007 he resigned in order to become CEO of Chrysler, which was owned by Cerberus Capital Management. Some analysts (and shareholders) sharply criticized his $210-million severance package.
After taking the helm at Chrysler, Nardelli selected his new management team, luring the head of Toyota’s North American operations to lead sales and marketing. Chrysler weathered a brief labour strike in October 2007, put several large pieces of property on the block to generate an expected $1 billion in cash, and began eliminating weaker vehicle models while laying off thousands of workers in North America. Despite Nardelli’s hopes to turn the struggling firm into a profitable car manufacturer, Chrysler’s sales continued to show declines in 2008, and at the end of the year the company received a government loan from the Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP). After negotiations with creditors were unsuccessful, Chrysler filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in April 2009. Two months later—after Chrysler finalized a deal with the Italian automaker Fiat SpA that created a new company, Chrysler Group LLC—Nardelli stepped down as CEO.
Nardelli continued to work for Cerberus, serving in various capacities. In 2010 he became CEO of Freedom Group, a holding company that specialized in firearms and was owned by Cerberus. Two years later he resigned as CEO and stepped down from his management positions at Cerberus.
