Sam Yagan,  (born 1977, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.), American entrepreneur who cofounded several technology start-up companies, notably OkCupid (2003), an online dating site.
Yagan was the son of Syrian immigrants who had settled in the Chicago area. After graduating from the Illinois Mathematics and Science Academy, Yagan attended Harvard University, where he earned (1999) a B.A. in applied mathematics and economics. While still at Harvard, he and college classmates Chris Coyne and Max Krohn launched SparkNotes, a study-guide Web site that they sold to the Internet company iTurf for $30 million in 2000. The following year SparkNotes was acquired by book retailer Barnes & Noble, which hired Yagan as vice president in charge of the company’s study-guide and test-preparation businesses.
Yagan left Barnes & Noble in 2002 to lead the development of eDonkey, a peer-to-peer file-sharing network that quickly attracted millions of users. While serving as president of eDonkey, Yagan also earned (2005) an M.B.A. degree from the Graduate School of Business at Stanford University. Threats of copyright-infringement lawsuits from the Recording Industry Association of America eventually forced the closing of eDonkey by 2005.
Yagan continued to work with Coyne and Krohn, with whom he founded OkCupid in 2003. The dating site grew steadily, partly because of its innovative use of social data to match users, and in 2011 Yagan and his partners sold OkCupid to IAC/InterActiveCorp (headed by media mogul Barry Diller) for an estimated $90 million. The company included other online sites, notably Match.com. Yagan was named the CEO of Match, Inc. in October 2012, and the following year he became CEO of the newly created Match Group. In November 2015 he shepherded the group through a successful initial public offering, which raised nearly $400 million. The following month Yagan stepped down as CEO to assume the post of vice-chairman of Match Group’s board of directors.
In 2014 Yagan helped launch yet another company, the Chicago-based venture capital firm Corazon Capital LLC, with the aim of investing in local tech start-ups; one of the companies it backed, the travel-booking site Rocketmiles, was acquired by the Priceline Group for about $20 million in 2015.
