Sara Blakely,  (born February 21, 1971, Clearwater, Florida, U.S.), American inventor and entrepreneur who created Spanx, a brand of body-slimming women’s undergarments, and in 2012 became the world’s youngest female self-made billionaire.
Blakely graduated from Florida State University with a bachelor’s degree in communications. She subsequently held various jobs during a three-month stint at Walt Disney World before becoming first a salesperson and then a national sales trainer at the office-supply company Danka. When she wanted an undergarment that was undetectable beneath her clothing, was comfortable, made her appear slimmer, and could be worn with open-toed shoes, she cut the feet off of a pair of panty hose and found that she had created a garment that other women would want. In 2000 Blakely used $5,000 in personal savings to market her invention. She worked during the day at Danka and devoted nights to researching fabric types, patents, and trademark designs. She ultimately found a hosiery factory willing to produce her footless hose, wrote her own patent application, and chose a playfully endearing product name, “Spanx,” and logo, a young blonde woman modeled on herself. Rather than invest in advertising, Blakely traveled across the United States, meeting and modeling for the boards of stores such as Neiman Marcus.
A major break came in late 2000 when Oprah Winfrey featured Spanx on her popular nationally syndicated television talk show. Thereafter sales skyrocketed, and the charismatic Blakely rapidly built an empire without advertising or outside investment. Her salesmanship was complemented by her unabashed showmanship. Never able to pass up a chance to market Spanx, Blakely served as her own model both on television and at in-store public appearances across the U.S. She drew increased attention to Spanx when she appeared as a contestant on the 2004–05 reality television program Rebel Billionaire, which was hosted by the British entrepreneur and philanthropist Sir Richard Branson. Blakely finished second but impressed Branson enough that the host gave her $750,000; with this money she established the Sara Blakely Foundation, a philanthropic organization providing scholarships and grants to aspiring female entrepreneurs. Subsequent media appearances spurred increased sales, and by the end of the decade, annual sales of Spanx had reached hundreds of millions of dollars. In early 2012 the company, of which Blakely was the sole owner, was valued at $1 billion. Three years later she was among a group of investors who purchased the Atlanta Hawks of the National Basketball Association.
