Sergio Marchionne,  (born June 17, 1952, Chieti, Italy—died July 25, 2018, Zürich, Switzerland), Canadian Italian business executive who, as CEO, reinvigorated Italian automobile manufacturer Fiat SpA in the first decade of the 21st century.
Marchionne was born into an Italian military family. When he was 14, his family immigrated to Toronto. He later earned a bachelor’s degree in philosophy (1978) from the University of Toronto, a bachelor’s degree in commerce (1979) and a master’s degree in business (1985) from the University of Windsor, and a law degree (1983) from Osgoode Hall Law School of York University in Toronto.
After completing his law degree, Marchionne immediately began working as a tax specialist and chartered accountant for the professional-services firm Deloitte & Touche LLP in Toronto. From 1985 to 1988 he served as group controller and then director of corporate development for the global packaging company Lawson Mardon Group Ltd. in Toronto. The following year Marchionne became the executive vice president of the conglomerate Glenex Industries Inc. He served as vice president of finance and chief financial officer (CFO) for the accounting firm Acklands Ltd. from 1990 to 1992. He then returned to Lawson Mardon, where he was vice president of legal and corporate development and CFO until it was acquired (1994) by the Swiss international packaging and aluminum company Alusuisse Lonza Group Ltd. (Algroup). Marchionne quickly moved up through the ranks at the new company, and in 1997 he became the CEO and managing director of Algroup. Following the firm’s merger with the Montreal-based production company Alcan Inc. in 2000, he was appointed CEO and then chairman of the spin-off company Lonza Group Ltd. In 2002 Marchionne was named CEO of the Swiss testing, verification, and certification company Société Genéralé de Surveillance (SGS) Group, and in 2006 he was appointed chairman.
He joined the board of Fiat SpA in 2003 and the following year became CEO. Though lacking in engineering experience, Marchionne was unexpectedly selected two years later as CEO of the automotive division Fiat Group Automobiles SpA. He quickly returned the troubled car company to profitability, however, by downsizing and restructuring management as well as by speeding the introduction of new models, notably the retro-styled minicar sensation Fiat 500.
In 2009 Marchionne replaced Robert Nardelli as CEO of Chrysler Group LLC. Fiat had gained control of the American car company following its emergence from Chapter 11 bankruptcy, and Marchionne, because of his tremendous success in turning around the formerly troubled Fiat, was placed at the helm. In 2011 Chrysler reported its first profit in five years.
