Son Masayoshi, original name Yasumoto Masayoshi,  (born August 31, 1957, Saga prefecture, Kyushu, Japan), Japanese entrepreneur who served as chairman and CEO of Softbank Corp, a media and telecommunications company he founded in 1981.
Son was a third-generation Korean with Japanese citizenship. Before traveling to the United States to study in 1973, he repeatedly tried to meet Fujita Den, president of McDonald’s Company (Japan), Ltd., to seek his advice. When they finally met, Fujita advised Son to study computer science. Nearly 20 years later the two met again. By that time, Son had become a leading distributor of computer software and related publications in Japan and was president of Softbank Corp. Fujita was deeply moved when Son thanked him for the advice he had given years earlier. Son graduated from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1980 with a B.A. in economics. While in school, he and a group of other students developed a sound-translation device capable of converting Japanese into English and German. He sold the technology to Sharp Corporation and used the proceeds to establish the predecessor to Softbank after his return to Japan in 1981.
Son’s spectacular success brought him comparison to Bill Gates, cofounder of Microsoft Corporation; Morita Akio, longtime head of Sony Corporation; and Honda Soichiro, founder of the automobile- and motorcycle-manufacturing company that bore his name. Son, however, differed from the others because he alone expanded his business by using aggressive merger-and-acquisition tactics. He financed mergers and acquisitions by issuing corporate bonds rather than obtaining loans from banks. Son defined his tactics as “diplomatic warfare” in which both Softbank and the firm it sought to acquire gained something without having engaged in an all-or-nothing confrontation. Since he first offered Softbank shares on the over-the-counter market in July 1994 to obtain capital, Son was said to have invested between $3 billion and $5 billion on mergers and acquisitions. These included the purchase of Phoenix Publishing Systems Inc., Ziff-Davis, Inc.’s convention operations and publishing division; the rights to host COMDEX, the computer industry’s largest trade show, from the Interface Group; and a majority share in Kingston Technology Company, Inc., an American memory-card maker. In 1996 Softbank joined News Corporation of Australia, which was run by media tycoon Rupert Murdoch, in the purchase of a 21 percent share of Asahi National Broadcasting Co., Ltd., a major Japanese commercial television station. A segment of the media called the announcement an unexpected foreign capital invasion of the Japanese broadcasting world. Softbank and News Corporation sold their share in 1997.
That year Softbank began investing in various global Internet initiatives. Despite losing an estimated 75 billion yen ($748 million) in the dot-com crash of 2000, Son established a broadband service with Yahoo Japan Corporation the following year. In 2006 Son engineered Softbank’s acquisition of Vodafone KK, the Japanese arm of the mobile-phone group Vodafone.
