Steve Ballmer, in full Steven Anthony Ballmer,  (born March 24, 1956, Detroit, Michigan, U.S.), American businessman who was CEO of the computer software company Microsoft Corporation (2000–14).
Ballmer graduated from Harvard University in 1977 with bachelor’s degrees in mathematics and economics. After working for two years at consumer products company Procter & Gamble as a product manager, he attended the Stanford University Graduate School of Business. In 1980 he left school to become a business manager for Bill Gates, a friend from Harvard who had dropped out of school and cofounded Microsoft. Over the next two decades, Ballmer held various posts as Microsoft grew into one of the most powerful and profitable companies in American history. Much of its initial success was due to the dominance of its operating systems MS/DOS and Windows.
In 1998 Ballmer became president of Microsoft, and two years later he became the company’s CEO, after Gates stepped down from that position to become chairman. Under Ballmer’s leadership, Microsoft diversified its focus through new products such as the electronic game console system Xbox, first released in 2001, and the Zune family of portable media players introduced in 2006. The Xbox struggled to make consistent profits, however, and the Zune players failed to challenge the market dominance of Apple’s iPod. Ballmer faced another challenge in 2007, when Microsoft’s operating system Vista was greeted with mixed reviews.
Gates, in order to concentrate on his philanthropic interests, withdrew from daily obligations at Microsoft in 2008, making Ballmer even more prominent as the public face of Microsoft. In 2009 the company expanded into the search engine market, releasing Bing. Later that year Microsoft brokered a deal with Internet portal site Yahoo! in which Yahoo! would use Bing for its Web site and handle premium advertisements for Microsoft’s Web site. In 2011 Ballmer helped arrange the $8.5 billion acquisition of the Internet communication company Skype. It was the largest acquisition in Microsoft’s history and placed the company in competition with Apple’s video chat service FaceTime and Google’s Internet communication service Voice. In August 2013 Ballmer announced that he would be stepping down as CEO within a year, and he was succeeded by Satya Nadella in February 2014. Later that year Ballmer purchased the Los Angeles Clippers of the NBA.
