Thomas J. Watson, Sr., in full Thomas John Watson, Sr.,  (born February 17, 1874, Campbell, New York, U.S.—died June 19, 1956, New York, New York), American industrialist who built the International Business Machines Corporation (IBM) into the largest manufacturer of electric typewriters and data-processing equipment in the world.
The son of a lumber dealer, Watson studied at the Elmira (New York) School of Commerce and then worked as a salesman, first in a retail store and then for a small cash register company. In 1895 Watson joined the sales staff of the National Cash Register Company in Dayton, Ohio, and he eventually rose to the post of general sales manager of the company under the tutelage of its president, John Henry Patterson. In 1912 Patterson involved Watson in an illegal antitrust scheme that resulted in convictions for both men, later overturned. Watson left the National Cash Register in 1913.
In 1914 Watson became president of the Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company, a maker of electrical punch-card computing systems and other products; the company changed its name to International Business Machines Corporation in 1924. An exceptional salesman and organizer, Watson assembled a highly motivated, well-trained, and well-paid staff. He gave pep talks, enforced a strict dress code, and posted the now famous slogan “Think” in company offices. Coupled with an aggressive research and development program, those efforts enabled IBM to dominate its market. Watson aggressively pursued international trade in the 1930s and ’40s, extending IBM’s virtual monopoly of the business machines industry worldwide. In 1952 he turned the IBM presidency over to his son, Thomas, Jr., while retaining the post of chairman. By the time of Watson’s death four years later, the company (which had 235 employees in 1914) employed 60,000 people and had 200 offices throughout the country, with factories and assembly plants around the world.
Watson was active in civic affairs and was noted for his efforts on behalf of the arts and world peace. In his honour, his wife started the Thomas J. Watson Foundation in 1961. In 1968 their four children focused the foundation money toward education and world affairs, issues that were of primary importance to their father throughout his life, and launched the Thomas J. Watson Fellowship, which offered college graduates a one-year grant for independent study and travel outside the United States.
