Tony Hall, in full Anthony William Hall, Baron Hall of Birkenhead,  (born March 3, 1951, Birkenhead, Wirral, England), British theatre and television administrator who served as chief executive (2001–13) of the Royal Opera House (ROH) and later as director general (2013–20) of the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC).
After graduating (1970) from Keble College, Oxford, Hall joined the BBC in 1973 as a trainee in its Belfast, Northern Ireland, newsroom. He aspired to become a producer rather than a broadcaster and worked on a number of the BBC’s flagship radio news programs. In 1985 he was appointed editor of the BBC’s main nightly television news bulletin. Two years later, at age 36, Hall became editor of BBC TV news and current affairs. His responsibilities included overseeing the first televised coverage of the House of Commons in 1989. He was appointed head of BBC TV news and current affairs in 1990; radio news was added to his responsibilities in 1993. During that period the BBC greatly expanded its service, with a 24-hour TV news channel, a radio station devoted to news and sports, and an online service that became one of the world’s most-viewed news Web sites.
In 2001 Hall left the BBC to become chief executive at London’s Royal Opera House. While retaining the ROH’s reputation as one of Britain’s leading cultural organizations, he broadened its appeal. He introduced low-price ticket schemes, established simulcast relays of live performances onto cinema screens across the country, and purchased the media company Opus Arte to market CDs and DVDs of ROH performances. In 2013 Hall returned to the BBC as its director general. At the time, the broadcasting system was engulfed in several scandals, most notably for failing to report evidence that its former presenter Jimmy Savile, who died in 2011, had sexually abused hundreds of women. On taking up his new post, Hall streamlined the BBC’s management and began the process of reviving not only public trust but also the morale of the BBC’s own staff. In addition, gender pay inequality became an important issue. In 2020 Hall resigned as director general to become chair of the National Gallery’s board of trustees.
Hall was made Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 2005; in 2010 he was created a life peer as Baron Hall of Birkenhead, and he sat in the House of Lords as a crossbencher (not aligned to any political party).
