William Paterson,  (born April 1658, Tinwald, Dumfries, Scotland—died January 22, 1719), Scottish founder of the Bank of England, writer on economic issues, and the prime mover behind an unsuccessful Scottish settlement at Darién on the Isthmus of Panama.
By 1686 Paterson was a London merchant and a member of the Merchant Taylors’ Company. Prior to this time, he had pursued his livelihood in such places as Bristol, England, as well as the Bahamas and Europe. In 1692, when Parliament sought ways to pay off England’s war debt, Paterson was among the first to submit a proposal that, although rejected in its early form, established the use of public debt borrowed from a bank. The plan that Parliament approved was drafted by Paterson and others such as Charles Montagu, then a lord of the Treasury. In 1694 the Bank of England was organized with Paterson as a founding director. He withdrew as a director the next year, however, following a policy disagreement.
After an unsuccessful attempt to organize a rival bank in London, Paterson resumed efforts to start a colony at Darién. Along with a group of Scottish and English merchants seeking investment outlets, he secured in 1695 the passage by the Scottish Parliament of the Act for a Company Trading to Africa and the Indies. Paterson was deprived of his position in the company by the directors because he was suspected of being involved with a loss of company funds, although his guilt was never proved. He nevertheless accompanied the expedition in 1698 as a private citizen. Paterson lost much of his financial investment in the affair. His wife and child died at Darién, and he was forced to return to England after falling gravely ill. Thereafter Paterson continued agitation for new expeditions to the West Indies. Shortly before his death, the British government paid him an indemnity for the losses incurred in his ill-fated expedition.
Paterson is credited with persuading William III to consider uniting England with Scotland (culminating in the Act of Union in 1707), and he is also credited with contributing to the formation of the Royal Bank of Scotland (established in 1727).
