Zhou Xiaochuan,  (born January 29, 1948, Dong’an [now Mishan], Heilongjiang province, China), Chinese economist, banking executive, and government official who served as the governor of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) from 2002 to 2018.
Zhou was born in far northeastern China in Heilongjiang province but grew up mostly in Beijing, where his father, Zhou Jiannan, was a government official. The elder Zhou was purged and sent to a camp in the countryside during the early part of the Cultural Revolution (1966–76) but was rehabilitated in the early 1970s and subsequently held several high-ranking posts in the government and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). Zhou Xiaochuan was also sent to the countryside (1968–72) before enrolling at the Beijing Institute of Chemical Technology (now Beijing University of Chemical Technology) and graduating (1975) with a degree in engineering. He went on to earn a Ph.D. in economic systems engineering (1985) from Tsinghua University in Beijing.
Upon completion of his degree, Zhou was appointed to a succession of economics- and finance-related posts in the government in the 1980s and ’90s, quickly proving himself to be a capable technocrat, administrator, and policy maker. During that time he served as vice-governor of the Bank of China (1991–95), vice-governor of the PBC (1996–98), president of the China Construction Bank (1998–2000), and then chairman of the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC; 2000–02). He distinguished himself during the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s by helping keep China’s currency, the renminbi (yuan), stable without seriously affecting China’s increasingly important export trade. Then, as chief of the CSRC, he instituted reforms of the securities-trading system that improved reporting procedures for companies trading stocks and procedures for delisting companies from the stock exchange.
Zhou was appointed governor of the PBC in December 2002, and the following year he presided over the enactment of reform legislation that transferred the bank’s regulatory functions to a newly formed government agency. Zhou also had been appointed chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee at PBC in January 2003, and he soon was addressing calls from foreign governments (notably the United States) for China to revalue its currency, which it did in July 2005. As the global crisis began to loom in late 2006, Zhou became a strong advocate for greater regulation of banks, including maintaining higher reserves (as he instituted at the PBC). He also increasingly called for global financial reforms, notably reduction in dependency on the U.S. dollar at the International Monetary Fund in favour of a multinational currency fund for its reserves and for a stronger presence of the renminbi in the global financial system. His positions on these issues and the great buildup of foreign reserves at the PBC as a result of China’s highly favourable balance of trade gave him and China increasing clout on the global economic stage at the start of the second decade of the 21st century. In 2018 Zhou retired from the PBC and was succeeded by Yi Gang.
In addition to his posts at the PBC, Zhou served as a member of the CCP’s Central Committee, and he maintained teaching positions at Tsinghua and other institutions. He wrote several books and numerous journal articles (in Chinese) on various aspects of financial and economic policy. Zhou’s wife, Li Ling, was also a notable public figure, a high-level bureaucrat who handled China’s trade disputes with foreign countries.
