Alison Cooper, in full Alison Jane Cooper,  (born March 31, 1966, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, England), British business executive who was CEO (2010–20) of the multinational Imperial Brands PLC (formerly Imperial Tobacco).
Cooper grew up in Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, and earned (1988) a degree in mathematics and statistics from the University of Bristol. Although she initially intended to become a teacher, she accepted a job as an accountant at Deloitte Haskins & Sells (later part of PricewaterhouseCoopers). There she worked in part with Imperial Tobacco, then a Deloitte client, before moving (1999) to that company as a group finance manager. After holding several positions with the tobacco company, she was named chief operating officer in 2009. The next year, she was made CEO, becoming the fifth woman to run a company listed on the U.K.’s benchmark Financial Times Stock Exchange index of 100 stocks (FTSE 100).
Cooper took the helm at a time when tobacco manufacturers were under pressure from declining sales and stricter government regulations. She was able to offset some of the economic loss presented by those challenges by cutting expenses. By the end of 2013, however, some industry watchers wondered if she and Imperial Tobacco would be able to weather the tough industry conditions. In July 2014, though, analysts’ expectations were buoyed after the company announced a $7.1 billion deal in which Imperial Tobacco would acquire assets from Reynolds American Inc., including the popular cigarette brands Kool, Salem, and Winston, and from Lorillard Inc., notably Maverick cigarettes and blu eCigs, the leading electronic cigarette sold in the United States. (The deal was part of a larger and more-complex transaction that included Reynolds buying Lorillard.) After receiving regulatory clearance, the deal was finalized in 2015, making the British company the third largest tobacco manufacturer in the United States, after Altria Group and the newly enlarged Reynolds. The deal also gave Imperial Tobacco a stronger foothold in the burgeoning and lucrative market of battery-powered e-cigarettes. In 2016 Cooper oversaw the rebranding of Imperial Tobacco as Imperial Brands PLC. However, over the next several years the company struggled—in part, because of U.S. regulations concerning vaping—and its share price markedly dropped. In 2019 Cooper announced she was stepping down as CEO, and she left the post the following year.
