Andrea Jung,  (born 1959, Toronto, Ontario, Canada), Canadian-born American businesswoman who was chairman (2001–12) and CEO (1999–2012) of Avon Products, Inc. She later became president and CEO (2014– ) of Grameen America.
Jung moved with her family from Toronto to Wellesley, Massachusetts, when she was a young child. Her father was an architect, and her mother was a chemical engineer; both were Chinese immigrants. Jung took piano lessons and was schooled in Mandarin Chinese. After graduating magna cum laude (1979) from Princeton University, Jung followed her interest in fashion and retailing by joining the executive training program of the department-store chain Bloomingdale’s. She later served as senior vice president and general merchandising manager for I. Magnin (1987–91) and as executive vice president for Neiman Marcus (1991–93).
In 1993 Jung became a consultant at Avon, a worldwide direct seller of women’s beauty supplies. However, she was quickly promoted to president of product marketing for U.S. operations. At the time, the company was exploring the possibility of moving into retail. Initially, Jung was opposed to the idea. She believed that the company was not ready to expand beyond its traditional direct-selling approach. By the time she was named president in 1998 and CEO in 1999, however, she and others had already begun studying new sales approaches. In 2001 Avon announced plans to sell beauty and lifestyle products through retail stores while maintaining the three million Avon sales representatives active in more than 130 countries. During the following years, Jung also increased the company’s use of the Internet in its sales and advertising initiatives, and she encouraged expansion in foreign markets. However, in 2008 the company’s profits began a steady decline. That year Avon also became embroiled in a scandal involving allegations that its subsidiary in China had bribed government officials there. The U.S. Department of Justice and the Securities and Exchange Commission later launched an investigation that resulted in Avon China’s pleading guilty in 2011. The subsidiary and Avon agreed to pay $135 million in fines. The following year, Jung resigned as CEO and later as chairman.
In 2014 Jung became president and CEO of Grameen America, a nonprofit organization founded by Muhammad Yunus; it provided assistance, often in the form of microloans, to women looking to start small businesses. Jung was the recipient of numerous honours. In 2000 she was given the Award for Distinguished Service from the Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center for her dedication to women’s health. On an international level, Jung also received numerous awards for her socially and environmentally responsible business principles.
