Andrew S. Grove, original name András István Gróf,  (born September 2, 1936, Budapest, Hungary—died March 21, 2016, Los Altos, California, U.S.), Hungarian-born American businessman who was credited with being the driving force behind the enormous success of semiconductor computer circuit manufacturer Intel Corporation, for which he served as president (1979–97), CEO (1987–98), and chairman (1997–2005).
Grove was born into a middle-class Jewish family. He survived both the Nazi and the communist regimes in Hungary, but after the Soviet Union crushed the 1956 Hungarian Revolution, he fled, first to Austria and then to the United States. He attended the City College of New York while working at a restaurant, obtaining a B.S. degree in chemical engineering in 1960. In 1963 Grove received a Ph.D. in chemical engineering from the University of California, Berkeley.
Shortly after graduation, Grove began working as a researcher at Fairchild Semiconductor Corporation, and he later became assistant head of research and development under Gordon E. Moore. When Moore and Robert Noyce founded Intel (a contraction for integrated electronics), they brought Grove along. The company introduced the world’s first microprocessor in 1971. The 8088 microchip, which Intel unveiled in 1978, was chosen by American computer manufacturer International Business Machines Corporation (IBM) for use in its first personal computer (PC). By 1997 Intel controlled 85 percent of the world’s PC chip market, and by the early 21st century, Intel and Intel-compatible microprocessors could be found in virtually every PC. Grove was widely credited with the company’s enormous success. He was one of the most respected managers in the industry, and he espoused an egalitarian philosophy of “constructive confrontation,” in which workers of any rank could propose ideas, provided they could withstand vigorous examination. In addition, he reportedly occupied a simple work cubicle at Intel, eschewing the office trappings normally bestowed upon one of his business stature.
In 1997 Grove was named Time magazine’s “Man of the Year.” He wrote an autobiography, Swimming Across (2001), and books about business management, including One-on-One with Andy Grove: How to Manage Your Boss, Yourself, and Your Coworkers (1987) and Only the Paranoid Survive: How to Exploit the Crisis Points that Challenge Every Company (1996). In 2005 he stepped down from Intel’s board to become its senior advisor to executive management.
