Cem Uzan, in full Cem Cengiz Uzan,  (born 1960, Turkey), Turkish businessman and politician known for launching the first private television channel in Turkey and for his subsequent foray into politics.
Uzan’s father had made his fortune in the construction industry. The Uzan family’s various business holdings grew extensively over the years and came to include a football (soccer) team, several media outlets, and banks, along with other assets in construction, energy, and finance. Cem Uzan played an active role in many of the family’s businesses. Uzan also pursued his own dealings, such as in 1990 when he, along with Turkish President Turgut Özal’s son, Ahmet, launched Turkey’s first private television channel, Star; that, however, violated the Turkish Radio and Television Corporation’s constitutional monopoly. Even though considerable controversy ensued about the legality of a private channel, in the long run it symbolized the initial step of de facto deregulation of broadcasting in Turkey.
In 2002 Uzan announced his intent to pursue a role in Turkish politics. He founded the Genç Parti (GP; Young Party), which quickly gained popularity in the run-up to the November 2002 general election. The appeal of the newly founded party was in part due to Uzan’s political campaign, designed by the successful advertising strategist Ali Taran. Other political parties and the media simply ignored the GP, which was what Taran wanted: instead of being forced to enter into public debate on difficult topics, Uzan could appear at rallies, spread an appealing populist and nationalist message, and use his own media outlets for his purposes. In his campaign, Uzan did not address controversial issues such as the European Union and Turkish economic policies, education, and health, but he instead promised free books for students and raged against the International Monetary Fund. The GP went on to win 7.2 percent of the general vote in the election but, despite its impressive (for a new party) showing, did not win enough votes to gain representation in the country’s legislative body.
Uzan and his family also became known for being involved in many lawsuits, as either plaintiffs or defendants. One high-profile lawsuit, filed in the United States in 2002, accused Uzan and his family of fraud and racketeering in regard to the operations of his family’s cell-phone provider business, Telsim, which had defaulted on a loan from Nokia and Motorola. The U.S. court ruled against the Uzans and ordered them to repay more than $4 billion. 
In late 2003, after a scandal relating to a bank owned by the Uzan family, the Turkish government began seizing more than 200 of the Uzans’ companies, including Telsim, to collect debt that the family had failed to repay to various parties. That same year, in June, Uzan verbally attacked Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan during a rally, accusing him of being “godless” and “treacherous.” Charges were brought against Uzan, and in 2004 he was found guilty of insulting Erdoğan. His original sentence included eight months in prison, but, following an appeal, it was revised and no longer included prison time.
In 2009 Uzan fled Turkey after new charges of fraud, forgery, embezzlement, and other crimes were leveled against him in regard to his business dealings. The next year a Turkish court found him guilty on several counts and sentenced him, in absentia, to 23 years in jail. His sentence was later reduced after some charges were dropped.
