Charles M. Schwab,  (born Feb. 18, 1862, Williamsburg, Pa., U.S.—died  Sept. 18, 1939, New York City), entrepreneur of the early steel industry in the United States, who served as president of both the Carnegie Steel Company and United States Steel Corporation and later pioneered Bethlehem Steel into one of the nation’s giant steel producers.
Schwab, the son of a woollen worker and blanket manufacturer, received a modest education in Loretto, Pa. After working briefly as a grocery clerk, he took a job as a labourer in the Andrew Carnegie-owned Edgar Thomson Steel Works at Braddock, Pa. It was there that his extraordinary ability to ingratiate himself and to facilitate harmonious working relationships led to his swift rise to the top of the Carnegie empire.
By the age of 19 he was assistant manager of the plant; and, after the plant superintendent was killed in an accident in 1887, Schwab took over management of the Thomson Works. Then in 1892 Andrew Carnegie appointed Schwab to heal the wounds between labour and management and to get the Homestead plant back into normal production after the bloody strike there. So greatly did Schwab improve labour and community relations at Homestead while simultaneously increasing production efficiency through technological advances that in 1897—at the age of 35—Charles M. Schwab became president of the Carnegie Steel Company at an annual compensation in excess of $1,000,000.
In December 1900, Schwab had dinner with financier J. Pierpont Morgan and broached the idea of creating a huge steel combine from several competing companies. Schwab made a list of the companies to be consolidated, proposed a method of financing, and then acted as intermediary between Morgan and Carnegie in the sale of the latter’s operations. When the United States Steel Corporation came into being in 1901, 39-year-old Schwab was—at J.P. Morgan’s insistence—made its first president. During his two-year stint at the head of U.S. Steel, Schwab earned more than $2,000,000 annually.
But Schwab’s genius for human relations could not keep him at peace with the corporation’s directors and with Morgan, and in 1903 he resigned. He then devoted his energies and his wealth to building up a much smaller enterprise—Bethlehem Steel Company—in which he had acquired a controlling interest in 1901. Schwab merged Bethlehem with the U.S. Shipbuilding Corporation to create Bethlehem Steel Corporation in 1904, and he eventually developed it into a rival of the steel-making giant that he and Morgan had jointly formed. Bethlehem first specialized in making steel girders for skyscrapers but then boomed as a consequence of its supplying war matériel to the Allied powers during World War I. Between April and December of 1918, Schwab served—at the appointment of Pres. Woodrow Wilson—as director general of the Emergency Fleet Corporation, charged with greatly expediting the nation’s shipbuilding capabilities.
Bethlehem and Schwab were later portrayed as “merchants of death” for making huge profits during the war years, but government charges to that effect were later repudiated by the courts. As president of the American Iron and Steel Institute from 1927 to 1932, Schwab was clearly the senior spokesman for the U.S. steel industry. He entered the last decade of his life with enormous wealth and prestige.
The Great Depression, some unwise investments, and a lifestyle too lavish even for a fortune estimated at $200,000,000 took their toll. He scaled down his expenses somewhat, but by the time that he died of heart disease in 1939 he was insolvent, having depleted the great fortune that he had accumulated as an authentic American tycoon.
