David Sarnoff,  (born February 27, 1891, Uzlian, Minsk, Russia [now Uzlyany, Belarus]—died December 12, 1971, New York, New York, U.S.), American pioneer in the development of both radio and television broadcasting.
As a boy in Russia, Sarnoff spent several years preparing for a career as a Jewish scholar of the Talmud. He immigrated with his family in 1900 and settled in New York City. While going to school, he helped support the family by selling newspapers, running errands, and singing the liturgy in a synagogue. In 1906 he left school to become a messenger boy for a telegraph company and with his first money bought a telegraph instrument. He soon became proficient in Morse operation and found work as a radio operator for the Marconi Wireless Telegraph Company of America (also called American Marconi), where he became a protégé of radio inventor Guglielmo Marconi.
After service on shore and at sea over the next few years, Sarnoff became manager of the radio station established by John Wanamaker atop his Manhattan department store. In April 1912 the Wanamaker station received messages from the ships that were rescuing the survivors of the Titanic, and Sarnoff relayed the news to the press. (Later exaggeration by the press and Sarnoff himself claimed that he had picked up the distress signal from the sinking Titanic and then remained at his instrument for 72 hours straight.) Rewarded by the Marconi company with rapid promotion, he became chief inspector, and in 1915 or 1916 he wrote the famous “radio music box” memo, in which he proposed the development of a commercially marketed radio receiver for use in the home.
When America entered World War I in 1917, Sarnoff attempted to enlist in the navy and then the army, but he was turned away because of his prominent role at American Marconi, which was a key supplier of radio equipment to the navy. To keep American radio technology from being controlled by foreign-owned companies like American Marconi, that company was absorbed by a new company, the Radio Corporation of America (RCA), in 1919. Sarnoff was RCA’s commercial manager.
In 1920 Sarnoff reiterated his “radio music box” memo and was given a small amount of money to develop a radio prototype. As RCA’s new general manager, he demonstrated radio’s market potential by broadcasting the boxing match between Jack Dempsey and Georges Carpentier (July 2, 1921); the broadcast created a sensation. Within three years RCA sold more than $80 million worth of receiving sets. In 1926 RCA formed the National Broadcasting Company (NBC).
As early as 1923, Sarnoff had perceived the potential of television, which the contributions of several inventors were making technically feasible. His meeting in 1929 with Westinghouse engineer Vladimir Zworykin convinced him that home television was possible, and Sarnoff persuaded Westinghouse to back Zworykin’s work. In 1930 Westinghouse’s television research and Zworykin were transferred to RCA. By 1939 Sarnoff was able to give a successful demonstration of the new medium at the New York World’s Fair.
Because RCA had built its business on its pool of patents, Sarnoff was jealous of any perceived infringement on the company’s primacy. RCA was embroiled in lengthy court battles over patents for television and FM radio. In the first, which began in 1932, RCA filed suit against inventor Philo Farnsworth to try to invalidate his patents on electronic television. The battle lasted seven years. RCA lost and had to pay royalties to Farnsworth (who by that time had had a nervous breakdown). In the second, which began in 1948, Edwin Armstrong, inventor of FM radio (and Sarnoff’s onetime friend), sued RCA for infringing on his patents. RCA managed to delay court proceedings until Armstrong’s fortune was exhausted. Armstrong committed suicide in 1954.
Sarnoff became president of RCA in 1930. During World War II, Sarnoff, a reserve officer, served on General Dwight D. Eisenhower’s staff as a communications consultant and was promoted to brigadier general. After the war, RCA became a leader in the television market, but it almost experienced a setback in the new field of colour television. In 1950 the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) approved the colour television standard developed by the Columbia Broadcasting System. However, existing black-and-white sets including those of RCA would not be able to receive colour programs. Sarnoff had committed RCA to developing a set that would be compatible with both black-and-white and colour images, but the RCA system was still not ready. Sarnoff initiated a crash program to develop the compatible system, and in 1953 RCA’s system was adopted as the standard for colour television by the FCC. Sarnoff became chairman of the board in 1949 and retired in 1970.
