George Ellery Hale,  (born June 29, 1868, Chicago, Ill., U.S.—died Feb. 21, 1938, Pasadena, Calif.), American astronomer known for his development of important astronomical instruments, including the Hale Telescope, a 200-inch (508-cm) reflector at the Palomar Observatory, near San Diego. The most effective entrepreneur in 20th-century American astronomy, Hale built four observatories and helped create the new discipline of astrophysics. He is known also for his research in solar physics, particularly his discovery of magnetic fields in sunspots.
Hale was born into a wealthy Chicago family and from an early age was enraptured by science. He built his first observatory at age 20 at the Hale home and acquired a professional long-focus refractor and spectroscopic apparatus that were competitive with the equipment of most colleges. Graduating from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with a bachelor’s degree in physics in 1890, Hale elucidated in his senior thesis his design for a spectroheliograph, an instrument for photographing the Sun in a very narrow range of visible wavelengths (that is, monochromatic light).
Hale’s work and his observatory came to the attention of William Rainey Harper, the first president of the new University of Chicago, which was funded by millionaire John D. Rockefeller. Harper attracted Hale and his observatory to the university in 1892. In October of that year, Harper and Hale secured support from the transportation magnate Charles T. Yerkes to build a great observatory with a 40-inch (102-cm) refractor, which would be the largest in the world. Hale broke with traditional observatory planning, in which observatories were merely buildings that housed telescopes, and designed the new facility, Yerkes Observatory, with space for “laboratories for optical, spectroscopic, and chemical work.”
In 1894 Hale founded The Astrophysical Journal, which helped professionalize astrophysics by defining standards by which astrophysical phenomena were to be described and discussed. Since its founding, The Astrophysical Journal has become the premier publication of research in astronomy.
At its opening in 1897, the Yerkes Observatory engaged in a full program of solar and stellar astrophysics, but Hale was always planning larger telescopes.  Soon his staff was fabricating a 60-inch (152-cm) reflector. In 1904 Hale established an observing station, the Mount Wilson Solar Observatory, at the summit of Wilson’s Peak in southern California. The 60-inch reflector was installed at Mount Wilson four years later at an independent facility supported by the newly established Carnegie Institution of Washington in Washington, D.C.
Hale was a major driver in the establishment of the American Astronomical Society in 1899. Hale was also very active in international science. In 1904 he founded the International Union for Cooperation in Solar Research, which after World War I (1914–18) was transformed into the International Astronomical Union.
Hale’s rationale for building observatories centred on the problem of stellar evolution: how stars change as they age. However, he was also interested in a wide variety of solar phenomena.  Fascinated with the structure of sunspots, Hale was able to show by 1908 that they were magnetically active storms of swirling gas in the solar photosphere. This discovery, made possible by Hale’s application of the Zeeman effect to solar spectroscopy, confirmed his conviction that the key to astronomical progress lay in the application of modern physics.
Well before his 60-inch reflector was in operation on Mount Wilson, Hale had set his sights on a 100-inch (254-cm) reflector. As he had with Yerkes, Hale pursued a local philanthropist, hardware magnate John D. Hooker, for support. Delayed by the imposing challenge of producing the mirror and then by World War I, the 100-inch reflector finally became operational at Mount Wilson in 1918. Hale had for a third time built the largest telescope in the world.
In the interim, more of his energies focused on the national organization of scientific activities through his creation in July 1916 of the National Research Council (NRC), which marshaled scientific expertise for national needs, specifically to ready the country for war. Hale spent most of the war years chairing the NRC in Washington, D.C., and as a result became a central figure in the postwar reorganization of international science.
In 1920 a 20-foot (6-metre) stellar interferometer mounted by American physicist A.A. Michelson on Hale’s 100-inch reflector made the first measurement of a star’s diameter. Since the diameters of even more stars could be measured with a larger telescope, Hale was convinced of the scientific necessity for large telescopes. Throughout the 1920s he wrote a series of popular articles on the possibilities of large telescopes, waxing romantic about the many compelling rationales underpinning astronomy’s insatiable need for light-gathering power. In 1928 he attracted some $6 million from the Rockefeller Foundation’s International Education Board for the construction of a 200-inch reflector; this was a major coup at a time when overall support for science in the United States was hardly robust. Over the next two decades there would be many technical and social obstacles to the completion of the telescope. Hale died in 1938, and construction of the telescope was halted during World War II (1939–45), but eventually, in 1949, the 200-inch Hale Telescope at the Palomar Observatory saw first light. It was the largest telescope in the world until 1976.
