Harry Cohn,  (born July 23, 1891, New York, N.Y., U.S.—died February 27, 1958, Phoenix, Ariz.), cofounder and president of Columbia Pictures and winner of 45 Academy Awards for films he produced.
The son of an immigrant Polish-Jewish tailor, Cohn quit school at age 14 and worked at sundry jobs before becoming a vaudeville singer and song plugger. His motion picture career began in 1913, when he worked as a secretary for a film distributor in New York City. In 1920 Cohn, his brother Jack, and mutual friend Joe Brandt founded C.B.C. Film Sales Company and relocated to Hollywood to begin production. The company became Columbia Pictures Corporation in 1924 in part to rid itself of its unglamourous nickname, “Corned Beef and Cabbage.”
Cohn chose the young Frank Capra to direct That Certain Thing (1928), because his name topped an alphabetical list of available directors. The picture was a success and marked the beginning of a fruitful relationship for Cohn and Capra that would last until the late 1930s. Capra played an important role in building Columbia’s reputation, and his direction of It Happened One Night (1934) propelled Columbia into the ranks of the major studios. About the same time, Cohn wrested power from his brother Jack—with whom he quarreled constantly—and became both president and head of production at Columbia. No other movie mogul had ever held both posts, and Cohn exploited his power to its utmost extent.
Notoriously tyrannical and foulmouthed, Cohn was dubbed “the meanest man in Hollywood.” He meddled in the private lives of actors and regarded those who worked for him as his personal property. Yet Cohn possessed a keen intuition for the potential of stories, actors, and directors that he combined with an uncanny instinct for predicting what kinds of films would sell to the public. Cohn promoted some of the top-drawing actors of the 1940s and ’50s, notably Rita Hayworth, Jack Lemmon, Glenn Ford, and Kim Novak. He also recruited first-rate directors, including George Cukor, Howard Hawks, Nicholas Ray, Otto Preminger, and Orson Welles. Columbia flourished during the 1950s, producing such films as Born Yesterday (1950), which featured a dictatorial tycoon often said to be patterned after Cohn himself. Other major commercial and critical successes include such classics as From Here to Eternity (1953), On the Waterfront (1954), The Bridge on the River Kwai (1957), and Anatomy of a Murder (1959). Cohn retained his position as the staunchly undemocratic president and production chief of Columbia until his death.
