John Browne, Lord Browne of Madingley, in full Edmund John Phillip Browne, Baron Browne of Madingley,  (born February 20, 1948, Hamburg, Germany), British businessman best known for his role as chief executive officer of British Petroleum (BP) from 1995 to 2007. During his tenure he was recognized for his efforts to make petroleum production a more environmentally conscious industry.
At the suggestion of his father, who worked for BP, Browne took a position with the firm in 1966. He worked as an apprentice while studying at the University of Cambridge, where he earned a degree in physics. He later received a business degree from Stanford University and held various positions at BP in exploration and production before becoming group treasurer and chief executive officer of BP Finance International in 1984. He became CEO of the Standard Oil Co. after it merged with BP in 1987, and he continued his climb up the BP management ladder, ultimately being named CEO in 1995.
When Browne took charge of BP, the company had no clear direction and had just raised itself from debt. In an effort to reinvigorate the company, Browne laid out a plan to expand BP. He hoped at the same time to protect it from fluctuating oil prices while grabbing a larger share of the market for natural gas, demand for which had increased as consumers sought cleaner alternatives to oil. In 1998 he announced the company’s $57 billion agreement to merge with Amoco, which effectively eliminated one competitor while sending industry giants Exxon, Mobil, Texaco, and Chevron scrambling to attempt their own mergers in response. Two years later, BP acquired Atlantic Richfield Co. for $27 billion, making BP Amoco one of the world’s top producers of oil and natural gas.
Meanwhile, Browne had been making other waves within the petroleum industry. In 1997 he abandoned the long-standing tradition of resistance to more environmentally friendly production procedures, promising to see that BP cut its emission of greenhouse gases significantly over the next several years. In 1999 BP Amoco began a plan to power 200 of its retail outlets by using solar panels. Although some environmentalists were skeptical, Browne said that he was responding to the wishes of consumers, who, he believed, would continue demanding cleaner alternatives to fossil fuel. He subsequently spent $45 million for a controlling interest in the solar panel producer Solarex, thereby positioning BP Amoco as the world’s largest solar-energy concern. BP’s 200th solar-powered station was completed in 2000.
Browne’s personal style, daring deals, and calls for environmentally sound business practices made him an odd and highly recognizable character within the oil industry. He was knighted in 1998, and in 2001 he was elevated to the House of Lords, becoming Baron Browne of Madingley. In 2007, however, Browne resigned suddenly from his position at BP amid accusations of perjury in a legal row over keeping details of his personal life out of the newspapers—specifically, details concerning his former relationship with a male companion. He remained active, holding various posts. Notably, from 2009 to 2017 he served as chairman of the Tate galleries, and in 2015 he became executive chairman of L1 Energy, an oil and gas venture.
