Juliana Rieser Force, Rieser also spelled Reiser,  (born Dec. 25, 1876, Doylestown, Pa., U.S.—died Aug. 28, 1948, New York, N.Y.), American art administrator, the first director of the Whitney Museum of American Art, whose natural aesthetic sensitivity guided her strong influence on that institution’s development.
Juliana Reiser (later changed to Rieser) at an early age went to work as a secretary. After directing a secretarial school in New York City, she became secretary to Helen Hay Whitney, wife of a prominent financier. In 1912 she married Willard B. Force. Two years later, when Helen Whitney’s sister-in-law, Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney, established the Whitney Studio to show the work of young modernist artists, Juliana Force was asked to assist in managing the studio. The next year she became director of the Friends of the Young Artists, which sponsored exhibitions and made purchases.
The informal association of artists and friends that developed was organized in 1918 as the Whitney Studio Club with a meeting place on West 4th Street, where Force presided. Her innate taste and receptivity to ideas more than made up for her lack of formal art training, and she soon became a central figure in the New York art world. Gertrude Whitney’s artist friends—Robert Henri, John Sloan, Arthur B. Davies, William Glackens, and others—were soon joined by a younger generation that included Stuart Davis, Edward Hopper, and Reginald Marsh, all of whom had their first exhibitions at the Whitney Studio Club. Moved to larger quarters in 1923, the club was disbanded in 1928 when it appeared to have served its purpose of nurturing a native modern art. After the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1929 rejected Gertrude Whitney’s offer to donate her personal collection of contemporary works of art, the Whitney Museum of American Art was born in 1930, with Force as director.
Opened in 1931, the Whitney Museum reflected in its informal and warm interior the taste of its director. She inaugurated a pioneering series of monographs on living American artists in 1931; organized morning and evening lecture series by art historians, critics, and others; and staged a variety of exhibitions of contemporary and historical art, folk art, primitives, and other unusual genres. The Whitney Museum came to be very important to American art, and Force was central to its influence. She remained director of the Whitney Museum until her death.
