Jürgen Schrempp,  (born Sept. 15, 1944, Freiburg im Breisgau, Ger.), German businessman who was chairman of the Daimler-Benz corporation (1995–2005) and the architect of Daimler’s ill-fated 1998 merger with the Chrysler Corporation.
After completing his education, Schrempp served as an apprentice mechanic at the Mercedes-Benz plant in his hometown, Freiburg im Breisgau, and qualified as a graduate engineer. In 1982 he became president of Euclid Inc., a subsidiary of the German luxury automaker Daimler-Benz based in Cleveland, Ohio, and in 1985 he was appointed president of Mercedes-Benz of South Africa. He left South Africa in 1987 to serve as head of the commercial vehicle division of Daimler-Benz. He was named chief executive of the newly founded Deutsche Aerospace AG (now Daimler-Benz Aerospace) in 1989, a position he held until he became chairman of Daimler-Benz in 1995.
As chairman Schrempp faced the formidable task of restructuring the company, which had diversified rapidly but not necessarily wisely, and turning it back into a profitable business. Although car sales were profitable, subsidiary businesses such as aerospace, software, and electronics were not. Schrempp wasted little time in paring down the company. By selling more than a dozen subsidiary companies and severely reducing the workforce, he refocused attention on the core automotive business and reversed the outward flow of money. For his efforts, some dubbed him “Neutron Jürgen” for General Electric chief executive Jack Welch, whom critics derided as “Neutron Jack”—a sobriquet that likened Welch’s strategy of eliminating numerous jobs in the interest of saving his company to the way a neutron bomb destroys lives while leaving buildings intact. Although Schrempp’s approach appeared similar to Welch’s, Schrempp saw himself as a hybrid who wedded American concern with profitability to a German tradition of responsibility to employees.
In May 1998 Daimler-Benz merged with the Chrysler Corporation of the United States, whose five-pointed trademark graced the hoods of a more standard line of vehicles. Schrempp spearheaded the deal, one of the biggest industrial takeovers in history. He agreed to run the new company, called DaimlerChrysler, jointly with Chrysler’s chief executive, Robert Eaton. In spite of this dual stewardship, Daimler-Benz was the dominant partner, and Schrempp became sole chairman in 2000.
Schrempp had his eye on creating a global car company, and in 2000 he expanded Daimler’s holdings again by taking a one-third stake in Japan’s Mitsubishi Motors Corporation. However, neither the merger with Chrysler nor the deal with the Japanese automaker was a success. Despite Schrempp’s efforts, which included the replacement in 2000 of Chrysler’s president, the American company was troubled from the start, posting huge losses and causing Daimler’s share prices to plummet. Mitsubishi was also a financial drain, and by November 2005 Daimler had divested itself of all its shares. At the end of that year, prior to the expiration of his contract, Schrempp stepped down from the company’s top position.
From 2000 to 2008 he served as a nonexecutive director of mobile telecommunications company Vodafone Group PLC. He also served on the boards of a number of African companies, among them South African Airways and the South African Coal, Oil, and Gas Corporation Ltd. Schrempp received numerous awards throughout his career, including the Woodrow Wilson Award for Corporate Citizenship and the Order of Good Hope, South Africa’s highest civilian honour.
