Kingman Brewster, Jr.,  (born June 17, 1919, Longmeadow, Mass., U.S.—died  Nov. 8, 1988, Oxford, Oxfordshire, Eng.), American educator and diplomat who as president of Yale University (1963–77) was noted for the improvements he made to the university’s faculty, curriculum, and admissions policies.
Brewster was educated at a private school near Boston and at Yale University. After working briefly in Washington, D.C., and serving as a navy fighter pilot in World War II, he enrolled at Harvard Law School, obtaining his LL.B. degree in 1948. He joined the Harvard law faculty in 1950. In 1960 Brewster was appointed provost at Yale and simultaneously became a professor in the Yale Law School. He became president of Yale in 1963.
As president, Brewster concentrated on improving science education while maintaining Yale’s high standing in the humanities. During his administration Yale opened its admissions policy, enrolling more black students and, in 1969, admitting undergraduate women to what had been a men’s university. Brewster was particularly outstanding in his resourceful handling of student protests during an era of vociferous disenchantment with authority. Despite severe criticism by some Yale alumni, he publicly opposed the U.S. role in the Vietnam War and denounced inequities in the military draft. His support for protest demonstrations drew further objections, but throughout the early 1970s, when many other campuses were torn by storms of dissent, Brewster managed to keep the Yale campus open and relatively tranquil. In the meantime, however, his attitudes led to serious erosion of financial support from alumni.
In 1977 Brewster was appointed ambassador to Great Britain by President Jimmy Carter, filling that position until 1981. He then joined a private law firm, and in 1986 he assumed the post of master of University College at Oxford, a position he held at the time of his death. Brewster was the author of Antitrust and American Business Abroad (1958; rev. ed. 1981) and coauthor of The Law of International Transactions and Relations (1960).
