Li Ka-shing,  (born June 13, 1928, Chaozhou, Guangdong province, China), Chinese entrepreneur and philanthropist, widely considered one of the most influential businessmen in Asia. His companies were involved in real estate, ports, and infrastructure, among other ventures.
Li was born into a poor family who fled mainland China for Hong Kong in 1940 after Japanese invasions. Without much formal education, Li began his career in Hong Kong as a salesman and eventually formed a plastics company, Cheung Kong. Business boomed throughout the 1950s, when Cheung Kong began making artificial flowers and exporting them to the United States. As the firm prospered, Li began to acquire property at a rate that by the late 1970s made him Hong Kong’s leading private developer.
In 1979 Li became the first Chinese businessman to buy one of the large British-owned local trading companies when he purchased a controlling interest in Hutchison Whampoa. Under his leadership, Hutchison emerged as the world’s largest independent operator of ports. The company also bought out Husky Oil in Canada and set up mobile-phone operations in Australia, Europe, and the United States. Among Li’s other ventures was an Internet service, Tom.com, that proved highly popular in China.
Characteristic of Li’s approach to business was the way Hutchison made money in the mobile-phone business in the United Kingdom. After getting a foot in the door by investing in a money-losing phone operation called Rabbit, Hutchison launched a service called Orange that was later sold for £8.83 billion ($14.6 billion). Shortly thereafter, Hutchison jumped back into the telecommunications business in the United Kingdom, acquiring a license for a wireless Internet service. For Li, making money involved identifying potentially lucrative technologies before they became lucrative, investing in them, and then selling when the properties hit peak value.
Li’s ties with high-ranking officials in China and Hong Kong benefited his business but prompted criticism. After his son was kidnapped in 1996, the culprit was caught by mainland police and executed. This led to widespread speculation that Li had bypassed local Hong Kong police and sought help at the highest levels of China’s government. Li’s attempt to influence the political climate in Hong Kong by threatening to cancel a major development also resulted in a backlash. In the United States some members of Congress worried that Li’s ties to Chinese leaders made his ownership of ports at both ends of the Panama Canal a security risk.
Li also gained attention for his philanthropy. He established the Li Ka Shing Foundation (1980) and other charitable organizations, which contributed millions to universities and hospitals in East Asia and North America. He also pledged support for rescue efforts after the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami and the Sichuan earthquake of 2008.
