Lucio Tan, in full Tan Eng Tsai,  (born July 17, 1933, Amoy, Fujian province, China), Chinese-born Filipino entrepreneur who headed such companies as Fortune Tobacco Corp., Asia Brewery, Inc., and Philippine Airlines, Inc.
Tan was the oldest of eight children. He studied chemical engineering at Far Eastern University in Manila. In one of his early jobs, he worked as a janitor in a cigarette factory before his promotion to tobacco “cook,” regulating the product mix. In 1966 Tan started his own tobacco company, Fortune Tobacco Corp.
Tan and Ferdinand Marcos reportedly met in the early 1960s when Marcos was a senator, and their friendship strengthened. After Marcos, who had served seven years as president of the Philippines, declared martial law in 1972, Tan served as the catalyst for what would become three of the country’s largest businesses. When his Fortune Tobacco Corp. allegedly received tax breaks, it was able to beat its rivals. In 1977 Tan acquired the insolvent General Bank and Trust (later renamed Allied Banking Corp.) for a pittance, and three years later he launched Asia Brewery, Inc., when Marcos rescinded a measure prohibiting the establishment of new beer companies.
After the fall of Marcos in 1986, the administrations of Corazon Aquino (1986–92) and Fidel Ramos (1992–98) tried to prove that Tan’s companies had been secretly owned by Marcos and therefore should be confiscated. In addition, it was alleged that Tan had not been duly assessed his fair share of taxes on his holdings. In 1992, unbeknownst to the Aquino government, Tan secretly financed the winning bid that secured the purchase of the newly privatized Philippine Airlines, Inc. (PAL). In 1995 he became chairman of the airline. As the owner of PAL and head of Fortune Tobacco Corp. (which by 1996 commanded nearly 75 percent of the Philippine market), and with an estimated net worth between $1 billion and $8 billion, Tan was considered the richest man in the Philippines. He was virtually untouched by an ongoing government probe into the legitimacy of his operations. Accused of tax evasion and other unsavoury business practices that dated back to his association with Marcos during the 1960s and ’70s, he avoided conviction when a Philippine Supreme Court ruling found that the tax bureau had prosecuted the matter in an improper manner. In 1996 he won ruling control of PAL, and the House of Representatives approved a bill that favoured tax breaks for his beer and cigarette concerns. In 2007 the Supreme Court upheld the decision that voided the state’s orders of sequestration of Tan’s companies.
