Marjorie Child Husted, née Marjorie Child,  (born c. 1892, Minneapolis, Minn., U.S.—died Dec. 23, 1986, Minneapolis), American home economist and businesswoman under whose supervision the image of Betty Crocker became a General Mills icon for the perfect cook and homemaker.
Husted attended public schools and graduated from the University of Minnesota in 1913. She remained at the university to take a degree in education the next year. After a period as secretary of the Infant Welfare Society of Minneapolis, she joined the Red Cross during World War I. After the war she was associated with the Women’s Cooperative Alliance until 1923, when she secured the post of supervisor of promotional advertising and merchandising for the Creamette Company of Minneapolis. A year later she moved to the Washburn-Crosby Company, a flour milling and sales firm, as field representative in home economics.
In 1926 Husted organized a home service department for Washburn-Crosby whose staff answered letters from consumers on various topics in homemaking over the standardized signature Betty Crocker, a name first employed in that manner in 1921. Washburn-Crosby was one of several firms that merged in 1928 to create General Mills, and to the new consolidated company it contributed both the Gold Medal flour label and its home service department with Betty Crocker. The department was renamed the Betty Crocker Homemaking Service in 1929 with Husted as director. Under her guidance Betty Crocker became the personification of the company, an epitome of the competent, friendly American homemaker. A portrait by a leading commercial artist, Neysa McMein, helped fix the image of Betty Crocker, whose likeness and signature appeared on a growing number of consumer items and became well known to the public. Husted was the voice of Betty Crocker on radio interview shows.
In 1946 Husted became a consultant to the officers and executives of General Mills, and in 1948 she was made consultant in advertising, public relations, and home service. She also served in 1948 as a consultant to the U.S. Department of Agriculture on food conservation. In April 1950 she left General Mills to form her own consulting firm, Marjorie Child Husted and Associates.
