Mukesh Ambani, in full Mukesh Dhirubhai Ambani,  (born April 19, 1957, Aden, Yemen), Yemeni-born Indian business mogul who is the chairman and managing director of the Indian conglomerate Reliance Industries Limited (RIL), the foremost company of the Indian energy and materials conglomerate Reliance Group.
Ambani was one of four children of Dhirubhai Ambani, who first worked as a gas-station attendant. Owing to the increasingly unstable political climate in Aden, the family relocated in 1958 to the Bhuleshwar neighbourhood of Bombay (now Mumbai), where they lived in a chawl (a communal building that commonly features low-rent two-room apartments). In the same year, Dhirubhai and a cousin founded the Reliance Commercial Corporation, which grew from a commodities-trading business that they initially operated out of a one-room rental space into RIL.
Ambani earned a bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering from the University of Bombay (now the University of Mumbai) and subsequently pursued a master’s degree in business administration from Stanford University. However, he left the program in 1981 to join the family business, where he worked to diversify the company, venturing into a vast array of areas, including communications, infrastructure, petrochemicals, petroleum refining, polyester fibres, and gas and oil production. In 2004 he was named one of the world’s most respected business leaders by the professional-services firm PricewaterhouseCoopers.
Following Dhirubhai’s death in 2002, Ambani and his brother, Anil, assumed joint leadership of the Reliance companies. However, feuds between the brothers over control prompted their mother, Kokilaben Ambani, to split Reliance’s assets via a noncompetition agreement (2006–10) under which Mukesh assumed control of the gas, oil, and petrochemicals units as RIL under the umbrella of the Reliance Group. Ambani has been credited with creating the globe’s largest start-up petroleum refinery as well as spearheading the creation of several state-of-the-art manufacturing facilities that vastly increased RIL’s production capabilities. In 2006 he was chosen to cochair the India Economic Summit of the World Economic Forum (WEF)—an international organization made up of some of the world’s prominent business leaders, politicians, policy makers, scholars, philanthropists, trade unionists, and representatives of nongovernmental organizations that convenes annually to discuss global commerce, economic development, political concerns, and important social issues. The following year he became India’s first rupee trillionaire.
In 2007 The Economic Times newspaper and the news agency Press Trust of India simultaneously named Ambani the world’s richest man. The following year he created the Mumbai Indians, an Indian Premier League cricket team. In 2010 he was elected to serve as a member of the WEF Foundation Board.
