Philip Henslowe,  (born c. 1550, Lindfield, Sussex, Eng.—died  Jan. 6, 1616, London), most important English theatre proprietor and manager of the Elizabethan Age.
Henslowe had apparently settled in Southwark, London, before 1577. He married a wealthy widow and with her money became an owner of much Southwark property, including inns and lodging houses. He was variously interested in dyeing, starch making, and wood selling, as well as pawnbroking, moneylending, and theatrical enterprises. He was a churchwarden and held some minor court offices, becoming a groom of the chamber. In 1587 Henslowe and a partner built the Rose Theatre on the Bankside near Southwark Bridge, and, under Henslowe’s financial management, various companies acted there from 1592 to 1603.
Henslowe had an interest in the suburban Newington Butts Theatre in 1594 and, later, in the Swan Theatre in the Paris Garden at the western end of the Bankside. The actor Edward Alleyn had married Henslowe’s stepdaughter, and Henslowe and he presented bearbaiting and bullbaiting in an old arena near the Swan. In 1613 Henslowe built a new theatre, the Hope, designed for plays as well as bearbaiting, on this site. The most sumptuous of Henslowe’s theatres was the Fortune, built just north of London for the Admiral’s Men in 1600.
Henslowe’s theatres gave the first productions of many important Elizabethan dramas; he was associated in one way or another with most of the famous playwrights for a quarter of a century, and his Admiral’s Men were the chief rivals of the Chamberlain’s Men, Shakespeare’s company. Henslowe was a shrewd, crotchety man of business who kept a tight hand on his theatrical companies, his players, and his playwrights. “Should these fellowes come out of my debt I should have no rule over them.” In the year before his death his players brought an indictment of “oppression” against him, but the outcome of the proceeding is not known.
Henslowe’s famous Diary is one of the most important sources for the English theatrical history of the time. It is actually a manuscript book of miscellaneous accounts and memoranda, playhouse receipts, payments to playwrights, loans or advances to players, payments for materials, costumes, and so on. It was edited (1904–08) by Sir Walter Gregg and was supplemented by Henslowe Papers (1907), also edited by Gregg.
