Richard D. Murdock,  (born March 21, 1947, Martinez, Calif., U.S.), American business executive who led some of the world’s foremost biotechnology companies.
Murdock received a bachelor’s degree in zoology from the University of California at Berkeley in 1969. Following graduation he held positions in sales and marketing, and from 1989 to 1991 he was the European vice president of the Fenwal Division of Baxter Healthcare Corporation. In September 1991 he became the vice president of marketing and corporate development at CellPro, Inc., a small biotechnology firm founded in 1989 and based in Bothell, Wash. By 1992 he had become president of the company. From June 1992 until 1998 he also held the positions of chief executive officer and director.
In late 1995 Murdock, having no family history of cancer, found lumps in his neck and groin. He was eventually diagnosed with advanced mantle cell lymphoma, a rare and deadly form of cancer. Murdock needed to find a treatment quickly: the average life expectancy following such a diagnosis was only about 30 months. Fortunately, because of his position at CellPro, he had an advantage not afforded other cancer victims.
At the time Murdock announced his condition, CellPro was working on a cell separation technology that it hoped would improve the outcome of bone marrow transplants, which were used to treat a variety of cancers, including mantle cell lymphoma. Because Murdock’s cancer was so advanced, the project was given top priority, and within a couple of months his researchers believed that they had found a viable treatment. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration granted CellPro a “compassionate use exemption,” which allowed the company to test the new treatment on Murdock in June 1996. It was a success; within a month after Murdock completed the treatment, test results revealed that he was free of cancer.
In 1997 CellPro was involved in an ongoing patent-infringement lawsuit brought by Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Md.; Baxter International, Inc.; and Becton Dickinson & Co. concerning an antibody used in the treatment that had given Murdock his second chance. In March of that year a federal district court jury ruled in favour of the plaintiffs, and CellPro was ordered to pay $2.3 million in damages. The company was hit even harder in July when a judge upheld the jury’s decision and increased the amount of the damages. In total, CellPro paid more than $15 million to settle the lawsuit and went bankrupt.
In December 1998 Murdock became the president and chief executive officer of Kyphon, Inc., a private orthopedic medical device company. In 2002 he was appointed interim chairman, president, and chief executive officer of SangStat Medical Corporation, a global biotechnology company focused on immunology. (Murdock had been a board member at SangStat since 1993.) In 2003 SangStat was acquired by Genzyme Corporation, and Murdock left the company shortly thereafter. He later became chairman of Open Monoclonal Technology, Inc., a company that develops antibodies through genetically engineered rats.
Murdock coauthored Patient Number One: A True Story of How One CEO Took on Cancer and Big Business in the Fight of His Life (2000).
