Robert L. Vesco, in full Robert Lee Vesco,  (born December 4, 1935, Detroit, Michigan, U.S.—died November 23, 2007, Havana, Cuba [see Researcher’s Note: Robert Vesco’s death date]), American financier, once considered the boy wonder of international finance, who later became a fugitive from U.S. and other legal authorities. He was a key figure in several American financial and political scandals of the early 1970s.
The son of a Detroit autoworker, Vesco left school at age 16 to work as an apprentice in an automotive body shop. He was later a draftsman and worked in the Detroit aluminum industry. In 1957 he went to New York City as an administrative assistant in engineering for a chemical company. He gained financial interests in two small New Jersey manufacturing companies, and by the mid-1960s he had merged them to form International Controls Corporation. He came to control many smaller companies, and within three years he had taken his companies’ annual sales from $1.3 million to more than $100 million.
In 1971 he acquired control of the Swiss-based mutual-fund empire Investors Overseas Services (IOS). The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission accused Vesco and his associates of looting the IOS of $224 million, defrauding thousands of investors by diverting assets from mutual funds. In 1973 Vesco was indicted for making illegal contributions totaling $250,000 to the reelection campaign of Pres. Richard M. Nixon. In 1976 he was indicted by a U.S. federal grand jury on charges relating to his fraudulent schemes in the IOS.
He fled the United States in 1972 and for various periods lived a life of luxury in Costa Rica, The Bahamas, Nicaragua, and Antigua. In all these countries he allegedly employed political bribery, and none granted occasional extradition requests from the United States and from Switzerland, where the IOS had been headquartered. While abroad, Vesco reportedly increased his stolen wealth through further large investments, notably in international arms sales to such countries as Libya.
About 1984 Vesco went to live in Cuba, where he was said to have had more than one home and his own private plane and yacht. In 1996 Cuban authorities jailed Vesco for economic crimes he committed there. Pres. Fidel Castro refused to extradite Vesco to the United States, and he was released from jail in 2005.
