Rong Yiren, Wade-Giles romanization Jung I-jen,  (born May 1, 1916, Wuxi, Jiangsu province, China—died October 26, 2005, Beijing), Chinese businessman and politician. He was the founder (in 1979) and president of China International Trust and Investment Corporation (CITIC), China’s largest investment company at the time, and later (1993–98) was vice president of China.
Rong was educated at a British-run university—St. John’s, in Shanghai—and was directing his family’s flour, textile, and banking businesses when the communists came to power in China in 1949. Though four of his six brothers left China, he remained and continued to run the family businesses, even after the government became a 50-percent partner in 1956. Even though Rong was not a communist, he was appointed deputy mayor of Shanghai (1957) and deputy minister of the textile industry (1959). In 1966, however, at the outset of the Cultural Revolution, Rong was seized by Red Guards, beaten, and assigned to menial jobs, and his business holdings were confiscated. With the rise in influence of Political Bureau reformer Deng Xiaoping seven years later, Rong once again became active in government affairs.
In 1979 Deng asked him to help with China’s new “open door” economic reforms. Rong formed CITIC to attract the foreign capital and skills needed to expand China’s business interests and modernize its aging industries. The corporation operates like a capitalist enterprise: it runs a bank in competition with government banks; arranges loans; sells bonds in overseas markets; invests in and imports equipment for Chinese businesses; and owns businesses in other countries, including Australia, Canada, and the United States. In May 1989 Rong allowed his employees to participate in pro-democracy demonstrations, but he later supported the government’s military repression of the demonstrators. After serving for a time as vice chairman of the National People’s Congress, Rong was elected vice president of China in 1993; he left office in 1998.
