Shishaku Shibusawa Eiichi,  (born March 16, 1840, Musashi province, Japan—died November 11, 1931, Tokyo), Japanese government official who helped establish the reforms that put Japan on a firm financial footing in the Meiji period (1868–1912). His Shibusawa Company became one of the largest of the zaibatsu (financial cartels) in the country, helping establish the close relations between government and business.
Although Shibusawa’s parents were peasants, they could afford to give him a good education. He early joined the loyalist movement that demanded the expulsion of all foreigners from Japan. Because of his ability he became a member of the staff of Tokugawa Yoshinobu, who granted him samurai status. When Yoshinobu assumed the office of shogun, or hereditary military dictator of Japan, Shibusawa was made a member of the central government. He soon changed his expulsionist ideas, and in January 1867 he accompanied Yoshinobu’s brother on a visit to Europe. On his return home, he discovered that the shogunate had been overthrown and replaced by an imperial government under the emperor Meiji.
The banking and trading concern that Shibusawa formed that year was the first Japanese company to be incorporated. In October 1869 he joined the government as an official in the tax ministry and helped carry out currency and tax reforms, revision of the system of weights and measures, and development of a new method of provincial administration.
In 1873 Shibusawa resigned from the government as a result of a policy disagreement and became president of the First National Bank (present-day Daiichi Kangyō Bank) of Japan, which he had helped found. That same year he founded the Ōji Paper Manufacturing Company, and 10 years later he began the famous Ōsaka Spinning Company. Larger and more efficient than any other of its kind, this plant established Shibusawa’s dominance over Japanese industrial life. Shibusawa, in fact, was involved in almost every enterprise associated with the country’s industrial development in this period, founding railways, steamship companies, fisheries, printing companies, steel plants, gas and electric industries, and oil and mining concerns. He retired in 1916 to devote himself to social welfare causes, in which he actively continued until his death at 91.
