Stanley Marcus, in full Harold Stanley Marcus,  (born April 20, 1905, Dallas, Texas, U.S.—died January 22, 2002, Dallas), American retail-store executive whose publicity campaigns gave the Neiman Marcus stores a reputation for luxury and fashion.
Stanley’s father, Herbert Marcus, and his uncle, Al Neiman, opened the first Neiman Marcus store in Dallas, Texas, in 1907. Their idea was to offer high-priced ready-to-wear clothing. At the time, women who could afford expensive clothes usually had them made by dressmakers. Neiman and Marcus hired a dressmaker away from a rival store to do alterations only, and they did away with the fabric and piece-goods department.
Stanley Marcus earned a master’s degree in business from Harvard in 1926 and began his career at the store as a floorman later that year. He set to work on building the store’s image, insisting that no brand that they carried could be available in any other Dallas store. He made Neiman Marcus the first department store to hold fashion shows for its customers. By 1929 he was merchandising manager of all apparel divisions.
In 1934, at Marcus’s suggestion, Neiman Marcus was the first specialty store to advertise in such national magazines as Vogue and Harper’s Bazaar. Executive vice president from 1935 to 1950, Marcus introduced the Neiman Marcus Award, called the “Oscar of fashion,” in 1938. He also selected a series of special displays of foreign merchandise and coordinated them with Dallas cultural events. Another of Marcus’s attention-getting tactics was to offer outlandish products intended for wealthy eccentrics, such as the “His and Her” series of gift items, which included “His and Her” windmills, camels, airplanes, and arks with live animals. Such items helped make the store’s catalogues, particularly the Christmas edition, extremely popular and internationally known.
Marcus served as cochairman for the Dallas Interracial Council for Business Opportunities and, in 1968, told suppliers that the store would favour affirmative-action employers. After the sale of Neiman Marcus to Broadway-Hale Stores, Inc. (from 1975, Carter Hawley Hale Stores, Inc.), in 1969, Marcus became a director of the corporation. He retired from the company in 1975, becoming chairman emeritus. In 1999 the Neiman Marcus Group, which included Neiman Marcus and the retailer Bergdorf Goodman, became a publicly held company.
A collector of rare books, Marcus actively supported the arts in Dallas. He also wrote Minding the Store (1974) and Quest for the Best (1979).
