Sumner Redstone, originally Sumner Murray Rothstein,  (born May 27, 1923, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.—died August 11, 2020, Los Angeles, California), American media executive whose company, National Amusements, Inc. (NAI), acquired leading film, television, and entertainment properties, notably Viacom and CBS.
Redstone’s father, Michael (Mickey), was a liquor wholesaler, nightclub owner, and drive-in movie operator. As a boy, Redstone studied at the Boston Latin School and went on to attend Harvard College (B.A., 1944) and Harvard Law School (L.L.B., 1947). After practicing law in Washington, D.C., and Boston, Redstone joined his father’s company, National Amusements, Inc., in 1954, and in 1967 he became its president and CEO. His leadership transformed NAI into one of the largest movie theatre chains in the United States. Redstone built new movie theatres near suburban shopping malls and, frustrated by the preferences shown to studio-owned theatres, successfully sued Hollywood studios for the right to show first-run movies. When he saw that movie production could be far more profitable than movie distribution, Redstone began acquiring large shares in studios. Moments after viewing Star Wars in 1977, he ordered 25,000 shares in the film’s sponsoring studio, 20th Century Fox.
In 1987, at age 63, Redstone became head of Viacom when NAI took a controlling interest in the cable network. That move was followed by a series of aggressive acquisitions over the next 15 years. Viacom’s holdings came to include Black Entertainment Television (BET), MTV Networks, United Paramount Network (UPN), publisher Simon & Schuster, and majority shares in Comedy Central and Blockbuster Inc. (sold by means of a stock spin-off in 2004). Redstone had borrowed against his Blockbuster shares to acquire Paramount Pictures in 1993. In 1999 Viacom purchased CBS for $37 billion—the largest entertainment merger up to that date—which made it a peer of American media leviathans TimeWarner and the Walt Disney Company. The combined company was known as Viacom, though the various CBS units retained their names. A reorganization in 2006, however, restored Viacom and CBS as separate entities. Redstone served as chairman of both companies until 2016, when he was forced to step down. His departure came amid a battle concerning control of NAI’s media empire. Questions were raised over Redstone’s mental competency, especially after a trust was changed to favour his once-estranged daughter, Shari Redstone.
