Susan Wojcicki, in full Susan Diane Wojcicki,  (born July 5, 1968, Santa Clara, California, U.S.), American tech industry executive who was CEO (2014– ) of the video-sharing Web site YouTube. She previously was the senior vice president in charge of marketing at YouTube’s parent company, Google Inc.
Wojcicki’s father was a physics professor at Stanford University, and her mother was a teacher. She grew up in the Stanford, California, area and later studied history and literature at Harvard University (A.B., 1990), economics at the University of California, Santa Cruz (M.S., 1993), and business at the University of California, Los Angeles (M.B.A., 1998). After returning to Silicon Valley in 1998, she rented out garage space in her Menlo Park home to the newly incorporated Google Inc., which briefly used it as the company’s first headquarters office.
Google had moved to more conventional office space  by the time Wojcicki went to work for the company in 1999. She had previously been employed by Intel Corporation, Bain & Co., and R.B. Webber & Co. Her task as Google’s first marketing manager was to find ways of generating revenue from the company’s signature search engine. Her first big success came in 2000, with the debut of AdWords, the clickable text-only advertisements that appear on Google search pages.
Several of Wojcicki’s subsequent successes at Google came from the purchase and nurturance of start-up companies in the field of Internet advertising. With the launch of the AdSense system and the acquisition of Applied Semantics, both in 2003, Google became a broker of online display advertising. For a fee, the AdSense system placed appropriate advertisements on participating Web sites. When an advertisement was viewed or clicked on and agreed-upon conditions were met, the Web publisher received some of the money that the advertiser had paid to Google. Wojcicki’s responsibilities greatly increased in 2008 with Google’s acquisition of the company DoubleClick. Among other capabilities, the DoubleClick system deployed cookies that tracked preferences of Internet users for the benefit of advertisers. Google kept pace with the rapid proliferation of smartphones when Wojcicki arranged for the purchase of the mobile advertising network AdMob in 2009.
Wojcicki first became involved with video sharing in connection with the launch of Google Video in 2005. The following year she oversaw the purchase of rival YouTube, an equally new venture that was enjoying greater success. The YouTube brand name was retained even after the company became a Google subsidiary. Wojcicki, who was elevated to senior vice president at Google in 2010, moved over to YouTube in 2014 and became the company’s CEO later that year. She thus became head of an operation that claimed to have more than one billion monthly users.
A parent herself, Wojcicki was a strong advocate of paid parental leave. Anne Wojcicki, a leading entrepreneur in the field of personal genomics, is her sister.
