Suze Orman,  (born June 5, 1951, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.), American financial adviser, television personality, and author known for her unconventional approach to money, which combined personal finance with personal growth.
Orman was the daughter of Russian-Jewish immigrants and attended the University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, where she earned a degree in social work (1976). She later moved to Berkeley, California, and became a waitress. Hoping to open her own restaurant, she collected money from friends and diners, but a stockbroker lost the funds in a series of bad investments. The experience piqued Orman’s interest in finance, and she entered Merrill Lynch’s stockbroker training program. As the first female stockbroker hired by the firm in northern California, she quickly displayed her unique style. At times using a crystal on her desk for guidance, Orman sought out ordinary people, such as small-business owners and truck drivers, rather than wealthy individuals, and, before making any investments, she established a relationship with her clients in an effort to figure out “what made them click.” Her methods proved highly profitable, and by 1980 she was named account executive. In 1983 she joined Prudential Bache Securities as vice president of investments and four years later opened the Suze Orman Financial Group. After initial success, however, the firm was forced to close after a dispute over commissions with an employee.
In 1994 Orman released You’ve Earned It, Don’t Lose It, appearing on television’s home shopping network QVC to promote the book. Aided by her on-screen energy and thought-provoking insights, it quickly sold out. Orman’s follow-up, The 9 Steps to Financial Freedom (1997), was on The New York Times best-seller list for more than one year. Soon after, she began presenting workshops on public television, and her Financial Freedom hour was one of the most successful programs in public television’s pledge-drive history. She became a regular guest on Oprah Winfrey’s television show, and in 2007–15 Orman hosted The Suze Orman Show on CNBC. In 2018 she began hosting the podcast Suze Orman’s Women & Money (and the Men Smart Enough to Listen).
Orman’s New Age approach to money was exemplified in The Courage to Be Rich (1999), in which she described money’s “energy force”—positive thoughts will attract money, while negative ones will repel it. The book was a best seller, as were her later works, including The Laws of Money, the Lessons of Life... (2003); The Money Book for the Young Fabulous and Broke (2005), a book for twenty-somethings to help them manage their burgeoning finances; Women and Money: Owning the Power to Control Your Destiny (2007); Suze Orman’s 2009 Action Plan (2009), which offered advice during a global economic crisis; The Money Class: Learn to Create Your New American Dream (2011), and The Ultimate Retirement Guide for 50+: Winning Strategies to Make Your Money Last a Lifetime (2020). Orman also wrote an advice section in O, the Oprah magazine and contributed to various other publications.
