Tony Schwartz,  (born August 19, 1923, New York City, New York, U.S.—died June 15, 2008, New York City), American media theorist and advertising pioneer credited with reinventing the genre of political advertising in the 1960s. He believed that in political campaign advertisements there is no reason to try to impart information about a candidate, because voters have already formed their opinions. Instead, he focused on creating more-effective campaigns through the inclusion of sensory impressions in order to provoke an emotional response in viewers. His most famous work was on the political advertisement known as the “Daisy ad,” which he helped create for incumbent Democratic Pres. Lyndon Johnson’s 1964 presidential campaign against conservative Republican Barry Goldwater.
Schwartz grew up in New York City and, later, Crompond, New York, near Peekskill. He graduated from Peekskill High School in 1941 and from the Pratt Institute in 1944. He served as a civilian artist for the U.S. Navy during World War II and afterward worked in advertising agencies as an art director. He later established his own agency, the Wexton Company. Particularly interested in the uses of sound, Schwartz employed portable equipment to record urban sounds and, during the 1950s, produced a number of record albums. He also produced and presented  the radio program Around New York, about the sounds and people of the city, at New York City station WNYC (1945–76). Over more than five decades, Schwartz created a collection of audiovisual materials that documented thousands of folk songs and other cultural and linguistic artifacts from his base in New York City and around the world. He lectured extensively and taught courses at New York University, Columbia University, and Emerson College.
The 1964 “Daisy ad,” perhaps the single most-talked-about political spot in television history, featured a little girl counting while pulling petals off a daisy. Her image was frozen as a monotone missile launch countdown began. When the count reached zero, a nuclear mushroom cloud appeared (a reference to Goldwater’s allowance that tactical nuclear weapons might be employed in fighting the Vietnam War). The image was followed by the voice of Johnson saying, “These are the stakes: to make a world in which all of God’s children can live or to go into the dark. We must either love each other or we must die.” Although the ad ran only once, in early September, and never mentioned Goldwater’s name, it played into the perception that the Republican candidate was too  extreme for the presidency and fixed it in many voters’ minds. Johnson won the November election easily.
Schwartz’s 1973 book The Responsive Chord explains how audio and visual material can be used to create “resonance” with an audience. His “resonance theory” posits that persons in the audience of a particular media object bring with them more information than they are being given; advertising can be designed to work with what an audience already knows to create the desired emotional response. In producing political campaign material, Schwartz suggested learning what an audience thinks of a candidate and using that information to create a positive emotional response. Thus, the audience members do not merely digest a message but help create it through the reaction of information already in their minds to the message in the ad.
