Verghese Kurien,  (born November 26, 1921, Kozhikode, Kerala state, India—died September 9, 2012, Nadiad, Gujarat state), Indian engineer and entrepreneur who was regarded as the architect of India’s “white revolution,” which transformed the country from an importer of dairy products to the world’s largest milk producer through a system of farmer cooperatives.
Kurien was born into a wealthy Syrian Christian family. He attended Loyola College of the University of Madras (B.Sc., 1940), and he earned another bachelor’s degree, in mechanical engineering, from the same university in 1943. He also studied engineering at the Tata Iron and Steel Company in Jamshedpur, then in Bihar state, and he undertook training in dairy engineering at the National Dairy Research Institute of Bangalore (now Bengaluru). Kurien received a government scholarship to study at Michigan State University, where he received (1948) a master’s degree in mechanical engineering. When he returned to India, he was required, as a condition of the scholarship, to work at the Government Research Creamery in Anand, Gujarat state, which he began doing in 1949.
At the time, a small cooperative of dairy farmers, the Kaira District Co-operative Milk Producers’ Union, was working to overcome an entrenched system in which small local dairies sold milk to a large supplier for very little money, and the supplier transported the milk to Bombay (now Mumbai) and sold it at a substantial profit. The cooperative’s chairman, Sri Tribhuvandas Patel, asked Kurien to help strengthen the organization. Kurien became manager of the cooperative (which later came to be called Amul and became one of the largest food producers in India). Under his leadership, the organization acquired equipment to process and store dairy products and proved to be a reliable supplier. In the process, it improved the lives of the rural dairy farmers. Other dairy cooperatives were formed on a similar model, and in 1965 Kurien became the first chairman of the new National Dairy Development Board. He instituted Operation Flood, also known as the “white revolution,” a long-range program with the objective of increasing milk production while both augmenting rural incomes and keeping prices within reach for consumers through the expansion of the cooperative movement. In addition, he established (1973) the Gujarat Co-operative Milk Marketing Federation. Gurien received numerous honours, chief among them the Ramon Magsaysay Award for community leadership (1963) and the World Food Prize (1989).
