Wang Jianlin,  (born October 24, 1954, Mianyang, Sichuan province, China), Chinese businessman who founded (1988) and served as chairman (1989– ) of Dalian Wanda Group, a conglomerate with major interests in real estate development and entertainment.
Wang’s rise to prominence was a quintessential rags-to-riches story. He joined the People’s Liberation Army in 1970 after having completed only middle school. He served with the Shenyang Military stationed in the Northeast for the next 16 years, during which time he completed his schooling through correspondence courses and managed to graduate (1986) from Liaoning University. After leaving the military, he worked as a local government official in the port city of Dalian until 1988, when he borrowed $80,000 to launch the business that would become Dalian Wanda Group. Wang held the title of chairman of Dalian Wanda from 1989.
Under Wang’s leadership the company quickly expanded beyond its initial focus on residential development in and around Dalian and in the 1990s completed projects in such cities as Chengdu and Changchun. In 2000 the company moved aggressively into commercial real estate, and the scale of its projects became increasingly ambitious. By 2013 the company had developed nearly 80 urban complexes known as Wanda Plazas that offered both commercial and residential spaces. In addition, it operated numerous five-star hotels and department stores across China.
Outside China, Wang was best known for his entertainment ventures. In 2012 Dalian Wanda bought the U.S. cinema chain AMC Entertainment for $2.6 billion. It was at that time the largest purchase of an American firm by a private Chinese company, and the deal made Dalian Wanda, which already owned some 6,000 movie screens in China, the largest cinema operator in the world. Wang described the acquisition as part of a broader strategy to develop close business ties with Hollywood filmmakers and studios, whose involvement he sought in his company’s plans to build a Hollywood-style film and entertainment district in the eastern Chinese city of Qingdao. In 2013 Dalian Wanda donated $20 million to the film museum of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Los Angeles. The academy in turn pledged its support for a proposed international film festival in Qingdao, which Wang hoped would one day rival the Cannes Film Festival.
Also in 2013 Wang oversaw his company’s purchase of a 65 percent stake in Hong Kong-listed Hengli Commercial Properties and its $470 million acquisition of British yacht manufacturer Sunseeker International. In 2015 Dalian Wanda bought a 20 percent stake in Atlético Madrid, a professional football (soccer) club.
