William Rainey Harper,  (born July 24, 1856, New Concord, Ohio, U.S.—died January 10, 1906, Chicago, Illinois), American Hebraist who served as leader of the Chautauqua Institution and as the first president of the University of Chicago.
Harper’s interest in Hebraic studies began in Muskingum College, New Concord, from which he graduated in 1870. In 1875, when only 19 years of age, he received a Ph.D. at Yale for studies in the Indo-Iranian and Semitic languages. In 1880, after several years of academy teaching, he was given a professorship in Hebrew at the Baptist Union Theological Seminary near Chicago. There he founded The Hebrew Student and Hebraica and organized the American Institute of Hebrew. He published a number of textbooks and study helps for the teaching of Hebrew, which found wide use. In 1886 he accepted a professorship in Semitic languages at Yale, and in 1889 he was appointed Woolsey Professor of Biblical Literature, filling both positions simultaneously. Harper began teaching Hebrew in the summer program at Chautauqua, New York, in 1883. Within nine years he was in charge of the entire Chautauqua system.
In 1891 Harper became president of the newly established University of Chicago. His liberal aims and comprehensive plans for the new university, drawn in part from innovations introduced at Chautauqua, attracted wide attention. He proposed dividing the traditional collegiate program into two parts. His model, which devoted the first two years to general education and the last two years to the study of more advanced subjects, paved the way for the development of the junior college. Harper also pioneered the first university extension system in the United States, offering correspondence courses and lectures given throughout Chicago to enrolled students. His other innovations included a yearlong academic calendar divided into quarters. Harper remained at the University of Chicago as president and head of the department of Semitic languages until his death. Among his more important books are Religion and the Higher Life (1904), A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on Amos and Hosea (1905), The Prophetic Element in the Old Testament (1905), and The Trend in Higher Education (1905).
