William Hepburn Russell,  (born January 31, 1812, Burlington, Vermont, U.S.—died September 10, 1872, Palmyra, Missouri), American businessman and coproprietor of Russell, Majors and Waddell, the most prominent freight, mail, and passenger transportation company in the United States in the mid-19th century. The company founded and operated the Pony Express (1860–61).
Russell’s family was descended from English nobility (William Russell was beheaded in 1683 for his alleged participation in a plot against King Charles II). When Russell was a small child, his father died while serving in the War of 1812. His mother remarried in 1816 and moved the family from Vermont to western Missouri. There, while still in his teens, Russell began working as a store clerk. His marriage to the daughter of a Baptist minister brought him the social recognition he desired, and by his mid-30s Russell was wealthy and well connected, having struggled and then succeeded as the part-owner of stores in Lexington, Missouri. Among the many ambitious, risky, and not always fruitful business ventures in which Russell engaged in the 1840s was outfitting wagon trains to supply military outposts on the Santa Fe Trail. In the early 1850s he partnered with William Waddell—like Russell, a member of the Lexington Baptist Church—on similar ventures.
As the U.S. military presence in the West grew, commissions for supplying outposts shifted from one-off wagon trains to long-term contracts, and Russell, Waddell, and Alexander Majors joined forces to enhance their logistical capabilities. A man of great gentility, given to formal speech and manner, Russell never accompanied any of the rough-and-tumble expeditions, but, once the partnership of Russell, Majors and Waddell was formed, he played a vital role as its visionary and its liaison with government officials as well as with important members of the business community.
The creation and short-lived operation of the Pony Express proved to be the company’s high point. As the mail system declined, in 1861, Russell appealed to Secretary of War John Floyd for additional funding to alleviate his mounting debt, but he was turned down. A shady deal with a clerk in the Department of the Interior who was related to Floyd, involving money borrowed illegally from the Indian Trust Fund, resulted in scandal and Russell’s arrest. His high-powered friends all but ignored him. He died a disappointed man.
