Cephalochordate, also called acrania,  any of more than two dozen species belonging to the subphylum Cephalochordata of the phylum Chordata. Small, fishlike marine invertebrates, they probably are the closest living relatives of the vertebrates. Cephalochordates and vertebrates have a hollow, dorsal nerve cord, pharyngeal gill slits, and a notochord. In most vertebrates, the embryonic notochord is eventually replaced by bony vertebrae or cartilaginous tissue; among cephalochordates, the notochord is retained into adulthood and is never replaced by vertebrae. There are about 20 species in two families, each with a single genus. Branchiostoma was formerly called Amphioxus, a name that is retained as an informal term. The other genus is Epigonichthys, also called Asymmetron. The genus Asymmetron is sometimes retained for some species. The cephalochordate fossil record extends back to about 525 million years ago during the early part of the Cambrian Period.
Adult lancelets reach a length of about six to seven centimetres (2.5 inches). There is little structural diversity within the group, the main difference between the two families being the restriction of the gonads to one side of the body in Epigonichthys.
Although edible, lancelets are never sufficiently abundant to constitute a significant source of food to humans or an important part of the food chain in nature. Rather, their significance has to do with their place in evolution, as invertebrates transitional to vertebrates providing clues for the history of human lineage. This connection was first shown by the Russian zoologist Aleksandr Kowalevsky in 1867 in embryological evidence that was influential in establishing that evolution has in fact occurred. More recently, the relationship has been well-supported by gene sequence comparisons. Lancelets have a structure that illustrates the characteristic features of chordates in simple form.
Lancelet sexes are separate, and asexual reproduction does not occur. Eggs and sperm are shed directly into the water, where fertilization occurs. The early stages of development strikingly resemble those of both tunicates and vertebrates. A larva is produced that is similar in structure to the adult but is peculiarly asymmetrical (the gill slits on one side develop first), smaller, and simpler, with fewer gill slits and no atrium. The larvae spend much of their time feeding in the open water but can be found on the bottom. After growing and developing, they metamorphose into the adult form and complete their life history in the substrate.
Lancelets are distributed throughout the world along tropical and temperate coasts. They inhabit soft bottoms ranging from sand to coarse shelly sand or gravel in shallow coastal water. Lancelets lie buried beneath this substrate, often with their mouths protruding above the surface, allowing them to take in water laden with food. In China, lancelets are sometimes eaten and even support a small fishing industry.
Lancelets can swim both forward and backward and can move rapidly through the gravel in which they live. Their behaviour is simple, largely being a matter of locating the proper habitat and escaping from predators. Larvae filter small organisms out of the water; at the time when they metamorphose into the adult, they also feed upon coarser materials deposited on the bottom. The adults filter small organisms from the overlying water by drawing a current into the mouth. The tentacle-like cirri around the mouth form a grid that keeps out sand and other large particles.
The lancelets are also called cephalochordates (Greek: kephale, “head”) because the notochord extends from near the tip of the tail to well into the anterior of the body. Because they do not have the braincase, or cranium, of a vertebrate, lancelets are often called acraniates. The pharynx, with its many gill slits, is surrounded by the atrium, a large cavity with a single exit (the atriopore) on the lower surface of the body. The atrium protects the gills. Tunicates also have an atrium, but its evolution is probably independent of that of the cephalochordrate atrium.
The bodies of lancelets, like those of fishes and other vertebrates, are largely made up of serially repeated units (segments) that include blocks of muscles called metameres. This segmentation also extends to the nerves that supply the myotomes and to some body cavities, excretory structures, and other parts. Segmentation is thought to provide more effective body coordination during locomotion. The segments of vertebrates and cephalochordates are so similar that they were almost certainly present in the common ancestor of the two groups. Tunicates and hemichordates have no clear indications of ever having possessed segments. Segments occur in other animals, including annelid worms and arthropods, but these segments have a different composition and probably a separate evolutionary origin.
A distinct “secondary” body cavity (coelom), like that which contains the internal organs in vertebrates and many other animals, is well developed and forms a system of cavities and spaces. Like the coelom of hemichordates, echinoderms, and a few other animals, it develops as outpouchings in the gut of the embryo.
