chondrichthyan,  (class Chondrichthyes), also called chondrichthian,  any member of the diverse group of cartilaginous fishes that includes the sharks, skates, rays, and chimaeras. The class is one of the two great groups of living fishes, the other being the osteichthians, or bony fishes. The name Selachii is also sometimes used for the group containing the sharks.
Many unique structural, physiological, biochemical, and behavioral characters make these fishes of particular interest to scientists. The dissection of a small shark is often the biology student’s introduction to vertebrate anatomy. These fishes are, in a sense, living fossils, for many of the living sharks and rays are assigned to the same genera as species that swam the Cretaceous seas over 100 million years ago. More than 400 species of sharks and about 500 species of rays are known. Although by any reckoning a successful group, the modern chondrichthyans number far fewer species than the more advanced bony fishes, or teleosts.
The danger some sharks and stingrays present to humans makes these animals fascinating and, at the same time, fearsome. Perhaps for this reason, they figure prominently in the folklore and art of many tropical peoples who depend on the sea. The danger from shark attack, while very real, is remarkably uncommon and easily sensationalized. Quite frequently, little attempt is made to distinguish between dangerous and harmless species.
The name Selachii refers to a category of fishlike vertebrates characterized by a skeleton primarily composed of cartilage. Selachii are given a variety of treatments by ichthyologists. Some authorities consider Selachii to be a class or subclass that contains all the modern sharks and rays; other authorities restrict the use of the name to an order of modern sharks and certain extinct ancestral forms. Under the latter system, the rays (including the sawfishes, guitarfishes, electric rays, mantas, skates, and stingrays) are ranked separately.
The chimaeras (Holocephali) bear many similarities to sharks and rays in skeletal structure, internal organs, and physiology. Ichthyologists commonly although not unanimously emphasize these similarities by grouping the modern and ancient sharks, rays, and chimaeras in the class Chondrichthyes, the cartilaginous fishes. Under this system, which is used in the present article, the sharks, skates, and rays are further grouped into one subclass, Elasmobranchii, and the chimaeras into another, Holocephali. Some authorities classify the elasmobranchs into one class (Selachii) and classify the chimaeras into another (Holocephali); however, assigning the two groups class rank implies a degree of distinctness equal to that of the amphibians (Amphibia), reptiles (Reptilia), birds (Aves), and mammals (Mammalia).
The majority of sharks and rays are marine fishes, but many enter estuaries; some travel far up rivers, and a few are permanent residents of fresh water. Most species live in the relatively shallow waters of continental margins or around offshore islands; a few roam far out in the vast spaces of the oceans. Some live at great depths, in midwaters or on the bottom; others are surface swimmers or inhabit the bottom in shallow waters.
Once regarded as “trash” fish, sharks and rays are increasingly represented in the fisheries of most countries. With numbers of more highly valued bony fishes decreasingly rapidly, many fisheries are specifically targeting elasmobranchs as a primary commercial resource. Annual yields are as much as 750,000 metric tons (roughly 827,000 short tons), and most of this is sold fresh, dried, salted, or processed. This intense harvest is causing the reduction of many shark and ray populations and, in some cases, causing the commercial extinction of some species. One consequence of this depletion of these top-level predators may be a disruption of the food chain in marine ecosystems.
