reptile,  any member of the class Reptilia, the group of air-breathing vertebrates that have internal fertilization, amniotic development, and epidermal scales covering part or all of their body. The major groups of living reptiles—the turtles (order Testudines), tuatara (order Rhynchocephalia [Sphenodontida]), lizards and snakes (order Squamata), and crocodiles (order Crocodylia, or Crocodilia)—account for over 8,700 species. Birds (class Aves) share a common ancestor with crocodiles in subclass Archosauria and are technically one lineage of reptiles, but they are treated separately (see bird).
The extinct reptiles included an even more diverse group of animals that ranged from the marine plesiosaurs, pliosaurs, and ichthyosaurs to the giant plant-eating and meat-eating dinosaurs of terrestrial environments. Taxonomically, Reptilia and Synapsida (a group of mammal-like reptiles and their extinct relatives) were sister groups that diverged from a common ancestor during the Middle Pennsylvanian Epoch (approximately 312 million to 307 million years ago). For millions of years representatives of these two groups were superficially similar. However, slowly lifestyles diverged, and from the synapsid line came hairy mammals that possessed an endothermic (warm-blooded) physiology and mammary glands for feeding their young. All birds and some groups of extinct reptiles, such as selected groups of dinosaurs, also evolved an endothermic physiology. However, the majority of modern reptiles possess an ectothermic (cold-blooded) physiology. Today only the leatherback sea turtle (Dermochelys coriacea) has a near-endothermic physiology. So far no reptile, living or extinct, has developed specialized skin glands for feeding its young.
Most reptiles have a continuous external covering of epidermal scales. Reptile scales contain a unique type of keratin called beta keratin; the scales and interscalar skin also contain alpha keratin, which is a trait shared with other vertebrates. Keratin is the main component of reptilian scales. Scales may be very small, as in the microscopic tubercular scales of dwarf geckos (Sphaerodactylus), or relatively large, as in the body scales of many groups of lizards and snakes. The largest scales are the scutes covering the shell of a turtle or the plates of a crocodile.
Other features also define the class Reptilia. The occipital condyle (a protuberance where the skull attaches to the first vertebra) is single. The cervical vertebrae in reptiles have midventral keels, and the intercentrum of the second cervical vertebra fuses to the axis in adults. Taxa with well-developed limbs have two or more sacral vertebrae. The lower jaw of reptiles is made up of several bones but lacks an anterior coronoid bone. In the ear a single auditory bone, the stapes, transmits sound vibrations from the eardrum (tympanum) to the inner ear. Sexual reproduction is internal, and sperm may be deposited by copulation or through the apposition of cloacae. Asexual reproduction by parthenogenesis also occurs in some groups. Development may be internal, with embryos retained in the female’s oviducts, and embryos of some species may be attached to the mother by a placenta. However, development in most species is external, with embryos enclosed in shelled eggs. In all cases each embryo is encased in an amnion, a membranous fluid-filled sac.
