Salamander,  (order Caudata),  any member of a group of about 740 species of amphibians that have tails and that constitute the order Caudata. The order comprises 10 families, among which are newts and salamanders proper (family Salamandridae) as well as hellbenders, mud puppies, and lungless salamanders. They most commonly occur in freshwater and damp woodlands, principally in temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere.
A brief treatment of salamanders follows. For more complete treatments, see caudata and amphibian.
Salamanders are generally short-bodied, four-legged, moist-skinned animals, about 10 to 15 cm (4 to 6 inches) long. Many are camouflaged, whereas others are boldly patterned or brightly coloured. The largest members of the order are the Chinese giant salamanders—Andrias sligoi can grow to 2 metres (6.6 feet), and A. davidianus can grow to 1.8 metres (5.9 feet) in length—and the Japanese giant salamander (A. japonicus), which can grow up to 1.7 metres (5.6 feet) in length.
Typical salamanders undergo a larval stage that lasts for a period of a few days to several years. Larval forms have external gills and teeth in both jaws and lack eyelids. These and other larval features may persist into sexual maturity—a condition known as heterochrony. A mud puppy (Necturus maculosus) of eastern North America and the axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum) of central Mexico are common species that exhibit this phenomenon.
Salamanders feed on insects, worms, snails, and other small animals, including members of their own species. Like other amphibians, they absorb water through their skin, and they require a moist habitat. In regions where the temperature goes below freezing, they often hibernate.
Most adult salamanders hide by day and feed by night. Some remain hidden underground until the breeding season, or they may emerge only when levels of moisture and temperature are appropriate. Many species, especially in the family Plethodontidae, are strictly terrestrial and avoid ponds and streams.
Fertilization in the suborder Cryptobranchoidea is external. In all other salamanders, fertilization is usually internal; males of such forms often produce a spermatophore, or sperm case, which the female takes into her body through the cloacal opening. Breeding often occurs in the water, but certain members of the Salamandridae and most species of the Plethodontidae families breed on land.
