Sea squirt, also called ascidian,  any member of the invertebrate class Ascidiacea (subphylum Urochordata, also called Tunicata), marine animals with some primitive vertebrate features. Sea squirts are primarily sessile (permanently fixed to a surface), potato-shaped organisms found in all seas, from the intertidal zone to the greatest depths. They commonly reside on pier pilings, ships’ hulls, rocks, large seashells, and the backs of large crabs. Some species live individually; others live in groups or colonies.
The body has an outer protective covering, the tunic, which contains a cellulose-like substance. Sea squirts have two large pores, one to guide water into the body cavity (the oral, or branchial, aperture), the other serving as an exit (the atrial, or cloacal, aperture). Water is propelled through the animal by pharyngeal cilia. Food and oxygen are taken from the water current as water passes through gill slits in the pharynx. Near the shore, debris from dead plants and animals constitutes an important part of the diet; in deeper water, plankton (microscopic plants and animals) is a more important food.
Although all adults are simultaneous hermaphrodites (possessing both male and female functional reproductive organs), eggs shed into the water are fertilized by sperm from other individuals. The tadpole-like larvae are free-swimming. The muscular tail contains a notochord (a flexible, rodlike structure common to all vertebrates) and a nerve cord. When the larva finds a place to metamorphose, it attaches itself by a sucker located at the anterior end of the body. Later the tail, with its notochord and nerve cord, is absorbed and disappears. Although as adults most sea squirts are sessile, some can move by attaching with one area of the body and letting go with another. Movement of up to 1.5 cm (0.6 inch) per day has been recorded in some colonies.
Reproduction also occurs by budding. Near the base of the adult sea squirt, lobes or outgrowths with clusters or chains of zooids (organic bodies) break off; the zooids then settle elsewhere to become new individuals. In “social” colonial sea squirts the zooids are relatively independent, whereas in “compound” colonial ascidians budding gives rise to a colony in which the zooids are embedded in a common tunic. Several zooids may share a single, common cloacal aperture, but each zooid has its own branchial aperture.
Sea squirts are sources of diverse natural products that are of special interest for biomedicine and drug discovery. For example, Ecteinascidia turbinata, a colonial sea squirt, produces a substance known as trabectedin (ET-743), which has anticancer properties and is used in the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas (cancers that originate in supporting tissues, such as muscle and fat).
