Tetrapod,  (superclass Tetrapoda),  a superclass of animals that includes all limbed vertebrates (backboned animals) constituting the classes Amphibia (amphibians), Reptilia (reptiles), Aves (birds), Mammalia (mammals), and their direct ancestors that emerged roughly 397 million years ago during the Devonian Period. In a strict evolutionary sense, all tetrapods are essentially “limbed fish,” because their ultimate vertebrate ancestor is a fish. All tetrapods share a variety of morphological features. These include a pair of bones (the ulna and radius and the tibia and fibula) in the epipodial segments of the forelimbs and hind limbs, digits on the end of each limb, an oval window (fenestra ovalis) in the skull opening into the middle ear, a stapes (ear bone), and several other skeletal features. Undoubtedly, the early tetrapods also shared unique physiological, behavioral, and soft anatomical features; however, only skeletal features are preserved in the fossil record and thus are used for classification.
There is near universal agreement that tetrapods originated somewhere within the fleshy-finned or lobed-finned fishes (Sarcopterygii), although total agreement does not exist on which sarcopterygian group is ancestral to them. The difficulty in deciding tetrapod ancestry stems from the inability to determine conclusively which traits are ancestral and which traits arose after one group diverged from another. Furthermore, the diversity of skeletal anatomies among the early tetrapods confuses this issue; when comparing the skeletal features of one group with those of another, it is unclear whether the comparison is between the same elements or ones that appear the same but arose from different ancestral structures. Nevertheless, Ventastega curonica is considered the first creature whose limb and skull anatomy share most of the features characteristic of early tetrapods. Fossil fragments of V. curonica—which included parts of a pelvis, a shoulder girdle, and a braincase—have been unearthed in Latvia and dated to 365 million years ago. However, tetrapods emerged much earlier, as indicated by fossil footprints set down in marine rocks dated to 397 million years ago.
