Vertebrate, also called Craniata,  any animal of the subphylum Vertebrata, the predominant subphylum of the phylum Chordata. They have backbones, from which they derive their name. The vertebrates are also characterized by a muscular system consisting primarily of bilaterally paired masses and a central nervous system partly enclosed within the backbone.
The subphylum is one of the best known of all groups of animals. Its members include the classes Agnatha, Chondrichthyes, and Osteichthyes (all fishes); Amphibia (amphibians); Reptilia (reptiles); Aves (birds); and Mammalia (mammals).
Although the vertebral column is perhaps the most obvious vertebrate feature, it was not present in the first vertebrates, which probably had only a notochord. The vertebrate has a distinct head, with a differentiated tubular brain and three pairs of sense organs (nasal, optic, and otic). The body is divided into trunk and tail regions. The presence of pharyngeal slits with gills indicates a relatively high metabolic rate. A well-developed notochord enclosed in perichordal connective tissue, with a tubular spinal cord in a connective tissue canal above it, is flanked by a number of segmented muscle masses. A sensory ganglion develops on the dorsal root of the spinal nerve, and segmental autonomic ganglia grow below the notochord. The trunk region is filled with a large, bilateral body cavity (coelom) with contained viscera, and this coelom extends anteriorly into the visceral arches. A digestive system consists of an esophagus extending from the pharynx to the stomach and a gut from the stomach to the anus. A distinct heart, anteroventral to the liver, is enclosed in a pericardial sac. A basic pattern of closed circulatory vessels is largely preserved in most living forms. Unique, bilateral kidneys lie retroperitoneally (dorsal to the main body cavity) and serve blood maintenance and excretory functions. Reproductive organs are formed from tissue adjacent to the kidneys; this original close association is attested by the tubular connections seen in males of living forms. The ducts of the excretory organs open through the body wall into a cloacal chamber, as does the anus of the digestive tract. Reproductive cells are shed through nearby abdominal pores or through special ducts. A muscular tail continues the axial musculature of the trunk.
Approximately 45,000 living species constitute the vertebrates. Species of several classes are found from the high Arctic or Antarctic to the tropics around the Earth; they are missing only from interior Antarctica and Greenland and from the North Polar ice pack. In size, vertebrates range from minute fishes to elephants and whales (of up to 100 tons), the largest animals ever to have existed. Vertebrates are adapted to life underground, on the surface, and in the air. They feed upon plants, invertebrate animals, and one another. Vertebrate faunas are important to humans for food and recreation.
In order to give a broad and comparative view of their life histories, the vertebrates are subdivided here into major groups based on morphology: the cyclostomes (jawless fishes), the chondrichthyes (cartilaginous fishes), the teleostomes (bony fishes), and the tetrapods.
The cyclostomes include two classes of living, jawless fishes (agnathous)—Petromyzontiformes (lamprey eels) and Myxiniformes (hagfishes). The hagfishes are totally marine, often living in deep waters associated with muddy bottoms. The lampreys may be marine as adults but spawn in fresh waters, where the larvae spend some time before metamorphosing to the adult. Some lampreys live entirely in fresh water and may change only slightly in habit as a result of metamorphosis. Without lateral fins, lampreys swim by undulations of the body and can control direction only for short distances.
The living agnaths are predatory, the lampreys being well known for attacking salmonoid fishes. The lamprey attaches to its prey using its round, suctorial mouth, and it rasps a hole through the outer tissues using a tongue armed with keratinized teeth. It suctions off bits of tissue, blood, and body fluids. The hagfishes feed somewhat similarly, but on a variety of prey—invertebrates (worms and soft-bodied forms) and dead fishes.
The lampreys produce small eggs, which develop directly into larvae that burrow into the muddy bottom of the stream. With its mouth at the surface of the mud, the larva filter feeds until large enough to metamorphose and swim off as a small adult. In contrast, the hagfishes produce relatively large encapsulated, yolky eggs up to two centimetres in length. When laid, these eggs attach to any available object by terminal hooks. The encased egg develops more or less directly into a miniature adult.
The sharks, rays, and chimaerids are usually marine, but some sharks have entered fresh waters (the Amazon) or even live there permanently (Lake Nicaragua). In size, sharks range from the whale shark, nearly 10 metres in length, to rather small species, three centimetres in length. They usually weigh 25 to 200 kilograms (55 to 440 pounds). Sharks are predatory animals. Some large shark species (basking and whale sharks) filter feed on small crustaceans. Herbivorous sharks are unknown. Sharks swim by undulations of the tail, but rays “fly” through the water by undulations of the pectoral fins. Most species occur in near-shore waters, but some range widely throughout the oceans. A few are found in deep water.
A few sharks produce live young (viviparous) after internal fertilization. The posterior angle of the male’s pelvic fins are modified into a clasper, which acts as an intromittent organ in copulating with the female. Most sharks lay large yolky, encapsulated eggs with hooks for attachment. The young develop directly and begin life as miniature adults. The young that develop in the mother’s uterus obtain nutrients from the large yolk sac until they are born alive. In a few cases, the uterine wall secretes nutrients.
The teleostome, or osteichthyian, fishes (those having an internal bony skeleton) can be divided into two groups: the subclasses Actinopterygii (ray-finned fishes) and Sarcopterygii (lobe-finned fishes). The latter group includes the lungfishes, which live in marshes, ponds, or streams, and are frequent air breathers. They lay fairly large eggs, with a limited amount of yolk, that are enclosed in jelly coats like those of an amphibian. The eggs develop into small fishes that feed on live prey. The larvae of the African lungfish have external gills to supplement oxygen intake.
Actinopterygian fishes are the common bony fishes of modern aquatic environments. They range in size from fishes that are only millimetres in size to those two or more metres (6.6 or more feet) in length, weighing 500 kilograms or more. Large species (sturgeons) are found in fresh waters (several other large species are found in the Amazon) as well as in marine environments. The diet may include plants, animals, and carrion. Most species are midwater swimmers, but many spend much time lying on the bottom. Tail, pectoral, and even dorsal fins are used in swimming. Reproduction in this group is by way of large numbers of small eggs, which produce small larvae or develop directly to the adult.
