Aldehyde condensation polymer,  any of a number of industrially produced polymeric substances (substances composed of extremely large molecules) that are built up in condensation reactions involving an aldehyde. In almost all cases the particular aldehyde employed is formaldehyde, a highly reactive gas that is commonly polymerized with phenol, urea, or melamine to produce a series of important synthetic resins. The reactions by which these compounds are built up into polymers are referred to as condensation reactions because they are usually accompanied by the release of water and other by-products. The resultant polymers—known as phenol-formaldehyde resin, urea-formaldehyde resin, and melamine-formaldehyde resin—are widely used as adhesives in plywood and other structural wood products. In the first half of the 20th century they were made into very important plastics such as Bakelite and Beetleware.
Phenol, urea, melamine, and formaldehyde have the following molecular structures: 
Aldehydes are chemical compounds containing a carbonyl group (C=O), a highly reactive arrangement in which a carbon atom and an oxygen atom are joined by a double bond. Formaldehyde (chemical formula HCHO) is structurally the simplest member of this family. Produced by the oxidation of methane, it is a colourless, pungent-smelling gas that is commonly stored and handled in a liquid solution. Phenol (C6H5OH) is a phenyl alcohol consisting of a hydroxyl group (OH) appended to a six-sided, ring-shaped phenyl group (C6H5). Derived from cumene, which in turn is produced by a reaction between benzene and propylene, phenol is a toxic liquid that must be stored and handled under clearly established safety procedures.
Urea (also called carbamide) and melamine (also called cyanuramide) are both colourless, crystalline solids containing an amino group (NH2). At one time both compounds were obtained from calcium cyanamide (and ultimately from calcium carbide). Urea is now produced by reacting carbon dioxide with ammonia, and melamine is obtained by the dehydration of urea.
These compounds are referred to as monomers, a general term for a class of compounds, mostly organic, that can link together in the presence of a catalyst to produce polymers. The aldehyde condensation polymers have the following general structures: 
In all three polymers the methylene groups (CH2) connected to the repeating units (and linking them to other units to produce giant molecules) are provided by the formaldehyde. The formation of the CH2 linkages generally follows a two-step process. In the first step, formaldehyde is reacted with one of the other monomers to produce a low-molecular-weight prepolymer consisting of small molecules in which a limited number of repeating units are linked together by methylol, or hydroxymethyl, groups (CH2OH). At this point the compound can be modified with fillers, pigments, and other additives and stored for future processing. In the second step, the prepolymer is cured (usually under heat and pressure and in the presence of a catalyst), and the CH2OH groups are “condensed” to CH2 with the loss of water. The polymers are thus thermoset, or interlinked into permanent three-dimensional networks that are ideally suited for the production of synthetic resins.
