Amylase,  any member of a class of enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis (splitting of a compound by addition of a water molecule) of starch into smaller carbohydrate molecules such as maltose (a molecule composed of two glucose molecules). Three categories of amylases, denoted alpha,  beta, and gamma, differ in the way they attack the bonds of the starch molecules.
Alpha-amylase is widespread among living organisms. In the digestive systems of humans and many other mammals, an alpha-amylase called ptyalin is produced by the salivary glands, whereas pancreatic amylase is secreted by the pancreas into the small intestine. The optimum pH of alpha-amylase is 6.7–7.0.
Ptyalin is mixed with food in the mouth, where it acts upon starches. Although the food remains in the mouth for only a short time, the action of ptyalin continues for up to several hours in the stomach—until the food is mixed with the stomach secretions, the high acidity of which inactivates ptyalin. Ptyalin’s digestive action depends upon how much acid is in the stomach, how rapidly the stomach contents empty, and how thoroughly the food has mixed with the acid. Under optimal conditions as much as 30 to 40 percent of ingested starches can be broken down to maltose by ptyalin during digestion in the stomach.
When food passes to the small intestine, the remainder of the starch molecules are catalyzed mainly to maltose by pancreatic amylase. This step in starch digestion occurs in the first section of the small intestine (the duodenum), the region into which the pancreatic juices empty. The by-products of amylase hydrolysis are ultimately broken down by other enzymes into molecules of glucose, which are rapidly absorbed through the intestinal wall.
Beta-amylases are present in yeasts, molds, bacteria, and plants, particularly in the seeds. They are the principal components of a mixture called diastase that is used in the removal of starchy sizing agents from textiles and in the conversion of cereal grains to fermentable sugars. Beta-amylase has an optimum pH of 4.0–5.0.
Gamma-amylases are known for their efficiency in cleaving certain types of glycosidic linkages in acidic environments. The optimum pH of gamma-amylase is 3.0.
