Anabolic steroid, also called anabolic-androgenic steroid,  drug that mimics the male hormone testosterone in its ability to increase the growth of muscle tissue and in its promotion of male secondary sex characteristics. Anabolic steroids are used medically in humans to treat a variety of conditions, including anemia, breast cancer, hypogonadism, short stature, malnutrition, osteoporosis, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) wasting syndrome. The drugs are also used in veterinary medicine (e.g., to aid recovery from starvation or injury). Some examples of anabolic steroids are nandrolone, oxandrolone, oxymetholone, stanozolol, and trenbolone acetate.
Anabolic steroids target the androgen receptor, the natural biological receptor for testosterone and its metabolite dihydrotestosterone. Stimulation of the androgen receptor results in cell growth, leading to an increase in muscle size. It also leads to virilization—the development of masculine traits, including increased libido and deepening of the voice.
Anabolic steroids are commonly abused by human athletes to build muscle and improve strength. The drugs are also used in livestock to augment muscle mass, and they are sometimes given to racehorses to increase stamina and heighten performance. The use of anabolic steroids is either forbidden or closely controlled in most human and some equine sports.
Abuse of anabolic steroids, however, can result in significant harm to the body. In humans, abuse can lead to coronary heart disease, sexual and reproductive disorders, immunodeficiencies, liver damage, stunted growth, aggressive behaviour, susceptibility to connective tissue injury, and (in females) irreversible masculinization. Similar side effects can occur in livestock and other animals. In horses, for example, anabolic steroids can cause liver damage and weakening of the tendons and can result in decreased testis size and sperm production in stallions and altered reproductive cycling in mares. Anabolic steroids are readily detected in urine and blood.
