Arieh Warshel,  (born November 20, 1940, Kibbutz Sde-Nahum, Palestine [later Israel]), American Israeli chemist who was awarded the 2013 Nobel Prize for Chemistry for developing accurate computer models of chemical reactions that were able to use features of both classical physics and quantum mechanics. He shared the prize with American Austrian chemist Martin Karplus and American British Israeli chemist Michael Levitt.
Warshel received a bachelor’s degree (1966) in chemistry from Technion–Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa and a master’s (1967) and a doctorate (1969) in chemical physics from the Weizmann Institute of Science in Reḥovot, Israel. He was a research fellow (1970–72) at Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts. He returned to the Weizmann Institute in 1972 as a research associate and left there in 1978 as an associate professor. From 1974 to 1976 he was a visiting scientist at the Medical Research Council (MRC) Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge, England. In 1976 he became an associate professor of chemistry at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles. He became a full professor there in 1984 and a distinguished professor in 2011.
During his time in graduate school, Warshel had worked with Levitt on computer modeling of molecules using classical physics. In 1970 he joined Karplus as a postdoctoral fellow at Harvard. Karplus had already worked on computer programs that used quantum mechanics in modeling chemical reactions. They wrote a program that modeled the atomic nuclei and some electrons of a molecule using classical physics and other electrons using quantum mechanics. Their technique was initially limited to molecules with mirror symmetry. However, Karplus was particularly interested in modeling retinal, a large complex molecule, found in the eye and crucial to vision, that changes shape when exposed to light. In 1974 Warshel, Karplus, and collaborators successfully modeled retinal’s change in shape. By that time Warshel had reunited with Levitt at the Weizmann Institute and later at the MRC Laboratory. In 1975 they published the results of a simulation of protein folding. They had long been interested in reactions involving enzymes, and they constructed a scheme in which they accounted for the interaction between those parts of the enzyme that were modeled classically and those modeled quantum mechanically. They also had to account for the interaction of both parts with the surrounding medium. In 1976 they applied their general scheme to the first computer model of an enzymatic reaction. More significantly, their scheme could be used to model any molecule.
