cadmium (Cd),  chemical element, a metal of Group 12 (IIb, or zinc group) of the periodic table.
Silver-white and capable of taking a high polish, cadmium is nearly as soft as tin and, like tin, emits a crackling sound when bent; it can be rolled out into sheets. Cadmium melts and boils at relatively low temperatures; its vapour is deep yellow and monatomic. The metal is permanent in dry air, becomes coated with the oxide in moist air, burns on heating to redness, and is readily soluble in mineral acids. Poisoning results from the inhalation of vapour or dust of cadmium. Friedrich Stromeyer, a German chemist, discovered the element (1817) in a sample of zinc carbonate, and, in the same year, K.S.L. Hermann and J.C.H. Roloff found cadmium in a specimen of zinc oxide. Both zinc compounds were being examined because their purity as pharmaceuticals was suspect.
A rare element (about 0.2 gram per ton in Earth’s crust), cadmium occurs in a few minerals and in small quantities in other ores, especially zinc ores, from which it is produced as a by-product. The chief zinc ore, zinc blende, or sphalerite, consists mainly of zinc sulfide, containing from 0.1 to 0.3 percent cadmium. All methods of zinc production begin with the conversion of the sulfide into zinc oxide by roasting: the cadmium becomes concentrated in the fumes, which are treated in various steps until a product is obtained containing over 99.9 percent cadmium. Some lead ores also contain small quantities of cadmium, and, if it is present in sufficient quantity, it is recovered by a cycle of operations similar to that used by zinc smelters. Zinc producers who use the electrolytic process recover cadmium in a somewhat different way, but again the principle is the same, beginning with the roasting of zinc sulfide, followed by the treatment of the flue dusts. Most cadmium is recovered in one of these three processes. China, South Korea, Canada, Japan, and Kazakhastan led the world in cadmium refinement in the early 21st century.
Most cadmium produced is electroplated onto steel, iron, copper, brass, and other alloys to protect them from corrosion. Cadmium plating is especially resistant to attack by alkali. Cadmium is physically similar to zinc but is denser and softer. The plated cadmium has a smaller grain size than electro-zinc coatings, and deposits tend to be more uniform and smooth. Consequently, good protection is afforded by thin coatings of cadmium, and thus, in spite of its high price, it is frequently used for the protection of precision parts. Its resistance to marine atmospheres is also superior to that of zinc.
An important application of cadmium is its use as the anode with either nickel or silver oxide as the cathode and a caustic potash electrolyte in rechargeable electrical storage batteries for uses in which lower weight, longer life, and stability upon storage in discharged condition are desirable as in aircraft.
Cadmium combines with many heavy metals to yield alloys; the most important are bearing alloys and low-melting alloys used for brazing. The small quantities of cadmium added to the heavy metals strengthen them. One percent added to copper increases its strength and hardness with only a small reduction in electrical conductivity. Alloyed with zinc, cadmium forms solders with good shear strength. Because it efficiently absorbs thermal neutrons, it is used in control rods for some nuclear reactors.
Natural cadmium is a mixture of eight isotopes: 106Cd (1.2 percent), 108Cd (0.9 percent), 110Cd (12.4 percent), 111Cd (12.8 percent), 112Cd (24.0 percent), 113Cd (12.3 percent), 114Cd (28.8 percent), and 116Cd (7.6 percent).
In its compounds cadmium exhibits almost exclusively the +2 oxidation state, as in the colourless Cd2+ ion, which forms a number of stable complex ions, especially halide complexes. A few compounds of the +1 oxidation state have been prepared by dissolving cadmium metal in molten doubly charged cadmium (Cd2+) halides. The resultant diatomic cadmium ion, Cd22+ (where cadmium is in the +1 oxidation state), is unstable in water and immediately disproportionates to cadmium metal and Cd2+.
The most important cadmium compound is cadmium oxide, CdO. It is a brown powder produced by burning cadmium vapor in air, and it provides a convenient starting material for the production of most other cadmium salts. Another compound of some economic value is cadmium sulfide, CdS. Generally produced by treating cadmium solution with a soluble sulfide, it is a bright yellow pigment known as cadmium yellow, which is used in high-grade paints and artist’s pigments because of its colour stability and resistance to sulfur and oxidation. One other compound of note, cadmium selenide (CdSe), is commonly precipitated by hydrogen selenide or alkaline selenides from solutions of cadmium salts. By varying the conditions of precipitation, stable colours ranging from yellow to bright red can be produced. On its own or mixed with cadmium sulfide, it is widely used as a high-grade pigment.
