Cannabinoids,  any of more than 80 known chemical compounds found in all parts of the cannabis plant (namely the species Cannabis indica and Cannabis sativa) and especially concentrated in the female flower heads. They are responsible for the physical and psychological effects that occur when marijuana—the dried leaves and flowers of the plant—and its derivatives are consumed.
Cannabinoids have a variety of effects on humans. The main psychoactive chemical in cannabis is tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). It induces mild euphoria and hallucinations—the “high” sought by many users of marijuana. The brains of several mammalian species, including humans, have a receptor for a substance naturally produced by the body that resembles THC and is thus susceptible to THC’s effects. Cannabidiol (CBD) is also significant among cannabinoids. It has a more sedative, relaxant effect on the body. Usually, cannabinoids are inhaled by smoking marijuana. Cannabis can also be prepared into a concentrated resin (hashish), vaporized, or ingested (alone or in food).
Though marijuana is one of the world’s most popular recreational drugs and remains illegal in many countries, medical marijuana and other derivatives of cannabis have gained acceptance in some quarters. Cannabinoids may stimulate appetite and relieve nausea in patients receiving chemotherapy. Marijuana has also been used to treat conditions such as chronic pain and glaucoma. Cannabinoids may be delivered for medical reasons by smoking or ingestion of specially grown strains of marijuana where medical marijuana is legal or via distillations that may be legal even in places where marijuana is prohibited. Many employers and professional bodies, such as the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), which sets the standards for drug testing for the Olympics, prohibit the consumption of marijuana and test for the presence of cannabinoids. Cannabinoids are fat soluble and may be detected by modern tests long after they are consumed.
Difficulty in concentrating, impaired motor skills, dry mouth, depression or apathy, panic attacks, paranoia, and anxiety are common side effects of consuming cannabinoids. Research has not indicated that users develop a strong physical dependence on cannabinoids, and there are no significant physical withdrawal symptoms once they are stopped. Psychological dependence may however occur. Headaches, nausea, irritability, and depression have been reported among frequent users shortly after quitting.
