Carbene,  any member of a class of highly reactive molecules containing divalent carbon atoms—that is, carbon atoms that utilize only two of the four bonds they are capable of forming with other atoms. Occurring usually as transient intermediates during chemical reactions, they are important chiefly for what they reveal about chemical reactions and molecular structure. In addition, some chemical compounds, particularly those in which the molecules contain carbon atoms arranged in small rings, can best be prepared by the use of carbenes.
According to the electronic theory of bonding, bonds between atoms are formed by a sharing of electrons. In terms of this theory, then, a carbene is a compound in which only two of the four valence, or bonding, electrons of a carbon atom are actually engaged in bonding with other atoms. By contrast, in multiple bonded compounds, such as hydrogen cyanide, all four of the valence electrons of the atoms are involved in bonds with other atoms. Because there is no excess or deficiency of electrons in the molecules of carbenes, they are electrically neutral (nonionic).
Because of the great reactivity of carbenes, they normally have very short lifetimes, and it is not surprising, therefore, that unambiguous and direct experimental evidence of their existence has been obtained only recently. Divalent carbon compounds had been postulated, however, as long ago as 1876, when it was proposed that dichlorocarbene, Cl―C―Cl, was an intermediate in the base-catalyzed hydrolysis (decomposition brought about by water) of chloroform (HCCl3). Toward the end of the 19th century, an extensive theory had been developed that postulated divalent carbon compounds as intermediates in many reactions. Later work, however, disproved many of these postulates, and, as a result, carbenes were no longer put forward as hypothetical reaction intermediates. Carbene chemistry revived in the 1950s after unambiguous evidence had demonstrated their existence and studies by several methods had yielded detailed information about their structures.
The theory of chemical bonding predicts two fundamentally different electron configurations for carbenes, either one of which may correspond to the ground state of the molecules (state of lower energy content) depending only on the nature of the atoms and groups attached to the divalent carbon atom. This duality arises from the fact that the two bonds of the carbene utilize only two of the four valence orbitals on carbon—orbitals being the regions occupied by the various electrons in an atom. The two valence orbitals of the carbon atom not used in bonding are available to accept the two nonbonding electrons. In general, each orbital can accommodate two electrons if their spins are paired—that is, if the angular momenta are of opposite sign. There are thus two possible distributions of the nonbonding electrons: they may be in the same orbital and have paired (opposite) spins, or they may be divided between the two available orbitals and have parallel spins. Substances with electrons having parallel (or unpaired) spins show a magnetic effect (moment). In a magnetic field this moment may be parallel, perpendicular, or antiparallel (parallel but proceeding in the reverse direction) to the direction of the field; these three possible alignments correspond to three forms of slightly different energy, and, as a result, substances with unpaired electrons can exist in all three forms and are said to be in a triplet state. By contrast, substances with all electrons paired show no net magnetic moment and are referred to as singlet states. In principle, carbenes can exist in either the singlet or triplet state (depending upon whether the electrons are in the same or different orbitals, respectively).
In most organic compounds (compounds of carbon), the singlet state is more stable than the triplet state, and the normal or ground state of the molecule is of this form. In these compounds triplets occur only as excited or high-energy states. In carbenes, on the other hand, because of the two nonbonding electrons and the two vacant orbitals, it is expected on theoretical grounds that the triplet state should be of comparable stability to the singlet state and may, in fact, be the ground state.
Theoretical considerations also suggest that the carbene carbon atom and the two atoms joined to it are arranged in a “V” rather than in a linear fashion—that is, the bonds from the carbon atom to the two substituent atoms are situated at an angle that is less than 180°—in both the triplet and the singlet states. The bond angle for the singlet state, however, is predicted to be larger than that for the triplet state. These predictions are fully supported by experiments. The simplest carbene, methylene, has been shown by a technique called electron magnetic resonance spectroscopy to have a triplet ground state, in which the angle between the carbon–hydrogen bonds equals 136°. The singlet state of methylene, which can be obtained in special circumstances, has been studied by another technique, optical spectroscopy, and its bond angle has been determined to be 104°. The structures and the configurations of the nonbonding electrons of the triplet and singlet states of methylene are shown as A and B in the accompanying drawing; the loops represent the orbitals not used in bonding, and the pairing and nonpairing of electron spins are indicated by antiparallel and parallel arrows, respectively. This schematic orbital representation shows both nonbonding orbitals occupied in A (the triplet state) and an empty orbital in B (singlet).
The structural features that determine whether a singlet or a triplet state corresponds to the lower energy form of the carbene molecule may be summarized by the rule that, with few exceptions, carbenes having only carbon or hydrogen atoms attached to the divalent (carbene) carbon atom have triplet ground states, whereas those with nitrogen, oxygen, and halogen substituents have singlet ground states. Examples of triplet carbenes are methylene (H―C―H), phenylmethylene (C6H5―C―H), diphenylmethylene (C6H5―C―C6H5) and propargylene (HC≡C―C―H). Carbenes with known singlet ground states are methoxymethylene (CH3O―C―H), chloromethylene (Cl―C―H), and phenylchloromethylene (C6H5―C―Cl).
