Carbon group element,  any of the six chemical elements that make up Group 14 (IVa) of the periodic table—namely, carbon (C), silicon (Si), germanium (Ge), tin (Sn), lead (Pb), and flerovium (Fl).
Except for germanium and the artificially produced flerovium, all of these elements are familiar in daily life either as the pure element or in the form of compounds, although, except for silicon, none is particularly plentiful in the Earth’s crust. Carbon forms an almost infinite variety of compounds, in both the plant and animal kingdoms. Silicon and silicate minerals are fundamental components of the Earth’s crust; silica (silicon dioxide) is sand. Tin and lead, with abundances in the crust lower than those of some so-called rare elements, are nevertheless common in everyday life. They occur in highly concentrated mineral deposits, can be obtained easily in the metallic state from those minerals, and are useful as metals and as alloys in many applications. Germanium, on the other hand, forms few characteristic minerals and is most commonly found only in small concentrations in association with the mineral zinc blende and in coals. Although germanium is indeed one of the rarer elements, it assumed importance upon recognition of its properties as a semiconductor (i.e., limited ability to conduct electricity).
In the periodic table, the elements with eight electrons outermost form the group known as the noble gases (Group 18 [0]), the least reactive of the elements. The carbon group elements (Group 14), with four electrons, occupy a middle position. Elements to the left of Group 14 have fewer than four electrons in the valence shell and tend to lose them (with their negative charges) to become positively charged ions, represented by the symbol for the element with a superscript indicating the number and sign of the charges; such elements are called metals. The nonmetals (except boron) are in the groups to the right of Group 14; each has more than four electrons in its outermost shell and tends to acquire electrons to complete its octet, forming negatively charged ions.
Chemical reactions result from the exchange of electrons among atoms. In general, if a metal loses its few valence electrons to a nonmetal, the resulting oppositely charged ions are attracted to one another and form a bond, classified as ionic or electrovalent. Two nonmetals, neither of which can actually lose its valence electrons in chemical reaction, may nevertheless share them in pairs in such a way that what is called a covalent bond results. Metal atoms will bond to one another in a third type of bond, which releases their valence electrons in a way that allows them to conduct electricity.
All the carbon group atoms, having four valence electrons, form covalent bonds with nonmetal atoms; carbon and silicon cannot lose or gain electrons to form free ions, whereas germanium, tin, and lead do form metallic ions but only with two positive charges. Even lead, the most metallic of the carbon group atoms, cannot actually lose all four of its valence electrons, because, as each one is removed, the remainder are held more strongly by the increased positive charge. Because the distinction between covalent and ionic (electrovalent) bonds is often a matter of convenience for the chemist, and because the actual bond structure within a molecule may be quite complicated, it is often useful instead simply to count the total number of electrons an element gains or loses in bonding without regard to the nature of the bonds. This number is called the oxidation number, or oxidation state, of the element; many elements have more than one oxidation state possible, each oxidation state being found in different compounds. The oxidation state of an element is conventionally written as a Roman numeral following the name of the element in a compound—for example, lead(II) means lead in the +2 oxidation state. An alternative system of representation uses an Arabic number after the element name; thus, lead in the +2 state is written lead(+2). With the chemical symbol of the element, the oxidation state may be written as a superscript, as in Pb2+. When the compounds are ionic, the oxidation state is also the actual ionic charge. Covalent bonds generally are considered to be formed by interaction of the orbitals (in most cases, only the s, p, and d orbitals) in specific and varied ways. The most common are called sigma and pi bonds, written σ and π, respectively. The sigma bonds are symmetrical with respect to the axis of the bond, whereas the pi bonds are not. Examples of sigma and pi bonding as well as of ionic bonding can be found among the compounds of the elements of the carbon group.
