Carl Shipp Marvel,  (born Sept. 11, 1894, Waynesville, Ill., U.S.—died Jan. 4, 1988, Tucson, Ariz.), American chemist whose early research was in classic organic chemistry but who is best known for his contributions to polymer chemistry.
After receiving bachelor’s and master’s degrees in chemistry (both in 1915) from Illinois Wesleyan University in Bloomington,  Marvel entered the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, where his dormitory mates gave him the nickname “Speed” because he could work late in the laboratory, sleep as late as possible the next morning, and still get to breakfast just before the dining hall closed. Marvel used his nickname throughout his career, even in official correspondence. After obtaining a doctorate (1920), Marvel remained at Illinois until he retired as research professor in 1961. With Roger Adams and Reynold C. Fuson, he helped to make the Illinois organic chemistry program preeminent in the United States. From 1961 to 1978 he was professor of chemistry at the University of Arizona in Tucson. Following his second retirement, he continued to work almost daily with a small group of postdoctoral fellows until the summer before his death. Despite his voluminous research, he considered teaching his primary contribution. Given his 176 predoctoral and 150 postdoctoral students, it was difficult to find organic polymer chemists anywhere in the world in the second half of the 20th century who had no relationship with him.
Although Marvel’s first 60 to 70 articles dealt largely with preparative organic chemistry, including amino acids and organometallic compounds, he worked primarily on the structure and synthesis of polymers with large molecular weights, with which he became more concerned after he became a lifelong consultant for the DuPont Company in 1928. Beginning in 1933, he studied polysulfone copolymers of sulfur dioxide and ethylene, determining their structure and developing polymerization initiators. In 1937 he began to study the polymerization mechanism and structure of vinyl polymers, leading to the preparation and polymerization of new monomers. During World War II he directed a group of chemists in the U.S. government’s synthetic rubber program, an effort that led to many new synthetic polymers during the decade after the war. Using results established by German wartime research, he developed the “cold rubber” process for American industry. During the late 1950s, in his syntheses of high-temperature-resistant synthetic materials for the U.S. space program, he developed the technique of cyclopolymerization. In one of the most important advances in the chemistry of high-temperature polymers during the 1960s, Marvel synthesized polybenzimidazoles (PBIs), a type of polyimide that is resistant to temperatures as high as 600 °C (1,100 °F) and is used in suits for astronauts and firefighters. In 1980 PBIs became the first man-made fibres to be produced commercially in almost a decade. Marvel continued his research on heat-resistant polymers at the University of Arizona until his death.
