Carl Dietrich Harries,  (born Aug. 5, 1866, Luckenwalde, Ger.—died Nov. 3, 1923, Berlin), German chemist and industrialist who developed the ozonolysis process (Harries reaction) for determining the structure of natural rubber (polyisoprene) and who contributed to the early development of synthetic rubber.
Harries studied chemistry at the University of Jena (1886–88), spent a year at Adolf von Baeyer’s chemical research laboratory at Munich, and received a doctorate (1890) from the University of Berlin. At Berlin he became August Wilhelm von Hofmann’s private assistant and lecture assistant (1890–92) and assistant at the institute of Emil Fischer, who succeeded Hofmann in 1892. Whereas Fischer worked with crystalline compounds, Harries was concerned with amorphous natural products (i.e., substances whose molecules assume a random, noncrystalline arrangement). In 1891–92 Harries noted that ozone attacks rubber, but his duties as Fischer’s assistant prevented him from following up this observation, which later was to prove crucial in his career. In 1899 he married Hertha von Siemens, daughter of industrialist Werner von Siemens, and became section director in Fischer’s institute.
In 1904 Harries became associate professor at Berlin but soon left to become full professor at the University of Kiel, where he worked on the action of ozone on organic substances and the chemistry of rubber. Concerned with the state of Germany’s industry during World War I, in 1916 Harries returned to Berlin to become director of the Scientific-Technical Advisory Council of the Siemens Combine and a member of the board of directors of Siemens & Halske Company. The manufacture of synthetic rubber in Germany during the war was based on his work. During his later years he turned from pure to applied science.
Ozonolysis—Harries’ technique of rupturing the double bonds of an unsaturated substance with ozone, followed by hydrolysis of the resulting ozonide—produced oxygenated fragments that were capable of forming readily identifiable crystalline derivatives. On the basis of this technique, Harries proposed that rubber consists of two isoprene units combined to form small eight-unit molecular rings, which form larger aggregates held together by weak intramolecular forces. Although these aggregate structures were later questioned and ultimately disproved by such polymer scientists as Samuel Pickles of England, Hermann Staudinger of Germany, and Herman Mark of the United States, Harries is still honoured for providing the first proof of the basic chemical structure of the rubber molecule and for contributing to the early development of synthetic rubber.
