Casein,  the chief protein in milk and the essential ingredient of cheese. In pure form, it is an amorphous white solid, tasteless and odourless, while its commercial type is yellowish with a pleasing odour. Cow’s milk contains about 3 percent casein.
Pure casein is an amorphous white solid without taste or odour. Commercial casein is slightly yellow, with a pleasant odour. Dry casein keeps well if protected from insects and rodents; damp casein is quickly attacked by molds and bacteria and acquires a disagreeable odour. The specific gravity is 1.25 to 1.31. Casein is a mixture of phosphoproteins of differing molecular weight.
Casein is a lyophilic colloid akin to albumin and gelatin. It is isoelectric at pH 4.6 where its solubility in water is but 0.01 percent. It is amphoteric: below pH 4.6 casein forms moderately soluble salts such as casein chloride; above pH 4.6 casein forms salts with bases. Sodium caseinate and other alkali salts are soluble without limit, while calcium caseinate, other alkaline earth salts, and heavy metal salts are nearly insoluble. Caseinates readily form gels when slowly coagulated from concentrated solutions. Formaldehyde forms an insoluble compound with casein. Casein is insoluble in most organic solvents. Paracasein is less lyophilic but otherwise identical with casein.
Casein is usually made from skim milk (rarely from buttermilk), by one of three methods: (1) naturally soured casein curdles when enough lactic acid develops from fermentation of milk sugar by the ever present bacterium Streptococcus lactisi; (2) acid casein is precipitated by adding dilute hydrochloric acid or sulfuric acid; (3) for rennet casein, warm skim milk is set with rennet extract until the calcium paracaseinate clots, after which the clot is cut into small pieces to allow the whey to drain. In all three methods the whey is drawn off, the curd washed with water, drained or pressed, dried in warm air, ground, and packed for sale. Rennet casein retains much of the calcium phosphate from the milk.
Casein is used in prepared foods, in medicines and dietary supplements, and in cosmetics. Minor industrial applications include the seasoning and dressing of leather, cleaners and polishes for shoes, textile printing and sizing, insecticide sprays, soapmaking, and many uses in which casein serves as a protective colloid, emulsifying agent, or binder. Major applications of casein are paper coatings, glues, paints, plastics, and man-made fibres.
Book and art papers are coated with pigmented casein to provide a suitable surface for half-tone illustrations. A moderately alkaline solution of naturally soured or acid casein is mixed with a water slurry of the pigments. Formaldehyde or lime may be added for better resistance to water. The mixture is spread on the paper in a coating machine and dried.
Wood joints made with casein glue withstand dampness for some time. Prepared casein glue is a powder composed of naturally soured or acid casein, lime, suitable sodium salts, and a fungicide. The powder is dissolved in water shortly before the glue is used, whereupon the sodium salts precipitate part of the lime, release sodium hydroxide, and dissolve the casein as sodium caseinate; later the rest of the lime slowly changes the sodium caseinate to insoluble calcium caseinate.
Casein paints or distempers provide moderately washable, lustreless decoration for interior walls or for exterior masonry. Casein powder paints, to be mixed with water, are similar to casein glue in composition except for the further addition of pigments. Casein paste paints, to be diluted with water, are made by pigmenting weakly alkaline solutions of casein. Casein is also used as the emulsifying agent in emulsion paints, which are oil paints that can be thinned with water.
Molded plastics of casein resemble horn, ivory, ebony, and marble in appearance. The principal use is for buttons for clothing. Rennet casein is granulated, moistened with water, and kneaded thoroughly. Dyes or pigments may be added. The granules absorb the water and are softened. The material is then passed through a heated cylinder press with rotating screw from which soft plastic is extruded under pressure in rods or tubes. The soft plastic may then be molded in the desired shape. The shaped plastic is hardened by long soaking in formaldehyde solution after which it is slowly dried.
Wool-like textile fibres are made from casein by extruding an alkaline solution of casein through spinnerets of the kind used in making rayon and then hardening the fibres in an acid bath containing formaldehyde. First marketed in the 1930s under the name Lanital in Italy and Aralac in the United States, human-made casein fibres saw use during World War II due to wool shortages. There was renewed interest in casein fibre in the 21st century as manufacturers sought to explore sustainable alternatives to petroleum-based synthetic fibres such as nylon.
