Cellulosic ethanol,  second-generation biofuel that is manufactured by converting vegetation unsuitable for human consumption into ethyl alcohol (ethanol). Whereas first-generation biofuels use edible feedstock such as corn (maize), cellulosic ethanol can be produced by using raw materials such as wood, grass, or nonedible plant parts. All biofuels are renewable, but cellulosic ethanol has a lesser impact on the food chain than first-generation biofuels because it can be produced from agricultural waste products or from energy crops grown on lands that are only marginally useful for food production. However, the conversion rate of raw materials to final product is lower for cellulosic ethanol than for first-generation biofuels, and, without improvements in manufacturing technology, the future of cellulosic ethanol may be as a fuel additive rather than as a petroleum replacement.
The use of regular feedstock as a primary component of first-generation biofuels sparked the “food versus fuel” debate, which questioned the value of first-generation biofuels as an environmentally friendly alternative to petroleum. In diverting arable land and feedstock from the human food chain, it was argued, biofuel production would have a direct impact on the price of food for consumers. Biofuel critics claimed that as the demand for raw materials increased, farmers would sell their crops to higher-paying biofuel manufacturers instead of to their traditional purchasers and thus create food shortages and rapid price increases. Although there have indeed been global increases in food prices and food shortages since the introduction of first-generation biofuels, especially in 2007 and 2008, supporters claim that those can be attributed to rising costs of petroleum and not to biofuel production. During that debate cellulosic ethanol emerged in 2006 as an alternative to first-generation ethanol, because it could use waste and nonfood plants grown on lower-quality land. Many of the energy crops also required less fertilizer than the food crops used in first-generation ethanol.
Because very few countries, such as Brazil, have the geography and climate to produce enough cellulosic ethanol to make a complete transition from petroleum to biofuel, many countries favour blending petroleum and cellulosic ethanol. Most blends are in the range of 5–10 percent cellulosic ethanol so they can be used in current vehicles without modifying the engine.
Cellulosic ethanol is produced from lignocellulosic biomass, which is primarily composed of cellulose and lignin found in dry plant matter. Lignocellulosic biomass can be generally categorized as virgin biomass from naturally occurring plants, waste biomass from industrial and agricultural by-products, and energy crops that are grown specifically for cellulosic ethanol production. The majority of cellulosic ethanol is manufactured from waste biomass, especially sugarcane bagasse, and from energy crops such as switch grass (Panicum virgatum). To be converted into biofuel, lignocellulosic biomass must be pretreated and then hydrolyzed with acid or enzymes to break the cellulose into simple sugars. Those sugars then undergo microbial fermentation to produce ethanol, which is distilled to a purity of about 95 percent. Cellulosic ethanol can also be produced through gasification, which results in a gas mixture of hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and carbon dioxide, which is then fermented or chemically catalyzed into ethanol.
One of the many challenges related to manufacturing cellulosic ethanol is that the conversion rate is lower than with first-generation biofuels, meaning that more raw materials are needed to produce the same volume of ethanol. The enzymes used for hydrolysis are also expensive and are one of the major factors limiting the cost-effectiveness of the technology. To improve the efficiency of that step in the process, research is being conducted on alternate conversion methods, modified enzymes, and novel energy crops.
Cellulosic ethanol continues to be popular politically in many parts of the world, including the United States, Brazil, and the European Union, and is touted as a possible solution to energy independence as well as a method for reusing some waste materials. Some countries, including the United States, have legislation requiring fuel manufacturers to add a set percentage of biofuel into their products. Such legislation is one of the main market drivers for market growth, leaving the technology vulnerable to an economic slump or legislative hesitation that could have a severe impact on its future. Biofuel is also a heavily subsidized energy source and would likely be unable to compete in the current market without government subvention. Although it is possible that production costs of cellulosic biofuels will one day be lower than production costs for petroleum, such a change would require a sharp rise in fossil fuel prices as much as lower production costs. As it stands, blended fuels are more likely to be a feasible long-term solution and the most-viable application of cellulosic ethanol.
