Chemical kinetics,  the branch of physical chemistry that is concerned with understanding the rates of chemical reactions. It is to be contrasted with thermodynamics, which deals with the direction in which a process occurs but in itself tells nothing about its rate. Thermodynamics is time’s arrow, while chemical kinetics is time’s clock. Chemical kinetics relates to many aspects of cosmology, geology, biology, engineering, and even psychology and thus has far-reaching implications. The principles of chemical kinetics apply to purely physical processes as well as to chemical reactions.
One reason for the importance of kinetics is that it provides evidence for the mechanisms of chemical processes. Besides being of intrinsic scientific interest, knowledge of reaction mechanisms is of practical use in deciding what is the most effective way of causing a reaction to occur. Many commercial processes can take place by alternative reaction paths, and knowledge of the mechanisms makes it possible to choose reaction conditions that favour one path over others.
A chemical reaction is, by definition, one in which chemical substances are transformed into other substances, which means that chemical bonds are broken and formed so that there are changes in the relative positions of atoms in molecules. At the same time, there are shifts in the arrangements of the electrons that form the chemical bonds. A description of a reaction mechanism must therefore deal with the movements and speeds of atoms and electrons. The detailed mechanism by which a chemical process occurs is referred to as the reaction path, or pathway.
The vast amount of work done in chemical kinetics has led to the conclusion that some chemical reactions go in a single step; these are known as elementary reactions. Other reactions go in more than one step and are said to be stepwise, composite, or complex. Measurements of the rates of chemical reactions over a range of conditions can show whether a reaction proceeds by one or more steps. If a reaction is stepwise, kinetic measurements provide evidence for the mechanism of the individual elementary steps. Information about reaction mechanisms is also provided by certain nonkinetic studies, but little can be known about a mechanism until its kinetics has been investigated. Even then, some doubt must always remain about a reaction mechanism. An investigation, kinetic or otherwise, can disprove a mechanism but can never establish it with absolute certainty.
The rate of a reaction is defined in terms of the rates with which the products are formed and the reactants (the reacting substances) are consumed. For chemical systems it is usual to deal with the concentrations of substances, which is defined as the amount of substance per unit volume. The rate can then be defined as the concentration of a substance that is consumed or produced in unit time. Sometimes it is more convenient to express rates as numbers of molecules formed or consumed in unit time.
A useful rate measure is the half-life of a reactant, which is defined as the time that it takes for half of the initial amount to undergo reaction. For a special type of kinetic behaviour (first-order kinetics; see below Some kinetic principles), the half-life is independent of the initial amount. A common and straightforward example of a half-life independent of the initial amount is radioactive substances. Uranium-238, for example, decays with a half-life of 4.5 billion years; of an initial amount of uranium, half of that amount will have decayed in that period of time. The same behaviour is found in many chemical reactions.
Even when the half-life of a reaction varies with the initial conditions, it is often convenient to quote a half-life, bearing in mind that it applies only to the particular initial conditions. Consider, for example, the reaction in which hydrogen and oxygen gases combine to form water; the chemical equation is 2H2 + O2 → 2H2O. If the gases are mixed together at atmospheric pressure and room temperature, nothing observable will happen over long periods of time. However, reaction does occur, with a half-life that is estimated to be more than 12 billion years, which is roughly the age of the universe. If a spark is passed through the system, the reaction occurs with explosive violence, with a half-life of less than one-millionth of a second. This is a striking example of the great range of rates with which chemical kinetics is concerned. There are many possible processes that proceed too slowly to be studied experimentally, but sometimes they can be accelerated, often by the addition of a substance known as a catalyst. Some reactions are even faster than the hydrogen-oxygen explosion—for example, the combination of atoms or molecular fragments (called free radicals) where all that occurs is the formation of a chemical bond. Some modern kinetic investigations are concerned with even faster processes, such as the breakdown of highly energetic and therefore transient molecules, where times of the order of femtoseconds (fs; 1 fs = 10–15 second) are involved.
The best way to study exceedingly slow reactions is to change the conditions so that the reactions occur in a reasonable time. Increasing the temperature, which can have a strong effect on the reaction rate, is one possibility. If the temperature of a hydrogen-oxygen mixture is raised to about 500 °C (900 °F), reaction then occurs rapidly, and its kinetics has been studied under those conditions. When a reaction occurs to a measurable extent over a period of minutes, hours, or days, rate measurements are straightforward. Amounts of reactants or products are measured at various times, and the rates are readily calculated from the results. Many automated systems have now been devised for measuring rates in this way.
