Chemical equilibrium,  condition in the course of a reversible chemical reaction in which no net change in the amounts of reactants and products occurs. A reversible chemical reaction is one in which the products, as soon as they are formed, react to produce the original reactants. At equilibrium, the two opposing reactions go on at equal rates, or velocities, and hence there is no net change in the amounts of substances involved. At this point the reaction may be considered to be completed; i.e., for some specified reaction condition, the maximum conversion of reactants to products has been attained.
The conditions that pertain to equilibrium may be given quantitative formulation. For example, for the reversible reaction A ⇋ B + C, the velocity of the reaction to the right, r1, is given by the mathematical expression (based on the law of mass action) r1 = k1(A), where k1 is the reaction-rate constant and the symbol in parentheses represents the concentration of A. The velocity of the reaction to the left, r2, is r2 = k2(B)(C). At equilibrium, r1 = r2, therefore:

The subscript e represents conditions at equilibrium. For a given reaction, at some specified condition of temperature and pressure, the ratio of the amounts of products and reactants present at equilibrium, each raised to their respective powers, is a constant, designated the equilibrium constant of the reaction and represented by the symbol K. The value of the equilibrium constant varies with the temperature and pressure according to the principle of Le Chatelier.
By methods of statistical mechanics and chemical thermodynamics, it can be shown that the equilibrium constant is related to the change in the thermodynamic quantity called the standard Gibbs free energy accompanying the reaction. The standard Gibbs free energy of the reaction, ΔG°, which is the difference between the sum of the standard free energies of the products and that of the reactants, is equal to the negative natural logarithm of the equilibrium constant multiplied by the so-called gas constant R and the absolute temperature T:

The equation allows the calculation of the equilibrium constant, or the relative amounts of products and reactants present at equilibrium, from measured or derived values of standard free energies of substances.
