Chlorophenol,  any of a group of toxic, colourless, weakly acidic organic compounds in which one or more of the hydrogen atoms attached to the benzene ring of phenol have been replaced by chlorine atoms; 2-chlorophenol is a liquid at room temperature, but all the other chlorophenols are solids. Most applications of chlorophenols are based on their toxicity: they and compounds made from them are used to control bacteria, fungi, insects, and weeds. Many members of the group are manufactured by treating phenol with chlorine; a few are made by hydrolysis of polychlorobenzenes.
The compound 4-chlorophenol is a starting material for making 2-benzyl-4-chlorophenol, a germicide; it can also be converted to acetophenetidin (also known as phenacetin), an analgesic.
Formaldehyde reacts with 2,4-dichlorophenol to form methylenebis(dichlorophenol), used as a mothproofing agent, an antiseptic, and a seed disinfectant; 2,4-dichlorophenol, with chloroacetic acid, forms 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D), a weed killer.
Of the trichlorophenols, the 2,4,6-isomer is used as a bactericide and fungicide. The 2,4,5-isomer has similar applications and can be converted into methylenebis(trichlorophenol), or hexachlorophene, or into thiobis(trichlorophenol), both used as germicides in soap; into dimethyl trichlorophenyl phosphorothioate, a systemic agent effective against grubs in cattle; and into 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T) or 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxypropionic acid (2,4,5-TCPPA), both widely used as weed killers.
Tetrachlorophenol is an insecticide and a bactericide and is used as a preservative for latex, wood, and leather. Pentachlorophenol (PCP) is a disinfectant, a fungicide, and an extremely effective preservative for wood. However, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has regulations requiring that it be applied only by trained and certified personnel. In the European Union, legislation limits the use of PCP; for example, PCP cannot be employed for the impregnation of fibres and textiles used in clothing or decorative furnishings.
