Dorothy Maud Wrinch,  (born Sept. 12, 1894, Rosario, Arg.—died Feb. 11, 1976, Woods Hole, Mass., U.S.), British American mathematician and biochemist who contributed to the understanding of the structure of proteins.
Shortly after her birth in Argentina, where her British father was employed as an engineer, Wrinch’s family returned to England. Wrinch grew up in Surbiton, a village near London. She won a scholarship in 1913 to attend a residential college for women, Girton College, Cambridge, where she studied mathematics and philosophy. In particular, she was strongly influenced by mathematician Godfrey Harold Hardy and philosopher and logician Bertrand Russell, with whom she became close friends. In 1916 she was the only female wrangler in the Mathematical Tripos (a wrangler is one who takes first-class honours in the mathematics examinations, or tripos, at the University of Cambridge). The next academic year (1916–17) Wrinch remained at Girton, where she studied for and passed part two (philosophy) of the Moral Sciences Tripos, which qualified her to study symbolic logic with Russell. She remained at the school for the next academic year as a research scholar before accepting a lectureship in 1918 at University College London, where she earned a master’s degree (1920) and a doctorate (1922) in mathematics.
In 1921 Wrinch returned to Girton, where she had been awarded a research fellowship in mathematics. The following year she married John William Nicholson, the director of mathematics and physics at Balliol College, Oxford. In 1923 Wrinch joined her husband at Oxford, where she taught mathematics part-time at a women’s college, Lady Margaret Hall. The couple had one child, Pamela, in 1927. That same year Wrinch’s professional life improved with a three-year full-time appointment to Lady Margaret Hall as a lecturer in mathematics and with a certification to teach mathematics to male students at Oxford.
During this period Wrinch found time to redo her mathematics education at the University of Oxford, earning a master’s degree (1924) and a doctorate (1929); she was the first woman to earn a doctorate in science (the science department included mathematics) from Oxford.
While Wrinch was pursuing her education—and publishing 42 papers on mathematics, mathematical physics, and the philosophy of science, all under her maiden name, which she used throughout her career—her husband developed a drinking problem, which led them to separate in 1930 and to divorce in 1938. In 1930 Wrinch also published a book, The Retreat from Parenthood, using the pseudonym Jean Ayling, about the problems of combining child rearing and a professional career.
In 1931 Wrinch obtained leave from Oxford to study biology, which she pursued at universities and laboratories in London, Paris, Vienna, and Berlin. In particular, she applied mathematical concepts to the structure of proteins and chromosomes, which led to her first paper on biochemistry, “Chromosome Behaviour in Terms of Protein Pattern,” published in Nature in 1934. This paper resulted in her being awarded a five-year research fellowship in 1935 by the Rockefeller Foundation to continue her application of mathematics to biology.
In 1937 Wrinch presented a new theory of protein structure at a meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. The theory hinged on the existence of cyclol bonds between the amino acids that make up proteins. Although the theory was attractive for the mathematical symmetry that it possessed and its ability to explain many properties of proteins, it came under attack almost immediately by British X-ray crystallographers, who asserted that the theory did not conform to their experimental data. In addition, American chemist Linus Pauling calculated that cyclol bonds were too unstable to persist for any length of time. Pauling and Wrinch engaged in an increasingly acrimonious debate through the pages of the Journal of the American Chemical Society. Eventually, both were proved wrong: cyclol bonds were found to exist in ergot (a fungal disease of cereal grasses), and amino acids were found to combine in DNA chains.
Wrinch blamed Pauling for her difficulty in finding an academic position in the United States after immigrating there in 1939. Following a one-year visiting position at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Md., in 1941, Wrinch obtained a joint visiting research professorship at three women’s colleges in Massachusetts: Amherst College, Mount Holyoke College, and Smith College. Otto Charles Glaser, a biologist and vice president of the men’s Amherst College, who was a staunch supporter of Wrinch’s cyclol theory, was instrumental in arranging the joint position; she married him that same year. In 1942 Wrinch obtained a full-time position at Smith, and in 1943 she became an American citizen. She retired to Woods Hole in 1971.
Her best-known work is Fourier Transforms and Structure Factors (1946), which applied mathematical concepts to the analysis of X-ray crystallographic data.
