ester,  any of a class of organic compounds that react with water to produce alcohols and organic or inorganic acids. Esters derived from carboxylic acids are the most common. The term ester was introduced in the first half of the 19th century by German chemist Leopold Gmelin.
Carboxylic acid esters, formula RCOOR′ (R and R′ are any organic combining groups), are commonly prepared by reaction of carboxylic acids and alcohols in the presence of hydrochloric acid or sulfuric acid, a process called esterification. In the reaction the hydroxyl group (OH) of the carboxylic acid is replaced by the alkoxy group (R′O) of the alcohol.
The reverse of the esterification reaction is an example of hydrolysis. Esters may also be obtained by reaction of acid halides or acid anhydrides with alcohols or by reaction of salts of carboxylic acids with alkyl halides. One ester may be converted to another ester by reaction (transesterified) with an alcohol, a carboxylic acid, or a third ester in the presence of a catalyst.
The hydrolysis of esters in the presence of alkalies such as potassium hydroxide (lye) or sodium—a reaction called saponification—is utilized in the preparation of soaps from fats and oils and is also used for the quantitative estimation of esters. Wet chemical fire extinguishers, which are used for fires that involve fats and oils, rely on saponification reactions to convert burning fats to soap, which is noncombustible. Oil paintings may also be affected by saponification, particularly those created using pigments containing heavy metals. Research suggests that heavy metals in pigments react with oils in paint to form soaps; when exposed to moisture (e.g., the original wet coating of paint or increased humidity), the soaps can become sticky or dissolve, causing damage to the painting.
Carboxylic acid esters of low molecular weight are colourless, volatile liquids with pleasant odours, slightly soluble in water. Many are responsible for the fragrance and flavour of flowers and fruits; for example, isopentyl acetate is present in bananas, methyl salicylate in wintergreen, and ethyl butyrate in pineapples. These and other volatile esters with characteristic odours are used in synthetic flavours, perfumes, and cosmetics. Certain volatile esters are used as solvents for lacquers, paints, and varnishes; for this purpose, large quantities of ethyl acetate and butyl acetate are commercially produced. Waxes secreted by animals and plants are esters formed from long-chain carboxylic acids and long-chain alcohols. Fats and oils are esters of long-chain carboxylic acids and glycerol.
Liquid esters of low volatility serve as softening agents for resins and plastics. Esters also include many industrially important polymers. Polymethyl methacrylate is a glass substitute sold under the names Lucite and Plexiglas; polyethylene terephthalate is used as a film (Mylar) and as textile fibres sold as Terylene, Fortrel, and Dacron.
Esters are also formed from alcohols and such inorganic acids as sulfuric, phosphoric, and nitric acids. Nitrate esters (e.g., glyceryl trinitrate, or nitroglycerin) are explosive. Phosphate esters are biologically important (nucleic acids belong to this group) and are used widely in industry as solvents, plasticizers, flame retardants, gasoline and oil additives, and insecticides.
Esters of sulfuric and sulfurous acids are used in the manufacture of dyes and pharmaceuticals. Dimethyl sulfate, the best-known ester of sulfuric acid, is a dangerous poison.
