Fatty acid,  important component of lipids (fat-soluble components of living cells) in plants, animals, and microorganisms. Generally, a fatty acid consists of a straight chain of an even number of carbon atoms, with hydrogen atoms along the length of the chain and at one end of the chain and a carboxyl group (―COOH) at the other end. It is that carboxyl group that makes it an acid (carboxylic acid). If the carbon-to-carbon bonds are all single, the acid is saturated; if any of the bonds is double or triple, the acid is unsaturated and is more reactive. A few fatty acids have branched chains; others contain ring structures (e.g., prostaglandins). Fatty acids are not found in a free state in nature; commonly they exist in combination with glycerol (an alcohol) in the form of triglyceride.
Among the most widely distributed fatty acids are the 16- and 18-carbon fatty acids, otherwise known as palmitic acid and stearic acid, respectively. Both palmitic and stearic acids occur in the lipids of the majority of organisms. In animals palmitic acid makes up as much as 30 percent of body fat. It accounts for anywhere from 5 to 50 percent of lipids in vegetable fats, being especially abundant in palm oil. Stearic acid is abundant in some vegetable oils (e.g., cocoa butter and shea butter) and makes up a relatively high proportion of the lipids found in ruminant tallow.
Many animals cannot synthesize linoleic acid (an omega-6 fatty acid) and alpha-linolenic acid (an omega-3 fatty acid). Those fatty acids are required, however, for cellular processes and the production of other necessary omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids. Thus, because they must be taken in through the diet, they are called essential fatty acids. Omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids derived from linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid, respectively, are needed conditionally by many mammals—they are formed in the body from their parent fatty acids but not always at levels needed to maintain optimal health or development. Human infants, for example, are thought to have a conditionally essential need for docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), which is derived from alpha-linolenic acid, and possibly also for arachidonic acid, which is derived from linoleic acid.
Fatty acids have a wide range of commercial applications. For example, they are used not only in the production of numerous food products but also in soaps, detergents, and cosmetics. Soaps are the sodium and potassium salts of fatty acids. Some skin-care products contain fatty acids, which can help maintain healthy skin appearance and function. Fatty acids, particularly omega-3 fatty acids, are also commonly sold as dietary supplements.
