Georg Charles von Hevesy,  also called George Charles de Hevesy,  (born Aug. 1, 1885, Budapest, Austria-Hungary [now in Hungary]—died July 5, 1966, Freiburg im Breisgau, W.Ger.), chemist and recipient of the 1943 Nobel Prize for Chemistry. His development of   isotopic tracer   techniques greatly advanced understanding of the chemical nature of life processes. In 1923 he also discovered, with the Dutch physicist   Dirk Coster, the element   hafnium.
Educated at the University of Budapest, the Technische Hochschule in Berlin, and the University of Freiburg, Hevesy became an assistant at the Technische Hochschule in Zürich. In 1911 he began work at the University of Manchester, England, under  Ernest Rutherford  on the chemical separation of radium D from lead. Though his attempts proved unproductive, they stimulated him to explore the use of radioactive isotopes as tracers. He joined  Friedrich Paneth  at Vienna (1913) and made significant progress in tracer studies. In the winter of 1918–19 he taught at the University of Budapest. Invited to Copenhagen in 1920 by Niels Bohr, Hevesy and Coster discovered hafnium among ores of zirconium by X-ray spectroscopy.
In 1926 Hevesy became a professor at Freiburg, where he began to determine the abundance of the chemical elements by X-ray spectroscopy and where he discovered the radioactivity of samarium. With the rise of the Nazi Party, Hevesy, who was of Jewish descent, left Germany for Copenhagen in 1934. Along with Hilde Levi, he founded radioactivation analysis, and, after preparing a radioactive isotope of phosphorus, he analyzed various physiological processes by tracing the course of “labeled” radioactive phosphorus through the body. These experiments revealed the dynamic state of the body constituents. After fleeing Nazi-occupied Denmark in 1943, Hevesy began working in a laboratory at the Institute of Research in Organic Chemistry, Stockholm. His published works include the two-volume  Adventures in Radioisotope Research  (1962).
