Gilbert N. Lewis, in full Gilbert Newton Lewis,  (born Oct. 23, 1875, Weymouth, Mass., U.S.—died March 23, 1946, Berkeley, Calif.), American physical chemist best known for his contributions to chemical thermodynamics, the electron-pair model of the covalent bond, the electronic theory of acids and bases, the separation and study of deuterium and its compounds, and his work on phosphorescence and the triplet state (in which the quantum number for total spin angular momentum is 1).
Lewis spent his youth in Lincoln, Neb. Initially educated at home by his parents, at age 13 he entered the preparatory school of the University of Nebraska in Lincoln. He continued at the university through his sophomore year before transferring to Harvard University in 1893, from which he received a bachelor’s degree in chemistry in 1896. After a year of teaching at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., he returned to Harvard to complete a master’s degree in 1898, followed by a doctorate the next year under the supervision of Theodore Richards for a dissertation on the electrochemistry of zinc and cadmium amalgams.
After graduation, Lewis remained at Harvard as an instructor for a year. He then pursued postgraduate work in the laboratories of Wilhelm Ostwald and Walther Nernst in Germany, before he returned for another three years as an instructor at Harvard and then a year in the Philippine Islands as superintendent of weights and measures. In 1905 Lewis joined the faculty of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, and in 1912 he was appointed permanent dean of the college of chemistry and chair of the department of chemistry at the University of California at Berkeley, where he remained until his death at age 70 of an apparent heart attack while working in his laboratory. During his 34-year tenure at Berkeley, Lewis succeeded in molding its chemistry department into one of the best in the United States.
Though his appointment as chair at Berkeley relieved him of all classroom teaching duties, Lewis was well known for his insightful and often witty comments during student and staff research seminars. A brilliant conversationalist, with an almost unlimited supply of jokes and bon mots, Lewis was also addicted to the use of limericks and puns. He preferred to write his books and papers by dictating them to his assistants and collaborators, having fully composed his carefully crafted sentences in his head. When dictating, he would pace up and down the room while smoking an imported cigar—a habit picked up during his stay in the Philippines.
In 1912 Lewis married Mary Hinckley Sheldon, by whom he had three children, a daughter and two sons.
Lewis’s major area of research was the field of chemical thermodynamics. In 1899 there was still a large gap between thermodynamic theory and practice. There was a complete theory of chemical equilibria, developed 20 years earlier by the American physicist Josiah Willard Gibbs, which showed that chemical equilibrium was determined by the free energies of the reacting substances. On the other hand, there was a vast amount of unorganized data on the enthalpies of reaction of chemical substances, collected earlier in the century by such chemists as Julius Thomsen of Denmark and Pierre-Eugène-Marcellin Berthelot of France. In addition, a series of empirical laws, dealing with the behaviour of ideal gases and dilute solutions, were developed that formed the substance of the newer physical chemistry championed by such chemists as Ostwald, Svante Arrhenius in Sweden, Jacobus van ’t Hoff in the Netherlands, and Nernst. Lewis set himself the task of closing this gap between theory and practice. This required that he either directly measure the missing free-energy values for chemical substances or supplement the existing enthalpy data with entropy values, which would allow their calculation. Second, it was also necessary to find some way of extending the empirical laws to include the behaviour of real gases and concentrated solutions.
In pursuit of the first of these goals, Lewis initiated a vigorous experimental program designed to measure the missing free-energy and entropy values. In pursuit of the second goal, he successively introduced the concepts of fugacity (1901), activity coefficient (1907), and ionic strength (1921; a measure of the average electrostatic interactions among ions in a solution). These efforts culminated in 1923 in the publication of Thermodynamics and the Free Energy of Chemical Substances, written in collaboration with chemist Merle Randall.
