Graphene,  a two-dimensional form of crystalline carbon, either a single layer of carbon atoms forming a honeycomb (hexagonal) lattice or several coupled layers of this honeycomb structure. The word graphene, when used without specifying the form (e.g., bilayer graphene, multilayer graphene), usually refers to single-layer graphene. Graphene is a parent form of all graphitic structures of carbon: graphite, which is a three-dimensional crystal consisting of relatively weakly coupled graphene layers; nanotubes, which may be represented as scrolls of graphene; and buckyballs, spherical molecules made from graphene with some hexagonal rings replaced by pentagonal rings.
The theoretical study of graphene was started in 1947 by physicist Philip R. Wallace as a first step to understanding the electronic structure of graphite. The term graphene was introduced by chemists Hanns-Peter Boehm, Ralph Setton, and Eberhard Stumpp in 1986 as a combination of the word graphite, referring to carbon in its ordered crystalline form, and the suffix -ene, referring to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in which the carbon atoms form hexagonal, or six-sided, ring structures.
In 2004 University of Manchester physicists Konstantin Novoselov and Andre Geim and colleagues isolated single-layer graphene using an extremely simple method of exfoliation from graphite. Their “scotch-tape method” used adhesive tape to remove the top layers from a sample of graphite and then apply the layers to a substrate material. When the tape was removed, some graphene remained on the substrate in single-layer form. In fact, derivation of graphene is not a difficult task by itself; each time someone draws with a pencil on paper, the pencil trace contains a small fraction of single-layer and multilayer graphene. The achievement of the Manchester group was not only to isolate graphene flakes but also to study their physical properties. In particular, they demonstrated that electrons in graphene have a very high mobility, which means that graphene could possibly be used in electronic applications. In 2010 Geim and Novoselov were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics for their work.
In these first experiments, the substrate for graphene was silicon naturally covered by a thin transparent layer of silicon dioxide. It turned out that single-layer graphene created an optical contrast with the silicon dioxide that was strong enough to make the graphene visible under a standard optical microscope. This visibility has two causes. First, electrons in graphene interact very strongly with photons in the visible light frequencies, absorbing about 2.3 percent of the light’s intensity per atomic layer. Second, the optical contrast is strongly enhanced by interference phenomena in the silicon dioxide layer; these are the same phenomena that create rainbow colours in thin films such as soap film or oil on water.
The basic electronic structure of graphene and, as a consequence, its electric properties are very peculiar. By applying a gate voltage or using chemical doping by adsorbed atoms and molecules, one can create either electron or hole (a region where an electron is missing that acts as a positive electric charge) conductivity in graphene that is similar to the conductivity created in semiconductors. However, in most semiconductors there are certain energy levels where electrons and holes do not have allowed quantum states, and, because electrons and holes cannot occupy these levels, for certain gate voltages and types of chemical doping, the semiconductor acts as an insulator. Graphene, on the other hand, does not have an insulator state, and conductivity remains finite at any doping, including zero doping. Existence of this minimal conductivity for the undoped case is a striking difference between graphene and conventional semiconductors. Electron and hole states in graphene relevant for charge-carrier transport are similar to the states of ultra-relativistic quantum particles—that is, quantum particles moving at the speed of light (the ultimate velocity in nature, according to the theory of relativity).
The honeycomb lattice of graphene actually consists of two sublattices, designated A and B, such that each atom in sublattice A is surrounded by three atoms of sublattice B and vice versa. This simple geometrical arrangement leads to the appearance that the electrons and holes in graphene have an unusual degree of internal freedom, usually called pseudospin. In fact, making the analogy more complete, pseudospin mimics the spin, or internal angular momentum, of subatomic particles. Within this analogy, electrons and holes in graphene play the same role as particles and antiparticles (e.g., electrons and positrons) in quantum electrodynamics. At the same time, however, the velocity of the electrons and holes is only about 1/300 the speed of light. This makes graphene a test bed for high-energy physics: some quantum relativistic effects that are hardly reachable in experiments with subatomic particles using particle accelerators have clear analogs in the physics of electrons and holes in graphene, which can be measured and studied more easily because of their lower velocity. An example is the Klein paradox, in which ultra-relativistic quantum particles, contrary to intuition, penetrate easily through very high and broad energy barriers. Thus, graphene provides a bridge between materials science and some areas of fundamental physics, such as relativistic quantum mechanics.
