Green chemistry, also called sustainable chemistry,  an approach to chemistry  that endeavours to prevent or reduce pollution. This discipline also strives to improve the yield efficiency of chemical products by modifying how chemicals are designed, manufactured, and used.
Green chemistry dates from 1991, when the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) launched the Alternative Synthetic Pathways for Pollution Prevention research program under the auspices of the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990. This program marked a radical departure from previous EPA initiatives in emphasizing the reduction or elimination of the production of hazardous substances, as opposed to managing these chemicals after they were manufactured and released into the environment. This research program later expanded to include the development of greener solvents and safer chemicals. The name green chemistry was officially adopted in 1996.
The goal of the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 was not simply to regulate the quantity and type of emissions but to place limits on the industry in order to reduce the amount of pollution it generated. American chemist Paul Anastas, one of the principal founders of green chemistry, claimed that by improving how chemicals are synthesized, it might be possible to prevent the production of pollutants.
To help define a more specific research agenda, the 12 principles of green chemistry were formulated by Anastas and American chemist John Warner in 1998:
Of these principles, “atom economy,” originally suggested by American chemist Barry Trost in 1973, became a central concept among green chemistry researchers. Atom economy was designed to overcome the limitations of the traditional concept of “yield,” the amount of final products, which was used for calculating the efficiency of chemical reactions. To calculate the yield, chemists traditionally considered only the amount of the main chemical product they intended to produce (“target molecules”) and not by-products, which might include environmentally hazardous materials. In contrast, atom economy takes into account all reactants and products and hence provides a more-reliable indicator of whether the reaction produces undesirable by-products—that is, pollutants. Green chemistry has since demonstrated that high-efficiency atom economy is indeed achievable through such processes as hydrogenation, metathesis, and cycloaddition.
