Growth factor,  any of a group of proteins that stimulate the growth of specific tissues. Growth factors play an important role in promoting cellular differentiation and cell division, and they occur in a wide range of organisms, including insects, amphibians, humans, and plants.
When investigators began studying the effects of biological substances on cells and tissues in culture, they discovered a group of peptide-hormone-like substances that were distinct from any previously known hormones. Because these substances were active in stimulating the growth of cells and tissues, they were called growth factors. Some growth factors are similar to hormones in that they can be secreted into the blood stream, which carries them to their target tissues. However, whereas the production of hormones is limited to glandular tissue, growth factors can be produced by many different types of tissue.
There are different kinds of growth factors, many of which were originally isolated from the tissues of animals, including mice and cattle. Examples of these substances include insulin-like growth factors (somatomedins), which stimulate growth by mediating the secretion of growth hormone from the pituitary gland; epidermal growth factor, which stimulates the growth of epithelial cells; platelet-derived growth factor, which stimulates the growth of muscle cells and connective tissue cells; and nerve growth factor, which stimulates the growth of neuronal cells. A growth factor that is ubiquitously distributed in plants, animals, and microorganisms is lipoic acid, which is used in photosynthesis and lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. Some cytokines, small proteins released by one cell to regulate the function of another cell, can act as growth factors.
Several growth factors are used therapeutically. For example, erythropoietin, which stimulates the growth of red blood cells, is used to treat anemia associated with chronic kidney failure, cancer chemotherapy, and zidovudine (AZT) therapy in AIDS patients. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF; filgrastim) and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF; sargramostim) are used to stimulate the production of white blood cells in patients with cancer. These agents also can be used to mobilize hematopoietic progenitor cells (hematopoietic stem cells) into the peripheral blood circulation in order to generate cells that can be harvested and used for autologous bone marrow transplant.
The abnormal production and regulation of growth factors can play a role in the progression of disease. For example, vascular endothelial growth factor induces endothelial cells (the building blocks of capillaries) to penetrate a tumour nodule and begin the process of angiogenesis, or capillary growth—a hallmark in the progression of cancer.
