Guanidine,  an organic compound of formula HN=C(NH2)2. It was first prepared by Adolph Strecker in 1861 from guanine, which had been obtained from guano, and this is the origin of the name. The compound has been detected in small amounts in a variety of plant and animal products, but some of its derivatives are widely distributed and are of considerable importance, especially in the action of muscular tissue. It is closely related to urea, into which it is converted by hydrolysis. Guanidine is readily prepared from calcium cyanamide. This, when heated with water, gives dicyandiamide, which gives a good yield of guanidine when fused with an ammonium salt.
A variety of other syntheses are known, some of which—the reduction of tetranitromethane and the action of ammonia on carbonyl chloride, for example—give a simple indication of the constitution of the compound. Guanidine itself is a colourless crystalline solid that absorbs water and carbon dioxide from the air and is thus not easy to prepare pure, but the salts crystallize well, notably the carbonate and the nitrate. Guanidine as a base is much stronger than the majority of organic bases; its aqueous solutions have a conductivity approaching that of the alkali hydroxides and it forms stable salts even with acids as weak as boric and silicic acids. It behaves as a monacidic base only and forms a cation—a positively charged ion—that can be written as
C(NH2)3+
An X-ray crystal analysis of the iodide conducted by W. Theilacker in 1935 shows, however, that all three nitrogen atoms are identically linked in the ion and are symmetrically arranged in a plane around the carbon atom. This is caused by resonance between the three structures which can be written by allotting the positive charge to each of the three nitrogen atoms in turn. The resonance energy is the cause of the stability of the ion and hence of the strong basic character of the compound.
Of the derivatives, nitroguanidine, obtained by the action of sulfuric acid on the nitrate, has been used to some extent as a constituent of explosives; its peculiarity is the low temperature produced in the explosion. Aminoguanidine and substituted aminoguanidine are intermediates in the synthesis of a variety of dyes and other heterocyclic compounds.
Two amino acid derivatives are of significant physiological interest. Arginine, or 1-amino-4-guanidovaleric acid, is a constituent of proteins and particularly of protamines but also plays an important part in nitrogen excretion in animals. With mammals this is largely excreted as urea, which is synthesized in the liver from ammonia and carbon dioxide by a series of reactions in which arginine is an intermediate. Creatine (methylguanidinoacetic acid is present in large amounts in mammalian muscle, and its internal amide, creatinine, is excreted by mammals especially during growth. The contraction of muscle is known to derive its energy from the enzymatic hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate and it is also known that one of the mechanisms whereby this substance is reformed in the muscle is by the action of creatine phosphate. The importance of the guanidine group in muscle is further shown by the fact that certain types of tetanus are associated with the occurrence of guanidine itself or of methylguanidine in the body. Other guanidine derivatives have proved to be of value as therapeutic agents. Decamethylenediguanidine (Synthalin) and related compounds have a specific effect in destroying trypanosomes. Sulfaguanidine, one of the least soluble of the sulfanilamide derivatives, is of great value in treating bacillary dysentery. Chlorguanide hydrochloride, the synthetic antimalarial, is a substituted biguanide.
