Heat of reaction,  the amount of heat that must be added or removed during a chemical reaction in order to keep all of the substances present at the same temperature. If the pressure in the vessel containing the reacting system is kept at a constant value, the measured heat of reaction also represents the change in the thermodynamic quantity called enthalpy, or heat content, accompanying the process—i.e., the difference between the enthalpy of the substances present at the end of the reaction and the enthalpy of the substances present at the start of the reaction. Thus, the heat of reaction determined at constant pressure is also designated the enthalpy of reaction, represented by the symbol ΔH. If the heat of reaction is positive, the reaction is said to be endothermic; if negative, exothermic.
The prediction and measurement of the heat effects that accompany chemical changes are important to the understanding and use of chemical reactions. If the vessel containing the reacting system is so insulated that no heat flows into or out of the system (adiabatic condition), the heat effect that accompanies the transformation may be manifested by an increase or a decrease in temperature, as the case may be, of the substances present. Accurate values of heats of reactions are necessary for the proper design of equipment for use in chemical processes.
Because it is not practical to make a heat measurement for every reaction that occurs and because for certain reactions such a measurement may not even be feasible, it is customary to estimate heats of reactions from suitable combinations of compiled standard thermal data. These data usually take the form of standard heats of formation and heats of combustion. The standard heat of formation is defined as the amount of heat absorbed or evolved at 25° C (77° F ) and at one atmosphere pressure when one mole of a compound is formed from its constituent elements, each substance being in its normal physical state (gas, liquid, or solid). The heat of formation of an element is arbitrarily assigned a value of zero. The standard heat of combustion is similarly defined as the amount of heat evolved at 25° C and at one atmosphere pressure when one mole of a substance is burned in excess oxygen. The method of calculating heats of reactions from measured values of heats of formation and combustion is based on the principle known as Hess’s law of heat summation.
