Henry Taube,  (born Nov. 30, 1915, Neudorf, Sask., Can.—died Nov. 16, 2005, Stanford, Calif., U.S.), Canadian-born American chemist, who won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1983 for his extensive research into the properties and reactions of dissolved inorganic substances, particularly oxidation-reduction processes involving the ions of metallic elements (see oxidation-reduction reaction).
Taube was educated at the University of Saskatchewan (B.S., 1935; M.S., 1937) and the University of California, Berkeley (Ph.D., 1940). He later taught at Cornell University (1941–46) and the University of Chicago (1946–61) before joining the faculty of Stanford University in 1962; he was named professor emeritus in 1986. Taube became a U.S. citizen in 1942.
In the late 1940s Taube carried out experiments with isotopes to show that in water solution the ions of metals form chemical bonds with several molecules of water and that the stability and geometric arrangement of the resulting hydrates, or coordination compounds, vary widely, depending on the identity and oxidation state of the ion. He also helped develop other techniques for studying such substances, and he devised an interpretation of their properties in terms of their electronic configurations. Analogous coordination compounds form in the presence of ammonia, chloride ions, or numerous other chemical species, which are called ligands when they engage in these reactions.
The oxidation or reduction of one metal ion by another involves their exchange of one or more electrons. Many such reactions occur rapidly in aqueous solution despite the fact that the stable shells of water molecules or other ligands should keep the two ions from getting close enough for electron exchange to occur directly. Taube showed that, in an intermediate stage of the reaction, a chemical bond must form between one of the ions and a ligand that is still bonded to the other. This ligand acts as a temporary bridge between the two ions, and its bond to the original ion can later break in such a way as to effect—indirectly—the electron transfer that completes the reaction. Taube’s findings have been applied in selecting metallic compounds for use as catalysts, pigments, and superconductors and in understanding the function of metal ions as constituents of certain enzymes.
Taube was the recipient of numerous honours, including two Guggenheim fellowships (1949, 1955) and the National Medal of Science (1976). In 1959 he became a member of the National Academy of Sciences.
