Herbert Charles Brown, original name Herbert Brovarnik,  (born May 22, 1912, London, Eng.—died Dec. 19, 2004, Lafayette, Ind., U.S.), one of the leading American chemists of the 20th century. His seminal work on customized reducing agents and organoborane compounds in synthetic organic chemistry had a major impact on both academic and industrial chemical practice and led to his sharing the 1979 Nobel Prize for Chemistry with the German chemist Georg Wittig.
Brown was born in a Jewish settlement camp in London, a temporary way station on his parents’ migration from the Ukraine to the United States, where they settled with family members living in Chicago. Brown earned a bachelor’s degree (1936) and a doctorate (1938) from the University of Chicago. His dissertation, under the direction of Hermann Schlesinger, involved the reaction of diborane with aldehydes and ketones. It was the beginning of a lifetime’s devotion to organoborane chemistry. (Boron-hydrogen compounds and their derivatives are known as borane.) Postdoctoral study of the chlorosulfonation of alkanes (hydrocarbon compounds with only single molecular bonds) may likewise be seen as the genesis of his almost equally long devotion to physical organic chemistry.
In 1939 Brown became Schlesinger’s personal research assistant. World War II soon came to dominate the research carried out by Schlesinger’s group at Chicago. Contributions were made to the Army Signal Corps’ desire for a convenient method for the field generation of hydrogen. Of more lasting importance, though, were the discovery and large-scale preparation of  sodium borohydride and lithium aluminum hydride.
Sodium borohydride is a relatively mild reducing agent, while lithium aluminum hydride is among the most powerful. A major portion of Brown’s research at Chicago (1939–43), Wayne State University (1943–47) in Detroit, and Purdue University (1947–78) in West Lafayette, Ind., was devoted to the development of new reducing agents. As a consequence of his work, organic chemists obtained an unparalled array of reducing agents carefully tailored to specific synthetic requirements. It was this work that was alluded to in the first part of the citation for his Nobel Prize.
Incidental to this work, Brown and B.C. Subba Rao studied the reduction of ethyl oleate by sodium borohydride in the presence of aluminum chloride. While the expected reduction of the ester group did indeed take place, there was an additional uptake of active hydrogen. Rather than dismissing the anomalous result, Brown boldly speculated that the double bond in oleic acid had been “hydroborated” by the excess reagent. Further research showed that this hydroboration reaction was a general property of double bonds.
At the time of this discovery (1956), hydroboranes were virtually unknown and thought not likely to be of synthetic use. Further work by Brown and his coworkers showed that organoboranes, produced by the hydroboration reaction, were in fact capable of an extraordinary range of synthetically important reactions. This work was addressed in the second part of his Nobel Prize citation.
Brown officially retired shortly before receiving the Nobel Prize. He wrote Hydroboration (1962) and Organic Syntheses via Boranes (1975), among other works.
