Herman Francis Mark,  (born May 3, 1895, Vienna, Austria—died April 6, 1992, Austin, Texas, U.S.), Austrian American chemist who, although not the world’s first polymer chemist, was known as the father of polymer science because of his many contributions to polymer science education and research.
In 1913 Mark decided to fulfill his military obligation by enlisting for one year in the Austrian army with the intention of starting college in the fall of 1914. World War I intervened, however, and he spent five years in a mountain infantry regiment; he was wounded three times, earned 15 medals, and became Austria’s most decorated company-grade officer. In 1919 he returned to the University of Vienna, which he had attended for a semester in 1915, and received a doctorate in chemistry in 1921. In 1922 he joined the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Fibre Research in Berlin. There he used newly developed experimental methods, such as X-ray diffraction, to study the molecular structures of natural textile fibres (e.g., cellulose, silk, and wool), which he showed to consist of long-chain molecules (macromolecules) with molecular weights above 10,000.
In 1926 Mark was invited by Kurt Meyer, the director of IG Farben’s polymer research laboratory, to be his assistant director. Mark worked on electron diffraction, a monograph (1928) with Meyer on cellulose that demolished the classic micellar theory of polymer formation, an equation relating the viscosity of a polymer solution to the molecular weight of the polymer (1929), and the synthesis and application of his results. His process for the catalytic production of styrene made possible the commercial manufacture of polystyrene and styrene-butadiene rubber.
In view of the growing Nazi threat, Mark, who was of Jewish descent, left Germany in 1932 to become professor of chemistry at the University of Vienna. There he developed the world’s first academic curriculum in polymer science and technology—at a time when only a few laboratories, mostly in industry, cultivated the subject and when no organized university courses were available. In April 1938, following the annexation of Austria by Germany, Mark and his family emigrated to neutral Switzerland. Later that year, Mark became research manager for the Canadian International Pulp and Paper Company in Hawkesbury, Ontario, where he modernized methods and equipment, trained laboratory personnel, and applied fundamental knowledge to practical production procedures. In 1940 he became adjunct professor and in 1942 professor at the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn (now the Polytechnic Institute of New York), where he organized what later became known as the Polymer Research Institute (the first of its kind in the United States) and continued as its director until he retired in 1964.
Mark was the recipient of many honorary degrees and honours, including the U.S. National Medal of Science (1979). Throughout his long career Mark visited more than a thousand scientists and engineers in more than a hundred countries, and he continued his extensive travels after his retirement.
