Hydrolysis,  in chemistry and physiology, a double decomposition reaction with water as one of the reactants. Thus, if a compound is represented by the formula AB in which A and B are atoms or groups and water is represented by the formula HOH, the hydrolysis reaction may be represented by the reversible chemical equation AB + HOH ⇌ AH + BOH. The reactants other than water, and the products of hydrolysis, may be neutral molecules, as in most hydrolyses involving organic compounds, or ionic molecules, as in hydrolyses of salts, acids, and bases.
Hydrolysis involving organic compounds may be illustrated by the reaction of water with an ester of a carboxylic acid; all such esters have the general formula RCO―OR′, in which R and R′ are combining groups (for example, if R and R′ both represent the methyl group, CH3, the ester is methyl acetate). The hydrolysis involves several steps, of which the slowest is the formation of a covalent bond between the oxygen atom of the water molecule and the carbon atom of the ester. In succeeding steps, which are very rapid, the carbon–oxygen bond of the ester breaks and hydrogen ions become detached from the original water molecule and attached to the nascent alcohol molecule. The whole reaction is represented by the equation RCO―OR′ + H2O → RCO―OH + R′―OH, in which RCO―OH denotes a molecule of a carboxylic acid, R′―OH denotes a molecule of an alcohol, and the dashes represent covalent bonds that are broken or formed during the reaction.
A characteristic feature of the hydrolysis of esters and of most other organic compounds is that a third substance, ordinarily an acid or a base, increases the rate at which the chemical change takes place. In the biochemical process of digestion, enzymes secreted by the digestive tract catalyze the hydrolysis of complex molecules into forms that the body organisms can assimilate. Proteins are decomposed to amino acids, fats to fatty acids and glycerol, and starches and complex sugars to glucose and other simple sugars; enzymes such as lipases, amylases, and proteinases catalyze the hydrolysis of fats, carbohydrates, and proteins, respectively.
Hydrolysis involving ionic compounds may be illustrated by the chemical changes occurring in an aqueous solution of the salt sodium acetate. In solution, the ionic constituents of the salt (the acetate ion and the sodium ion) separate; water molecules combine with the acetate ions to form acetic acid and hydroxide ions. Acetic acid dissociates reversibly into acetate ions and hydrogen ions, but only to a very small extent, so that the ionic content of the solution is largely sodium and hydroxide ions. Hence, the solution exhibits basic properties (i.e., turns red litmus paper blue).
