Joseph Priestley,  (born March 13, 1733, Birstall Fieldhead, near Leeds, Yorkshire [now West Yorkshire], England—died February 6, 1804, Northumberland, Pennsylvania, U.S.), English clergyman, political theorist, and physical scientist whose work contributed to advances in liberal political and religious thought and in experimental chemistry. He is best remembered for his contribution to the chemistry of gases.
Priestley was born into a family of moderately successful wool-cloth makers in the Calvinist stronghold of West Riding, Yorkshire. He entered the Dissenting Academy at Daventry, Northamptonshire, in 1752. Dissenters, so named for their unwillingness to conform to the Church of England, were prevented by the Act of Uniformity (1662) from entering English universities. Priestley received an excellent education in philosophy, science, languages, and literature at Daventry, where he became a “furious freethinker” in religion. He renounced the Calvinist doctrines of original sin and atonement, and he embraced a rational Unitarianism that rejected the Trinity and asserted the perfectibility of man.
Between 1755 and 1761, Priestley ministered at Needham Market, Suffolk, and at Nantwich, Cheshire. In 1761 he became tutor in languages and literature at the Warrington Academy, Lancashire. He was ordained a Dissenting minister in 1762. That year he married Mary Wilkinson, daughter of the ironmaster Isaac Wilkinson. They had one daughter and three sons.
Priestley’s interest in science intensified in 1765, when he met the American scientist and statesman Benjamin Franklin, who encouraged him to publish The History and Present State of Electricity, with Original Experiments (1767). In this work, Priestley used history to show that scientific progress depended more on the accumulation of “new facts” that anyone could discover than on the theoretical insights of a few men of genius. Priestley’s preference for “facts” over “hypotheses” in science was consistent with his Dissenting conviction that prejudice and dogma of any sort presented obstacles to individual inquiry and private judgment.
This view of scientific methodology shaped Priestley’s electrical experiments, in which he anticipated the inverse square law of electrical attraction, discovered that charcoal conducts electricity, and noted the relationship between electricity and chemical change. On the basis of these experiments, in 1766 he was elected a member of the Royal Society of London. This line of investigation inspired him to develop “a larger field of original experiments” in areas other than electricity.
Upon his return to the ministry at Mill Hill Chapel, Leeds, in 1767, Priestley began intensive experimental investigations into chemistry. Between 1772 and 1790, he published six volumes of Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air and more than a dozen articles in the Royal Society’s Philosophical Transactionsdescribing his experiments on gases, or “airs,” as they were then called. British pneumatic chemists had previously identified three types of gases: air, carbon dioxide (fixed air), and hydrogen (inflammable air). Priestley incorporated an explanation of the chemistry of these gases into the phlogiston theory, according to which combustible substances released phlogiston (an immaterial “principle of inflammability”) during burning.
Priestley discovered 10 new gases: nitric oxide (nitrous air), nitrogen dioxide (red nitrous vapour), nitrous oxide (inflammable nitrous air, later called “laughing gas”), hydrogen chloride (marine acid air), ammonia (alkaline air), sulfur dioxide (vitriolic acid air), silicon tetrafluoride (fluor acid air), nitrogen (phlogisticated air), oxygen (dephlogisticated air, independently codiscovered by Carl Wilhelm Scheele), and a gas later identified as carbon monoxide. Priestley’s experimental success resulted predominantly from his ability to design ingenious apparatuses and his skill in their manipulation. He gained particular renown for an improved pneumatic trough in which, by collecting gases over mercury instead of in water, he was able to isolate and examine gases that were soluble in water. For his work on gases, Priestley was awarded the Royal Society’s prestigious Copley Medal in 1773.
That same year Priestley moved to Calne, Wiltshire, where he served as librarian and tutor for William Petty, Earl of Shelburne, and his family. Here he sought and gained further evidence supporting his newly found belief in a benevolent God rather than the vengeful God of his Calvinist youth. Upon contemplating the processes of vegetation and the “agitation” of seas and lakes, Priestley envisioned the means by which a benevolent nature restored the “common air” that had been “vitiated and diminished” by such “noxious” processes as combustion and respiration. Apart from strengthening his own spiritual views, these observations informed the photosynthesis experiments performed by his contemporaries, the Dutch physician Jan Ingenhousz and the Swiss clergyman and naturalist Jean Senebier.
Priestley viewed his scientific pursuits as consistent with the commercial and entrepreneurial interests of English Dissenters. He embraced the 17th-century statesman and natural philosopher Francis Bacon’s argument that social progress required the development of a science-based commerce. This view was reinforced when he moved to become a preacher at the New Meeting House in Birmingham in 1780 and became a member of the Lunar Society, an elite group of local gentlemen, Dissenters, and industrialists (including Josiah Wedgwood, Erasmus Darwin, James Watt, and Matthew Boulton), who applied the principles of science and technology toward the solving of problems experienced in 18th-century urban life. When confronted by the multitude of diseases that plagued the growing populations in towns and military installations, Priestley designed an apparatus that produced carbonated water, a mixture that he thought would provide medicinal benefit to sufferers of scurvy and various fevers. Although it ultimately proved ineffective in treating these disorders, the “gasogene” that employed this technique later made possible the soda-water industry. Priestley also designed the “eudiometer,” which was used in the general movement for sanitary reform and urban design to measure the “purity” (oxygen content) of atmospheric air. Contemporary interest in pneumatic medicine culminated in the short-lived Pneumatic Institution, which the physician and chemist Thomas Beddoes founded in Bristol in 1798 in order to ascertain the effects of different “airs” on a variety of common ailments.
