krypton (Kr),  chemical element, a rare gas of Group 18 (noble gases) of the periodic table, which forms relatively few chemical compounds. About three times heavier than air, krypton is colourless, odourless, tasteless, and monatomic. Although traces are present in meteorites and minerals, krypton is more plentiful in Earth’s atmosphere, which contains 1.14 parts per million by volume of krypton. The element was discovered in 1898 by the British chemists Sir William Ramsay and Morris W. Travers in the residue left after a sample of liquid air had boiled almost entirely away.
Because its boiling point (−153.4 °C, or −244.1 °F) is about 30–40 °C (50–70 °F) higher than those of the major constituents of air, krypton is readily separated from liquid air by fractional distillation; it accumulates along with xenon in the least volatile portion. These two gases are further purified by adsorption onto silica gel, redistillation, and passage over hot titanium metal, which removes all impurities except other noble gases.
Krypton is used in certain electric and fluorescent lamps and in a flashlamp employed in high-speed photography. Radioactive krypton-85 is useful for detecting leaks in sealed containers, with the escaping atoms detected by means of their radiation. Krypton is named from the Greek word kryptos, “hidden.”
When a current of electricity is passed through a glass tube containing krypton at low pressure, a bluish white light is emitted. The wavelength of an orange-red component of light emitted by stable krypton-86, because of its extreme sharpness, served from 1960 to 1983 as the international standard for the metre. (One metre equaled 1,650,763.73 times the wavelength of this line.)
Natural krypton is a mixture of six stable isotopes: krypton-84 (56.99 percent), krypton-86 (17.28 percent), krypton-82 (11.59 percent), krypton-83 (11.5 percent), krypton-80 (2.29 percent), and krypton-78 (0.36 percent). Krypton has isotopes of every mass number from 69 through 101; of these isotopes,25 are radioactive and are produced by fission of uranium and by other nuclear reactions. The longest-lived of these, krypton-81, has a half-life of 229,000 years. After it has been stored a few days, krypton obtained by nuclear fission contains only one radioactive isotope, krypton-85, which has a half-life of 10.7 years, because all the other radioactive isotopes have half-lives of 3 hours or less.
Krypton is the lightest of the noble gases that form isolable chemical compounds in macroscopic amounts. For many years it was considered to be totally unreactive. In the early 1960s, however, krypton was found to react with the element fluorine when both are combined in an electrical-discharge tube at −183 °C (−297 °F); the compound formed is krypton difluoride, KrF2. Several other methods for the synthesis of KrF2 are now known, including irradiation of krypton and fluorine mixtures with ultraviolet radiation at −196 °C (−321 °F).
KrF2 is a colourless crystalline solid that is highly volatile and slowly decomposes at room temperature. No other molecular fluoride of krypton has been isolated, so all krypton compounds are derived from KrF2, where Kr is in the +2 oxidation state. Krypton difluoride is a powerful oxidative fluorinating agent. (Its oxidizing power means that it extracts electrons from other substances and confers on them a positive charge. Its fluorinating ability means that it transfers an F− ion to other substances. Hence, in a formal sense, oxidative fluorination is the net result of extraction of two electrons and addition of F−; this can be considered to be equivalent to the transfer of F+.) KrF2 is, for example, capable of oxidizing and fluorinating xenon to XeF6 and gold to AuF5.
The cationic species KrF+ and Kr2F3+ are formed in reactions of KrF2 with strong fluoride-ion acceptors such as the pentafluorides of Group 15, in which the fluoride ion F− is transferred to the pentafluoride to give complex salts that are analogous to those of XeF2; here no oxidation is involved. Among these complex salts are [KrF+][SbF6−] and [Kr2F3+][AsF6−]. The Kr2F3+ cation is V-shaped with a fluorine atom bonded to each of two krypton atoms and both krypton atoms bonded to a common fluorine in the middle, i.e., F(KrF)2+.
The KrF+ cation ranks among the most powerful chemical oxidizers presently known and is capable of oxidative fluorination of gaseous xenon to XeF5+ and chlorine, bromine, and iodine pentafluorides to the ClF6+, BrF6+, and IF6+ cations, respectively. The KrF+ cation behaves as only an oxidizing agent in converting gaseous oxygen to O2+.
The KrF+ cation has been shown to behave as a Lewis acid (electron-pair acceptor) toward a number of Lewis bases that are resistant to oxidation by the strongly oxidizing KrF+ cation at low temperatures. These Lewis acid-base adducts are exemplified by HCNKrF+ and F3CCNKrF+, which are formed as AsF6− salts. Such cations are the only known examples of krypton bonded to nitrogen. The compound Kr(OTeF5)2 is the only reported example of a compound in which krypton is bonded to oxygen. No compounds in which krypton is bonded to elements other than fluorine, oxygen, and nitrogen have been isolated.
Clathrate “compounds,” in which the element is trapped in cagelike structures of water or other molecules, are known. There is no diatomic molecule of krypton.
