Maud Leonora Menten,  (born March 20, 1879, Port Lambton, Ontario, Canada—died July 26, 1960, Leamington, Ontario), Canadian biochemist and organic chemist best known for her work on enzyme kinetics. She also made important discoveries contributing to the science of histochemistry (the staining of cells with chemicals such as dyes, enabling microscopic visualization and quantification of specific cell components).
Menten spent her youth in Harrison Mills, British Columbia, where her mother worked as a postmistress and her father, William Menten, piloted boats across the Fraser River to Chilliwack, a centre of trade for agricultural products. The family also owned and operated a hotel and a general store. In 1900 Menten left Harrison Mills to attend the University of Toronto. After receiving a bachelor’s degree in 1904, she began thesis work on the distribution of chloride compounds in nerve cells, which culminated in a master’s degree in 1907. She then worked as a fellow at the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research (now the Rockefeller University) in New York, investigating the use of radium bromide in the treatment of malignant (cancerous) tumours in rats. This was followed by a brief internship at the New York Infirmary for Women and Children, after which Menten returned to Toronto to study medicine. In 1911 she became one of the first Canadian-born women to earn a medical degree.
The following year Menten explored enzyme kinetics with German-born biochemist Leonor Michaelis at a hospital in Berlin, and the two quickly developed a theory—the Michaelis-Menten hypothesis—to explain the mechanism and velocity of reversible reactions between enzymes and their substrates. According to the hypothesis, the velocity of an enzymatic reaction and the concentration of substrate available for the reaction are directly related, such that, depicted graphically, with reaction velocity (V) on the y-axis and substrate concentration (S) on the x-axis, the reaction curve obtained usually is hyperbolic in shape. The two researchers then mathematically derived the reaction curve, producing the Michaelis-Menten equation: V = VM[S] / KM + [S], in which VM represents maximal reaction velocity and KM is the Michaelis constant. The hypothesis, equation, and constant, formally proposed in 1912–13, are now described collectively as Michaelis-Menten kinetics.
From 1915 to 1916 Menten studied cancer in the laboratory of George W. Crile at Western Reserve University (now Case Western Reserve University), in Cleveland. During that same period she was enrolled at the University of Chicago, where she earned a Ph.D. in biochemistry in 1916. She then took a position at the University of Pittsburgh; she later became a professor of pathology there and eventually retired from there in 1950.
In addition to her work with Michaelis, Menten investigated the mobility of proteins in the presence of electric fields (electrophoresis). This work provided important information on differences in size and mobility of hemoglobin molecules. Menten also contributed to the discovery of a dye reaction that could be used to identify the enzyme alkaline phosphatase, levels of which serve as an indicator of renal and liver function, in the kidneys. This advance was hailed as a major step in the development of histochemistry. Menten also used histochemical approaches to study glycogen and nucleic acids (in bone marrow).
Menten published more than 70 papers over the course of her career, and even after her retirement from Pittsburgh, she continued to pursue her interests in cancer research at the British Columbia Medical Research Institute. In 1954, however, due to poor health, she was forced to retire permanently from research. In 1998, for her enduring scientific achievements, Menten was selected for induction into the Canadian Medical Hall of Fame.
