Melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), also called intermedin or melanotropin,  any of several peptides derived from a protein known as proopiomelanocortin (POMC) and secreted primarily by the pituitary gland. In most vertebrates, melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH) peptides are secreted specifically by the intermediate lobe of the pituitary gland and function primarily in skin darkening, with an array of other, minor activities.
The MSH peptides include α-MSH, β-MSH, and γ-MSH. They are distinguished from one other by their preferential binding to different melanocortin receptors (MCRs), through which they exert their effects, and by their structure, with each arising from a different region of POMC. The α-MSH peptide, for example, is derived from the middle region of POMC, whereas β-MSH is derived from the C-terminus (the end containing a carboxyl group) and γ-MSH from the N-terminus (the end containing an amine group). Another peptide produced from the cleavage of POMC is adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), which can be further cleaved to form α-MSH. The α-MSH peptide contains 13 amino acids, which are found in the same sequence in all species studied. β-MSH and γ-MSH vary in length and sequence. The different amino-acid sequences of the MSH peptides are thought to account for their ability to activate different MCRs.
Following secretion from the pituitary, MSH circulates in the blood and binds to MCRs on the surface of pigment-containing cells called melanocytes (in humans) and chromatophores (in lower vertebrates). The ensuing activation of MCRs causes an increase in melanin pigment concentrations and alters the distribution of melanin within the cells. In humans, that process manifests most noticeably as skin darkening, with exposure to sunlight serving as the stimulus for MSH production and secretion. Similar effects are seen in amphibians, in some fishes, and in reptiles, in which MSH regulates melanin synthesis in cells known as melanophores (a type of chromatophore) and enables the animals to adapt their colouring to their environment. In those species, MSH-driven skin pigmentation typically occurs via photoreceptor stimulation (e.g., from light reflecting off a water surface), pituitary activation, and MSH release. However, local production of MSH in skin, through cell-cell communication (paracrine signaling), without involvement of the pituitary gland, may also mediate changes in skin pigmentation. MSH peptides also can be released from neurons originating in the arcuate nucleus and other regions of the brain, where they act on pathways that control feeding and energy expenditure. In mammals, MSH is known to suppress appetite.
Diseases that may be attributed to the under- or oversecretion of MSH are not well defined in humans. Deficiency of α-MSH in POMC neurons is suspected of contributing to the disordered physiology that characterizes type 2 diabetes mellitus.
