Methane,  colourless, odourless gas that occurs abundantly in nature and as a product of certain human activities. Methane is the simplest member of the paraffin series of hydrocarbons and is among the most potent of the greenhouse gases. Its chemical formula is CH4.
Methane is lighter than air, having a specific gravity of 0.554. It is only slightly soluble in water. It burns readily in air, forming carbon dioxide and water vapour; the flame is pale, slightly luminous, and very hot. The boiling point of methane is −162 °C (−259.6 °F) and the melting point is −182.5 °C (−296.5 °F). Methane in general is very stable, but mixtures of methane and air, with the methane content between 5 and 14 percent by volume, are explosive. Explosions of such mixtures have been frequent in coal mines and collieries and have been the cause of many mine disasters.
In nature, methane is produced by the anaerobic bacterial decomposition of vegetable matter under water (where it is sometimes called marsh gas or swamp gas). Wetlands are the major natural source of methane produced in this way. Other important natural sources of methane include termites (as a result of digestive processes), volcanoes, vents in the ocean floor, and methane hydrate deposits that occur along continental margins and beneath Antarctic ice and Arctic permafrost. Methane also is the chief constituent of natural gas, which contains from 50 to 90 percent methane (depending on the source), and occurs as a component of firedamp (flammable gas) along coal seams.
The production and combustion of natural gas and coal are the major anthropogenic (human-associated) sources of methane. Activities such as the extraction and processing of natural gas and the destructive distillation of bituminous coal in the manufacture of coal gas and coke-oven gas result in the release of significant amounts of methane into the atmosphere. Other human activities that are associated with methane production include biomass burning, livestock farming, and waste management (where bacteria produce methane as they decompose sludge in waste-treatment facilities and decaying matter in landfills).
Methane is an important source of hydrogen and some organic chemicals. Methane reacts with steam at high temperatures to yield carbon monoxide and hydrogen; the latter is used in the manufacture of ammonia for fertilizers and explosives. Other valuable chemicals derived from methane include methanol, chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, and nitromethane. The incomplete combustion of methane yields carbon black, which is widely used as a reinforcing agent in rubber used for automobile tires.
Methane that is produced and released into the atmosphere is taken up by methane sinks, which include soil and the process of methane oxidation in the troposphere (the lowest atmospheric region). Most methane produced naturally is offset by its uptake into natural sinks. Anthropogenic methane production, however, can cause methane concentrations to increase more quickly than they are offset by sinks. Since 2007 methane concentrations in Earth’s atmosphere have increased by 6.8–10 parts per billion (ppb) per year. By 2020 atmospheric methane had reached 1873.5 ppb, some two to three times higher than preindustrial levels, which hovered at 600–700 ppb.
Increased concentrations of methane in the atmosphere contribute to the greenhouse effect, whereby greenhouse gases (particularly carbon dioxide, methane, and water vapour) absorb infrared radiation (net heat energy) and reradiate it back to Earth’s surface, potentially trapping heat and producing substantial changes in climate. Increased atmospheric methane also adds to the greenhouse effect indirectly. For example, in methane oxidation, hydroxyl radicals (OH−) remove methane by reacting with it to form carbon dioxide and water vapour, and as concentrations of atmospheric methane increase, concentrations of hydroxyl radicals decrease, effectively prolonging the atmospheric lifetime of methane.
