PETN, abbreviation of pentaerythritol tetranitrate,  a highly explosive organic compound belonging to the same chemical family as nitroglycerin and nitrocellulose.
PETN has the chemical formula C5H8N4O12. It is prepared by reacting pentaerythritol (C5H12O4), an alcohol traditionally used in paints and varnishes, with nitric acid (HNO2). The reacting solution is chilled to precipitate the PETN, which is filtered out, washed, dried, and recrystallized to produce a colourless crystalline material that is generally stored and shipped as a mixture with water and alcohol.
PETN retains its properties in storage for longer periods than do nitroglycerin and nitrocellulose. Nevertheless, it is a sensitive compound and is easily detonated by an appropriate mechanical shock. PETN was first synthesized in 1894 and was introduced as a commercial explosive after World War I. It has been valued in both military and civilian applications for its shattering force and efficiency. It is used by itself in detonators, blasting caps, and a detonating fuse known as Primacord, which is used to propagate a series of detonations from one explosive charge to another. A mixture of roughly equal amounts of PETN and trinitrotoluene (TNT) creates a military high explosive called pentolite, which is used in grenades, artillery projectiles, and shaped-charge warheads such as the ones launched by the old bazooka-type antitank weapons of World War II and their modern descendants. Mixed with the extremely powerful compound RDX in an appropriate solvent, PETN forms a plastic explosive mixture known as Semtex.
Either alone or in the Semtex mixture, PETN is a valued weapon in terrorist bombings, because of its explosive power, its ability to be molded and fitted into unusual packages, and the difficulty of detecting the organic compound with X-ray and other conventional equipment. A cassette recorder filled with Semtex brought down a civilian airliner in the Lockerbie bombing of 1988. Attempts by the so-called shoe bomber of 2001 and the underwear bomber of 2009 to bring down airliners with PETN hidden in their clothing failed in part because the bombers tried unsuccessfully to ignite their charges with a common match flame and some sort of chemical initiator. An electrically activated shock-type detonator would be detected by normal airport screening if carried on a passenger, but it might be effectively hidden in an electronic appliance delivered as a package bomb—as occurred in attempted cargo-plane bombings in 2010, when computer printers with toner cartridges filled with PETN were intercepted by security agencies only because the agencies had been informed of the bombs by human intelligence.
Like nitroglycerin, PETN has been used in the treatment of angina pectoris.
