Phenol-formaldehyde resin, also called phenolic resin,  any of a number of synthetic resins made by reacting phenol (an aromatic alcohol derived from benzene) with formaldehyde (a reactive gas derived from methane). Phenol-formaldehyde resins were the first completely synthetic polymers to be commercialized. In the first decades of the 20th century, Bakelite, a trademarked phenolic plastic, revolutionized the market for molded and laminated parts for use in electrical equipment. Phenolics are still very important industrial polymers, though their most common use today is in adhesives for the bonding of plywood and other structural wood products. The chemical composition of phenol and formaldehyde and their combination into networks of permanently interlinked large molecules are explained briefly in the article aldehyde condensation polymer.
In industrial practice, there are two basic methods for making the polymer into useful resins. In one method, an excess of formaldehyde is reacted with phenol in the presence of a base catalyst in water solution to yield a low-molecular-weight prepolymer called a resole. The resole, frequently in liquid form or solution, can be cured to a solid thermosetting network polymer by, for instance, sandwiching it between layers of wood veneer and then heating the assembly under pressure to form a plywood.
The other method involves reacting formaldehyde with an excess of phenol, using an acid catalyst. This process produces a solid prepolymer called a novolac (or novolak), which resembles the final polymer except that it is of much lower molecular weight and is still thermoplastic (that is, it can be softened by reheating without undergoing chemical decomposition). Curing can be accomplished by grinding the novolac to a powder, mixing it with fillers such as wood flour, minerals, or glass fibres, and then heating the mixture in a pressurized mold. In order to be cured to a thermosetting resin, novolacs require the addition of more formaldehyde or, more commonly, of compounds that decompose into formaldehyde upon heating.
Phenol-formaldehyde resins make excellent wood adhesives for plywood and particleboard because they form chemical bonds with the phenol-like lignin component of wood. They are especially desirable for exterior plywood, owing to their good moisture resistance. Phenolic resins, invariably reinforced with fibres or flakes, are also molded into insulating and heat-resistant objects such as appliance handles, distributor caps, and brake linings.
