Pheromone,  any endogenous chemical secreted in minute amounts by an organism in order to elicit a particular reaction from another organism of the same species. Pheromones are widespread among insects and vertebrates; they are also found in crustaceans but are unknown among birds. The chemicals may be secreted by special glands or incorporated in other substances, such as urine. They may be shed freely into the environment or deposited in carefully chosen locations. Pheromones are also used by some fungi, slime molds, and algae as attractants in reproduction; organisms of complementary reproductive cell types grow or move toward each other.
Pheromones are widely used to promote aggregation. Among social insects such as termites and ants, several different pheromones may transmit the various messages needed to coordinate the complex activities of a colony. Some ants lay scent pheromones along a trail leading to a food source so that other members of the colony can find the food. Pheromones are also used to signal the presence of danger. A wounded minnow has been shown to release a chemical from specialized epidermal cells that elicits a dispersal response from the school. Pheromones play a role in sexual attraction and copulatory behaviour, and they have been shown to influence the sexual development of many mammals as well as of insects such as termites and grasshoppers. Such pheromones tend to last relatively longer and extend farther distances than alarm pheromones. Aspects of vertebrate parent-young responses are often elicited by chemical stimuli. Entomologists use particular sex-attractant pheromones and aggregation pheromones to lure and trap harmful insects.
Pheromones may be involved in human sexual response. In testing human vaginal secretions, scientists have identified fatty acids identical to several that are presumed to act as sex pheromones in other primates. The human female’s sensitivity to musklike odours is greatest around the time of ovulation, which some researchers interpret as proof of the ancestral presence of a musky pheromone in the male.
