Phosphide,  any of a class of chemical compounds in which phosphorus is combined with a metal. The phosphide ion is P3−, and phosphides of almost every metal in the periodic table are known. They exhibit a wide variety of chemical and physical properties. Although there are a number of ways to prepare phosphides, the most general method is to heat stoichiometric amounts of the metal and red phosphorus to high temperature in an inert atmosphere (i.e., one lacking any chemically reactive substances) or in a vacuum. Other methods that can be used include electrolysis reactions, the reaction of a metal (or a metal halide or metal sulfide) with phosphine (PH3), and reduction of a metal phosphate with elemental carbon at an elevated temperature.
4Ti + 2PH3 + heat → 2Ti2P + 3H2 Ca3(PO4)2 + 8C + heat → Ca3P2 + 8CO
   In some cases, a metal phosphide will react further with additional metal or phosphorus (usually requiring heat) to yield a phosphide of different stoichiometry; for example,
4RuP + P4 + heat → 4RuP2.
Because of the wide variety of properties exhibited by phosphides, it is difficult to place them into classes. One suggestion is to classify them into three categories on the basis of stoichiometry: (1) phosphorus-rich phosphides, in which the metal-to-phosphorus ratio is less than one, (2) metal-rich phosphides, where the metal-to-phosphorus ratio is greater than one, and (3) monophosphides, in which the metal-to-phosphorus ratio is exactly one. Phosphorus-rich phosphides tend to have lower thermal stabilities and lower melting points than phosphides of the other two categories. Examples of these compounds are phosphides formed with the later transition metals (e.g., RuP2, PdP3, and NiP3).
A large variety of structures of phosphides are known. The structural type appears to depend on both steric and electronic effects. (Steric effects are concerned with the spatial disposition of atoms.) Phosphides that are metal-rich exhibit properties that are metallic in nature. They are hard, brittle, high-melting, and chemically inert. Such phosphides have the appearance of a metal and have high thermal and electrical conductivities. The size of the metal seems to determine the structures of the compound. Examples of metal-rich phosphides are Ni5P2 and Ir2P.
The phosphides of the electropositive alkali metals and alkaline-earth metals exhibit what is very close to ionic bonding. These compounds readily react with water or dilute acid to produce phosphine, PH3.
