polarity,  in chemical bonding, the distribution of electrical charge over the atoms joined by the bond. Specifically, while bonds between identical atoms, as in H2, are electrically uniform in the sense that both hydrogen atoms are electrically neutral, bonds between atoms of different elements are electrically inequivalent. In hydrogen chloride, for example, the hydrogen atom is slightly positively charged whereas the chlorine atom is slightly negatively charged. The slight electrical charges on dissimilar atoms are called partial charges, and the presence of partial charges signifies the occurrence of a polar bond.
The polarity of a bond arises from the relative electronegativities of the elements. Electronegativity is the power of an atom of an element to attract electrons toward itself when it is part of a compound. Thus, although a bond in a compound may consist of a shared pair of electrons, the atom of the more electronegative element will draw the shared pair toward itself and thereby acquire a partial negative charge. The atom that has lost its equal share in the bonding electron pair acquires a partial positive charge because its nuclear charge is no longer fully canceled by its electrons.
The existence of equal but opposite partial charges on the atoms at each end of a heteronuclear bond (i.e., a bond between atoms of different elements) gives rise to an electric dipole. The magnitude of this dipole is expressed by the value of its dipole moment, μ, which is the product of the magnitude of the partial charges times their separation (essentially, the length of the bond). The dipole moment of a heteronuclear bond can be estimated from the electronegativities of the atoms A and B, χA and χB, respectively, by using the simple relationwhere D denotes the unit debye, which is used for reporting molecular dipole moments (1 D = 3.34 × 10−30 coulomb·metre). Moreover, the negative end of the dipole lies on the more electronegative atom. If the two bonded atoms are identical, it follows that the dipole moment is zero and the bond is nonpolar.
As the difference in electronegativity between two covalently bonded atoms increases, the dipolar character of the bond increases as the partial charges increase. When the electronegativities of the atoms are very different, the attraction of the more electronegative atom for the shared electron pair is so great that it effectively exercises complete control over them. That is, it has gained possession of the pair, and the bond is best regarded as ionic. Ionic and covalent bonding therefore can be regarded as constituting a continuum rather than as alternatives. This continuum can be expressed in terms of resonance by regarding a bond between atoms A and B as a resonance between a purely covalent form, in which the electrons are shared equally, and a purely ionic form, in which the more electronegative atom (B) has total control over the electrons:
As the electronegativity difference increases, the resonance lies increasingly in favour of the ionic contribution. When the electronegativity difference is very large, as between an electropositive atom like sodium and an electronegative atom like fluorine, the ionic structure dominates the resonance, and the bonding can be regarded as ionic. Thus, as the electronegativity difference of the two bonded elements increases, a nonpolar bond gives way to a polar bond, which in turn becomes an ionic bond. There are, in fact, no purely ionic bonds, just as there are no purely covalent bonds; bonding is a continuum of types.
Even a homonuclear bond, which is a bond between atoms of the same element, as in Cl2, is not purely covalent, because a more accurate description would be in terms of ionic-covalent resonance:
That the species is nonpolar despite the occurrence of ionic contributions stems from the equal contributions of the ionic structures Cl−Cl+ and Cl+Cl− and their canceling dipoles. That Cl2 is commonly regarded as a covalently bonded species stems from the dominant contribution of the structure Cl―Cl to this resonance mixture. In contrast, the valence bond theory wave function of hydrogen chloride would be expressed as the resonance hybrid
In this case, the two ionic structures contribute different amounts (because the elements have different electronegativities), and the larger contribution of H+Cl− is responsible for the presence of partial charges on the atoms and the polarity of the molecule.
A polyatomic molecule will have polar bonds if its atoms are not identical. However, whether or not the molecule as a whole is polar (i.e., has a nonzero electric dipole moment) depends on the shape of the molecule. For example, the carbon-oxygen bonds in carbon dioxide are both polar, with the partial positive charge on the carbon atom and the partial negative charge on the more electronegative oxygen atom. The molecule as a whole is nonpolar, however, because the dipole moment of one carbon-oxygen bond cancels the dipole moment of the other, for the two bond dipole moments point in opposite directions in this linear molecule. In contrast, the water molecule is polar. Each oxygen-hydrogen bond is polar, with the oxygen atom bearing the partial negative charge and the hydrogen atom the partial positive charge. Because the molecule is angular rather than linear, the bond dipole moments do not cancel, and the molecule has a nonzero dipole moment.
The polarity of H2O is of profound importance for the properties of water. It is partly responsible for the existence of water as a liquid at room temperature and for the ability of water to act as a solvent for many ionic compounds. The latter ability stems from the fact that the partial negative charge on the oxygen atom can emulate the negative charge of anions that surround each cation in the solid and thus help minimize the energy difference when the crystal dissolves. The partial positive charge on the hydrogen atoms can likewise emulate that of the cations surrounding the anions in the solid.
A chemical tends to dissolve more readily in a solvent of similar polarity. Nonpolar chemicals are considered lipophilic (lipid-loving), and polar chemicals are hydrophilic (water-loving). Lipid-soluble, nonpolar molecules pass readily through a cell membrane because they dissolve in the hydrophobic, nonpolar portion of the lipid bilayer. Although permeable to water (a polar molecule), the nonpolar lipid bilayer of cell membranes is impermeable to many other polar molecules, such as charged ions or those that contain many polar side chains. Polar molecules pass through lipid membranes via specific transport systems.
