polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE),  a strong, tough, waxy, nonflammable synthetic resin produced by the polymerization of tetrafluoroethylene. Known by such trademarks as Teflon, Fluon, Hostaflon, and Polyflon, PTFE is distinguished by its slippery surface, high melting point, and resistance to attack by almost all chemicals. These properties have made it familiar to consumers as the coating on nonstick cookware; it is also fabricated into industrial products, including bearings, pipe liners, and parts for valves and pumps.
PTFE was discovered serendipitously in 1938 by Roy Plunkett, an American chemist for E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company (now DuPont Company), who found that a tank of gaseous tetrafluoroethylene refrigerant had polymerized to a white powder. During World War II it was applied as a corrosion-resistant coating to protect metal equipment used in the handling of radioactive material for the Manhattan Project. For more than a decade after the war, PTFE saw little commercial use, owing to difficulties encountered in devising methods for processing the slippery, high-melting material. DuPont released its trademarked Teflon-coated nonstick cookware in 1960.
Tetrafluoroethylene (C2F4), a colourless, odourless gas, is made by heating chlorodifluoromethane (CHClF2) in the range of 600–700 °C (1,100–1,300 °F). Chlorodifluoromethane in turn is obtained by reacting hydrogen fluoride (HF) with chloroform (CHCl3). Tetrafluoroethylene monomers (small, single-unit molecules) are suspended or emulsified in water and then polymerized (linked into giant, multiple-unit molecules) under high pressure in the presence of free-radical initiators. The polymer consists of a chain of carbon atoms with two fluorine atoms bonded to each carbon: 
The fluorine atoms surround the carbon chain like a protective sheath, creating a chemically inert and relatively dense molecule with very strong carbon-fluorine bonds. The polymer is inert to most chemicals, does not melt below 327 °C (620 °F), and has the lowest coefficient of friction of any known solid. These properties allow it to be used for bushings and bearings that require no lubricant, as liners for equipment used in the storage and transportation of strong acids and organic solvents, as electrical insulation under high-temperature conditions, and in its familiar application as a cooking surface that does not require the use of fats or oils.
Fabrication of PTFE products is difficult because the material does not flow readily even above its melting point. Molded parts can be made by compressing and heating fine powders mixed with volatile lubricants. Metallic surfaces can be sprayed or dipped with aqueous dispersions of PTFE particles to form a permanent coating. Dispersions of PTFE can also be spun into fibres.
