polyester,  a class of synthetic polymers built up from multiple chemical repeating units linked together by ester (CO-O) groups. Polyesters display a wide array of properties and practical applications. Permanent-press fabrics, disposable soft-drink bottles, compact discs, rubber tires, and enamel paints represent only a few of the products made from this group.
Polyesters most commonly are prepared from a condensation reaction between an organic alcohol (containing hydroxyl [OH] groups) and a carboxylic acid (containing carboxyl [COOH] groups). These two functional groups react to form the characteristic ester linkage, a chemical group with the structure: 
R and R′ represent the linked units that, repeated thousands of times within a single molecule, make up the long polymeric chain. The precise composition and structure of these repeating units vary widely, but roughly speaking they can be grouped into chains that are aliphatic (i.e., have an open structure) and those that contain ring-shaped molecular groups—particularly the large hydrocarbon aromatic groups.
Among the aliphatic group are the unsaturated polyesters, a class of resins that are molded into fibreglass-reinforced structures such as pleasure-boat hulls. Another aliphatic polyester is polyglycolic acid, a special type of degradable polymer that is made into bioabsorbable surgical sutures.
Ring-containing polyesters are the larger and commercially more important group. By far the most prominent member of this class is polyethylene terephthalate (PET), a stiff, strong polymer that is spun into fibres known by such trademarks as Dacron and Terylene. PET is also extruded into the film known as Mylar and is blow-molded into disposable beverage bottles. A related polyester is polybutylene terephthalate (PBT). PBT is used in applications similar to those of PET, and it is also employed in a synthetic rubber known as copolyester elastomer.
In general, the more aromatic groups included in the repeating units, the stiffer and higher-melting the polymer. This rule can be illustrated by polycarbonate, a rigid, tough, crystal-clear resin from which compact discs are made, and the polyarylates, a class of engineering plastics that often take the place of metals in machine parts.
Alkyd resins are oil-modified polyesters used in paints, varnishes, and other kinds of coating materials.
