Praseodymium (Pr),  chemical element, a rare-earth metal of the lanthanide series of the periodic table.
Praseodymium is a moderately soft, ductile, and malleable silvery white metal. It rapidly displaces hydrogen from water in diluted acids (except hydrofluoric acid [HF]) and slowly oxidizes in air, developing a green-yellowish oxide coating with complex and varying stoichiometry that can be expressed using a generic formula PrOx (1.5 ≤ x ≤ 2). The metal is best stored sealed in a plastic covering either in vacuum or in an inert atmosphere. Praseodymium is strongly paramagnetic, and an unstrained single-crystal sample will order antiferromagnetically at 0.03 K (−273.12 °C, or −459.62 °F). However, if praseodymium is strained, it may order at temperatures as high as about 20 K (−253 °C, or −424 °F).
Praseodymium was discovered in didymia, a mixture of several rare-earth oxides. From it, by repeated fractional crystallization of ammonium didymium nitrate, Austrian chemist Carl Auer von Welsbach in 1885 separated salts of the elements praseodymium (the green fraction) and neodymium (the pink fraction). Praseodymium occurs in minerals such as monazite and bastnasite and as one of the products of nuclear fission.
Natural praseodymium is entirely the stable isotope praseodymium-141. Excluding nuclear isomers, a total of 38 radioactive isotopes of praseodymium have been reported. They range in mass from 121 to 159 and have half-lives from 10 milliseconds (praseodymium-121) to 13.57 days (praseodymium-143).
This element is commercially separated and purified by liquid-liquid extraction or ion-exchange techniques. The metal is prepared by electrolysis of fused anhydrous halides or by the metallothermic reduction of the fluoride or chloride with calcium. Praseodymium exists in two allotropic (structural) forms. The α-phase is double close-packed hexagonal with a = 3.6721 Å and c = 11.8326 Å at room temperature. The β-phase is body-centred cubic with a = 4.13 Å at 821 °C (1,510 °F).
Praseodymium is a minor constituent of misch metal, which is used to make lighter flints and as alloying additions to ferrous and nonferrous alloys. The metal is also used as an addition to Nd2Fe14B permanent magnet alloys leading to a reduction of the amount of neodymium required. Praseodymium-stabilized zirconia (ZrO2) is the foundation of synthetic green-coloured gems. A mixture of praseodymium and neodymium is the active component in didymium glass, used for goggles to protect the eyes of glassblowers and welders. Praseodymium compounds are also used to produce light green to yellow colours in ceramics and other glasses.
Praseodymium forms trivalent compounds such as the olive-green oxide Pr2O3, which dissolves readily in acids to yield green trivalent praseodymium salts. The tetravalent blackish purple dioxide PrO2 is known, but the Pr4+ ion is unknown in aqueous solution.
