Pyrolysis,  the chemical decomposition of organic (carbon-based) materials through the application of heat. Pyrolysis, which is also the first step in gasification and combustion, occurs in the absence or near absence of oxygen, and it is thus distinct from combustion (burning), which can take place only if sufficient oxygen is present. The rate of pyrolysis increases with temperature. In industrial applications the temperatures used are often 430 °C (about 800 °F) or higher, whereas in smaller-scale operations the temperature may be much lower. Two well-known products created by pyrolysis are a form of charcoal called biochar, created by heating wood, and coke (which is used as an industrial fuel and a heat shield), created by heating coal. Pyrolysis also produces condensable liquids (or tar) and noncondensable gases.
Pyrolysis transforms organic materials into their gaseous components, a solid residue of carbon and ash, and a liquid called pyrolytic oil (or bio-oil). Pyrolysis has two primary methods for removing contaminants from a substance: destruction and removal. In destruction, the organic contaminants are broken down into compounds with lower molecular weight, whereas in the removal process, they are not destroyed but are separated from the contaminated material. Pyrolysis is a useful process for treating organic materials that “crack” or decompose under the presence of heat; examples include polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), dioxins, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Although pyrolysis is not useful for removing or destroying inorganic materials such as metals, it can be used in techniques that render those materials inert.
Pyrolysis has numerous applications of interest to green technology. It is useful in extracting materials from goods such as vehicle tires, removing organic contaminants from soils and oily sludges, and creating biofuel from crops and waste products. Pyrolysis can help break down vehicle tires into useful components, thus reducing the environmental burden of discarding the tires. Tires are a significant landfill component in many areas, and they release PAHs and heavy metals into the air when they are burned. However, when tires are pyrolyzed, they break down into gas and oil (usable for fuel) and carbon black (usable as filler in rubber products, including new tires, and as activated charcoal in filters and fuel cells). In addition, pyrolysis can remove organic contaminants, such as synthetic hormones, from sewage sludge (semisolid materials that remain after wastewater is treated and the water content reduced) and make heavy metals remaining in the sludge inert, which allows the sludge to be used safely as fertilizer.
Furthermore, pyrolyzing biomass (biological materials such as wood and sugarcane) holds great promise for producing energy sources that could supplement or replace petroleum-based energy. Pyrolysis causes the cellulose, hemicellulose, and part of the lignin in the biomass to disintegrate to smaller molecules in gaseous form. When cooled, those gases condense to the liquid state and become bio-oil, while the remainder of the original mass (mainly the remaining lignin) is left as solid biochar and noncondensable gases.
