quinone,  any member of a class of cyclic organic compounds containing two carbonyl groups, > C = O, either adjacent or separated by a vinylene group, ―CH = CH―, in a six-membered unsaturated ring. In a few quinones, the carbonyl groups are located in different rings. The term quinone also denotes the specific compound para- (p-)benzoquinone (C6H4O2). The quinone structureplays an important role in theories concerning the relationship of chemical constitution to colour. Quinones occur as biological pigments (biochromes), for example, including the benzoquinones, naphthoquinones, anthraquinones, and polycyclic quinones. The quinones are found in bacteria, in certain fungi, and in various higher plant forms, but in only a few animals. Those animals in which they do occur—e.g., sea urchins, aphids, lac insects, and certain scale insects—obtain their quinone compounds from the plants they eat. The K vitamins are naphthoquinones, as are some chemical indicators of acidity or alkalinity and various dyes used to colour certain types of fabrics.
Quinones usually are prepared by oxidation of aromatic amines, polyhydric phenols, and polynuclear hydrocarbons. The most important characteristic reaction of quinones is reduction to the corresponding dihydroxy form. In acidic solution, p-benzoquinone is reduced reversibly to hydroquinone (C6H6O2); the reaction is marked by a measurable electrical potential of a magnitude that depends upon the hydrogen ion concentration of the reaction medium and the benzoquinone and hydroquinone concentrations. The so-called quinhydrone electrode, containing equivalent amounts of p-benzoquinone and hydroquinone, is used to determine hydrogen ion concentrations of unknown solutions. Hydroquinone is used principally as a photographic developing agent.
A bright yellow solid with a sharp odour, p-benzoquinone is slightly soluble in water and melts at about 115° C. Hydroquinone is a white, crystalline solid, soluble in water and alcohol. See also anthraquinone.
