radium  (Ra),  radioactive chemical element, the heaviest of the alkaline-earth metals of Group 2 (IIa) of the periodic table. Radium is a silvery white metal that does not occur free in nature.
Radium was discovered (1898) by Pierre Curie, Marie Curie, and an assistant, G. Bémont, after Marie Curie observed that the radioactivity of pitchblende was four or five times greater than that of the uranium it contained and was not fully explained on the basis of radioactive polonium, which she had just discovered in pitchblende residues. The new, powerfully radioactive substance could be concentrated with barium, but, because its chloride was slightly more insoluble, it could be precipitated by fractional crystallization. The separation was followed by the increase in intensity of new lines in the ultraviolet spectrum and by a steady increase in the apparent atomic weight of the material until a value of 225.2 was obtained, remarkably close to the currently accepted value of 226.03. By 1902, 0.1 gram of pure radium chloride was prepared by refining several tons of pitchblende residues, and by 1910 Marie Curie and André-Louis Debierne had isolated the metal itself.
Thirty-four isotopes of radium, all radioactive, are known; their half-lives, except for radium-226 (1,600 years) and radium-228 (5.75 years), are less than a few weeks. The long-lived radium-226 is found in nature as a result of its continuous formation from uranium-238 decay. Radium thus occurs in all uranium ores, but it is more widely distributed because it forms water-soluble compounds; Earth’s surface contains an estimated 1.8 × 1013 grams (2 × 107 tons) of radium.
Since all the isotopes of radium are radioactive and short-lived on the geological time scale, any primeval radium would have disappeared long ago. Therefore, radium occurs naturally only as a disintegration product in the three natural radioactive decay series (thorium, uranium, and actinium series). Radium-226 is a member of the uranium-decay series. Its parent is thorium-230 and its daughter radon-222. The further decay products, formerly called radium A, B, C, C′, C″, D, and so on, are isotopes of polonium, lead, bismuth, and thallium.
The chemistry of radium is what would be expected of the heaviest of the alkaline earths, but the intense radioactivity is its most characteristic property. Its compounds display a faint bluish glow in the dark, a result of their radioactivity in which emitted alpha particles excite electrons in the other elements in the compound and the electrons release their energy as light when they are de-excited. One gram of radium-226 undergoes 3.7 × 1010 disintegrations per second, a level of activity that defined the curie (Ci), an early unit of radioactivity. This is an energy release equivalent to about 6.8 × 10−3 calorie per second, sufficient to raise the temperature of a well-insulated 25-gram sample of water at the rate of 1 °C every hour. The practical energy release is even greater than this (by four to five times), because of the production of a large number of short-lived radioactive decay products. The alpha particles emitted by radium may be used to initiate nuclear reactions.
Radium’s uses all stem from its radioactivity. The most important use of radium was formerly in medicine, principally for the treatment of cancer by subjecting tumours to the gamma radiation of its daughter isotopes. Radium-223, an alpha emitter with a half-life of 11.43 days, has been studied for use in cell-directed cancer therapy, in which a monoclonal antibody or related targeting protein with high specificity is attached to the radium. In most therapeutic applications, however, radium has been superseded by the less costly and more powerful artificial radioisotopes cobalt-60 and cesium-137. An intimate mixture of radium and beryllium is a moderately intense source of neutrons and has been used for scientific research and for well logging in geophysical prospecting for petroleum. For these uses, however, substitutes have become available. One of the products of radium decay is radon, the heaviest noble gas; this decay process is the chief source of that element. A gram of radium-226 will emit 1 × 10−4 millilitre of radon per day.
When a radium salt is mixed with a paste of zinc sulfide, the alpha radiation causes the zinc sulfide to glow, yielding a self-luminescent paint for watch, clock, and instrument dials. From about 1913 up until the 1970s, several million radium dials, coated with a mixture of radium-226 and zinc sulfide, were manufactured. By the early 1930s it was found, however, that exposure to radium posed a serious hazard to health: a number of women who had worked with the radium-containing luminescent paint during the 1910s and ’20s subsequently died. They had ingested considerable amounts of radium through the technique called “lip-pointing,” which meant using their lips and tongues to shape their paintbrushes to a fine tip. Like calcium and strontium, radium tends to concentrate in bones, where its alpha radiation interferes with red corpuscle production, and some of those women developed anemia and bone cancer. The practice of employing radium in luminescent coatings was curtailed in the early 1960s after the high toxicity of the material was recognized. Phosphorescent paints that absorb light and later release it have replaced radium. (The detection of exhaled radon provides a very sensitive test for radium absorption.)
Radium metal may be prepared by electrolytic reduction of its salts, and it displays high chemical reactivity. It is attacked by water with vigorous evolution of hydrogen and by air with the formation of the nitride. It occurs exclusively as the Ra2+ ion in all its compounds. The sulfate, RaSO4, is the most insoluble sulfate known, and the hydroxide, Ra(OH)2, is the most soluble of the alkaline-earth hydroxides. The gradual buildup of helium within crystals of radium bromide, RaBr2, weakens them, and they occasionally explode. In general, the compounds of radium are very similar to their barium counterparts, making separation of the two elements difficult.
In modern technology, radium is separated from barium by fractional crystallization of the bromides, followed by purification through ion-exchange techniques for removal of the last 10 percent of the barium.
