Ralph F. Hirschmann,  (born May 6, 1922, Fürth, Ger.—died June 20, 2009, Lansdale, Pa., U.S.), American chemist who is best known for his development of techniques for the chemical synthesis of peptides. Hirschmann’s work significantly impacted the area of medicinal chemistry, proving fundamental to breakthroughs in drug development in the late 20th and early 21st centuries.
Hirschmann was the youngest of three boys, and his father worked as a banker. In the late 1930s, following the rise to power of the Nazi Party in Germany, the Hirschmann family moved to Kansas City, Mo., U.S. Hirschmann attended Oberlin College in Ohio, where he received a bachelor of arts degree in 1943. Upon graduation he joined the U.S. Army (serving for three years), and in 1944 he became a naturalized citizen. Hirschmann then studied organic chemistry under the guidance of American chemist William S. Johnson at the University of Wisconsin in Madison, earning a doctorate degree in 1950. That same year he joined Merck Research Laboratories in New Jersey and shortly thereafter discovered that the behaviour of the products of chemical reactions is controlled by the electron configurations of the atoms within the compounds. This effect, which he called stereoelectronic control, has since proved fundamental to scientists’ understanding of organic chemistry.
In 1968 Hirschmann was promoted to director of protein research at Merck. The next year, working with American chemist Robert G. Denkwalter, Hirschmann developed a novel method for the organic synthesis of an enzyme known as ribonuclease. The method involved linking together short segments of amino acids known as peptides using special protecting groups (essentially, nonreactive molecules) to control the synthetic reactions. In the absence of protecting groups, peptides polymerize uncontrollably with nearby amino acids. The inability to restrain these reactive tendencies had thwarted the success of early attempts at peptide synthesis. At the same time that Denkwalter and Hirschmann completed their work, a team of scientists led by American chemist Bruce Merrifield at the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research (now Rockefeller University) in New York City accomplished the same feat, but by linking together individual amino acids to create a full-length ribonuclease enzyme. (Merrifield was awarded the 1984 Nobel Prize for Chemistry for his work.)
In 1972 Hirschmann became senior director of medicinal chemistry at the Merck facility in West Point, Pa., and several years later was promoted to senior vice president of basic research for the company, directing projects at both the New Jersey and the West Point laboratories. In leading a variety of endeavours, Hirschmann oversaw the development of multiple new therapeutic agents, including Vasotec, which was used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension); Ivomec, which was used to treat parasitic infection in animals; and Proscar, which was used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia (enlarged prostate) in men.
Hirschmann held the position of vice president of basic research until his retirement from Merck in 1987. He then taught at the University of Pennsylvania and the Medical University of South Carolina. In the 1990s, while collaborating with chemists at Pennsylvania, he helped establish a new field of synthetic drug discovery called peptidomimetics, which involved the modification of substances to create small peptidelike compounds. Hirschmann retired from his teaching duties in 2006 because of health problems.
Throughout Hirschmann’s career, he wrote or cowrote more than 200 scientific papers. He also received numerous awards and honours, including several from the American Chemical Society (ACS), such as the Alfred Burger Award in Medicinal Chemistry (1994) and the Arthur C. Cope Award (1999). He received the National Medal of Science (2000), awarded to him by U.S. Pres. Bill Clinton, and the American Institute of Chemists Gold Medal Award (2003). Hirschmann was inducted into the ACS Medicinal Chemistry Hall of Fame in 2007. An award established in his name in 1988—the ACS Ralph F. Hirschmann Award in Peptide Chemistry—was sponsored by Merck Research Laboratories and was given to individuals who make outstanding contributions to the fields of chemistry, biochemistry, or biophysics.
