Richard R. Schrock,  (born Jan. 4, 1945, Berne, Ind., U.S.),  American chemist who, with Robert H. Grubbs and Yves Chauvin, was awarded the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 2005 for developing metathesis, one of the most important types of chemical reactions used in organic chemistry. Schrock was honoured as “the first to produce an efficient metal-compound catalyst for metathesis.”
Schrock received a B.A. (1967) from the University of California, Riverside, and a Ph.D. (1971) from Harvard University. He held a one-year National Science Foundation postdoctoral fellowship at the University of Cambridge and spent three years doing research at E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Co. In 1975 he joined the faculty at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where he was named the Frederick G. Keyes Professor of Chemistry in 1989. Schrock also served as associate editor of the American Chemical Society journal Organometallics, and he won the 1996 ACS Award in Inorganic Chemistry for his work in inorganic polymer chains.
At MIT Schrock conducted research on metathesis, a reaction in which catalysts create and break double carbon bonds of organic molecules in a way that causes different groups of atoms in the molecules to change places with one another. This shift yields new molecules with new properties. Working with a mechanism first proposed in the early 1970s by Chauvin, he systematically tested catalysts that contained tantalum, tungsten, or other metals in an effort to understand which metals could be used and how they worked. In a major advance in 1990 Schrock and his associates reported the development of efficient metathesis catalysts that used the metal molybdenum. Their chemistry was based on a class of metal-containing compounds, called Schrock carbenes, that Schrock had been developing since the 1970s. The new metathesis catalysts, however, were sensitive to the effects of air and water, which reduced their activity. (Grubbs later discovered catalysts that solved this particular problem.) Schrock’s work contributed to the development of many useful products, including advanced plastics, fuel additives, agents to control harmful plants and insects, and new drugs. Catalysts for metathesis also played a role in the creation of “green chemistry,” in which the need for and the generation of hazardous substances in chemical processes were reduced or eliminated.
