Robert H. Grubbs,  (born February 27, 1942, near Possum Trot, Kentucky, U.S.), American chemist who, with Richard R. Schrock and Yves Chauvin, won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 2005 for developing metathesis, an important type of chemical reaction used in organic chemistry. Schrock and Grubbs were honoured for their advances in more-effective catalysts based on a mechanism first proposed by Chauvin.
Grubbs studied chemistry at the University of Florida (B.S., 1963; M.S., 1965) and at Columbia University, New York City (Ph.D., 1968). After a year as a postdoctoral fellow at Stanford University, he joined the chemistry faculty at Michigan State University. In 1978 he moved to the California Institute of Technology, where he was named the Victor and Elizabeth Atkins Professor of Chemistry in 1990.
Grubbs’s prizewinning research centred on metathesis, a reaction in which catalysts create and break double carbon bonds of organic molecules in a way that causes different groups of atoms in the molecules to change places with one another. This changing of places results in new molecules with new properties. Building on the work of Chauvin, who in the 1970s had shown how metathesis could take place, Grubbs and his associates in 1992 reported the discovery of a catalyst that contained the metal ruthenium. It was stable in air and worked on the double carbon bonds in a molecule selectively, without disrupting the bonds between other atoms in the molecule, unlike the significant but unstable molybdenum-based catalysts reported by Schrock two years earlier. The new catalyst also had the ability to jump-start metathesis reactions in the presence of water, alcohols, and carboxyl acids. Grubbs’s discovery helped pave the way for practical applications of metathesis, including the development of new products such as advanced plastics and pharmaceuticals. Catalysts used in metathesis also contributed to the rise of “green chemistry,” which involves using techniques that minimize pollution in chemical processes.
