Robert F. Furchgott, in full Robert Francis Furchgott,  (born June 4, 1916, Charleston, S.C., U.S.—died May 19, 2009,  Seattle, Wash.), American pharmacologist who, along with Louis J. Ignarro and Ferid Murad, was co-awarded the 1998 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for the discovery that nitric oxide (NO) acts as a signaling molecule in the cardiovascular system. Their combined work uncovered an entirely new mechanism by which blood vessels in the body relax and widen.
Furchgott received his B.S. in chemistry from the University of North Carolina in 1937 and his Ph.D. in biochemistry from Northwestern University in 1940. He joined SUNY-Brooklyn’s department of pharmacology in 1956, a position he held until 1989, when he retired as professor emeritus and became an adjunct professor at the University of Miami School of Medicine in Florida. Nearly all of Furchgott’s research involved the study of the mechanism of drug interaction with the receptors in blood vessels.
In the work for which he shared the Nobel Prize, Furchgott demonstrated that cells in the endothelium, or inner lining, of blood vessels produce an unknown signaling molecule. The molecule, which he named endothelium-derived relaxing factor (EDRF), signals smooth muscle cells in blood vessel walls to relax, dilating the vessels. Furchgott’s work would eventually be linked with research done by Murad in 1977, which showed that nitroglycerin and several related heart drugs induce the formation of nitric oxide, a colourless, odourless gas that acts to increase the diameter of blood vessels. Once Ignarro demonstrated that EDRF was nitric oxide, the stage was set for the discovery of the many applications of this important basic research. Furchgott and Ignarro first announced their findings at a scientific conference in 1986 and triggered an international boom in research on nitric oxide. Scientists later showed that nitric oxide is manufactured by many different kinds of cells in the body and has a role in regulating a variety of body functions. The research done by Murad, Furchgott, and Ignarro was key to the development of the highly successful anti-impotence drug sildenafil citrate (Viagra), which acts to increase nitric oxide’s effect in penile blood vessels. Researchers suggested that nitric oxide could be a key to improved treatments for heart disease, shock, and cancer.
In addition to the Nobel Prize, Furchgott received the Albert Lasker Basic Medical Research Award in 1996.
