Roger Y. Tsien, in full Roger Yonchien Tsien,  (born February 1, 1952, New York, New York, U.S.—died August 24, 2016, Eugene, Oregon), American chemist who was a corecipient, with Osamu Shimomura and Martin Chalfie, of the 2008 Nobel Prize for Chemistry.
Tsien attended Harvard University before receiving a Ph.D. in physiology from the University of Cambridge in 1977. He remained at Cambridge as a researcher until 1981, when he left for the University of California, Berkeley, and an eventual professorship there. In 1989 he became a professor at the University of California in San Diego, where he also headed a research laboratory. In 1994 he began the research that led to his Nobel honour. Tsien and his corecipients were honoured for their work in the discovery and development of the green fluorescent protein (GFP), a naturally occurring substance in the jellyfish Aequorea victoria that is used as a tool to make visible the actions of certain cells. Their work with GFP opened a vast set of opportunities for studying biological processes at the molecular level.
GFP provides a visual signal that scientists use to probe protein activity, such as when and where proteins are produced and how different proteins or parts of proteins move and approach each other within a cell. In the 1960s Shimomura showed that Aequorea victoria’s green fluorescence, which had been discovered in 1955, is produced by the protein that was later named GFP. American biochemist Douglas Prasher analyzed the chromophore in GFP in the 1980s and subsequently found and cloned the gene responsible for making GFP. In 1993 Chalfie showed that the gene that instructs the cell to make GFP could be embedded in the nucleic acids of other organisms, first in the bacterium Escherichia coli and then in the transparent nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, so that they would make their own GFP. This discovery opened the possibility of using GFP in virtually any organism. Tsien then showed, beginning in 1994, that oxygen is required for GFP fluorescence and that point mutations in the gene could shift the wavelength and intensity of the fluorescence—in other words, he discovered how to make the proteins glow more brightly and in different colours. That find made it possible to study different processes in the same cell simultaneously.Tsien also helped to determine the structure of GFP and described how to use GFP and its variants to study the role and behaviour of calcium ions in living systems. He received one-third of the 2008 Nobel Prize for Chemistry for his expansion of the GFP’s available colour palette.
Tsien’s later research involved developing ways to use fluorescence to distinguish cancer cells from surrounding tissue and also to mark nerve cells; it was hoped that both advances would prove useful in surgery.
In addition to the Nobel Prize, Tsien received numerous honours, and in 1998 he became a member of the National Academy of Sciences.
