Saccharin, also called Ortho-sulfobenzoic Acid Imide,  organic compound employed as a non-nutritive sweetening agent. It occurs as insoluble saccharin or in the form of various salts, primarily sodium and calcium. Saccharin has about 200–700 times the sweetening power of granulated sugar and has a slightly bitter and metallic aftertaste. For table use, it is sold as 1/4-, 1/2-, or 1-grain pellets of the salts, a 1/4-grain pellet being the equivalent of a level teaspoon of sugar.
Saccharin was discovered by the chemists Ira Remsen and Constantin Fahlberg in 1879, while they were investigating the oxidation of o-toluenesulfonamide. Fahlberg noticed an unaccountable sweet taste to his food and found that this sweetness was present on his hands and arms, despite his having washed thoroughly after leaving the laboratory. Checking over his laboratory apparatus by taste tests, Fahlberg was led to the discovery of the source of this sweetness—saccharin. Saccharin became the first commercially available artificial sweetener. It is still made by the oxidation of o-toluenesulfonamide, as well as from phthalic anhydride.
Insoluble saccharin is a white crystal that melts at 228.8° to 229.7° C (443.8° to 445.5° F). Sodium and calcium saccharins are white crystalline powders that are very soluble in water. Saccharin is stable in a pH range of 2 to 7 and at temperatures up to 150° C (302° F). It has no caloric value and does not promote tooth decay. It is not metabolized by the body and is excreted unchanged. Saccharin is widely used in the diets of diabetics and others who must avoid sugar intake. It is also extensively employed in diet soft drinks and other low-calorie foods, and it is useful in foods and pharmaceuticals in which the presence of sugar might lead to spoilage.
In toxicological studies, saccharin has been shown to induce a greater incidence of bladder cancer in rats that have been fed the sweetener at high levels (i.e., 5 to 7.5 percent of the diet). At the same time, epidemiological studies have failed to show a link between human bladder cancer and the use of saccharin at normal levels, and the sweetener is approved for addition to foods in most countries of the world.
