Sidney Altman,  (born May 7, 1939, Montreal, Que., Can.), Canadian American molecular biologist who, with Thomas R. Cech, received the 1989 Nobel Prize for Chemistry for their discoveries concerning the catalytic properties of RNA, or ribonucleic acid.
Altman received a B.S. in physics in 1960 from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. After a brief period as a graduate student in the physics department at Columbia University, Altman changed his course of study and enrolled in the graduate program in biophysics at the University of Colorado. There he studied chemical compounds called acridines, focusing primarily on how these compounds affect the replication of bacteriophages (viruses that infect bacteria). Altman received a Ph.D. in biophysics in 1967. He then was awarded a fellowship to work at Harvard University, where he conducted research on bacteriophages under the guidance of American molecular biologist Matthew Stanley Meselson. In 1969 Altman became a researcher at the Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge, Eng. There he worked with British biophysicist Francis Crick and South African biologist Sydney Brenner and embarked on the research that would later lead to his Nobel Prize-winning discoveries. Altman joined the biology faculty at Yale University in 1971, where he became a full professor in 1980 and was the department chairman from 1983 to 1985. Altman also served as dean of the undergraduate Yale College from 1985 to 1989. He took U.S. citizenship in 1984 but concurrently retained his Canadian citizenship.
Altman’s initial investigations into RNA concerned a small molecule called transfer RNA (tRNA), which carries amino acids to organelles called ribosomes, where the amino acids are linked into proteins. He isolated and characterized a precursor molecule in the biochemical pathway leading to the synthesis of tRNA and subsequently identified an enzyme called ribonuclease P (RNase P), which cleaved a specific bond within the precursor molecule. This enzymatic cleavage enabled the tRNA synthetic pathway to advance to the next step. During purification of RNase P, Altman discovered that there was an RNA segment within the enzyme and that this segment served as the active, or catalytic, portion of the enzyme.
Altman was working independently of Cech when both discovered the catalytic properties of RNA. The old belief was that enzymatic activity—the triggering and acceleration of vital chemical reactions within living cells—was the exclusive domain of protein molecules. Altman’s and Cech’s revolutionary discovery was that RNA, traditionally thought to be simply a passive carrier of genetic codes between different parts of the living cell, could also take on active enzymatic functions. This knowledge opened up new fields of scientific research and biotechnology and caused scientists to rethink old theories of how cells function. It also led to new hypotheses about the history of the emergence of RNA on Earth and the possibility that RNA was the molecule that gave rise to Earth’s first life forms.
