Silicon carbide,   exceedingly hard, synthetically produced crystalline compound of silicon and carbon. Its chemical formula is SiC. Since the late 19th century silicon carbide has been an important material for sandpapers, grinding wheels, and cutting tools. More recently, it has found application in refractory linings and heating elements for industrial furnaces, in wear-resistant parts for pumps and rocket engines, and in semiconducting substrates for light-emitting diodes.
Silicon carbide was discovered by the American inventor Edward G. Acheson in 1891. While attempting to produce artificial diamonds, Acheson heated a mixture of clay and powdered coke in an iron bowl, with the bowl and an ordinary carbon arc-light serving as the electrodes. He found bright green crystals attached to the carbon electrode and thought that he had prepared some new compound of carbon and alumina from the clay. He called the new compound Carborundum because the natural mineral form of alumina is called corundum. Finding that the crystals approximated the hardness of diamond and immediately realizing the significance of his discovery, Acheson applied for a U.S. patent. His early product initially was offered for the polishing of gems and sold at a price comparable with natural diamond dust. The new compound, which was obtainable from cheap raw materials and in good yields, soon became an important industrial abrasive.
About the same time Acheson made his discovery, Henri Moissan in France produced a similar compound from a mixture of quartz and carbon; but in a publication of 1903, Moissan ascribed the original discovery to Acheson. Some natural silicon carbide was found in Arizona in the Canyon Diablo meteorite and bears the mineralogical name moissanite.
The modern method of manufacturing silicon carbide for the abrasives, metallurgical, and refractories industries is basically the same as that developed by Acheson. A mixture of pure silica sand and carbon in the form of finely ground coke is built up around a carbon conductor within a brick electrical resistance-type furnace. Electric current is passed through the conductor, bringing about a chemical reaction in which the carbon in the coke and silicon in the sand combine to form SiC and carbon monoxide gas. A furnace run can last several days, during which temperatures vary from 2,200° to 2,700° C (4,000° to 4,900° F) in the core to about 1,400° C (2,500° F) at the outer edge. The energy consumption exceeds 100,000 kilowatt-hours per run. At the completion of the run, the product consists of a core of green to black SiC crystals loosely knitted together, surrounded by partially or entirely unconverted raw material. The lump aggregate is crushed, ground, and screened into various sizes appropriate to the end use.
For special applications, silicon carbide is produced by a number of advanced processes. Reaction-bonded silicon carbide is produced by mixing SiC powder with powdered carbon and a plasticizer, forming the mixture into the desired shape, burning off the plasticizer, and then infusing the fired object with gaseous or molten silicon, which reacts with the carbon to form additional SiC. Wear-resistant layers of SiC can be formed by chemical vapour deposition, a process in which volatile compounds containing carbon and silicon are reacted at high temperatures in the presence of hydrogen. For advanced electronic applications, large single crystals of SiC can be grown from vapour; the boule can then be sliced into wafers much like silicon for fabrication into solid-state devices. For reinforcing metals or other ceramics, SiC fibres can be formed in a number of ways, including chemical vapour deposition and the firing of silicon-containing polymer fibres.
Until the invention of boron carbide in 1929, silicon carbide was the hardest synthetic material known. It has a Mohs hardness rating of 9, approaching that of diamond. In addition to hardness, silicon carbide crystals have fracture characteristics that make them extremely useful in grinding wheels and in abrasive paper and cloth products. Its high thermal conductivity, together with its high-temperature strength, low thermal expansion, and resistance to chemical reaction, makes silicon carbide valuable in the manufacture of high-temperature bricks and other refractories. It is also classed as a semiconductor, having an electrical conductivity between that of metals and insulating materials. This property, in combination with its thermal properties, makes SiC a promising substitute for traditional semiconductors such as silicon in high-temperature applications.
