Somatostatin,  polypeptide that inhibits the activity of certain pancreatic and gastrointestinal hormones. Somatostatin exists in two forms: one composed of 14 amino acids and a second composed of 28 amino acids. The name somatostatin, essentially meaning stagnation of a body, was coined when investigators found that an extract of hypothalamic tissues inhibited the release of growth hormone from the pituitary gland. Somatostatin subsequently was found to be widely distributed throughout the central nervous system and to occur in other tissues.
In the pancreas, somatostatin is produced by the delta cells of the islets of Langerhans, where it serves to block the secretion of both insulin and glucagon from adjacent cells. Insulin, glucagon, and somatostatin act in concert to control the flow of nutrients into and out of the circulation. The relative concentrations of these hormones regulate the rates of absorption, utilization, and storage of glucose, amino acids, and fatty acids. The anatomic proximity of the beta, alpha, and delta cells in the islets of Langerhans is important. Somatostatin and glucagon appear to have a paracrine relationship, each influencing the secretion of the other, with both affecting the rate of insulin release. Somatostatin also inhibits the secretion of several gastrointestinal hormones—including gastrin, secretin, cholecystokinin (CCK), and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP)—resulting in the inhibition of many functions of the gastrointestinal tract, including the secretion of acid by the stomach, the secretion of digestive enzymes by the pancreas, and the absorption of nutrients by the intestine.
Few examples of somatostatin deficiency have been found. Alzheimer disease appears to cause a decrease in somatostatin levels in brain tissue, although it is not clear what role this plays in the course of the disease. In the late 1970s a rare somatostatin-producing tumour called a somatostatinoma was first identified. Since then somatostatinomas have been well characterized. The tumours tend to develop in the pancreas, duodenum, or jejunum, and diagnosis is based on plasma levels of a substance called somatostatin-like immunoreactivity (SLI), which may be 50 times greater than normal in individuals with a somatostatinoma. The excess levels of somatostatin may cause abdominal cramps and pain, persistent diarrhea, high blood glucose concentrations, weight loss, and episodic flushing of the skin.
