Stephanie Kwolek, in full Stephanie Louise Kwolek,  (born July 31, 1923, New Kensington, Pennsylvania, U.S.—died June 18, 2014, Wilmington, Delaware), American chemist, a pioneer in polymer research whose work yielded Kevlar, an ultrastrong and ultrathick material best known for its use in bulletproof vests.
Kwolek’s father, a foundry worker, died when she was 10 years old, and her mother raised her and a brother alone. In 1946 she received a Bachelor of Science degree in chemistry from the Carnegie Institute of Technology (now Carnegie Mellon University), Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Intending eventually to go to medical school, she went to work as a laboratory chemist at the rayon department of the DuPont Company in Buffalo, New York. DuPont had introduced nylon just before World War II, and in the postwar years the company resumed its drive into the highly competitive market of synthetic fibres. Kwolek thus became engaged in basic research in a new and fast-growing field, and as a consequence she never left employment with DuPont. She moved with the company’s Pioneering Research Laboratory to Wilmington, Delaware, in 1950 and retired with the rank of research associate in 1986. Having accumulated many patents and awards in her career, she continued in retirement to work as a consultant and public speaker.
Kwolek is best known for her work during the 1950s and ’60s with aramids, or “aromatic polyamides,” a type of polymer that can be made into strong, stiff, and flame-resistant fibres. Her laboratory work in aramids was conducted under the supervision of research fellow Paul W. Morgan, who calculated that the aramids would form stiff fibres owing to the presence of bulky benzene (or “aromatic”) rings in their molecular chains but that they would have to be prepared from solution because they melt only at very high temperatures. Kwolek determined the solvents and polymerization conditions suitable for producing poly-m-phenylene isophthalamide, a compound that DuPont released in 1961 as a flame-resistant fibre with the trade name Nomex. She then extended her work into poly-p-benzamide and poly-p-phenylene terephthalamide, which she noted adopted highly regular rodlike molecular arrangements in solution. From these two “liquid crystal polymers” (the first ever prepared), fibres were spun that displayed unprecedented stiffness and tensile strength. Poly-p-phenylene terephthalamide was released commercially in 1971 with the trade name Kevlar, a fibre that finds use in high-strength tirecord, reinforced boat hulls and other structural parts, and lightweight bulletproof vests.
