Svante Arrhenius, in full Svante August Arrhenius,  (born February 19, 1859, Vik, Sweden—died October 2, 1927, Stockholm), Swedish physicist and physical chemist known for his theory of electrolytic dissociation and his model of the greenhouse effect. In 1903 he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Chemistry.
Arrhenius attended the famous Cathedral School in Uppsala and then entered Uppsala University, from which he received a bachelor’s degree (1878) and a doctorate (1884). He was given the honorary title of docent at Uppsala University in 1884 and awarded a travel stipend by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1886. The latter allowed him to complete his education by sojourns (1886–90) in the laboratories of Wilhelm Ostwald at the University of Riga in Latvia (then part of Russia) and at the University of Leipzig in Germany, Friedrich Kohlrausch at the University of Würzburg in Germany, Ludwig Boltzmann at the University of Graz in Austria, and Jacobus Henricus van’t Hoff at the University of Amsterdam.
Arrhenius’s scientific career encompassed three distinct specialties within the broad fields of physics and chemistry: physical chemistry, cosmic physics, and the chemistry of immunology. Each phase of his career corresponds with a different institutional setting. His years (1884–90) as a doctoral and postdoctoral student pioneering the new physical chemistry were spent at the Institute of Physics of the Academy of Sciences in Stockholm and at foreign universities; his work in cosmic physics (1895–1900) was carried out at the Stockholms Högskola (now the University of Stockholm); and his studies in immunochemistry (1901–07) took place at the State Serum Institute in Copenhagen and the Nobel Institute for Physical Chemistry (established in 1905) in Stockholm.
Arrhenius’s main contribution to physical chemistry was his theory (1887) that electrolytes, certain substances that dissolve in water to yield a solution that conducts electricity, are separated, or dissociated, into electrically charged particles, or ions, even when there is no current flowing through the solution. This radically new way of approaching the study of electrolytes first met with opposition but gradually won adherents through the efforts of Arrhenius and Ostwald. The same simple but brilliant way of thinking that inspired the dissociation hypothesis led Arrhenius in 1889 to express the temperature dependence of the rate constants of chemical reactions through what is now known as the Arrhenius equation.
Cosmic physics was the term used by Arrhenius and his colleagues in the Stockholm Physics Society for their attempt to develop physical theories linking the phenomena of the seas, the atmosphere, and the land. Debates in the Society concerning the causes of the ice ages led Arrhenius to construct the first climate model of the influence of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2), published in The Philosophical Magazine in 1896. The general rule that emerged from the model was that if the quantity of CO2 increases or decreases in geometric progression, temperature will increase or decrease nearly in arithmetic progression. Linking the calculations of his abstract model to natural processes, Arrhenius estimated the effect of the burning of fossil fuels as a source of atmospheric CO2. He predicted that a doubling of CO2 due to fossil fuel burning alone would take 500 years and lead to temperature increases of 3 to 4 °C (about 5 to 7 °F). This is probably what has earned Arrhenius his present reputation as the first to have provided a model for the effect of industrial activity on global warming.
Arrhenius’s work in immunochemistry, a term that gained currency through his book of that title published in 1907, was an attempt to study toxin-antitoxin reactions, principally diphtheria reactions, using the concepts and methods developed in physical chemistry. Together with Torvald Madsen, director of the State Serum Institute in Copenhagen, he carried out wide-ranging experimental studies of bacterial toxins as well as plant and animal poisons. The technical difficulties were too great, however, for Arrhenius to realize his aim of making immunology an exact science. Instead, it was his spirited attacks on the reigning theory in the field of immunity studies, the side-chain theory formulated by the German medical scientist Paul Ehrlich, that attracted attention. This, however, was of short duration, and Arrhenius gradually abandoned the field.
Arrhenius was a member of the Nobel Committee for Physics of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences from 1901 to 1927, and he had a decisive influence on the awarding of Nobel Prizes in physics and chemistry during most of that period. He also participated in drawing up the statutes of the Nobel Foundation (1900). His most notable contribution was the suggestion that candidates for the prizes be put forth by foreign as well as Swedish nominators, thereby ensuring that the selection process became international. This suggestion was illustrative of Arrhenius’s internationalist outlook.
Popularization of science was of great concern to Arrhenius throughout his career. His most successful venture into this genre was Worlds in the Making (1908), originally published in Swedish and translated into several languages. In it he launched the hypothesis of panspermism—that is, he suggested life was spread about the universe by bacteria propelled by light pressure. These speculations have not found their way into modern cosmogony. Arrhenius wrote the article on physical chemistry for the 13th edition (1926) of the Encyclopædia Britannica.
Arrhenius married twice, the first time in 1894 to Sofia Rudbeck, who was one of the first Swedish women to earn a bachelor’s degree in science from Uppsala University. The marriage was unhappy and short-lived, ending in divorce in 1896. A son, Olof Arrhenius, was born in 1895. Arrhenius’s second marriage was to Maria Johansson in 1905. She was the sister of Johan Erik Johansson, professor of physiology at the Karolinska Institute and a close friend of Arrhenius. Three children were born of this marriage.
Arrhenius’s later years were darkened by World War I, which dealt a blow to his internationalist outlook and cut him off from his many friends on both sides of the conflict. In the early 1920s, Arrhenius was again able to travel on the Continent and to England. His travels were finally cut short by a stroke that he suffered in 1924 and from which he never fully recovered. He was buried at the town cemetery in Uppsala, a stone’s throw from the house where he spent his childhood and youth.
