Tetraethyl lead (TEL), also spelled tetraethyllead,  organometallic compound containing the toxic metal lead that for much of the 20th century was the chief antiknock agent for automotive gasoline, or petrol. Beginning in the 1970s, “leaded gasoline” was phased out, first in the United States and then in Europe and around the world, on account of its contribution to lead poisoning and its interference with pollution-control devices installed in automobiles.
The compound, manufactured by the action of ethyl chloride on a powdered alloy of lead and sodium, is a dense, colourless liquid that is quite volatile, boiling at about 200 °C (400 °F). The molecule consists of a single atom of lead (Pb) bonded to four ethyl groups (CH2CH3) through a carbon (C) atom. The resulting arrangement has the chemical formula C8H20Pb and adopts a tetrahedral structure, as shown in the diagram.
In the hot cylinder of a gasoline engine, the bonds between the lead atom and the ethyl groups are broken. Upon combustion, the lead atom forms lead oxide (PbO), which prevents fractions of the fuel mixture from burning too quickly and causing a highly undesirable “engine knock.” Beginning in the 1920s, TEL, added to gasoline in very small quantities (not exceeding 3 cubic cm per gallon), considerably improved engine performance. To prevent accumulation of lead deposits in the cylinders, a small quantity of ethylene bromide was added to the gasoline. The lead and bromine formed a compound that left the engine in the exhaust.
TEL can cause acute or chronic lead poisoning if inhaled or absorbed through the skin. Indeed, the industrial chemist widely given credit for discovering the antiknock properties of the compound, Thomas Midgley, Jr., was forced to leave his job for several months in 1923 in order to recuperate from lead poisoning. From 1923 to 1925 several workers suffered agonizing deaths from acute lead poisoning at the first plants built by the General Motors Corporation, the DuPont Company, and the Standard Oil Company (New Jersey) for producing TEL on an industrial scale. The dangers of lead poisoning were well known at the time, publicized by such occupational-health advocates as Alice Hamilton of Harvard Medical School. Procedures were installed at TEL plants for safely processing the compound, and officials from the automobile and oil industries (including Midgley himself) succeeded in convincing government health authorities and regulators that the minute quantities of lead emitted from engine exhaust had not been proved to constitute a danger to public health. As a result, use of TEL was approved, and “ethyl gasoline” became the standard antiknock formulation for use in automobile engines.
Studies of the prevalence of lead poisoning continued, however, and resulted in reports by geochemist Clair Patterson in the 1960s on the accumulation of lead in industrial nations and by pediatrician Herbert Needleman in the 1970s on lead poisoning and intellectual development in children. Finally, in 1972 the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency announced that leaded gasoline would be phased out—not specifically to combat lead poisoning but because lead was known to interfere with new smog-reducing catalytic converters that from 1975 would be built into new cars. Use of TEL declined markedly from 1975 to 1985, and since 1995 no leaded gasoline has been available for use in passenger automobiles in the United States. (The use of TEL continued for many years in aviation gasoline and racing fuel, however.) The use of leaded gasoline in cars was banned in Canada in 1990 and in the European Union in 2002. In 2011 the United Nations Environment Programme’s Partnership for Clean Fuels and Vehicles was able to announce that the sale of leaded gasoline had disappeared in all but a small handful of countries and that the use of TEL in even those countries would soon end.
