Thomas Steitz,  (born August 23, 1940, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, U.S.—died October 9, 2018, Branford, Connecticut), American biophysicist and biochemist who was awarded the 2009 Nobel Prize for Chemistry, along with Indian-born American physicist and molecular biologist Venkatraman Ramakrishnan and Israeli protein crystallographer Ada Yonath, for his research into the atomic structure and function of cellular particles called ribosomes. (Ribosomes are tiny particles made up of RNA and proteins that specialize in protein synthesis and are found free or bound to the endoplasmic reticulum within cells.)
Steitz received a bachelor’s degree in chemistry in 1962 from Lawrence College in Wisconsin and a Ph.D. in molecular biology and biochemistry in 1966 from Harvard University in Massachusetts. Following a year of postdoctoral research in chemistry at Harvard, Steitz joined the Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology at the University of Cambridge in England. He remained at Cambridge until 1970, when he became a professor of chemistry at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut. Steitz investigated the structures of various cellular macromolecules, including nucleic acids and proteins, using a technique called X-ray crystallography. He focused in particular on elucidating the structures that underlie the activity and function of ribosomes.
Among Steitz’s major accomplishments was the determination of the structure of the large ribosomal subunit (50S) of the archaean Haloarcula marismortui (a primitive single-celled organism) to a resolution of 9 angstroms (Å; 1 Å is equivalent to 10−10 metre, or 0.1 nanometre). In addition, he created a map of the 50S ribosomal subunit of H. marismortui at a resolution of 5 Å, revealing the locations of protein and RNA components within the subunit, and later provided a complete structure of the 50S subunit at a resolution of just 2.4 Å. Steitz also used X-ray crystallography to investigate the atomic characteristics of the processes of gene expression, DNA replication, genetic recombination, transcription, and translation.
In 2000 Steitz cofounded Rib-X Pharmaceuticals, a company that specialized in the discovery and development of new classes of antibiotics. He also served as chair of the scientific advisory board for the company.
Steitz became a Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigator in 1986 and was elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1990. He received the Lewis S. Rosenstiel Award for Distinguished Work in Basic Medical Science in 2001, the Keio Medical Science Prize in 2006, and the Gairdner International Award in 2007.
