Thomas Robert Cech,  (born Dec. 8, 1947, Chicago, Ill., U.S.), American biochemist and molecular biologist who, with Sidney Altman, was awarded the 1989 Nobel Prize for Chemistry for their discoveries concerning RNA (ribonucleic acid).
Cech attended Grinnell College in Grinnell, Iowa (B.A., 1970), and the University of California at Berkeley (Ph.D., 1975, in chemistry). After serving as a National Cancer Institute fellow at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1975–77), he joined the Department of Chemistry at the University of Colorado in 1978, becoming a full professor in 1983. Concurrently he was an investigator for the National Institutes of Health from 1978 and for the Howard Hughes Medical Institute from 1988.
Cech and Altman received a Nobel Prize for their independent discoveries that RNA, traditionally considered to be only a passive messenger of genetic information, can also take on an enzymatic role in which it catalyzes, or facilitates, intracellular chemical reactions essential to life. Before their discoveries, enzymatic activity had been attributed exclusively to proteins. Cech was the first person to show that an RNA molecule could catalyze a chemical reaction, and he published his findings in 1982. Altman, whose earlier research had pointed strongly to such a conclusion, conclusively demonstrated such enzymatic activity by an RNA molecule in 1983.
In 1997 Cech and his research team discovered telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT), the catalytic subunit of an enzyme called telomerase, which is responsible for regulating the length of telomeres. (Telomeres form the end segments of chromosomes.) Four years later his lab also located the “protection of telomeres protein” (POT1) that caps the end of a chromosome, protecting it from degradation and ensuring the maintenance of appropriate telomere length. These discoveries had major implications in understanding the underlying mechanisms of cancer, as the disease was thought to be due in large part to the production of telomerase and the subsequent failure of cells to die after a certain number of replications. This knowledge was also thought to lend important insight into the aging process, as telomere length becomes markedly shorter as an organism ages.
Cech served as president of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (2000–09), during which time he was involved in the development of the institute’s Janelia Farm Research Campus, opened in 2006 in Ashbury, Va. He continued in his capacity as an investigator for the institute after his tenure as president. In 2009 Cech was elected to the board of directors of Merck & Co., Inc., which three years earlier had purchased Sirna Therapeutics, a company that he had founded in 1993. He was awarded the National Medal of Science in 1995.
