Unsaturated fat,  a fatty acid in which the hydrocarbon molecules have two carbons that share double or triple bond(s) and are therefore not completely saturated with hydrogen atoms. Due to the decreased saturation with hydrogen bonds, the structures are weaker and are, therefore, typically liquid (oil) at room temperature. Unsaturated fats are more likely found in vegetables as well as in fish. Saturated fats, in contrast, are typically found in meat products and are solid at room temperature.
Unsaturated fats are an important supply of calories and, therefore, energy to the human body. In general, fats are made of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen and are the most concentrated source of energy in food. Fats along with protein and carbohydrates are the three main nutrients present in food. Fats are categorized according to their percentage of hydrogen bonds as saturated (all hydrogen bonds) or unsaturated (not all hydrogen bonds).
Eating more unsaturated fats and less saturated fat (such as butter) can help lower cholesterol and heart-related health risks by decreasing the bad cholesterol (low-density lipoprotein [LDL]) even though the average person makes about 75 percent of cholesterol in his or her liver and only about 25 percent is obtained from the diet. The most important influence on the blood cholesterol level is the actual mix of different types of cholesterol in the diet. A diet with more unsaturated versus saturated fats is important because unsaturated fats are necessary for the body, and they also protect against illness. The American Heart Association recommends a moderate intake of all types of fats.
There are two main types of the unsaturated fats: monounsaturated and polyunsaturated. Monounsaturated fats—which include olive, peanut, and canola oils—have one double bond present per molecule. They are considered the healthiest types of fats because they lower total cholesterol, bad cholesterol, and triglycerides (the amount of fat circulating in the blood). Polyunsaturated fats have more than one double bond and are more likely to be found in fish, especially salmon; soy beans; mayonnaise; soft margarine; and fish oil. They provide essential fatty acids for healthy skin and the development of body cells.
