uranium (U),  radioactive chemical element of the actinoid series of the periodic table, atomic number 92. It is an important nuclear fuel.
Uranium constitutes about two parts per million of Earth’s crust. Some important uranium minerals are pitchblende (impure U3O8), uraninite (UO2), carnotite (a potassium uranium vanadate), autunite (a calcium uranium phosphate), and torbernite (a copper uranium phosphate). These and other recoverable uranium ores, as sources of nuclear fuels, contain many times more energy than all the known recoverable deposits of fossil fuels. One pound of uranium yields as much energy as 1.4 million kilograms (3 million pounds) of coal.
For additional information about uranium ore deposits, as well as coverage of mining, refining, and recovery techniques, see uranium processing. For comparative statistical data on uranium production, see table.
Uranium is a dense, hard metallic element that is silvery white in colour. It is ductile, malleable, and capable of taking a high polish. In air the metal tarnishes and when finely divided breaks into flames. It is a relatively poor conductor of electricity. Though discovered (1789) by German chemist Martin Heinrich Klaproth, who named it after the then recently discovered planet Uranus, the metal itself was first isolated (1841) by French chemist Eugène-Melchior Péligot by the reduction of uranium tetrachloride (UCl4) with potassium.
The formulation of the periodic system by Russian chemist Dmitry Mendeleyev in 1869 focused attention on uranium as the heaviest chemical element, a position that it held until the discovery of the first transuranium element neptunium in 1940. In 1896 the French physicist Henri Becquerel discovered in uranium the phenomenon of radioactivity, a term first used in 1898 by French physicists Marie and Pierre Curie. This property was later found in many other elements. It is now known that uranium, radioactive in all its isotopes, consists naturally of a mixture of uranium-238 (99.27 percent, 4,510,000,000-year half-life), uranium-235 (0.72 percent, 713,000,000-year half-life), and uranium-234 (0.006 percent, 247,000-year half-life). These long half-lives make determinations of the age of Earth possible by measuring the amounts of lead, uranium’s ultimate decay product, in certain uranium-containing rocks. Uranium-238 is the parent and uranium-234 one of the daughters in the radioactive uranium decay series; uranium-235 is the parent of the actinium decay series. See also actinoid element.
The element uranium became the subject of intense study and broad interest after German chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann discovered in late 1938 the phenomenon of nuclear fission in uranium bombarded by slow neutrons. Italian-born American physicist Enrico Fermi suggested (early 1939) that neutrons might be among the fission products and could thus continue the fission as a chain reaction. Hungarian-born American physicist Leo Szilard, American physicist Herbert L. Anderson, French chemist Frédéric Joliot-Curie, and their coworkers confirmed (1939) this prediction; later investigation showed that an average of 21/2 neutrons per atom are released during fission. Those discoveries led to the first self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction (December 2, 1942), the first atomic bomb test (July 16, 1945), the first atomic bomb dropped in warfare (August 6, 1945), the first atomic-powered submarine (1955), and the first full-scale nuclear-powered electrical generator (1957).
Fission occurs with slow neutrons in the relatively rare isotope uranium-235 (the only naturally occurring fissile material), which must be separated from the plentiful isotope uranium-238 for its various uses. Uranium-238, however, after absorbing neutrons and undergoing negative beta decay, is transmuted into the synthetic element plutonium, which is fissile with slow neutrons. Natural uranium, therefore, can be used in converter and breeder reactors, in which fission is sustained by the rare uranium-235 and plutonium is manufactured at the same time by the transmutation of uranium-238. Fissile uranium-233 can be synthesized for use as a nuclear fuel from the nonfissile thorium isotope thorium-232, which is abundant in nature. Uranium is also important as the primary material from which the synthetic transuranium elements have been prepared by transmutation reactions.
Uranium, which is strongly electropositive, reacts with water; it dissolves in acids but not in alkalies. The important oxidation states are +4 (as in the oxide UO2, tetrahalides such as UCl4, and the green aqueous ion U4+) and +6 (as in the oxide UO3, the hexafluoride UF6, and the yellow uranyl ion UO22+). In an aqueous solution uranium is most stable as the uranyl ion, which has a linear structure [O=U=O]2+. Uranium also exhibits a +3 and a +5 state, but the respective ions are unstable. The red U3+ ion oxidizes slowly even in water that contains no dissolved oxygen. The colour of the UO2+ ion is unknown because it undergoes disproportionation (UO2+ is simultaneously reduced to U4+ and oxidized to UO22+) even in very dilute solutions.
Uranium compounds have been used as colouring agents for ceramics. Uranium hexafluoride (UF6) is a solid with an unusually high vapour pressure (115 torr = 0.15 atm = 15,300 Pa) at 25 °C (77 °F). UF6 is chemically very reactive, but, despite its corrosive nature in the vapour state, UF6 has been widely used in the gas-diffusion and gas-centrifuge methods of separating uranium-235 from uranium-238.
Organometallic compounds are an interesting and important group of compounds in which there are metal-carbon bonds linking a metal to organic groups. Uranocene is an organouranium compound U(C8H8)2, in which a uranium atom is sandwiched between two organic ring layers related to cyclooctatetraene C8H8. Its discovery in 1968 opened a new area of organometallic chemistry.
