Urea-formaldehyde resin,  any of a class of synthetic resins obtained by chemical combination of urea (a solid crystal obtained from ammonia) and formaldehyde (a highly reactive gas obtained from methane). Urea-formaldehyde resins are used mostly as adhesives for the bonding of plywood, particleboard, and other structured wood products. The chemical composition of urea and formaldehyde and the reaction by which they are polymerized into networks of permanently interlinked molecules are briefly described in the article aldehyde condensation polymer.
In industrial production, urea resins are made by the condensation of formaldehyde and urea in an aqueous solution, using ammonia as an alkaline catalyst. The condensation reaction gives a colourless, syrupy solution that can be spray-dried to a powder for later use in coatings or adhesives; it can also be mixed with cellulose filler to produce powders for molding into solid objects. Under the influence of heat and pressure, the resin, at this point made up largely of low-molecular-weight intermediate polymers or prepolymers, is cured to its final state, which consists of a three-dimensional network of interlinked polymers.
Patents for hard, transparent thermosetting resins based on urea and formaldehyde were granted to German and British chemists in the early 1920s. In 1925 the British Cyanides Company, Ltd., (now British Industrial Plastics, Ltd.) introduced light, unbreakable tableware made from its trademarked Beetle urea resin, and within two years the American Cyanamid Company had acquired the rights to produce Beetleware in the United States. Clear in its pure state, urea formaldehyde could be strengthened by cellulose and tinted by numerous pigments to make light, thin, hard, strong, colourful, and translucent articles for the home and kitchen. Its resistance to many chemicals suited it for cosmetics jars and other containers, and its electrical resistance made it desirable for products such as wall outlets and switch plates.
Urea formaldehyde began to be replaced in molded articles in the 1950s by melamine-formaldehyde resin and by new thermoplastic resins such as polystyrene. Like phenolic and melamine resins, urea-formaldehyde polymers are now employed primarily as wood adhesives. They are less durable than the other two resins, however, and do not have sufficient weather resistance to be used in exterior applications. Because urea-formaldehyde resins are lighter in colour than phenol-formaldehyde resins, they are traditionally reserved for interior plywood and decorative paneling, but concerns over the release of formaldehyde into the air have led to substitution even here by phenolics.
Urea-formaldehyde polymers are also used to treat textile fibres in order to improve wrinkle and shrink resistance, and they are blended with alkyd paints in order to improve the surface hardness of the coating.
