Vasopressin, also called antidiuretic hormone,  hormone that plays a key role in maintaining osmolality (the concentration of dissolved particles, such as salts and glucose, in the serum) and therefore in maintaining the volume of water in the extracellular fluid (the fluid space that surrounds cells). This is necessary to protect cells from sudden increases or decreases in water content, which are capable of interfering with proper cell function. Normal serum osmolality ranges from about 285 to 300 milliosmoles per kilogram (mOsm/kg) in healthy people. Vasopressin and a hormone called oxytocin evolved from a single primordial neurohypophyseal hormone called vasotocin, which is present in lower vertebrates.
Special nerve cells called osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus are very sensitive to changes in serum osmolality. The osmoreceptors are closely associated with the same nerve cells that produce and secrete vasopressin. Serum osmolality that increases or decreases by as little as 1 percent can cause respective decreases or increases in vasopressin release. The immediate effect of an increase in serum osmolality—for example, if a person becomes dehydrated (e.g., loses water by excessive perspiration)—is a stimulation the osmoreceptors. This stimulation leads to the separation of vasopressin from molecules of neurophysin, to which vasopressin is loosely attached within the secretory cells. Vasopressin is then released from the posterior pituitary gland, leading to the subsequent retention of water by the kidneys. Conversely, the immediate effect of a decrease in serum osmolality—for example, if a person becomes overhydrated (e.g., drinks too much water)—is the inhibition of the osmoreceptors. This inhibition leads to a decrease in vasopressin secretion and a subsequent increase in water excretion. The osmoreceptors are also closely linked to the thirst centre, which is stimulated by high serum osmolality and is inhibited by low serum osmolality in the same way as is vasopressin secretion.
In the kidneys, vasopressin acts on the cells of the collecting ducts. These cells contain receptors for vasopressin that are linked to vesicles that contain special water channels (aquaporins). When the cells are stimulated by vasopressin, the aquaporins fuse with the region of the cell membrane that is exposed to urine, allowing water to enter the cells. The water is then returned to the circulation. This causes the volume of urine to decrease and the urinary content of sodium, chloride, and other substances to increase. When this occurs, the urine is said to be concentrated.
Vasopressin is also released in response to a decrease in blood volume. Special pressure sensors called baroreceptors can detect arterial blood pressure; they are located in the carotid sinus, which is intimately associated with each carotid artery high in the neck, and in a group of specialized cells in the left atrium of the heart. When blood volume increases, the tissues of the carotid sinus and left atrium are stretched, and the nerves in the baroreceptors are stimulated. These nerves carry impulses to the vasopressin-producing nerve cells that inhibit the secretion of vasopressin, resulting in increased water excretion. Conversely, if blood volume decreases, the stretch of the carotid sinus and left atrium decreases, vasopressin release increases, and water excretion decreases, thereby helping to restore blood volume to normal. Other stimuli of vasopressin release include pain, stress, and several drugs, including opiate drugs.
