vitamin A, also called retinol,  a fat-soluble alcohol, most abundant in fatty fish and especially in fish-liver oils. Vitamin A is also found in milk fat, eggs, and liver; synthetic vitamin A is added to margarine. Vitamin A is not present in plants, but many vegetables and fruits contain one or more of a class of pigments that can be converted to vitamin A in the body; of these pigments, beta-carotene (provitamin A) is an excellent source of vitamin activity. The existence of vitamin A was first clearly recognized in 1913, its chemical nature was established in 1933, and it was first synthesized in 1947.
Vitamin A is readily destroyed upon exposure to heat, light, or air. The vitamin, which functions directly in vision, is converted into retinaldehyde, a component of a light-sensitive pigment called rhodopsin (visual purple), which is present in the retina of the eye. In the form of retinoic acid combined with specific proteins, it also functions in the regulation of embryonic development and growth. Retinoic acid is also essential for maintenance of the epithelial tissues (the skin and the mucous membranes lining the internal body surfaces), for sperm formation, and for proper functioning of the immune system.
Vitamin A is required by humans in very small amounts; the recommended intakes for adult men and women are 1,000 and 800 micrograms (μg; 1 μg = 0.000001 gram), respectively, with an extra allowance for women who are pregnant or lactating. It is assumed that every 6 μg of beta-carotene has the activity of 1 μg of retinol. (See table of the vitamins.)
Deficiency of vitamin A results in various disorders that most commonly involve the eye and the epithelial tissues. In humans, one of the earliest signs of vitamin A deficiency is night blindness (nyctalopia), the visual failure to adapt promptly from light to darkness and to see in the dark. This aspect of vision is normally dependent on rhodopsin, which maintains its photosensitivity only in the presence of vitamin A.
If the deficiency is severe and persists, especially in malnourished infants and children, a condition known as xerophthalmia may develop. In xerophthalmia, the eyes are sensitive to light, the secretion of lubricating tears is stopped, and the eyelids become swollen and sticky with pus. The mucous surfaces of the eye may become eroded in spots, allowing infection to set in, thus leading to ulceration and other destructive changes of the cornea (the transparent outer covering of the eye) and other eye structures. This condition will eventually result in blindness. Except in the later stages, when cellular damage in the cornea and associated deeper structures is too extensive, xerophthalmia can be effectively treated with vitamin A. It is usually most effective when supported by a well-balanced diet rich in protein. Although xerophthalmia is seldom encountered in countries where dairy products are readily available, it is common among poor children in Indonesia, Bangladesh, India, and the Philippines, and occurs in some parts of Africa. The global incidence has been estimated at some 500,000 new cases per year, half of which lead to blindness. In order to prevent xeropthalmia, infants in some countries are given a single large dose of vitamin A at six months of age, followed by another dose four to six months later.
Early signs of vitamin A deficiency may also be reflected in changes in the mucous membranes of the mouth, throat, and respiratory and genito-urinary passages. These lining membranes become atrophied and dry and lose their cilia, the tiny hairlike projections that normally help in clearing away foreign particles. The defective mucous surfaces have weakened resistance to bacterial invasion, and their susceptibility to various infections increases. If insufficient intake of vitamin A is prolonged, the skin may become dry and rough, with the appearance of plugs of horny material about the hair follicles (follicular hyperkeratosis).
Vitamin A excess, also called hypervitaminosis A, is a toxic condition produced by a high intake of vitamin A, generally 150,000 μg daily over a period of several months. Unlike the water-soluble vitamins (e.g., vitamin C, thiamin, riboflavin), vitamin A is soluble in fat, and a surplus in the body is not eliminated in the urine but rather is stored in the liver, where it may eventually reach toxic levels.
General signs of toxicity include nausea, coarsening and loss of hair, drying and scaling of the skin, bone pain, fatigue, and drowsiness. There may also be blurred vision and headache in adults and growth failure, enlargement of the liver, and nervous irritability in infants. Prognosis is good when vitamin A intake is reduced.
Vitamin A and vitamin A derivatives, such as the acne medication isotretinoin, can cause birth defects when taken in excess during pregnancy.
Carotene is not toxic per se, but the blood plasma may contain a high enough concentration of the pigment to impart a yellowish colour to the skin, a condition known as carotenemia.
