Von Willebrand factor (vWF, or VWF),  glycoprotein that plays an important role in stopping the escape of blood from vessels (hemostasis) following vascular injury. Von Willebrand factor (VWF) works by mediating the adherence of platelets to one another and to sites of vascular damage.
VWF binds to a protein complex made up of the glycoproteins Ib, IX, and V on the surfaces of platelets. The binding of VWF to this complex facilitates the activation and aggregation of platelets and the interaction of platelets with components such as collagen in the damaged vessel lining. These actions are important in the formation of a blood clot that halts bleeding.
VWF circulates in low concentrations in the plasma portion of blood and is made by cells in the bone marrow and by endothelial cells, which form the lining on the inside surface of blood vessels. The protein is activated by flowing blood and thus has the potential to stimulate the formation of blood clots even in the absence of vessel damage. In order to prevent unnecessary clotting, VWF is regulated by an enzyme known as ADAMTS13. When VWF is active, it exists in an unfolded form, which exposes its platelet-binding domains and thus allows it to bind to the glycoprotein complexes on platelets. However, unfolding also exposes cleavage sites for ADAMTS13, which cuts VWF into fragments that have little or no ability to bind to and activate platelets.
There are more than 300 mutations in the VWF gene that can cause von Willebrand disease, a condition characterized by reduced or delayed clot formation, which results in prolonged bleeding following vascular injury. Whereas some mutations are associated with only slightly reduced levels or activity of VWF, others are associated with drastic reductions leading to severe disease. In contrast, mutations that affect ADAMTS13 cause diseases characterized by excess clotting and have been associated with familial thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, a rare disorder involving abnormal blood coagulation.
