Sir William Maddock Bayliss,  (born May 2, 1860, Wolverhampton, Staffordshire, Eng.—died  Aug. 27, 1924, London), British physiologist, co-discoverer (with the British physiologist Ernest Starling) of hormones; he conducted pioneer research in major areas of physiology, biochemistry, and physical chemistry.
Bayliss studied at University College, London, and Wadham College, Oxford. He began a long and profitable collaboration with Starling soon after he obtained a teaching post at University College, London (1888), where he became professor of general physiology (1912–24). Their study in the 1890s of nerve-controlled contraction and dilation of blood vessels resulted in the development of an improved hemopiezometer (a device for measuring blood pressure). Observation of intestinal movements led to their discovery of the peristaltic wave, a rhythmic contraction that forces forward the contents of the intestine.
Bayliss and Starling are best known, however, for determining, in 1902, the chemical substance that stimulates the secretion of pancreatic digestive juices—the first example of hormonal action. In a famous experiment performed on anesthetized dogs, they showed that dilute hydrochloric acid, mixed with partially digested food, activates a chemical substance in the epithelial cells of the duodenum. They found that this activated substance, which they called secretin, released into the bloodstream, comes into contact with the pancreas, where it stimulates secretion of digestive juice into the intestine through the pancreatic duct. They coined the term hormone (Greek horman, “to set in motion”) to describe specific chemicals, such as secretin, that stimulate an organ at a distance from the chemical’s site of origin.
Bayliss went on to demonstrate how the enzyme trypsin was formed from inactive trypsinogen in the small intestine and to measure precisely the time required for a trypsin solution to digest specific quantities of protein.
Bayliss’ World War I investigation of wound shock led him to recommend gum-saline injections that were responsible for saving many lives. He wrote The Nature of Enzyme Action (1908) and The Vaso-Motor System (1923); his best known work is Principles of General Physiology (1915), considered to be the best text on the subject at that time. He was knighted in 1922.
