ytterbium (Yb),  chemical element, a rare-earth metal of the lanthanide series of the periodic table.
Ytterbium is the most volatile rare-earth metal. It is a soft, malleable silvery metal that will tarnish slightly when stored in air and therefore should be stored in vacuum or in an inert atmosphere when long storage time is required. It slowly oxidizes in air, forming Yb2O3; the metal is readily dissolved in diluted acids—except hydrofluoric acid (HF), in which a protective layer of YbF3 forms on the surface and impedes further chemical reaction. Ytterbium is weakly paramagnetic, having the lowest magnetic susceptibility of all the rare-earth metals.
The first concentrate of ytterbium was obtained in 1878 by Swiss chemist Jean-Charles Galissard de Marignac and named by him for the town of Ytterby, Sweden, where it (and the first discovered rare-earth element, yttrium) was found. French chemist Georges Urbain and Austrian chemist Carl Auer von Welsbach independently demonstrated in 1907–08 that Marignac’s earth was composed of two oxides, which Urbain called neoytterbia and lutetia. The elements are now known as ytterbium and lutetium. Ytterbium is among the less-abundant rare earths. It occurs in minute amounts in many rare-earth minerals such as laterite clays, xenotime, and euxenite and is found in products of nuclear fission as well.
Natural ytterbium consists of seven stable isotopes: ytterbium-174 (32.0 percent), ytterbium-172 (21.7 percent), ytterbium-173 (16.1 percent), ytterbium-171 (14.1 percent), ytterbium-176 (13 percent), ytterbium-170 (3 percent), and ytterbium-168 (0.1 percent). Not counting nuclear isomers, a total of 27 radioactive isotopes of Yb ranging in mass from 148 to 181 with half-lives ranging from 409 milliseconds (ytterbium-154) to 32.018 days (ytterbium-169) have been characterized.
Ytterbium is separated from the other rare-earth elements by solvent-solvent extraction or ion-exchange techniques. The elemental metal is prepared by the metallothermic reduction of its oxide, Yb2O3, with lanthanum metal, followed by a vacuum distillation to further purify the metal. Ytterbium exists in three allotropic (structural) forms. The α-phase, which exists below 7 °C (45 °F), is close-packed hexagonal with a = 3.8799 Å and c = 6.3859 Å at room temperature. The β-phase is face-centred cubic with a = 5.4848 Å, and it is the normal structure at room temperature. The γ-phase is body-centred cubic with a = 4.44 Å at 763 °C (1,405 °F). Ytterbium has the lowest boiling point of the rare-earth metals.
The element has little practical use beyond research. Radioactive 169Yb isotope is a source of hard X-rays useful in portable radiographic devices. It is used as a dopant in a variety of optical materials, including lenses. The metal is used in pressure sensors because its electrical resistivity is strongly pressure-dependent.
Ytterbium, like europium, is a divalent metal. A compound of ytterbium in the +2 oxidation state was first prepared in 1929 by W.K. Klemm and W. Schuth, who reduced ytterbium trichloride, YbCl3, to ytterbium dichloride, YbCl2, with hydrogen. The ion Yb2+ has also been produced by electrolytic reduction or treatment of a Yb3+ salt with sodium amalgam. The element forms a series of pale green Yb2+ salts such as ytterbium sulfate, dibromide, hydroxide, and carbonate. The pale green ytterbium ion Yb2+ is unstable in aqueous solution and reduces water readily, liberating hydrogen; it is less stable than the comparable europium ion, Eu2+, and more stable than the samarium ion Sm2+. In its predominant +3 oxidation state, ytterbium forms a series of white salts including the trisulfate and the trinitrate; the sesquioxide is also white.
