Yves Chauvin,  (born October 10, 1930, Menen, Belgium—died January 27, 2015, Tours, France),  French chemist who was corecipient, with Robert H. Grubbs and Richard R. Schrock, of the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 2005 for developing metathesis, an important chemical reaction used in organic chemistry. Chauvin offered a detailed explanation of “how metatheses reactions function and what types of metal compound act as catalysts in the reactions.”
Chauvin graduated in 1954 from the Lyon School of Chemistry, Physics, and Electronics. From 1960 he spent most of his career conducting research at the French Institute of Petroleum (IFP), where he was named research director in 1991 and honorary research director upon his retirement in 1995. Chauvin held several patents and developed valuable petrochemical industrial processes, notably in regard to homogeneous catalysis. He was elected a member of the French Academy of Sciences in 2005.
Chauvin’s work centred on metathesis, in which catalysts create and break double carbon bonds of organic molecules in a way that causes different groups of atoms in the molecules to change places with one another. The shift of groups of atoms from their original position to a new location yields new molecules with new properties. Researchers in the 1950s had found that various catalysts could be used to carry out metathesis reaction. However, since it was not understood how the catalysts worked at a molecular level, the hunt for better catalysts was purely a hit-and-miss endeavour. In the early 1970s Chauvin achieved a breakthrough when he described the mechanism by which a metal atom bound to a carbon atom in one group of atoms causes the group to shift places with a group of atoms in another molecule. Although the catalyst starts the chemical reaction in which two new carbon-carbon bonds are formed, it comes away from the chemical reaction unaffected and ready to start the reaction again. Chauvin’s work showed how metathesis could take place, but its practical application required the development of new catalysts, the first of which were discovered by Schrock (in 1990) and Grubbs (in 1992). Their work led to the development of many new products, including advanced plastics, fuel additives, and pharmaceuticals and played a role in the advancement of “green chemistry”—the design of chemical processes and products in which the need for and the generation of various hazardous substances were reduced or eliminated.
