Itsekiri, also called Jekri, Isekiri, or Ishekiri,  ethnic group inhabiting the westernmost part of the Niger River delta of extreme southern Nigeria. The Itsekiri make up an appreciable proportion of the modern towns of Sapele, Warri, Burutu, and Forcados. They speak a Yoruboid language of the Benue-Congo branch of Niger-Congo languages and share elements of culture with the Yoruba, Edo, Urhobo, and Ijo through a variety of contacts.
The Itsekiri live on the coast in an area of extensive mangrove swamps and freshwater wetlands. They are primarily fishermen and have employed traps, fences, and nets, as well as rod-and-line techniques. Women make mats and baskets from reeds and palm materials. Silversmithing has died out, and blacksmithing has declined.
Myths of origin establish that Ginuwa, the Itsekiri founder and first olu (king), was originally a prince of Benin, so that subsequent kings are descendants of the oba of Benin. Lesser chiefs once met as a council and advised the olu. Chieftaincy is being redefined in conformity with modern government, and some settlements do not participate in chieftaincy at all.
Within settlements adult males trace patrilineal descent from settlement founders. In broader context, the Itsekiri claim affiliation to groups of kin by descent in both male and female lines. Itsekiri men often take wives from neighbouring peoples, where girls unrelated to prospective husbands can more easily be found.
Living on the coast, the Itsekiri encountered Europeans before groups farther inland did. The Portuguese during the 15th century were the first to make contact, and as a result the Itsekiri established a reputation as great traders and middlemen by supplying European manufactured goods to inland peoples in exchange for slaves and palm oil from the interior. The British colonial administration eventually broke their trade monopoly in the 1890s, however, and the flourishing Itsekiri economy went into decline.
In traditional Itsekiri religion, Oritse is the supreme deity and creator of the world. Among the other deities are Umale Okun, god of the sea, and Ogun, god of iron and war. Divination may be accomplished by men skilled in consulting the Ifa oracle, and ceremonies are performed to the ancestors on various occasions.
In the 1980s the Niger River delta area inhabited by the Itsekiri was noted as a major centre of petroleum production in Nigeria. At the turn of the 21st century, the region surrounding the town of Warri was the scene of ethnic strife among Itsekiri, Urhobo, and Ijo.
