Luvale, also spelled Lubale, or Lovale, also called Lwena, or Luena,  Bantu-speaking people of northwestern Zambia and southeastern Angola. In terms of history, language, material culture, and religion, the Luvale are closely related to the Lunda and Ndembu to the northeast, who extend northward into southern Congo (Kinshasa). They are also culturally similar to the Kaonde to the east, and to the Chokwe and Luchazi, important groups of eastern Angola. Luvale have long differentiated themselves from Lunda, however; ethnic politics has led to strife between the two groups several times since the 1940s. Conflict between them is especially acute over prime agricultural lands, given the area’s generally poor soils; both groups, in turn, oppose their powerful Lozi neighbours to the south.
Seeking slaves for the Portuguese, Ovimbundu (Mbundu) traders from Angola encountered the Luvale in the upper Zambezi during the late 18th century. In exchange for guns and cloth, beads, and other trade goods, the Luvale raided their neighbours to procure slaves for the Ovimbundu. Their activities were only stopped by British conquest in the early 20th century.
The Luvale differ from other northwestern Zambian peoples in their strong lineage and clan structures. Commoner lineage groups play important social and political roles and are largely independent of the Luvale chiefs, whose formal powers are apparently limited. Matrilineal descent is observed and cross-cousin marriage preferred. Male initiation (mukanda) is an important experience, a rite of passage by which full manhood and attendant responsibilities are attained.
The Luvale are renowned fishermen; each year they export dried catfish to mining centres of the Copperbelt. They also have an active hunting tradition, although game has become scarce in much of their region, and they keep cattle. Cassava and corn (maize) are staple crops, with peanuts (groundnuts) and yams important as well.
The Luvale migrate to labour centres as far away as South Africa. Stigmatized as rustics, they have often been allowed access to only the most menial of jobs. Luvale is one of the eight official languages of Zambia.
