Anne Jane Hartley Gilbert, née Anne Jane Hartley,  (born Oct. 21, 1821, Rochdale, Lancashire, Eng.—died Dec. 2, 1904, Chicago, Ill., U.S.),  American dancer and actress, popular on the 19th-century stage for her character roles.
Anne Hartley grew up in London. At age 12 she began studying dance in the ballet school of Her Majesty’s Theatre, Haymarket. She danced in the corps at Her Majesty’s and Drury Lane theatres until 1846, when she married George H. Gilbert, a dancer and manager. From barnstorming tours through England and Ireland they earned enough money to immigrate to the United States, arriving in New York City in October 1849.
The Gilberts made their way to the Wisconsin frontier to take up farming, but the venture was a failure, and by the next year they had returned to the stage in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Later in 1850 they joined a theatrical company in Chicago for which they arranged and performed ballets. Anne soon began taking small acting roles as well, especially after an injury ended her husband’s dancing career. In 1857 she joined the acting company of John Ellsler in Cleveland, Ohio. Character parts, especially old women, became her specialty, and she attracted considerable notice in an Ellsler production of Pocahontas. In 1858, as a member of Lewis Baker’s company in Louisville, Kentucky, she played Lady Macbeth opposite Edwin Booth.
Gilbert made her New York debut in September 1864 in Finesse, presented by the company of Mrs. John Wood at the Olympic Theatre. Over the next several years she appeared with that company in Martin Chuzzlewit, A New Way to Pay Old Debts, David Copperfield, Our Mutual Friend, and other popular pieces. Under different management she was a hit in Caste at the Broadway Theatre in 1867, and later that year she played opposite Edwin Forrest in a series of Shakespearean productions. In 1869 she joined the company of Augustin Daly, under whose management she remained for 30 years, except for a period in 1877–80 when Daly was without a theatre and Gilbert appeared with A.M. Palmer’s company.
With Daly she appeared in Play, Dreams, Frou-Frou, The Big Bonanza, Man and Wife, Pique, and many other productions. Needles and Pins, which opened in November 1880, first brought together in Daly’s company Gilbert, Ada Rehan, John Drew, Jr., and James Lewis, who in their years together became known as “The Big Four,” a highly acclaimed team unrivaled in ensemble technique. After Daly’s death in 1899 Gilbert acted under Charles Frohman’s management in The Girl and the Judge and Mice and Men, among others. In October 1904, at the age of 83, she had her first starring role, in Granny, an adaptation by Clyde Fitch commissioned specifically for her. She was a great success from the play’s opening at the Lyceum Theatre in New York City, and a month later she took the production to Chicago, where it opened at Powers’ Theatre. A few days later she died in her Chicago hotel.
