Arthur Saint-Léon, original name in full Charles-Victor-Arthur Michel,  (born September 17, 1821, Paris, France—died September 2, 1870, Paris), French dancer, choreographer, violinist, and inventor of a method of dance notation, celebrated as the choreographer of the ballet Coppélia.
The son of Léon Michel, a dancer who had served as assistant to Pierre Gardel at the Paris Opéra and who had adopted the name Saint-Léon, Arthur Saint-Léon spent most of his boyhood in Stuttgart, Germany, where his father held the post of court ballet master. At a young age he proved to be a remarkably gifted dancer. He received his early training from his father and later studied under François Decombe Albert, a former principal dancer who was particularly renowned for developing virtuosity in ballet students. Although dancing would become Saint-Léon’s main focus, he also revealed in his youth an extraordinary skill as a violinist and reputedly studied under Joseph Mayseder and Niccolò Paganini.
His first major engagement as a dancer was in Brussels in 1838–39. From there he moved to Vienna and Milan, and in 1843 he was engaged in London, where he was acclaimed for his phenomenal technique. There his path crossed that of the ballerina Fanny Cerrito, who was then in the prime of her career. They found themselves ideally matched, and they became a major feature of the London seasons for several years. Together they produced the popular ballet La Vivandière in 1844, and in the following year, in Paris, they married.
From 1847 Saint-Léon and Cerrito were engaged for three seasons at the Paris Opéra, where Saint-Léon produced an expanded version of La Vivandière that was notable for its brilliant pas de six. In 1849, in Le Violon du diable, he not only excelled as choreographer and dancer, but in one dance he played the violin as he partnered Cerrito. He later produced two more ballets in which they were both featured, Stella (1850) and Pâquerette (1851).
In 1851 Saint-Léon and Cerrito separated. A year earlier Saint-Léon had succeeded Coralli as the Opéra’s ballet master, a post that he held until 1853. During that period he published a manual of his own method of dance notation, La Sténochorégraphie (1852), in which the pas de six from La Vivandière was notated in detail. This was translated into Labanotation by Ann Hutchinson Guest in 1996.
Saint-Léon held the post of ballet master in Lisbon from 1854 to 1856, after which he undertook an arduous tour of Europe with a small company headed by Louise Fleury, who became his lifelong companion.
In 1859 he was appointed ballet master of the Imperial Russian Ballet, succeeding Jules Perrot. He held that post until his death in 1870, producing a series of ballets, most successfully The Little Hump-backed Horse (1864), which was notable for its injection of Russian folklore in both the plot and the dances. It remained in the Russian repertory for many years until being superseded, in Soviet times, by a version with new choreography and music.
The Russian season being of short duration, Saint-Léon was free to spend his summers in Paris, and between 1863 and 1870 he enjoyed the unique privilege of simultaneously heading the ballet in two European capitals. In Paris he presented two ballerinas whom he had encouraged in Russia, Marfa Muraviyeva and Adele Grantzow, and he enriched the repertory of the Paris Opéra with two ballets that introduced a composer then new to the field of ballet, Léo Delibes: La Source (1866) and Coppélia (1870), a work that has become a lasting favourite.
