Augusta Maywood, original name Augusta Williams,  (born 1825, probably New York, N.Y., U.S.—died Nov. 3, 1876, Lwów, Pol., Austrian Empire [now Lviv, Ukraine]), first American ballerina to achieve international renown.
Augusta Williams was the daughter of itinerant English actors. She acquired the name of her stepfather, the theatrical manager Robert Campbell Maywood, when she was three. She began studying ballet under Paul H. Hazard in 1836, and in 1837 she made her public debut in The Maid of Cashmere (Marie Taglioni’s ballet from Daniel Auber’s opera Le Dieu et la Bayadère). She and her costar, fellow student Mary Ann Lee, were a great success. Enthusiastic audiences encouraged a rivalry between the two dancers, and in March 1838 the two appeared together in The Dew Drop, or La Sylphide, a version of Taglioni’s La Sylphide, in New York City.
In May of 1838 Maywood’s father took her to Paris, where she studied under Jean Coralli and Joseph Mazilier, respectively ballet master and principal dancer at the Paris Opéra. In November 1839 she made her Paris debut at the Opéra in Coralli’s Le Diable Boîteux and was a great popular and critical success. In 1840 she eloped with the dancer Charles Mabille. They returned to Paris and were legally married, but, their Opéra contracts broken, they were consigned over the next five years to dancing engagements in venues around Marseille and Lyon, France; Lisbon, Portugal; and other smaller cities. In 1845 Maywood left Mabille and went to Vienna, where she danced with great success at the Kärntnertor Theatre until late in 1847. After a short engagement in Budapest, she went to Milan in 1848 and made her La Scala debut. At age 23 she became prima ballerina at La Scala, where she remained until her retirement in 1862.
Among the ballets in which Maywood appeared are Giselle, La Gypsy, Faust, and, after she began touring with her own company—she was the first ballerina to do so—her own ballet versions of Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin and Filippo Termanini’s Rita Gauthier, the latter based on Alexandre Dumas fils’s La Dame aux camélias. She married Carlo Gardini, an Italian physician, journalist, and impresario, in 1858 and retired from the stage four years later. They settled in Vienna, where she opened a school of ballet. She taught until 1873 and in later years lived in northern Italy on Lake Como. Maywood died in obscurity.
