Birju Maharaj, in full Brijmohan Nath Mishra Maharaj,  (born February 4, 1937), Indian dancer, a master of the kathak form and a leading exponent of the Kalka-Bindadin gharana (community of musicians sharing a distinctive musical style) of Lucknow.
Birju Maharaj was born into a well-known kathak dancing family. He began performing as a child alongside his father, Acchan Maharaj. After the death of his father, when Birju was nine years old, he began training with his uncles, the well-known dance masters Shambhu and Lacchu Maharaj. He became a dance teacher at the age of 13, and by the time he was 28 his mastery of the dance form had won him the coveted Sangeet Natak Akademi (India’s national academy of music, arts, and dance) Award.
Known for his perfect rhythm and expressive abhinaya, or gesture language, Birju Maharaj developed a style that blends elements belonging to both his uncles as well as those belonging to his father. He claimed to have inherited the precision of footwork and the play of the face and neck from his father, and the stylized fluidity of movement from his uncles. In addition to delineating episodes from the Radha-Krishna legend, Birju Maharaj innovatively used the dance form to express himself on various non-mythological and social issues. He was especially known as a brilliant choreographer, and he helped popularize dance-dramas.
Also an accomplished singer, his renditions of thumris and dadras (forms of classical vocal music) were appreciated by many. He also played the naal, the tabla, and the violin. He composed the music and sang for two classical dance sequences in the movie Shatranj ke Khilari (1977; The Chess Players), directed by Satyajit Ray, among other film work.
Over the years Birju Maharaj toured extensively and gave many performances and lecture demonstrations. He was the recipient of numerous awards for his contributions to the performing arts, including one of the country’s highest civilian honours, the Padma Vibhushan (1986).
