Carlotta Grisi, in full Caronna Adela Giuseppina Maria Grisi,  (born June 28, 1819, Visinada, Istria, Austrian Empire [now Vizinada, Croatia]—died May 29, 1899, Saint-Jean, near Geneva, Switzerland), Italian ballerina of the Romantic era who was a muse to the choreographer and dancer Jules Perrot and to the poet Théophile Gautier; she created the title role in Giselle.
A cousin of the celebrated opera singer Giulia Grisi, Carlotta Grisi received her early training at the ballet school of La Scala in Milan. Her family was poor, and at age 10 she was withdrawn from the school to join a touring opera company. In 1834 she entered the ballet company of the San Carlo, Naples; there she attracted the attention of Jules Perrot, who molded her into a ballerina of exquisite sensitivity. Their visit to London in 1836 was followed by a longer engagement in Vienna. In 1840 they appeared—she as Madame Perrot, although they were never married—at a minor Paris theatre in a light opera, Zingaro. Perrot’s plan was to negotiate a joint engagement at the Paris Opéra, but it was Grisi alone who was engaged.
Grisi’s first creation at the Opéra was Giselle (1841), which immediately established her as the successor to the great stars of the 1830s, Marie Taglioni and Fanny Elssler. It also marked the beginning of a lifelong friendship with the poet and critic Théophile Gautier, who, in collaboration with the dramatist Jules-Henri Vernoy de Saint-Georges, had written the scenario of Giselle. He also later wrote the scenario of La Péri (1843), in which she repeated her former triumph. Grisi remained the undisputed principal ballerina of the Opéra until 1849, creating roles in François Decombe Albert’s La Jolie Fille de Gand (1842), Joseph Mazilier’s Le Diable à quatre (1845) and Paquita (1846), and Perrot’s La Filleule des fées (1849).
The terms of her Paris engagement did not prevent her from appearing at Her Majesty’s Theatre in London, where she danced in Giselle and Le Diable à quatre and also created leading roles in Perrot’s dramatic masterpiece La Esmeralda (1844) and Paul Taglioni’s Electra (1849) and Les Métamorphoses (1850). In London she was also featured in two  divertissements, Perrot’s Pas de quatre (1845) and Paul Taglioni’s Les Graces (1850). Her last London creation was the mime role of Ariel in Fromental Halévy’s opera La Tempesta (1850), in which she made a striking foil to the Caliban of the celebrated bass Luigi Lablache.
The last phase of Grisi’s career took place in St. Petersburg, at a time when Perrot was ballet master. She danced there from 1850 to 1853, appearing not only in roles she had created elsewhere but also in three new works by her former teacher, The Naiad and the Fisherman (1851), The War of the Women (1852), and Gazelda (1853). She last appeared onstage in Warsaw in 1853.
Grisi never married, but she had two daughters, one by Perrot and the other by Prince Leon Radziwill. She retired near Geneva, where she was frequently visited by Gautier. Immortalized by the creation of Giselle, Grisi as an artiste bridged the two branches of Romantic ballet that had been established by the ethereal Taglioni and the dramatic Elssler.
