Charles Weidman, in full Charles Edward Weidman, Jr.,  (born July 22, 1901, Lincoln, Nebraska, U.S.—died  July 15, 1975, New York, New York), major innovator of American modern dance, noted for the abstract, rhythmic pantomime he developed and employed in his comic and satiric works.
Weidman became interested in dance after seeing Ruth St. Denis and Ted Shawn perform, and after studying with Elinor Frampton in Lincoln he joined them and became a leading Denishawn dancer, excelling in such popular character roles as the crapshooter in Shawn’s “Danse américaine”. In the late 1920s he left Denishawn and with Doris Humphrey founded the Humphrey-Weidman school and company, which endured until 1945. During their association he occasionally aided Humphrey in her pure-movement choreography, notably the trilogy “New Dance” (1936), and often performed in her dances; characterization and pantomime, however, remained his main interest.
“The Happy Hypocrite” (1931), based on Max Beerbohm’s story of the same name, was his first major work. His version of Voltaire’s Candide (1933) was one of the earliest full-evening compositions in U.S. modern dance. Although judged less than a total success, “Candide” was notable for its pantomime performed in formal dance structure. In later works Weidman so fully integrated dance and pantomime that distinct sequences of each were no longer recognizable. Weidman was also one of the first to expand modern dance thematically from its concern with the individual to include observations on society. “On My Mother’s Side” (1940) and its sequel “And Daddy Was a Fireman” (1943) presented amusing, penetrating portraits of his ancestors. “Flickers” (1942), in which Weidman played Rudolph Valentino, was a comic view of silent films. In other works his subject was less humorous. The “Lynch Town” portion of his “Atavisms” concerned mob violence in the South, and “This Passion” contained a sequence derived from a famous murder case of the day. Although most of Weidman’s successful works were topical, “Opus 51” (1938) and “Kinetic Pantomime” (1934) were themeless.
Weidman’s other activities and contributions to dance were varied and numerous. Between 1932 and 1934 he did extensive choreography for Broadway plays and revues, including As Thousands Cheer, I’d Rather Be Right, and, with Humphrey, School for Husbands. Like Ted Shawn, Weidman encouraged male dancers and brought a masculine balance to the Humphrey-Weidman Company. Following Humphrey’s retirement from performing in 1945, he founded his own school. In 1948 he formed the Theatre Dance Company, for which he created “Fables for Our Time”, based on James Thurber’s book; it is often considered his masterpiece. After teaching on the West Coast during the late 1950s, he joined the artist Mikhail Santaro in New York City to form the Expression of Two Arts Theatre, which presented experimental productions blending the resources of the graphic and choreographic arts. In his final years he combined the creation of new dances with revivals of many of his most popular works.
