Country dance,   genre of social dance for several couples, the characteristic form of folk and courtly dances of the British Isles. In England after about 1550, the term country dancing referred to a dance of the upper classes; similar dances, usually called traditional, existed contemporaneously among country people and persisted in popular tradition.
Country dances are performed in three characteristic formations: (1) circular, for an indefinite number of couples (“round” dances), (2) “longways” set, double-file line for an indefinite number of couples, men on one side, women on the other, and (3) geometric formations (e.g., squares, triangles) or sets, usually for two, three, or four couples. The dancers execute a succession of varied patterns of figures. In “progressive-longways” dances, continuous interchange brings a new leading couple to the head of the set with each repetition of the pattern of figures. Round and longways dances predominate in the folk tradition. Longways and geometric sets are more frequent among courtly dances.
The patterns of the English country dances are similar to those of Irish set dances and of Scottish country dances such as reels and strathspeys. The step work of English dances, however, is simpler and the styling less formal.
Country dances from England were assimilated into the traditional dance of other countries—e.g., Portugal and Denmark. English colonists carried them to North America, where they began a new folk-dance tradition as the “contra,” or longways dance (e.g., the Virginia reel), and, in modified form, as the American square dance.
Courtly dances also were exported from England. Longways and geometric sets appeared in Italy by the 15th century. The 18th-century French contredanse was at first based on English country dances and later evolved into independent varieties; by the 19th century it had spread to Germany and back to England. Although country dance originated as folk dance, the historical sources for its figures and music are urban and courtly: Italian (15th–16th century), English (16th–19th century), and French (18th century). The chief English source is John Playford’s The English Dancing Master of 1650, continued in additional volumes until 1728 and critically revised in 1957 by M.J. Dean-Smith.
Cecil Sharp (1859–1924), founder of the English Folk Dance Society, made extensive collections of rural country dances at a time when they were in danger of dying out and was largely responsible for their 20th-century revival. The Royal Scottish Country Dance Society has published traditional dances dating back to the 17th century and modern dances in traditional style. Popular country dances include Nonesuch, Hunsdon House, Morpeth Rant, Corn Rigs, and Old Mole. 
