Cynthia Gregory,  (born July 8, 1946, Los Angeles, California, U.S.), American ballerina who was noted principally for classical roles.
Gregory began taking ballet lessons at the age of five. She later studied with Michel Panaieff, Robert Rossellat, and Carmelita Maracci, and while still a child she appeared in productions of the Los Angeles Civic Light Opera and the Santa Monica Civic Ballet. In 1961 she joined the corps de ballet of the San Francisco Ballet, and in 1962 she became a soloist.
In 1965 Gregory moved to New York City and won a place in the American Ballet Theatre, where she became a soloist in 1966 and principal dancer in 1967. She danced roles in such classic romantic works as Giselle, Les Sylphides, The Sleeping Beauty, and Swan Lake. Her Odette/Odile in David Blair’s version of Swan Lake in 1967 was hailed by critics, and over the next few years she made the role virtually her own. She demonstrated an equal gift for dramatic roles in such modern works as Antony Tudor’s Dark Elegies, Undertow, and Lilac Garden; Michael Smuin’s Gartenfest, Schubertiade, and The Eternal Idol; José Limón’s The Moor’s Pavane; and Alvin Ailey’s The River.
At the end of 1975 she left the American Ballet Theatre suddenly, but after nearly a year of quiet retirement in California she rejoined the company in October 1976 and quickly regained her prima ballerina standing. Her performance in a revival of Agnes de Mille’s Fall River Legend in May 1979 was greeted as a triumph. Gregory was the recipient of a Dance Magazine award in 1975, and she became a permanent guest artist with the Cleveland San Jose Ballet in 1986. She retired from the American Ballet Theatre in 1991, having received numerous awards.
Gregory remained involved with dance. She served as artistic adviser to the Nevada Ballet Theatre and its academy and occasionally taught. In addition, she chaired Career Transitions for Dancers (its services were integrated into The Actors Fund in 2015). Gregory published the books Ballet Is the Best Exercise (1986) and Cynthia Gregory Dances Swan Lake (1990).
