Dance criticism,  the descriptive analysis of a dance performance that is printed, broadcast, or transmitted electronically.
Dance is among the most ephemeral of all forms of art, and until the use of photography and the development of useful dance notation in the late 19th century, most of the very few records of dance performance were in books and journalistic reviews. Valuable insights communicated by knowledgeable, objective observers increase the understanding of choreography and technique among those who have not seen a performance, and such insights frequently add layers of meaning for those who were in attendance. In the 21st century, objective criticism flourishes where a free press is the norm; in other places, dance reviews may be written by the choreographer or by a professional writer paid by someone connected with the performance. This article considers writings about Western concert dance traditions, especially ballet and modern dance, and focuses on criticism that is available in English.
Critical aesthetic concepts began to be formulated by Classical philosophers as early as the 5th century bc. For Plato, who believed that all art is imitation, dance had artistic and moral value (Republic). In Laws Plato expanded his general theory of imitation and also discussed dance in relation to education, health, and virtue, claiming that certain mimetic images could provide models for virtuous living. Aristotle, in Poetics, furthered the imitation theory and stated, “Rhythm alone, without harmony, is the means in the dancer’s imitation.” Accordingly, a dance gains harmony when performed to music and language when accompanied by poetry or prose. He maintained that all performing arts are conveyed by rhythm, harmony, and language, either singly or in combination. Aristotle also formulated the basis of good design: that which establishes a complete whole to which all parts are integral. The Greek rhetorician Lucian, writing in the 2nd century ad, discussed intellectual and technical aspects of the art in The Dance, portraying beautiful dances as the products of beautiful souls.
Most dance writings in the Middle Ages came from the Bible, ancient and contemporary philosophy, and Christian Church Fathers. For example, St. Augustine sanctioned dance only in praise of God, but Thomas Aquinas believed that the pleasure derived from viewing any beautiful images could enhance spiritual well-being.
Writers of the Italian Renaissance grounded their work in what actual dancers did, and they established a pattern that continues to the present day: dance criticism flourishes in conjunction with centres of vital performance activity. In Italy of the 15th and 16th centuries, manuals by the itinerant dancing masters Guglielmo Ebreo, Domenico da Piacenza, and Fabrizio Caroso established artistic principles and body positions that were developed as ballet. The artistocratic writer Baldassare Castiglione’s Il Cortegiano (1528; The Courtier) spread throughout Europe in translation; in this volume he identified grace, effortlessness, and beauty as essential qualities in the dance.
With the marriage of the well-bred Italian Caterina de’ Medici (in France, Catherine de Médicis) to the future French king Henry II in 1533, the principal dance cynosure moved from Italy to France. Over the next half-century Catherine produced the Valois festivals, using theatrical spectacles to promote her political agenda. Among the works produced was the seminal Ballet comique de la reine (1581; “The Queen’s Comic Ballet”) by Balthazar de Beaujoyeulx, which unified multiple aspects of performance, including stage design, plot, spectacle, and dance; the work was a milestone in the development of ballet. In 1588 a monument of dance writing, Orchésographie by the French Jesuit priest Thoinot Arbeau, was published; this compendium of dances with detailed instructions and musical indications became a valuable source for later scholars.
The French king Louis XIV established Paris’s Royal Academy of Dance (1661), the first national school. Throughout the 17th century the choreographer, chronicler, and dance theorist Claude-François Ménéstrier, another Jesuit, collected libretti, described performances, and applied Aristotelian principles to rules and guidelines for ballet, which he set forth in Traité des tournois, joustes, carrousels, et autres spectacles publics (1669; “Treatise on Tournaments, Jousts, Tilts, and Other Public Spectacles”) and Des Ballets anciens et modernes selon les règles du théâtre (1682; “Ancient and Modern Ballets According to the Rules of Theatre”). In a conscious deviation from Classical models, Ménéstrier believed that unity of design was essential to dance, more so than unity of action, time, and place.
Eighteenth-century philosophers weighed in on the subject. The French encyclopaedist Denis Diderot maintained that technical facility was not enough to sustain the vitality of dance; he also recommended that dances portray bourgeois characters, rather than the usual gods, goddesses, and aristrocrats. The Scottish philosopher and economist Adam Smith introduced the notion that dance could be abstract, with no subject other than movement. The French writer Abbé Jean-Baptiste Dubos wrote firsthand accounts of performances he attended. A strong Milan-Paris-London axis for dance and writing about dance was in place early in the century, and a new form called ballet d’action evolved, in which the spoken word was slowly eliminated from dance productions. The London-based John Weaver’s publications made him one of the most distinguished writers of the period and the first dance critic to write comprehensively in English; his notable books include An Essay Towards an History of Dancing (1712), Anatomical and Mechanical Lectures upon Dancing (1721), and The History of Mimes and Pantomimes (1728). Weaver also wrote on dancing in three issues of The Spectator (no. 67, 334, and 370). The great French choreographer Jean-Georges Noverre, in the widely known Lettres sur la danse et sur les ballets (1760), claimed that ballet should unite dance and mime.
By mid-century in northern Europe, the Sturm and Drang movement had begun to unfold, providing roots for Romanticism, a force that would mesmerize artists and audiences for more than a hundred years. Romanticism juxtaposed dual worlds of reality and dream, natural and supernatural, providing a dichotomy that encompassed formalism and expressiveness in the 19th-century dance aesthetic. A great stride in technique was developed in the 1820s—pointe work, or dancing on the tips of the toes. The exact origins are unknown, but early champions were the pioneering Romantic choreographer Felippo Taglioni and his daughter, the ballerina Marie Taglioni. The advent of pointe work was perfectly matched to the portrayal of the otherworldly characters—for example, sylphs, willies (from Giselle, ghosts of maidens who were betrayed by their fiancés), and fairies—that filled Romantic ballet stages.
These advances in ballet technique and theatricality were met with a new kind of journalism: that of the professional dance critic. The French journalist and poet Théophile Gautier, who wrote primarily for Paris’s La Presse, established the profile. Gautier was a keen reporter who knew the theatre well through his friendship with ballerina Carlotta Grisi and his composition of ballet libretti, chief of which was for Giselle. Gautier wrote knowingly of the era’s great ballerinas—Taglioni, Grisi, Fanny Elssler, Fanny Cerrito, and Lucile Grahn—as well as the less recognized; his work forms a detailed chronicle from 1836 until his death in 1872. Other important European centres of Romantic ballet were Copenhagen and St. Petersburg, and insightful dance writing also was produced by the French poets Stéphane Mallarmé and Paul Valéry.
