Folk dance,  generally, a type of dance that is a vernacular, usually recreational, expression of a past or present culture. The term folk dance was accepted until the mid-20th century. Then this and other categories of dance were questioned and their distinctions became subject to debate.
For the purposes of this article, the designation folk dance will be used for convenience, without the extended discussion of terms that a more scholarly treatment would require. It is important, however, to examine other ways to write and think about the types of dances that might be characterized as traditional. It is also essential to note that people in many non-Western cultures do not themselves describe any activity as dance in the way that English speakers do. This article examines possible ways to look at and define folk dance, how various groups might conceive of their dances, and how the study of folk dance was born and developed. See also dance, for a general treatment of dance as an art form. For further treatment of the folk arts, see folk music; folklore; folk literature; folk art.
Logically speaking, the adjective folk should modify the noun dance to indicate a certain kind of dance and dancing and perhaps the style or some other distinguishing feature of the dance or performance. It should also imply who the performers are. However, the term folk dance, which has been in common use since the late 19th century, along with its parent term folklore, which was coined in 1846, is not as descriptive or uncontroversial as it might seem. Much of the problem lies in the attitudes and purposes of early scholars and their audience.
Usually, the designation folk was used by those who did not consider themselves to belong to the folk and were confident that they knew which other people were the folk. Some of these observers described folk communities with condescension as peasants, simple or quaint people who were illiterate and unselfconscious, carrying on supposedly unsophisticated and ancient traditions. Such writers concluded that “true” folk dances were created anonymously and transmitted from person to person. Many scholars of the late 19th and early 20th centuries postulated a sort of Darwinian social evolution that passed from imagined beginnings through existing folk dances to arrive at modern recreational dances. This attitude, which fell out of favour by the 1930s, was part of a larger worldview that sometimes went so far as to place certain other groups of people farther down the human evolutionary tree from themselves and their peers.
Not surprisingly, a backlash developed, and since the middle of the 20th century the word folk has often been avoided because of the condescending attitude its use is thought to represent. Many cultural groups around the world demanded that their performing arts not be characterized by the term. Thus, some archives and organizations found it expedient to change the word folk to traditional in their names. For example, in the 1960s the Folk Music Archives at Indiana University was renamed Archives of Traditional Music. Similarly, in 1980 the International Folk Music Council, a nonprofit organization supported by UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization), changed its name to International Council for Traditional Music. Its study section on dance broadened in scope from folk dance to ethnochoreology, the study of all dance forms in a culture.
Although many academics in the 21st century avoid any use of the word folk because of its past misuse and possible offensiveness, those who do accept the term often mean “traditional,” “authentic,” or “from olden times.” Those who want to avoid implying that culture is static may refuse to use any such categorical term.
The descriptors traditional and authentic are problematic too when applied to folk dances that are self-consciously developed, revived, and restaged for public display in order to reinforce a national identity, to attract tourists, or both. Examples include dances performed by the Bayanihan Philippine National Folk Dance Company and the numerous folklórico groups from Mexico. Neither does the word traditional comfortably identify dances that are transplanted from one context to another, such as the European folk dances performed by the Matachines Society of the Yaqui Indians of southern Arizona in the United States and Sonora, Mexico. Nor do these terms include the fusions of folk dances from two or more cultures into new forms that represent newly established communities, such as the multicultural Israeli folk dances and the fused traditions of the Métis of Canada. These are discussed below.
Of major significance, a point that is critical to the understanding of folk dance is the following fact: folk dance is not a universal genre of dance. When folk dances are compared from one culture to another, they have in common no universal movement, figure, form, style, or function. Neither does a specific movement, figure, form, style, or function identify a dance as a folk dance. The simplest approach to definition might be to say that folk dances are those dances identified with and performed by folk dancers. By the same reasoning, folk dancers are those persons who perform folk dances.
Yet these circular definitions are inadequate. Some persons who perform what outsiders define as folk dances do not themselves identify their dances as folk dances. And some persons who perform such dances do not identity themselves as folk dancers. Others reject the word folk entirely, as having nothing to do with who they are or what dances they do.
The matachines dances are a good example of how fluid the definitions of folk dance and folk dancers are. The Yaqui Indian Matachines Society is a group in northern Mexico and southern Arizona whose members continue to observe a sacred vow to dance their devotions for the Virgin Mary with medieval European folk dances taught to them after 1617 by Jesuit padres. These Yaqui do not think of their dances as folk dances, nor do they think of themselves as folk dancers, although persons from the outside readily make those assignments. Although the origins of the matachines dances of other parts of the Americas are similar, the dances themselves are different. To complicate matters further, in parts of Europe there are matachines folk dance groups that have nothing in common with the Yaqui society or the other American groups. What the dances are, who performs them, and what insiders and outsiders call the dances and the dancers—all these designations vary, although the dances are known by the same name.
