Glen Tetley, in full Glenford Andrew Tetley, Jr.,  (born February 3, 1926, Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.—died January 26, 2007, West Palm Beach, Fla.), American dancer, choreographer, and ballet director, whose performances and compositions integrated elements of modern dance and classical ballet.
Tetley began his dance career relatively late for a professional performer. In 1946, dissatisfied with his premedical studies at Franklin and Marshall College in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, he moved to New York City and began training in modern dance with Hanya Holm and Martha Graham. He soon expanded his studies to include classical ballet, enrolling at the Metropolitan Opera Ballet School to work with Margaret Craske and Antony Tudor. The diversity of Tetley’s training was reflected in his performance career. Between 1946 and 1962 he danced in musical productions on Broadway—including Kiss Me, Kate (1948) and Juno (1959)—and performed for television, as well as with dance companies such as the Joffrey Ballet, the Martha Graham Company, and the American Ballet Theatre.
Having achieved critical acclaim as a performer, Tetley shifted his attention to choreography. In 1962 he formed his own company and created Pierrot Lunaire, a work focusing on the interaction of three commedia dell’arte characters and set to the atonal song cycle of the same name by the experimental composer Arnold Schoenberg. Its success gained Tetley a position as guest artist with the Netherlands Dance Theatre in The Hague. He staged several innovative works with the Dutch company, including The Anatomy Lesson (1964), which was based on the 17th-century Dutch master Rembrandt’s painting Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp, and Embrace Tiger and Return to Mountain (1968), which incorporated movements from the ancient Chinese exercise T’ai Chi Ch’uan. Tetley became the codirector of the company in 1969, the same year that he disbanded his own company. Mutations (1970) was among the most-discussed works he created during this period, largely because of Tetley’s controversial use of nudity.
Voluntaries (1973), staged for the Stuttgart Ballet in Germany to honour its deceased director, John Cranko, led to Tetley’s next position. From 1974 to 1976 he served as director of the company.
In addition to maintaining his official positions, Tetley often worked as a freelance choreographer, staging works with most of the major dance companies throughout the world. Field Figures (1970) and Dances of Albion—Dark Night: Glad Day (1980) were staged for the Royal Ballet in England. Le Sacre du printemps (1973; “The Rite of Spring”) was produced for the Munich State Opera. The Tempest (1979) and Murderer Hope of Women (1983) are among several works he composed for the English company Ballet Rambert. Contredances (1979) was first performed by the American Ballet Theatre, and Revelation and Fall (1984) debuted with the Australian Dance Theatre. After creating Alice (1986) for the National Ballet of Canada, Tetley worked as an artistic associate with the company from 1987 to 1989. He choreographed more than 60 works during his lengthy career, and his later ballets include Amores (1997) and Lux in Tenebris (1999).
Because of his peripatetic career, Tetley was highly influential in both European and American dance circles, and his work helped to bring about a synthesis of modern dance and classical ballet. His creative staging, which often incorporated set pieces in innovative ways, and the daring, often sexual, subject matter he addressed sometimes sparked debate among critics and audiences. Yet Tetley was nearly universally praised for the passion and strong physicality of his work, as well as for his incredible productivity as a choreographer.
