Heinrich Biber, in full Heinrich Ignaz Franz von Biber,  (baptized  Aug. 12, 1644, Wartenberg, Bohemia, Austrian Habsburg domain [now Stráž pod Ralskem, Cz.Rep.]—died  May 3, 1704, Salzburg [Austria]), Bohemian composer, one of the outstanding violin virtuosos of the Baroque era.
In 1668 Biber earned his first position, that of valet and musician to the bishop of Olomouc, in the Moravian town of Kroměříž. He left without permission in 1670 to enter the service of the archbishop of Salzburg, but he regularly sent music back to the court at Kroměříž, where most of his manuscripts still reside.
Biber spent most of his life at the Salzburg court, rising from valet (1670) to deputy kapellmeister (1679) to kapellmeister and dean of the choir school (1684). He was ennobled by Emperor Leopold in 1690. Biber’s works were known throughout Europe, and he earned a high reputation as a violin virtuoso, although he is not known to have toured as a performer.
At the Salzburg Cathedral, Biber had at his disposal large instrumental and choral forces, for which he regularly composed sacred and dramatic music. He showed particular mastery of contemporary counterpoint, choral writing, and variation techniques. In 1682, for the 1,100th anniversary of the founding of the archbishopric, he composed a mass (Missa Salisburgensis) that used seven divided ensembles positioned throughout the cathedral.
He wrote many pieces for the violin, particularly sonatas for violin and clavier and sonatas for solo violin with continuo, that are well constructed and of some technical difficulty. They show development of the violin’s resources, especially the use of scordatura (abnormal tuning for special effects). He also wrote for varied instrumental ensembles in the current genres, such as sonatas and partitas.
His best-known works are the 15 Mystery Sonatas (also known as the Rosary Sonatas) on events in the life of Mary, for violin and continuo, and his Passacaglia in G Minor for unaccompanied violin. His works for the stage include at least two operas, of which one survives, Chi la dura, la vince (1687; “They Who Endure Will Win”).
Biber and his wife, Maria Weiss, had four surviving children, three of whom became musicians. His sons, Anton Heinrich (1679–1742) and Karl Heinrich (1681–1749), were both violinists at the Salzburg court; Karl eventually became kapellmeister. His daughters, Maria Cäcilia (born 1674) and Anna Magdalena (1677–1742), both entered convents as nuns; Anna took the name Maria Rosa Henrica and became director of the choir and chapel in the Benedictine convent of Nonnberg.
