John Weaver,  (baptized July 21, 1673, Shrewsbury, Shropshire, England—died September 24, 1760, Shrewsbury), dancer, ballet master, choreographer, and theorist known as the father of English pantomime.
Like his father, a dance teacher at Shrewsbury, Weaver began his career as a dance master in the town. In 1700 he went to London, where he became a specialist in comic roles. In his initial choreographic effort, The Tavern Bilkers (1702), a burlesque and the first English pantomime ballet, he used Italian commedia dell’arte characters such as Harlequin and Scaramouche. At the time, dance was generally considered a form of amusement, but Weaver viewed dance as more than entertainment. In his outstanding serious work The Loves of Mars and Venus (1717) he combined an interest in classical literature with the drama that characterized Italian pantomime and English theatre. The story was told through gesture and movement without spoken or sung explanation. Because of the experimental nature of the ballet, its libretto appeared concurrently; it was the first formal libretto published for a dance drama.
Weaver continued to explore ancient mythology and the narrative potential of dance in his subsequent ballets, such as Orpheus and Eurydice (1718) and The Judgement of Paris (1733). Because of commercial pressures and changing tastes, Weaver’s later productions did not maintain a purist approach to movement as a means of expression. Instead, song and speech were incorporated, albeit to a limited extent. Because his best productions featured plots and acting instead of the then-popular displays of technical virtuosity, Weaver was an important precursor of Jean-Georges Noverre and Gasparo Angiolini, innovative choreographers who, later in the 18th century, would demand unity of plot, choreography, and decor in their ballets d’action.
Weaver’s writings on dance are of major significance. His Orchesography (1706) was the first English version of the French choreographer Raoul-Auger Feuillet’s Chorégraphie. The work included the most widely adopted dance notation system of the period. Its introduction to an English-speaking audience enabled more widespread communication of dance compositions and promoted a uniform set of standards in dance throughout England. A Small Treatise of Time and Cadence in Dancing (1706) was an expansion of the musical section in Orchesography. In An Essay Towards an History of Dancing (1712) Weaver drew from diverse sources to document the history of dance from its ancient traditions to the 18th century and argued for dance’s importance as a means of expression and a sign of social accomplishment. Weaver also wrote about the physical aspects of dance in Anatomical and Mechanical Lectures upon Dancing (1721), in which he emphasized the need to understand human anatomy in order to use the body as a tool of expression. Weaver’s contributions helped to establish dance in England as a narrative form and a respected method of artistic expression.
