John Neumeier,  (born February 24, 1942, Milwaukee, Wisconsin), American ballet dancer, choreographer, and director who choreographed and directed some 120 ballets over the course of his career.
Neumeier studied dance in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and Chicago. During and after the completion of his academic studies at Marquette University (B.A., 1961), he danced (1960–62) with the Sybil Shearer Company in Chicago. He studied ballet in Copenhagen and at the Royal Ballet School in London, where his dancing caught the attention of Marcia Haydée. He was hired to dance with the Stuttgart Ballet by its South African director, John Cranko. In 1969 Neumeier was appointed director of ballet in Frankfurt, Germany, where he was noted for his reinterpretations of classics. From Frankfurt he moved (1973) to the Hamburg Ballet, where he became artistic director and chief choreographer. In addition, Neumeier was made the general manager of the Hamburg State Opera in 1996.
Neumeier’s first ballet for Hamburg was Romeo and Juliet (1974), set to the music of Sergey Prokofiev. It was Neumeier’s initial offering in a series of works based loosely on Shakespeare that grew to include A Midsummer Night’s Dream (1977), with music by Felix Mendelssohn, György Ligeti, and others; Othello (1985), featuring music by Arvo Pärt and others; As You Like It (1985), with music by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart; Hamlet (1997; created in 1985 for the Royal Danish Ballet and originally called Amleth), with music by Sir Michael Tippett; and VIVALDI or What You Will (1996), with music by Antonio Vivaldi. The ballets for which Neumeier was perhaps best known were his Saint Matthew Passion (1981), with music by J.S. Bach; Lady of the Camellias (1978), with music by Frédéric Chopin; and Peer Gynt (1989), featuring music by Alfred Schnittke.
At the culmination of each season, Neumeier and his troupe held an event called Ballet Days (established in 1975), a weeklong festival at which they presented a compendium of the works produced during the season. Ballet Days concluded with a Nijinsky Gala, named for the great Russian dancer Vaslav Nijinsky, whose personality and art were a long-held passion of Neumeier’s. By his own account, his fascination with Nijinsky began when he was 11 years old and happened upon Anatole Bourman’s The Tragedy of Nijinsky (1936). The book piqued Neumeier’s interest, which only grew as he matured. In addition to collecting memorabilia related to Nijinsky and the Ballets Russes, Neumeier created three so-called biographical ballets, Vaslav (1979), with music by Bach; Nijinsky (2000), with music by Robert Schumann and others; and Le Pavillon d’Armide (2009), with reference to Michel Fokine’s ballet of the same name and music by Nikolay Tcherepnin. In 2006 he established the Foundation John Neumeier, which had as its mission the cataloging and preservation of both his extensive dance collection and the materials and notes he had kept over the length of his prolific career.
In 2013 Neumeier celebrated 40 years as director of the Hamburg Ballet. During Neumeier’s tenure that company had become one of the leading European troupes, touring as well throughout Japan, Russia, and North America. Among his many innovations were the founding of the School of the Hamburg Ballet (1978) and the launching of the National Youth Ballet (2011).
