Justin Peck,  (born 1987, Washington, D.C.), American ballet dancer and choreographer who earned acclaim as a soloist but was better known for crafting ballets in which complex structures frame clearly articulated classical steps. He became resident choreographer of New York City Ballet (NYCB) in 2014.
Peck grew up in San Diego. As a youngster, he traveled annually with his family to New York City. During one visit he saw tap dancer Savion Glover perform. That experience prompted Peck to study the dance form along with musical theatre. At age 13 Peck appeared in San Diego as a supernumerary in a weeklong run of American Ballet Theatre’s (ABT’s) Giselle. ABT’s strong male principals inspired Peck to begin classical training at California Ballet. At age 15 Peck began attending NYCB’s School of American Ballet (SAB). As an SAB student, Peck studied music and attended nightly performances that showcased NYCB cofounder George Balanchine’s choreography. Those opportunities allowed Peck to hone his musicality and sharpen his eye for structure and pattern. In 2006 Peck became an NYCB apprentice, and he joined the company’s corps de ballet the following year. He was promoted to the rank of soloist in 2013.
While Peck excelled as a dancer, he achieved stardom as a choreographer. In 2009 he created his first work, A Teacup Plunge, for the Columbia Ballet Collaborative. That year he also participated in the New York Choreographic Institute, an NYCB affiliate founded in 2000. Then, in 2011, Peter Martins, NYCB ballet master in chief, awarded Peck his first choreographic residency. Peck produced six works for the company in the following two years. Notable among them were Year of the Rabbit (2012), an ensemble piece set to the music of Sufjan Stevens, and Paz de la Jolla (2013), an exuberant number for 18 dancers inspired by California’s beach culture.
In 2014 Peck assumed the post of NYCB’s resident choreographer. By the end of 2015, he had more than two dozen creations to his credit, including Everywhere We Go (2014), a second collaboration with Stevens, and the commissions Debonair (2014) for Pacific Northwest Ballet and Heatscape (2015) for Miami City Ballet. In addition, NYCB premiered his ‘Rōdē,ō: Four Dance Episodes and New Blood in 2015. Peck’s pieces not only brought him critical acclaim but also attracted a new audience of twentysomethings to the ballet. Peck made his Broadway debut in 2018, choreographing the revival of Rodgers and Hammerstein’s Carousel. He won a Tony Award that year for his work.

Peck’s accomplishments in the dance world and beyond earned him the moniker wunderkind. He was the subject of filmmaker Jody Lee Lipes’s Ballet 422 (2014), a documentary that followed Peck for two months as he created NYCB’s 422nd original dance, Paz de la Jolla. That year 2wice Arts Foundation also partnered with Peck and NYCB principal Daniel Ulbricht to develop the iPad app Passe-Partout. The program allowed users to remix movement phrases choreographed by Peck and performed by him and Ulbricht. Peck, whose career showed no sign of slowing down, remained an NYCB soloist; he was the second dance maker to hold the position of resident choreographer.
