Dame Margot Fonteyn, original name in full Margaret Evelyn Hookham, married name Margot Fonteyn Arias,  (born May 18, 1919, Reigate, Surrey, England—died February 21, 1991, Panama City, Panama), outstanding ballerina of the English stage whose musicality, technical perfection, and precisely conceived and executed characterizations made her an international star. She was the first homegrown English ballerina, and she became an iconic and much-loved figure, particularly after she was professionally paired with Russian dancer Rudolf Nureyev.
As a young teenager, she studied dance in Shanghai with George Goncharov and then in London with Serafima Astafieva and at the Sadler’s Wells Ballet school. She debuted with the Vic-Wells Ballet in 1934. When Alicia Markova left the company the following year, Fonteyn took over many of her classical roles, including Giselle, and became a leading danseuse of the Vic-Wells Ballet. In 1939 she danced Aurora in a revival of The Sleeping Beauty; her interpretation is still considered the definitive Aurora of the era.
Apart from the classical repertoire, she created many roles in such ballets by Frederick Ashton as Horoscope, Symphonic Variations, Daphnis and Chloë, and Ondine (considered by many to be her greatest creation) and gave outstanding performances in revivals of Michel Fokine’s The Firebird and Petrushka. Other ballets associated with her career are Kenneth MacMillan’s Romeo and Juliet (1965) and John Cranko’s Poème de l’extase (1970) and, with Nureyev as partner, Swan Lake, Raymonda, and Le Corsaire pas de deux, and other classics, in addition to new ballets created especially for them.
After 1959 she appeared with the Royal Ballet as guest artist and also toured extensively. Her celebrated partnership with Nureyev began in the early 1960s and is generally considered to have enriched her characterizations. In 1955 she married Roberto Emilio Arias, former Panamanian ambassador to Great Britain. She became president of the Royal Academy of Dancing in 1954 and was created Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in 1956. Several of her ballet performances were filmed, including Swan Lake (1937 and 1966), Romeo and Juliet (1966), and Sleeping Beauty (1959). In the late 1970s, as she began to curtail her performing, she turned to television presentations. She also wrote a number of books, among them Margot Fonteyn: Autobiography (1975), A Dancer’s World (1979), and The Magic of Dance (1979). She remained active in the world of dance until her death.
