Merrill Ashley, original name Linda Michelle Merrill,  (born December 2, 1950, St. Paul, Minnesota, U.S.), American ballerina who served as principal dancer for New York City Ballet (NYCB) in the last quarter of the 20th century.
Ashley was raised in Rutland, Vermont, and began studying ballet at age seven. In 1964, when she was 13, she received a Ford Foundation scholarship and began to study full time at the School of American Ballet, the official school of NYCB. In 1967 she joined NYCB’s corps de ballet—and changed her name because the company already had a member named Linda Merrill—and before long she was dancing solo roles in addition to appearing with the corps. Ashley officially became a soloist in 1974 and began adding more demanding choreography to her repertoire. She was promoted to the rank of principal dancer in 1977. George Balanchine, the company’s founder, began casting Ashley in more lyrical ballets to broaden her range, and in 1980 he created the second of the two ballets he choreographed for her, Ballade, to display this softer, more romantic side. Other Balanchine ballets that especially demonstrated her artistry include Concerto Barocco, Donizetti Variations, Gounod Symphony, and Chaconne.
Besides dancing with NYCB, Ashley formed her own group, Merrill Ashley and Dancers, which toured in 1980 and 1981. She also performed as a guest artist with a number of companies. Her autobiography, Dancing for Balanchine, was published in 1984.
Ashley’s farewell performance on November 25, 1997, not only marked her retirement from a 30-year career with NYCB, it also severed one of the few remaining direct links to Balanchine, who had died in 1983. Ashley was the only NYCB ballerina who was still performing a ballet that Balanchine had created especially for her. Ballo della Regina, choreographed in 1978, showcased the virtuoso aspects of her technique—her speed, clarity, and precision—and was featured frequently throughout her final season. After her departure from the stage, Ashley was a teaching associate at NYCB until 2008. She then served as a guest teacher at other companies from 2009 to 2012. The documentary The Dance Goodbye follows Ashley for some 10 years after her last performance as she copes with injuries incurred during her career.
