Michaela DePrince, original name Mabinty Bangura,  (born January 6, 1995, Kenema district, Sierra Leone), Sierra Leonean-born American ballet dancer known for her technical prowess and tenacious spirit.
She was born Mabinty Bangura during Sierra Leone’s prolonged civil war and spent her early years in that country. Rebel forces killed her father, and her mother died soon after of starvation. An uncle deposited her at an orphanage, where she was mistreated because she had vitiligo—a medical disorder of skin pigmentation that caused the appearance of white patches on her neck and chest. She also witnessed the butchering of a pregnant teacher by rebels before her orphanage relocated to a refugee camp in Guinea. Amid the bleak conditions, she found a glossy magazine cover that featured a ballerina. Though she had no knowledge of ballet, she treasured the photo and aspired to become a dancer. In 1999 American couple Elaine and Charles DePrince adopted her along with another girl, her friend Mia. The girls were raised in New Jersey with the DePrinces’ nine other natural and adopted children.
DePrince began taking ballet lessons soon after arriving in the United States. At age five she enrolled in the Rock School for Dance Education (RSDE) in Philadelphia. After she studied there for six years, the family moved to Vermont. The next year, at age 13, DePrince resumed her training at RSDE as a boarder. In 2010 she competed in the Youth America Grand Prix (YAGP) for the fourth time. She won a full scholarship to the Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis School (JKOS) at American Ballet Theatre (ABT), New York City. She was one of six youths profiled in American filmmaker Bess Kargman’s First Position (2011). In 2012 she performed on the television program Dancing with the Stars.
While at JKOS, DePrince performed with the ABT Studio Co. and toured with the Albany Berkshire Ballet. In 2012 and 2013 DePrince was a guest artist with Johannesburg’s South African Mzansi Ballet. At age 17 she joined New York City’s Dance Theatre of Harlem (DTH). In 2013 DePrince left DTH for the Dutch National Ballet (DNB), and the following year she was promoted from the junior to the main company, where she was the only dancer of African origin among DNB’s 30 nationalities. In 2015 she began to be cast in solo roles. Her public profile also grew following the publication of her memoir, Taking Flight: From War Orphan to Star Ballerina (2014; with her mother, Elaine DePrince), which was sold internationally under the title Hope in a Ballet Shoe. She used the attention to raise awareness about the need for more opportunities for black women in classical ballet.
