Nicholas Roerich, original Russian Nikolay Konstantinovich Ryorikh, Ryorikh also spelled Rerikh,  (born October 9 [September 27, Old Style], 1874, St. Petersburg, Russia—died December 13, 1947, Nagar, India), Russian painter, scenic designer, and writer who is perhaps best known for his work with Serge Pavlovich Diaghilev’s Ballets Russes and especially for his monumental historical sets. One noteworthy example was his costume and stage design for the 1913 premiere of Igor Stravinsky’s early Modernist landmark The Rite of Spring (Le Sacre du printemps). Roerich was also a popular mystic.
Roerich’s parents, Konstantin (a lawyer) and Maria (a notary), often entertained writers, artists, and scientists, and the stimulating environment sparked many of Roerich’s interests. In autumn 1893 he enrolled in both the St. Petersburg Academy of Fine Arts to study drawing and St. Petersburg University to study law. At St. Petersburg University he met Diaghilev, who recognized his artistic talent. Soon after completing his university thesis, Roerich met and married Helena Shaposhnikov.
When Diaghilev took an exhibition of Russian paintings to Paris in 1906, Roerich was represented by 16 works. Those works as well as thousands of other largely landscape paintings evince Roerich’s intense feeling for the epic dimensions and mystery of nature, particularly prehistoric nature. Work on set designs for opera and Ballets Russes productions followed. His achievements in that field of endeavour arose out of the opportunity to create scenic evocations of the past, such as the 12th-century Russia of Polovtsian Dances (1909) from Aleksandr Borodin’s Prince Igor or the legendary Scandinavia of Edvard Grieg’s Peer Gynt (1912).
In 1915 Roerich and his family moved to Sortavala, Finland, so that he could recover from a bout with pneumonia. When the October Revolution in 1917 postponed his return to Russia, he turned his attention to painting, took assignments in stage design, and wrote blank verse. In 1920 Roerich immigrated to the United States, and that same year he and his wife founded the Agni Yoga Society (incorporated 1946), an institution that combines elements of Eastern thought with modern Western moral philosophy. An exhibition of more than 400 of his works debuted in New York City, where Roerich founded the Master Institute of United Arts (1921–37), for which he assembled a first-rate faculty to instruct in a wide range of disciplines. (In 1949 the institute was reborn on West 107th Street as the Nicholas Roerich Museum.)
Roerich gained a significant reputation in the United States, especially among the well-to-do, many of whom supported his philosophy and provided him funds. In December 1923 the Roerich family began an extended exploration of India and its neighbouring regions in a quest for the Eastern spirituality that had come to play an increasingly important role in Roerich’s thinking and artistic output. The family established the Urusvati Himalayan Research Institute in 1928 in the Himalayan foothills of the Kullu valley in Himachal Pradesh. There too, though they continued to travel, the Roerich family established a home.
