Phil Spector, in full Harvey Phillip Spector,  (born December 26, 1940, New York City, New York, U.S.—died January 16, 2021, French Camp, California), American record producer of the 1960s, described by the writer Tom Wolfe as the “First Tycoon of Teen.” There had been producers since the beginning of the record industry, but none had assumed the degree of control demanded by Spector.
At age 18 he and two Los Angeles school friends recorded “To Know Him Is to Love Him,” a simple teenage ballad written by Spector, its title taken from his father’s gravestone. Released under the name of the Teddy Bears, it was one of the biggest hits of 1958. But the group was never to be heard from again, because Spector had other ideas. He moved to New York City and served an apprenticeship with the writer-producer team of Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller before branching out to supervise the recordings of Curtis Lee (“Pretty Little Angel Eyes”), the Paris Sisters (“I Love How You Love Me”), and others. In 1961, needing to escape the restraining influence of older and more conservative opinion, he formed his own label, Philles Records, and, working at Gold Star Recording Studios in Los Angeles, he began to release a string of records that demonstrated his unique vision of what pop music could achieve in its age of innocence.
With the Crystals’ “Da Doo Ron Ron” and “Then He Kissed Me” and the Ronettes’ “Be My Baby” and “Baby I Love You,” Spector blended conventional teen romance sentiments with orchestral arrangements of immense scale and power in what he described as “little symphonies for the kids.” Others called it the wall of sound, and the style reached a peak in 1965 with the blue-eyed soul of the Righteous Brothers’ epic “You’ve Lost That Lovin’ Feelin’,” a huge worldwide hit. Spector threatened to top it with Ike and Tina Turner’s majestic “River Deep—Mountain High” the following year, but some sectors of the music industry, jealous of his success and irritated by his arrogance, ensured its commercial failure.
A wounded Spector went into a retirement from which he briefly emerged in 1969 to work on the solo records of John Lennon and George Harrison, at whose behest (and to Paul McCartney’s lasting displeasure) he completed the postproduction of Let It Be, the Beatles’ final album. Later collaborations with Leonard Cohen and the Ramones were no more successful than his attempts to reestablish his own label. His time had gone.
Spector was absent from the spotlight for most of the next few decades, during which he gained a reputation as a recluse. However, he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1989.
Spector then made headlines in 2003, when actress Lana Clarkson was fatally shot at his home. He was subsequently charged with murder, and his 2007 trial ended in a mistrial after the jury was unable to reach a unanimous decision. At Spector’s retrial, begun in October 2008, the presiding judge ruled that jurors could consider the lesser charge of involuntary manslaughter as well as the original murder charge. After six months of testimony and 30 hours of deliberation, the second jury found Spector guilty of second-degree murder, and in May 2009 he was sentenced to 19 years to life in prison. His health later deteriorated, and in 2014 he was transferred to a prison-run medical facility. Spector died from complications of COVID-19 in 2021.
