Rita Hayworth, original name Margarita Carmen Cansino,  (born October 17, 1918, Brooklyn, New York, U.S.—died May 14, 1987, New York, New York),   American film actress and dancer who rose to glamorous stardom in the 1940s and ’50s.
Hayworth was the daughter of Spanish-born dancer Eduardo Cansino and his partner, Volga Hayworth, and, as a child, she performed in her parents’ nightclub act. While still a teenager, she caught the attention of a Hollywood producer, and in the mid-1930s she began appearing in films, using her given name of Rita Cansino, starting with Under the Pampas Moon (1935). Movies from this period included Charlie Chan in Egypt (1935), Dante’s Inferno (1935), and Meet Nero Wolfe (1936). On the advice of her first husband, Edward Judson (who became her manager), she changed her name to Rita Hayworth and dyed her hair auburn, cultivating a sophisticated glamour that first registered with her role as an unfaithful wife who tries to seduce Cary Grant in Only Angels Have Wings (1939).
After a few inconsequential films, Hayworth gradually rose to the rank of star, playing femmes fatales in quality melodramas such as The Lady in Question (1940), Blood and Sand (1941), and The Strawberry Blonde (1941). Her dancing skills were well showcased opposite Fred Astaire (who in later years cited Hayworth as his favourite dance partner) in You’ll Never Get Rich (1941) and You Were Never Lovelier (1942) and with Gene Kelly in Cover Girl (1944), a film that helped establish both Hayworth and Kelly among the top stars of the day. It was also during this time that she became a favourite pinup of American servicemen; her publicity still, depicting the lingerie-clad Hayworth kneeling seductively on a bed, became an indelible image of World War II.
The definitive Hayworth film is undoubtedly Gilda (1946), in which she appeared opposite Glenn Ford, her frequent costar. A classic of film noir, Gilda featured Hayworth as the quintessential “noir woman,” a duplicitous temptress and an abused victim in equal measure. A daring, quirky film for its time, Gilda was rife with sexually suggestive imagery and dialogue (such as Hayworth’s “If I’d been a ranch, they would have named me the Bar Nothing”) and featured Hayworth’s striptease to the song “Put the Blame on Mame,” perhaps the actress’s most famous film scene. Two years later Hayworth starred in another film noir classic, The Lady from Shanghai (1947). Directed by Hayworth’s then-husband, Orson Welles, it is perhaps the most labyrinthine film in the genre. Hayworth’s portrayal of a cynical seductress is one of her most praised performances. It was also about this time that Life magazine dubbed Hayworth “The Love Goddess,” an appellation that, much to the actress’s chagrin, would remain with her for life.
Never comfortable with fame or the trappings of a celebrity life, Hayworth was absent from films during her marriage (1949–51) to Prince Aly Khan (son of the Aga Khan III). Although several of her dramatic performances in films of the 1950s are among her most-praised—in particular Affair in Trinidad (1952), Salome (1953), Miss Sadie Thompson (1953), Pal Joey (1957), Separate Tables (1958), and They Came to Cordura (1959)—Hayworth grew increasingly frustrated with the acting profession. This frustration, coupled with another failed, stressful marriage (to singer Dick Haymes), caused her to become increasingly cynical and to display a sense of detachment from her work. Her film appearances became increasingly sporadic throughout the 1960s, and she appeared in her final film, The Wrath of God, in 1972.
Rumours of Hayworth’s erratic and drunken behaviour began to circulate during the late 1960s, and her attempt to launch a Broadway career in the early ’70s was stifled by her inability to remember lines. In truth, Hayworth was suffering from the early stages of Alzheimer disease, although she would not be officially diagnosed with the condition until 1980. The publicity surrounding Hayworth’s battle was a catalyst for increasing national awareness of the disease and for bringing about federal funding for Alzheimer research.
