Robert Battle,  (born August 28, 1972, Miami, Florida, U.S.), American dancer and choreographer who was the artistic director (2011– ) of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.
Battle, who was raised by his great-uncle and his cousin, studied dance under Daniel Lewis and Gerri Houlihan at the New World School of the Arts, a respected arts high school in Miami. After graduation he studied at the Juilliard School in New York City, where the former Paul Taylor Dance Company star Carolyn Adams became his mentor. Upon his graduation in 1994, Battle joined the Parsons Dance Company. In 1998 Parsons began showcasing dances created by Battle, and critics took notice.
Battle left Parsons in 2001 to start his own troupe, the Battleworks Dance Company. It debuted as the American representative at the Global Assembly of the World Dance Alliance in Düsseldorf, Germany, the following year and went on to perform at the American Dance Festival and the Jacob’s Pillow Dance Festival, among other venues. Battle became known for his thematically challenging fast-paced choreography, and among the companies that commissioned works from him or performed his dances were Hubbard Street Dance Chicago, the River North Chicago Dance Company, Koresh Dance Company of Philadelphia, and Ballet Memphis.
Battle’s association with the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater began in 1999 when he was commissioned to create a dance for the Ailey II troupe. He subsequently contributed a number of dances to the company, notably Juba (2003) and In/Side (2009). In 2010 Judith Jamison, the company’s director, named Battle as her successor, and the following year he officially took up the post. In 2011 he established the New Directions Choreography Lab within the company. Focusing exclusively on choreography, the program granted fellowships to emerging or mid-career choreographers and provided support to nurture their talent.
Battle was the recipient of numerous awards. In 2005 he was honoured as a Master of African American Choreography by the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, and in 2007 he received the prestigious Statue Award of the Princess Grace Foundation-USA.
