Rukmini Devi Arundale,  (born February 29, 1904, Madura, Madras Presidency, British India [now Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India]—died February 24, 1986, Chennai, Tamil Nadu), Indian classical dancer and follower of theosophy, best known for catalyzing the renaissance of the bharata natyam dance form and founding the Kalakshetra Foundation in Madras (now Chennai). The foundation aimed to preserve and popularize bharata natyam and other Indian traditions as well as to spread the ideals of theosophy.
Born to South Indian Sanskrit scholar and historian K.A. Nilakanta Sastri and his wife Seshammal, Arundale was reared in an upper-class Brahman family in Adyar, a suburb of Madras. Her father was closely associated with the Theosophical Society, a monistic (emphasizing unity in the diversity of all phenomena) spiritual organization headquartered in Madras though founded in New York City. Arundale was greatly influenced as a young woman not only by her father but also by Annie Besant, the Theosophical Society’s British cofounder and president (1907–33), as well as by British educator and theosophist George Arundale, whom she married in 1920.
Arundale traveled extensively with her husband and Besant on various theosophical missions, all the while absorbing the ideology of the society. Also during her travels, Arundale became enamoured with classical dance. She was initially drawn to Western ballet, and Russian ballerina Anna Pavlova arranged for her to study with Cleo Nordi (one of Pavlova’s students). Pavlova also advised Arundale to seek inspiration in traditional Indian arts.
Arundale took Pavlova’s advice to heart and subsequently embarked on a campaign to study and promote bharata natyam, a type of South Indian classical dance that was traditionally performed in Hindu temples. In so doing, she aimed both to resurrect a moribund Indian art form and to reverse the negative social stereotypes associated with its female practitioners—the temple servants known as devadasis, whose obligations to the temple deity involved prostitution. Arundale formally trained under Pandanallur Meenakshi Sundaram Pillai, a respected nattuvanar (male bharata natyam director), and gave her first public performance, at the Theosophical Society, in 1935. That event was remarkable not only on account of Arundale’s artistry but also because it was a staged, public performance (as opposed to a temple event), and it set a precedent for upper-class women to practice an art form traditionally associated with a widely maligned lower-class community.
Meanwhile, in 1934, the year after Besant’s death, Arundale established the Besant Theosophical High School and the Besant Arundale Senior Secondary School to impart education based on both theosophist and traditional Hindu values. In 1936 she added Kalakshetra, an Indian arts academy that was especially dedicated to the cultivation of the bharata natyam tradition. Together, the high school, the senior secondary school, and the arts academy became the Kalakshetra Foundation.
Building on the efforts of T. Balasaraswati and other dancers from the devadasi community who had similarly striven to bring bharata natyam from the temple grounds into the public sphere, Arundale took steps to broaden the dance’s appeal as she developed the Kalakshetra curriculum. She worked to purge bharata natyam of its shringara (erotic) element, investing it instead with an aura of bhakti (devotion). She also introduced aesthetically designed costumes, jewelry, and stage scenarios. To add contemporary sophistication to the productions, she adopted a dance-drama format. Arundale conceived and choreographed numerous bharata natyam pieces in the new style, including six dances derived from the ancient Hindu epic Ramayana, which have remained among her best-known works.
Ultimately, Arundale’s work was integral to the revival of bharata natyam and to the elevation in status of both the tradition and its practitioners. The interplay of elements of stagecraft, lighting, costumes, music, and choreography, moreover, transformed the devotional experience into an art form that could be appreciated on a global platform. Kalakshetra’s institutionalization of the dance form also helped ensure its transmission to future generations. In recognition of her services to Indian culture, Arundale received the Padma Bhushan, one of India’s highest civilian honours, in 1956. She also received the Sangeet Natak Akademi (India’s national academy of music, arts, and dance) Award in 1957, and in 1993 the Indian parliament declared her foundation an institution of national importance.
