Suzanne Théodore Vaillande Douvillier, née Suzanne Théodore Vaillande, also called Madame Placide,  (born Sept. 28, 1778?, Dôle, France—died Aug. 30, 1826, New Orleans, La., U.S.),  Franco-American dancer, mime, and probably the first woman choreographer in America.
Suzanne Vaillande was apparently an illegitimate child. Little is known of her childhood beyond the conjecture that she may have studied dance in the ballet school of the Paris Opéra. By 1790 she was in Santo Domingo, French West Indies, where she formed a professional and personal alliance with Alexander Placide, a multitalented theatrical figure. In 1791 they made their way to the United States, and in 1792 Vaillande (billed as Madame Placide, although they were not married) appeared at the John Street Theatre in New York City in The Bird Catcher, a ballet by Placide presented as an afterpiece to the regular program. The Bird Catcher is generally held to be the first ballet piece to have been presented in New York.
Vaillande and Placide remained in New York for several months and presented a number of ballets, including The Woodcutters, The Old Schoolmaster Grown Young, and The Philosophers, or The Merry Girl, and several pantomimes. Later in 1792 they appeared in Philadelphia and Boston; in 1793 they were in Newport, Rhode Island; and in 1794 they settled in Charleston, South Carolina. There Madame Placide appeared in Maximilien Gardel’s La Chercheuse d’esprit and Le Déserteur Français, Jean-Georges Noverre’s Les Caprices de Galathée, and in 1796 her own Echo and Narcissus, in addition to Placide’s works.
In June 1796 Placide fought a duel with Louis Douvillier, a singer and dancer who had joined the company a year earlier, over Vaillande’s affections. Subsequently she married Douvillier, with whom she performed in Norfolk, Virginia; Philadelphia; New York; and elsewhere before settling in New Orleans in 1799. She remained on the stage in ballet and pantomime until 1818. In addition to her distinction as perhaps the first female American choreographer, she was probably also the first to design and paint stage scenery.
