T. Balasaraswati, in full Thanjavur Balasaraswati,  (born May 13, 1918, Madras [now Chennai], India—died February 9, 1984, Madras), Indian dancer and singer in the Karnatak (South Indian) tradition, who was one of the 20th century’s foremost exponents of the bharata natyam style of classical dance. She was instrumental not only in expanding the performance of this dance form beyond the precincts of the temples where it was traditionally performed but also in cultivating international appreciation of the art form.
Balasaraswati belonged to an unbroken lineage of musicians and dancers descended from those who served the 18th-century Thanjavur court. Born into the community of female temple servants, or devadasis, who maintained the bharata natyam tradition, she started training at the age of five under the renowned nattuvanar (bharata natyam director) Kandappa Pillai. At age seven she had her arangetram (debut public performance) at a shrine to the goddess Devi in the city of Kanchipuram and stunned the audience with her rhythmically executed movements. As Balasaraswati matured, she became ever more adept at both nritta (nonrepresentational movement) and abhinaya (movement depicting specific emotions or moods). As a young teenager, she was seen by internationally known Indian dancer and choreographer Uday Shankar, who became an ardent promoter of her performances, and throughout the 1930s she captured the imagination of audiences across India.
The frequency of Balasaraswati’s performances decreased sharply during the 1940s, partly because she suffered periods of poor health but more significantly as a result of the promotion and passage of the Madras Devadasis Prevention of Dedication Act (1947). Devadasis typically lived in matrilineal households, and many of the women were married—or dedicated—to a temple deity, which precluded them from marrying any mortal man whom they took as a partner. This social system did not match that of mainstream Indian society, and, consequently, the activities of the devadasis, including their dancing, whether in temples or as a spiritual offering in private homes, was popularly associated with prostitution. The Devadasi Act was intended to purge India of the perceived social scourge; it prohibited dancing by the devadasis in honour of a deity and essentially outlawed their art form.
Interest in bharata natyam rebounded in the 1950s as the public grew concerned that a unique Indian art form was on the brink of extinction. Balasaraswati, encouraged by an administrator at the Music Academy in Madras, established a dance school in association with the institution. There she trained new dancers in the bharata natyam tradition as she had inherited it from her ancestors and from the broader devadasi community. Meanwhile, a number of prominent artists and arts advocates—notably the Brahman (highest social class) theosophist, dancer, and teacher Rukmini Devi Arundale—championed not only the revival but also the reformulation of bharata natyam, largely to exclude shringara (erotic) depictions of divine love. Such an approach was antithetical to that of Balasaraswati, who understood the shringara elements not as carnal but as beautiful, spiritual, and indeed integral to the bharata natyam tradition.
Balasaraswati began to gain international recognition in the early 1960s, with performances in East Asia, Europe, and North America. Later that decade, throughout the 1970s, and into the early 1980s, she visited the United States repeatedly and held residencies—as both a teacher and a performer—at Wesleyan University (Middletown, Connecticut), California Institute of the Arts (Valencia), Mills College (Oakland, California), the University of Washington (Seattle), and Jacob’s Pillow Dance Festival (Beckett, Massachusetts), among other institutions. Through her international engagements as well as her activities in India, especially in Madras, Balasaraswati not only exposed countless audiences to the traditional style of bharata natyam but also trained many new practitioners of the art form.
For her contributions to Indian arts and culture, Balasaraswati received a Sangeet Natak Akademi (India’s national academy of music, dance, and drama) award in 1955 and the Padma Vibhushan, one of the country’s top civilian honours, in 1977. Although she danced extensively throughout her life, she was seldom filmed. In 1976, however, the acclaimed Indian film director Satyajit Ray made a short documentary, Bala, as a tribute to her artistic achievement. In 2006 Aniruddha Knight, Balasaraswati’s grandson, also produced a short documentary.
