Valéria Dienes, Hungarian form Dienes Valéria, née Valéria Geiger,  (born May 25, 1879, Szekszárd, Hung.—died June 8, 1978,  Budapest), dancer, teacher, and choreographer, considered the most important exponent of the Hungarian tradition in movement art.
In 1905 she received a Ph.D. in philosophy, mathematics, and aesthetics, and not long afterward she married the mathematician Pál Dienes. Her interests soon turned to music and psychology. In 1908 she traveled to Paris, where she attended classes given by Henri Bergson, participated in Raymond Duncan’s experimental course on Greek culture and lifestyle, and saw the most influential modern dancer of the age, Isadora Duncan, Raymond’s sister. Returning to Hungary in 1912, she began teaching a course in Greek movement, and in 1915 she founded a school to disseminate her own system of movement and gesture, which she called orkesztika (“orchestics”). To develop this system, she examined human movement according to what she saw as its four disciplines of orchestics:  the interrelationship of space (plastics, or kinetics), time (rhythmics), strength (dynamics), and meaning (mimetics, later symbolics). Between 1965 and 1974 she elaborated on these four themes in three extensive studies: A relatív kinetika alapvonalai (“The Fundamentals of Relative Kinetics”), A mozdulatritmika alapvonalai (“The Fundamentals of Movement Rhythmics”), and A szimbolika fő problémái (“The Main Problems of Symbolics”).
After preparing a proposal for the reform of women’s sports for the leaders of the Hungarian Soviet Republic (1919), she was forced into exile in 1920. She returned in 1923 and resumed teaching; in 1929 she started her four-year course for teachers. Already the founder and joint president of the Movement Culture Association (1928), she also founded the Orchestic Society.
The focus of her choreographic works began as “poems in dance” based on the verse of modern Hungarian poets Endre Ady and Mihály Babits; later, from 1925 to 1942, her choreography was inspired by abstractions and included Nyolc boldogság (“Eight Joys”), Hajnalvárás (“Waiting for Sunrise”), Szent Imre misztériuma (“The Mystery of Saint Emeric”), and A gyermek útja (“The Child’s Progress”). Dienes’s biography Fehér királylány (1930; “White Princess”) was made into a poem in dance and a film. In 1934 Dienes was awarded the Baumgarten Prize, then the highest literary award in Hungary, for her philosophical work.
