Victoria Beckham, in full Victoria Caroline Adams Beckham, byname Posh Spice,  (born April 17, 1974, Goff’s Oak, Hertfordshire, England), English singer and designer who gained stardom in the mid-1990s as a member of the pop band Spice Girls and later launched a successful line of clothing and accessories.
At age 20, Adams was one of the five young women selected to create the music group Spice Girls. The media christened Adams “Posh Spice,” a moniker frequently used to refer to her thereafter. In 1996 the band released its debut album, Spice, which included the hit single “Wannabe.” The album, which sold more than 20 million copies worldwide, made the Spice Girls a cultural phenomenon, and a year later the group released a second full-length album, Spiceworld, and appeared in Spice World: The Movie.
In 1997 Adams also began a relationship with English football (soccer) player David Beckham. The couple, known as “Posh and Becks,” had a son, named Brooklyn, in March 1999 and four months later married in a lavish ceremony at a castle outside Dublin. They later had two more sons, Romeo (2002) and Cruz (2005), and a daughter, Harper (2011). From the early days of the marriage, the family was subjected to intense scrutiny from the British media. While the Spice Girls stayed together during this time, their third album, Forever, was released in 2000 to a decidedly lukewarm reception. The following year the group disbanded, though they had several subsequent reunions.
Beckham’s post-Spice Girls career was eclectic. In 2001 she released her self-titled first solo album and an autobiography, Learning to Fly. While the album failed to reach the top of the charts, Learning to Fly became a best seller in Britain. Beckham also appeared in a number of television documentaries, including Being Victoria Beckham (2002), The Real Beckhams (2003), and the six-episode Victoria Beckham: Coming to America (2007), all of which were based on various aspects of her work and family life.
Beckham made her first foray into fashion in 2004, debuting a line of denim called VB Rocks. Three years later she released collections of sunglasses and jeans, dVb denim, as well as the Intimately Beckham fragrance line. In 2008 Beckham expanded her fashion repertoire, rolling out a well-received dress collection; 2011 saw the release of a line of handbags, and a beauty line debuted in 2019. She also dabbled in modeling, appearing in runway shows as well as in print advertisements, and she authored a book of fashion advice, That Extra Half an Inch: Hair, Heels, and Everything in Between (2006). Beckham was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 2017 for her services to the fashion industry. 
