Yvonne Rainer,  (born November 24, 1934, San Francisco, California, U.S.), American avant-garde choreographer and filmmaker whose work in both disciplines often featured the medium’s most fundamental elements rather than meeting conventional expectations.
Rainer moved to New York City in 1957 to study theatre. She found herself more strongly drawn to modern dance than acting, however, and began studying at the Martha Graham School and later with Merce Cunningham. Rainer was one of the organizers of the Judson Dance Theater, a focal point for vanguard activity in the dance world throughout the 1960s, and she formed her own company for a brief time after the Judson performances ended. Rainer was noted for an approach to dance that treated the body more as the source of an infinite variety of movements than as the purveyor of emotion or drama. Many of the elements she employed in the early 1970s—such as repetition, patterning, tasks, and games—later became standard features of modern dance.
Her best-known dance, “Trio A,” (1966) a section of a larger work called The Mind Is a Muscle (1966–68), consisted of a simultaneous performance by three dancers that included a difficult series of circular and spiral movements. It was widely adapted and interpreted by other choreographers. Rainer choreographed more than 40 concert works, including Terrain (1963).
Rainer sometimes included filmed sequences in her dances, and in the mid-1970s she began to turn her attention to film directing. Her early films do not follow narrative conventions, instead combining reality and fiction, sound and visuals, to address social and political issues. Rainer directed several experimental films about dance and performance, including Lives of Performers (1972), Film About a Woman Who… (1974), and Kristina Taking Pictures (1976). Her later films included The Man Who Envied Women (1985), Privilege (1990), and MURDER and murder (1996). The last-mentioned work, more conventional in its narrative structure, is a lesbian love story as well as a reflection on urban life and on breast cancer, and it features Rainer herself. Her film work received several awards, and in 1990 she was a recipient of a MacArthur Foundation award.
In 2000 Rainer resumed her career as a choreographer, and her subsequent dances included Spiraling Down (2008), Assisted Living: Do You Have Any Money? (2013), and The Concept of Dust, or How do you look when there’s nothing left to move? (2014).
