Julia Clifford Lathrop,  (born June 29, 1858, Rockford, Ill., U.S.—died April 15, 1932, Rockford), American social welfare worker who was the first director of the U.S. Children’s Bureau.
Lathrop attended Vassar College, graduating in 1880. Over the next 10 years she worked in her father’s law office and interested herself in various reform movements. In 1890 she moved to Chicago and joined Jane Addams at the newly established Hull House settlement. In July 1893, at Governor John P. Altgeld’s appointment, she took a place on the Illinois Board of Charities. It was her first opportunity to undertake the sort of arduous, detailed, and passionately devoted work that would come to characterize her career. Lathrop immediately began a personal inspection of all 102 county almshouses and farms in the state. She interrupted that work during the winter of 1893–94 to make an inspection of the county charity institutions in Cook county. Her stark descriptions of the Cook county infirmary, asylum, and other institutions were printed as a chapter in Hull-House Maps and Papers (1895). Lathrop was particularly disturbed by the treatment of the mentally ill, who were often thrown in with the physically ill, with no provision for separating the young and the old. From the time of her inspections she was a strong advocate of extramural care for mental patients, and later, in 1909, she became a charter member of Clifford W. Beers’s National Committee for Mental Hygiene. In 1901 she resigned from the Illinois Board of Charities in protest against the low quality of the staffs of most of the institutions under its purview. She served again on the board from 1905 until her plan for its reorganization was adopted in 1909.
Lathrop’s interest in the problem of finding trained personnel to staff public institutions led her to join Graham Taylor in organizing the Chicago Institute of Social Science in 1903–04. She lectured regularly at the school, which shortly was renamed the Chicago School of Civics and Philanthropy, and in 1907, assisted by Sophonisba Breckinridge, she established its research department and served for a year as its director. She continued as a trustee of the school until it became the School of Social Service Administration of the University of Chicago in 1920. She was active in other fields as well: in 1899 she joined Lucy Flower in the campaign that secured the creation in Cook county of the world’s first juvenile court system. In 1908 she joined Breckinridge and Grace Abbott in forming the Immigrants’ Protective League.
In 1912 President William Howard Taft appointed Lathrop to head the newly created U.S. Children’s Bureau of the Department of Commerce and Labor. She was the first woman to head a statutory federal bureau at the appointment of the president with consent of the Senate. With a limited budget and staff, she first undertook a study of infant mortality and developed a plan for uniform birth registration. Subsequent studies by the bureau centred on child labour, mothers’ pensions, illegitimacy, juvenile delinquency, nutrition, and the treatment of the mentally retarded. Following passage of the Keating-Owen Child Labor Act in 1916, a Child Labor Division was created within the bureau to enforce it, and Lathrop brought in her old associate Abbott to direct the division. (The law was declared unconstitutional in 1918, as was a second law of 1919 in 1922.) During World War I the bureau took on added responsibilities for children of servicemen and of working mothers and other matters. During 1918–19 Lathrop also served as president of the National Conference of Social Work.
Lathrop also campaigned hard for the Sheppard-Towner Act, offering federal funds to states for programs of maternity and infant care, which was passed shortly after her resignation for reasons of health in 1921. (She was succeeded by Abbott.) From 1922 she lived in Rockford, Illinois. In that year she was elected president of the Illinois League of Women Voters, and in the same year she was appointed to a presidential commission investigating conditions at the immigration station at Ellis Island, New York. She contributed articles to various periodicals and a chapter to The Child, the Clinic, and the Court (1925). From 1925 to 1931 she served as an assessor for the Child Welfare Committee of the League of Nations.
