Altria Group, formerly Philip Morris Companies, Inc.,  American holding company founded in 1985, the owner of several major American companies with interests in tobacco products and wine, most notably Philip Morris Inc., the largest cigarette manufacturer in the United States. Its headquarters are in Richmond, Virginia.
The ancestor of the present company was incorporated in 1919 as Philip Morris & Company, Ltd. Inc., acquiring the assets of a small New York corporation of the same name. Throughout the 1930s, ’40s, and ’50s it expanded its interests in tobacco processing and marketing and became a principal maker of cigarettes. In the mid-1950s Philip Morris began using cowboy imagery to advertise its Marlboro brand of cigarettes, and Marlboro’s ever-growing popularity propelled the company to second place among American cigarette makers by the mid-1970s. In 1978 Philip Morris acquired the international cigarette business of the Liggett Group Inc. (formerly Liggett & Myers). By the early 1980s the company was the leading cigarette maker in the United States. In 1999 it purchased all rights to the Liggett cigarette brands L&M, Chesterfield, and Lark. Its other major cigarette brands sold in the United States and abroad included Benson and Hedges, Parliament, Virginia Slims, and Merit.
In the last decades of the 20th century, Philip Morris embarked on a period of diversification in order to reduce dependence on the faltering tobacco market. In 1970 it obtained a controlling interest in the Miller Brewing Company, which it held until it sold the business in 2002 to South African Breweries PLC. In 1978 it purchased the Seven-Up Company, a soft-drink maker; unable to expand its soft-drink market, it sold Seven-Up in 1986. In 1985 the publicly held Philip Morris Companies was incorporated as the parent company of Philip Morris Inc. The new holding company bought the General Foods Corporation, carrier of such well-known food brands as Maxwell House coffee and Birds Eye frozen foods. In 1988 the Philip Morris Companies acquired Kraft, Inc., a large maker of cheeses and grocery products, and in 2000 it purchased Nabisco, maker of snacks such as Oreo cookies and Ritz crackers. All these acquisitions were merged under what eventually became Kraft Foods Inc. The Philip Morris Companies thus became one of the world’s largest corporate producers of consumer goods.
In the early 21st century Philip Morris refocused on its traditional markets. Between 2001 and 2007 the holding company sold off its interest in Kraft Foods, and in 2003 it changed its name to Altria Group. Its cigarette subsidiary retained the Philip Morris name, but to this core business it added in 2007 the John Middleton Company, a maker of pipe tobacco and cigars. In 2009 Altria purchased UST Inc., a holding company that owned the U.S. Smokeless Tobacco Company, maker of popular dipping tobaccos such as Skoal and Copenhagen, and Ste. Michelle Wine Estates, a wine-making company based in Washington state. These two companies became subsidiaries of Altria Group. Another subsidiary, investment company Philip Morris Capital Corporation, was formed in 1982.
