AOL, formerly called America Online,  one of the largest Internet-access subscription service companies in the United States, providing a range of Web services for users. AOL was one of the first companies to establish a strong sense of community among its users through buddy lists and instant messaging services, which transmit billions of messages daily.
Founded in 1989 in Dulles, Virginia, the company initially served only users of Apple Computer’s Macintosh and Apple II machines, expanding to include personal computers running Microsoft Corporation’s Windows OS (operating system) in 1993. America Online grew in popularity throughout the 1990s, becoming the leading Internet service provider in the United States. In 2000 AOL merged with Time Warner Inc., in a deal that subsequently proved disappointing to both parties. America Online officially changed its name to AOL on April 3, 2006. In December 2009 it was spun off as an independent company.
AOL offers Internet users services that include e-mail (the service’s “You’ve Got Mail” alert to subscribers became lodged in the popular culture), AOL Instant Messenger (AIM) software, AOL Video, video search, news, sports, weather, stock quotes, and MapQuest, an online source of maps and directions. The company also markets IN2TV, where subscribers can watch certain classic television shows over the Internet at no extra charge, and TMZ.com, a leading celebrity news site, developed in partnership with Warner Brothers. AOL generates revenue from running one of the largest Internet subscription services and providing broadband services to millions of customers around the world. In addition to its revenue from subscriptions, AOL generates substantial income from its advertising program, which is one of the biggest and most successful of its kind. The main program, Advertising.com, is one of the largest third-party online advertising-placement networks in the United States.
In a move to generate more original content, AOL acquired the Web site The Huffington Post for $315 million in March 2011. As part of the deal, The Huffington Post Media Group was formed, with Arianna Huffington as its president and editor in chief. The new venture included all of AOL’s media properties and The Huffington Post. In 2015 Verizon Communications acquired AOL for $4.4 billion.
AOL’s global coverage spans Europe (France, Britain, Germany, the Netherlands, Austria), Asia-Pacific (Japan, Australia, India), and the Americas (Canada, Mexico, Argentina, Puerto Rico). AOL has received numerous awards for philanthropic initiatives.
