Apprenticeship,  training in an art, trade, or craft under a legal agreement that defines the duration and conditions of the relationship between master and apprentice.
From the earliest times, in Egypt and Babylon, training in craft skills was organized to maintain an adequate number of craftsmen. The Code of Hammurabi of Babylon, which dates from the 18th century bce, required artisans to teach their crafts to the next generation. In Rome and other ancient societies, many craftsmen were slaves, but, in the later years of the Roman Empire, craftsmen began to organize into independent collegia intended to uphold the standards of their trades.
By the 13th century a similar practice had emerged in western Europe in the form of craft guilds. Guild members supervised the product quality, methods of production, and work conditions for each occupational group in a town. The guilds were controlled by the master craftsmen, and the recruit entered the guild after completing his training as an apprentice—a period that commonly lasted seven years. It was a system suited to domestic industry, with the master working in his own premises alongside his assistants. This created something of an artificial family relationship, in that the articles of apprenticeship took the place of kinship.
As time went on, however, governments had to contend with the exclusionary practices of the guilds, whose members could monopolize their trades in each town. Powerful guilds, for example, could levy high fees against outsiders to prevent them from entering a trade. Even apprenticeships could be restricted, with preference given to the sons of guild members or the sons of wealthy acquaintances. Responding to these improprieties, the English government tried to define the conditions of apprenticeship with the Statute of Artificers of 1563, which attempted to limit exclusionary practices and to ensure adequate labour.
The notion of individual training extended beyond the craft guilds in the Middle Ages. For example, universities advanced the same principle with the master’s degree, as did religious orders that required newcomers to pass through a novitiate. In medicine, the guild system applied to the surgeon, who also acted as barber and was regarded as a craftsman with less prestige than the physician. Lawyers served an apprenticeship by working in close association with a master of the profession.
The Industrial Revolution altered attitudes toward training. Machines created a need for both skilled workers (such as machinists or engineers) and unskilled workers. Unskilled employees who showed aptitude advanced to semiskilled jobs. Apprenticeships actually grew in importance with the development of trade unions, which were created to uphold quality and control recruitment (by protecting union jobs).
In England apprenticeship was maintained by the craft industries and even extended to analogous fields. The education system, for example, offered various apprentice programs for student teachers, and there was a comparable system of training for young farmers.
Apprenticeship was fairly common in the American colonies, with indentured apprentices arriving from England in the 17th century. (Benjamin Franklin served as apprentice to his brother in the printing trade.) But apprenticeship in colonial America was less important than in Europe because of the high proportion of skilled workers in the colonies.
Because modernization and industrialization brought new impetus to the division of labour, the development of large-scale machine production increased the demand for workers with specialized skills. The more ambitious among them sought to increase their effectiveness and potential for advancement by voluntary study. To meet this need, mechanics’ institutes were established, such as the one founded in London in 1823 by George Birkbeck, which still exists as Birkbeck College, and Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art in New York City, established in 1859. In France technical education on a national scale dates from 1880.
Early in the 20th century, assembly-line methods expanded the number of unskilled or semiskilled jobs, which made the long period of apprenticeship for skilled occupations unattractive. This led many countries to devise labour programs that made skilled jobs more accessible to the general population.
Apprenticeship remained a necessary part of craft industries, in spite of the mechanization that initially increased the number of jobs not requiring formal instruction. After World War I a new pattern of recruitment emerged. Apprenticeship on traditional lines was maintained for skilled craftsmanship; for less-skilled work “learnership” became a common practice, providing the newcomer with opportunities to learn by working with others. Some industries introduced a system of upgrading, wherein labourers and unskilled workers were allowed to undertake skilled work after having served as assistants to other skilled workers. These training methods were supplemented by two approaches: pupil apprenticeship, whereby the recruit learned working skills with the intention of qualifying for an advanced position in the industry; and student apprenticeship, which allowed those with a university education, technical education, or working experience to qualify for employment.
Like the medieval guilds, the emerging trade unions restricted entry to skilled trades by means of rigorous apprenticeship, but they also created opportunities for semiskilled workers to advance into skilled jobs. The formerly exclusive craft unions also began to change. From the 1920s they began to accept workers who had not entered as apprentices. As a result, the ratio of apprentices to journeymen ceased to be an issue.
The nature of apprenticeship changed greatly after World War II, with considerable variation between different countries. Perhaps the most radical changes took place in West Germany, which had the advantage of a practically new start. There a distinction was made between skilled trades needing apprentices, semiskilled trades needing trainees, and handicrafts that employed artisans. Trades were grouped under local chambers of industry, handicrafts under chambers of handicrafts. The apprentice registered a contract with the appropriate chamber and kept a workbook that was inspected from time to time. There were also tests at monthly or quarterly intervals. Part-time attendance at a vocational school, included in the hours of employment, was compulsory until age 18.
In France vocational training came under the supervision of the Directorate of Technical and Vocational Education of the Ministry of Education. This created 24 national professional consultative commissions that represented employers, government, and trade unions. In 1930 the government began developing technical colleges to train a significant proportion of all skilled workers. Apprenticeship could be arranged by contract with a private employer, by attendance at school beyond the normal age of 16 (called the complementary course), or by apprenticeship to an artisan trade. For the final examinations, those at the colleges and schools were supervised by the directorate, while those for apprentices were supervised by the local chambers of crafts.
In Britain the Employment and Training Act of 1948 created a Central Youth Employment Executive and led to proposals for a National Joint Apprenticeship and Training Council to be set up in each industry. The printing trade, for example, introduced selection by objective testing of suitability and aptitude, while the motor-vehicle-repair industry developed an apprenticeship scheme for a national craftsman’s certificate. The Post Office Engineering Department, which never accepted the traditional pattern of apprenticeship, developed a three-year course for recruits. But the most significant break with the past was the module system in the engineering industry, which provided a year’s training in a wide selection of skills, followed by selected training in specialized skills. These were accompanied by performance tests and appropriate further education.
In the United States conditions of apprenticeship have typically been more flexible than those in Europe. This type of training is overseen by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, established within the U.S. Department of Labor in 1937. While the lowest age for entry into the workforce is 16, many trades require a high-school diploma, which makes the effective entry age 18. The training period varies from two to five years, with much of the training taking place at technical and vocational schools. A trainee typically advances after passing qualifying examinations, with pay (which can vary from 60 to 90 percent of the journeyman’s rate) increasing at each phase. In effect, American apprentices are indentured to the industry rather than to an employer.
In Japan apprenticeship and employee training have often featured a personal orientation rarely found in other industrial nations. The unique Japanese concept of apprenticeship stems from a difference in the relationship between employer and employee. Although this arrangement does not hold for most small and medium-sized companies, large Japanese companies have had a social obligation to provide lifelong work for employees who, in return, are required to continue with the same employer (until death or retirement)—no matter what the job assignment. Because Japanese apprenticeship emphasizes employment with a particular company, the close relationship between an apprentice and a specific trade, common elsewhere, is missing in Japan.
