B.F. Goodrich Company,  major American manufacturing company of the 20th century, for 90 years a maker of automobile tires and related products.
Founded in Akron, Ohio, the company grew out of a partnership—Goodrich, Tew and Company—formed in 1870 by Benjamin Franklin Goodrich, a medical doctor from New York who was attracted by the business possibilities of relocating to the Midwest, and his brother-in-law Harvey W. Tew. The B.F. Goodrich Company was the first rubber manufacturer west of the Appalachian Mountains. By the early 20th century, however, so many rival companies had settled in Akron that the city became known as the “rubber capital of the world,” and Goodrich became only one of the “Big Four” tire makers (the others were Goodyear, Firestone, and Uniroyal).
The company started out as a producer of rubberized hoses and belts and then expanded into pneumatic tires, newly introduced for use on bicycles. In 1896 it produced the first pneumatic automobile tires made in the United States. Other technological innovations from the company included the first rubber-wound golf ball, the first commercial tubeless tire, the first U.S. space suits, and the development of synthetic rubber. As the company diversified into plastic and chemical products early in the 20th century, it became one of the largest producers of polyvinyl chloride in the United States. The company also expanded into aircraft components, beginning with airplane tires and then over the years acquiring companies that made components ranging from brakes and landing gear to electrical control systems. By the 1980s, when the company’s name was streamlined to BFGoodrich Company, its aerospace division had become more profitable than its mature tire and materials divisions.
In 1986 Goodrich merged its tire operations with those of Uniroyal to form the Uniroyal-Goodrich Tire Company. In the following year Goodrich sold off its remaining interest in Uniroyal-Goodrich, and in 1989 the venture was bought by French tire maker Michelin, which subsequently used BFGoodrich as a trademarked brand name of a line of tires. Meanwhile, the BFGoodrich Company divested itself of its chemical operations and concentrated on aerospace products and services. In 2001 it was renamed Goodrich Corporation, and in 2011 it agreed to be purchased by aerospace giant United Technologies Corporation.
