Chrysler,  American automotive company first incorporated as Chrysler Corporation in 1925. It was reorganized and adopted its current name, Chrysler Group LLC, in 2009, and in 2014 it became a wholly owned subsidiary of Fiat SpA. It was for many years the third largest (after General Motors Corporation and the Ford Motor Company) of the “Big Three” automakers in the United States.
Chrysler’s origins lie in the Maxwell Motor Company, Inc. (formed in 1913). The first Maxwell car was made in 1904 by Jonathan Maxwell and Benjamin Briscoe, who in 1909 joined the short-lived United States Motor Company. With the collapse of this combine in 1913, Maxwell continued on alone until the postwar recession. In 1920, deeply in debt and facing ruin, the company convinced  Walter P. Chrysler, who had resigned from the Buick division of General Motors, to join the effort to revitalize the company. In 1922 the Maxwell company took over Chalmers Motor Car Co. (founded in 1908). In the following year Chrysler bought control. Under Chrysler’s leadership, the company began to manufacture competitive automobiles, beginning with a revolutionary six-cylinder vehicle that was introduced at the 1924 New York Automobile Show. In 1925 the Maxwell Motor Company became the Chrysler Corporation, with Chrysler as president. With the purchase of Dodge Brothers, Inc. (founded in 1914), and the introduction of Plymouth in 1928, the Chrysler Corporation became a major presence in the American automotive industry.
Along with General Motors and Ford, Chrysler played a key role in supporting the U.S. military effort during World War II. By many accounts Chrysler led the pack, accepting defense contracts even before the United States entered the war. Between 1942 and 1945 virtually all civilian car production was suspended, as the automotive industry turned its factories to the task of filling defense contracts. Under the leadership of company president K.T. Keller, Chrysler built more than 25,000 Sherman and Pershing tanks during the course of the war.
The 1950s and ’60s marked a period of growth and innovation at Chrysler. The company pioneered the “muscle car,” beginning with the 1955 C-300, featuring a 300-horsepower hemi V-8 engine, and following with the outstanding 1960 Chrysler 300 F. Popular high-performance cars of the 1960s included the Chrysler 300 coupes, the Chrysler Imperial LeBaron, the Dodge Charger, and the Dodge Coronet.
Also beginning in the 1950s, Chrysler began absorbing other companies in and out of the automotive industry. In 1966–67 it acquired control of Simca in France, Rootes Motors Ltd. in Britain, and Barreiros Diesel in Spain—which were renamed Chrysler France, Chrysler United Kingdom, and Chrysler España, respectively. In 1979 these were sold to PSA Peugeot Citroën SA in exchange for minority shares in Peugeot Citroën. In 1970 the Mitsubishi Motors Corporation of Japan began producing subcompact cars to be sold in the United States under the Chrysler name; the following year Chrysler began buying shares in Mitsubishi, eventually acquiring 24 percent of the Japanese automaker before selling all of its stock in the early 1990s.
Like the rest of the American automobile industry, Chrysler was caught off guard by a serious challenge from small fuel-efficient Japanese cars after the oil crisis of 1973. With oil prices rising tenfold by 1980, consumers were less interested in “muscle” and more interested in price and fuel efficiency—and Chrysler, like its rivals General Motors and Ford, did not have viable competing compact cars in its lineup. In serious financial straits, the company hired Lee A. Iacocca as its president and chairman of the board. In the 1960s Iacocca had achieved prominence at Ford for his innovative engineering and design breakthroughs, including the sporty Mustang, which was introduced to great acclaim at the 1964 World’s Fair. However, Iacocca’s contentious relationship with his boss, Henry Ford II, led to his being fired in 1978. Within months he was running Chrysler, a company awash in problems. Indeed, soon after taking the job, Iacocca learned that Chrysler was on the brink of bankruptcy.
In 1979, in the midst of the second oil crisis in a decade, Iacocca made the bold move of appealing to the U.S. Congress for a loan guarantee of $1.5 billion. He overcame strong resistance on Capitol Hill by producing a list including each congressional district with an estimate of the number of jobs that would be lost if Chrysler failed. The strategy worked. Congress approved the deal, and in January 1980 Pres. Jimmy Carter signed the Chrysler Corporation Loan Guarantee Act.
Having secured the loan, Iacocca went to work transforming the company, beginning with serious cost-cutting measures. He announced that he would slash his own salary to $1 a year, and he demanded that everyone else, up and down the line, “take a haircut.” With unprecedented cooperation from both union and management, Iacocca trimmed the company’s balance sheet. In 1983 a more stable Chrysler repaid the loan, well in advance of its deadline, along with an additional $350 million in interest. In a ceremony in Washington, D.C., Iacocca proclaimed, “We at Chrysler borrow money the old-fashioned way. We pay it back.”
That same year Chrysler introduced the Dodge Caravan and Plymouth Voyager—the first minivans, a type of family-oriented vehicle that would become the automotive sales leader for the next 25 years. The development of the K-car platform, with its signature vehicles the Dodge Aries, Plymouth Reliant, and Chrysler LeBaron, further enhanced Chrysler’s profitability. During this period Iacocca became something of a populist star, especially when he began to appear in a series of television commercials promoting Chrysler cars by challenging viewers, “If you can find a better car, buy it!”
In 1987 Chrysler purchased an Italian company, Nuova Automobili F. Lamborghini (founded in 1963 by Ferruccio Lamborghini), maker of expensive, high-performance sports cars, and American Motors Corporation (founded in 1954 through the merger of Nash-Kelvinator Corporation and Hudson Motor Car Company), maker of the Jeep four-wheel-drive vehicles. Iacocca especially saw potential in the Jeep Cherokee, which went on to become one of the most popular sport-utility vehicles (SUVs). During this period Chrysler set up a 50–50 joint venture, named Diamond-Star Motors, with Mitsubishi to produce subcompact cars at an Illinois plant. In 1991 Mitsubishi bought out Chrysler’s interest in the company and renamed it Mitsubishi Motors Manufacturing America.
