coin,  a piece of metal or, rarely, some other material (such as leather or porcelain) certified by a mark or marks upon it as being of a specific intrinsic or exchange value.
The use of cast-metal pieces as a medium of exchange is very ancient and probably developed out of the use in commerce of ordinary ingots of bronze and other metals that possessed an intrinsic value. Until the development of bills of exchange in medieval Europe and paper currency in medieval China, metal coins were the only such medium. Despite their diminished use in most commercial transactions, coins are still indispensable to modern economies; in fact, their importance is growing as the result of the widespread use of coin-operated machines. For a discussion of paper currencies, see money.
Being made in most ages of precious metal, or alternatively possessing a substantial token value, coins have always been prized, often hoarded, and, therefore, frequently buried for safety. The contents of such savings banks have been dug up in all ages, so that the coins of past civilizations continue to be found in vast numbers. Studied alongside literary or archaeological evidence, they yield a wide range of information that is especially valuable for chronology and economic history. Coins may reflect the wealth and power of cities and states, and study of their distribution may help to define the physical extent of territorial dominion or to illustrate major commercial connections. Thus, the popularity in ancient times of Athenian coins in the Levant and of Corinthian silver in Magna Graecia (southern Italy) testifies to established trade links. Finds of early Roman imperial gold in India corroborate the reference of the Roman historian Pliny the Elder to the drain on Roman gold to pay for Indian and other Eastern luxuries. Likewise, huge finds of Arab silver coins in Scandinavia show the extent of trade, in particular the demand for furs by the ʿAbbāsid caliphs and the Sāmānid rulers of Iran. One result of such widespread commercial contacts is that certain currencies acquired special international preeminence. In ancient times, those of Athens, Corinth, and Philip II of Macedon were widely popular. The uniform coinage of Philip’s son Alexander the Great was struck at mints widely scattered throughout his vast empire and was universally accepted. In medieval times, the gold dinars (a term derived from the Roman denarius) of the early caliphs and the gold ducats of Florence and Venice played a similar role—as did the silver dollars of Mexico, the Maria Theresa of Austria, and the gold sovereigns of Great Britain in modern times. Moreover, the study of depreciation and debasement of coinage may illuminate past national financial distress. For example, the heavily alloyed 3rd-century-ad Roman antoniniani (coins introduced by the Roman emperor Caracalla, originally having a value of two denarii) tell their tale as clearly as the depreciating paper currency of Germany in and after 1919.
No less valuable than the economic evidence yielded by a comparative study of coins is their purely documentary importance. Together with medals, they present an unrivaled series of historical portraits from the 4th century bc to the present day, many of them otherwise unknown, like the Greco-Bactrian kings or certain usurpers during the Roman Empire. Greek coinage is a particularly notable contribution to the history of art, displaying not only the beauty and strength of many artistic traditions but also (like Roman coinage) the miniature likenesses of numerous large-scale sculptural and architectural works now lost. The imperial coinage of Rome, apart from its portraiture, is important above all for the remarkable detail of its chronological and political content; and from both Greek and Roman coins much can be learned of mythology and religion. The Christian influences active in medieval Europe can be similarly measured from medieval currencies.
The principal metals of which ancient coins were made were electrum, gold, silver, copper, brass, and bronze—all of them more or less resistant to decay. Their use at first was generally dictated by availability. The earliest coins of Asia Minor were of electrum, a natural occurring alloy washed from Lydian rivers (electrum was later produced artificially). Gold became the major currency metal of southwestern Asia as a whole, being derived from Scythian, Pontic, and Bactrian sources. The city-states of the Greek mainland preferred the silver that adjacent mines supplied, and the mines of Italy led to the choice of bronze for the earliest coinage of Rome. With the development of internal economies and external trade, gold, silver, and copper or bronze quickly came to be used side by side; Philip II of Macedon popularized gold in Greece, but it became paramount only in the Byzantine and Arab empires and in the great commercial currencies of the Italian republics of the 13th century onward. Silver, however, was nearly always powerful in Roman currency and was the major coinage metal of Europe from the 8th to the 13th century. Bronze or copper was first used for small change in Greece from the late 5th century bc and in the Roman and Byzantine systems as well; the vast currency of China consisted of base metals down to modern times.
The foregoing metals furnished most currencies until the early 20th century, when the appreciation in value of gold and silver and the need to economize led to the general production of paper currencies for the higher units of value. Token units of lower value expressed in terms of nickel (used, exceptionally, in Bactria in the 2nd century bc), cupronickel, bronze, and, in times of postwar stress, aluminum and aluminum bronze supplemented precious metals in some countries. Lead, which may easily decay, has seldom been used for coinage, except by the Andhras (inhabitants of the Deccan in ancient India), in pre-Roman Gaul, and in the more recent coinages of the Malay states. Iron, very occasionally used in antiquity—e.g., in Sparta—reappeared in German coins of World War I. Zinc was employed by Rome as a constituent of fine brass coins and as an element in the alloy of a few Chinese coins from the 15th to the 17th century. Base metals furnished the material for some Celtic coins in Gaul and Britain in the last century bc. In crises, currencies have been produced from leather, cloth, card, paper, and other materials.
