Comptroller,  official whose primary responsibility is to furnish an organization with accounting records and reports. The comptroller is responsible for instituting and maintaining documents, safeguarding assets, disclosing liabilities, presenting income and other tax information, and preparing and interpreting operating and financial reports.
The comptroller of a private business organization often has important advisory functions in addition to the record-keeping and reporting responsibilities. These duties might include the preparation and enforcement of the budget, measuring expected profitability of alternate proposals, and assembling relevant information for administrative decision making. In short, the comptroller is responsible for accumulating and interpreting information and for translating it into instruments of administrative control.
The comptroller usually maintains procedures for auditing invoices, vouchers, records, warrants, and payrolls. These and other auditing procedures are sometimes centralized under an internal auditor who may be responsible to the comptroller, to the president of the company, or to the board of directors. Comptrollership functions are occasionally distributed among different officials and the title of comptroller is then omitted. The comptroller should be sharply distinguished from the treasurer, property custodian, and others who handle the physical assets of the organization.
Units of government traditionally give greater emphasis to
auditing and safeguarding features and less emphasis to advisory
functions. Branches of the U.S. government make use of numerous
comptrollers including the comptroller of the currency, an office created by the National Currency Act of 1863 to supervise all national banks and approve the creation of new national banks. The British government has an official designated as the comptroller and auditor general. This individual holds a permanent appointment as an officer of parliament and is responsible for ensuring that all government expenditures are properly made.
