employment agency,  an organization to help workers find employment and employers find workers. Employment agencies may be either privately owned or publicly provided or managed. Their services are available to the unemployed, to those who seek different or better jobs, and to employers. A private employment agency may charge fees of the employer, the worker, or both. An agency may be local, national,
or, in some exceptional instances, international in scope. Its
services may be limited to certain trades and occupations or to
classes of workers (skilled or unskilled, male or female). In
some countries or under certain circumstances the notification of
vacancies may be obligatory upon employers, while refusal of
suitable work offered may entail suspension or disallowance of an
applicant’s unemployment benefits.
Both in periods of national emergency when labour shortages are widespread and in normal times, public employment offices play a vital role in uniting the jobless and the job. They are relied upon to provide comprehensive, impartial
information about opportunities for employment and to disseminate
this information to those who need it. In complex industrial
societies with continuously changing technology, problems of unemployment have prompted a reevaluation of the role and services
of public employment systems.
The public employment service system in the
United States evolved from a combination of city, state, and federal
legislation over a period of about six decades. In the U.S.,
as in Europe, the first publicly financed employment offices were
established by individual municipalities: New York City in 1834;
San Francisco in 1868; Los Angeles and Seattle in 1893; Duluth, Minnesota; Sacramento, California; Butte, Montana; and Tacoma, Washington between 1899 and 1906. The increasing number of free, municipally operated
employment offices usually catered to unskilled and casual labour.
The recurrence of periodic unemployment, the complaints
against private employment agencies, and the lack of farm labour
in many states were largely responsible for the entry of several
states into the field of employment services. In 1890 Ohio established
a state-directed system and a number of other states quickly followed suit.
By 1923 public employment office laws
had been enacted in 32 states. The municipal employment offices
which continued to exist in some cities were quite inadequate
and failed to provide an effective organization of the labour
market in their communities. Little attention was devoted to
the problems of administration; there was no uniformity in their
records or standards, no cooperation between offices, and no specified
policies of office management. The
state services gradually became aware of the need for administrative,
program, and policy ties with state-administered offices in other areas. This clearly called for a federal institution
capable of tying the state agencies together into a cohesive,
integrated system with comparable programs, policies, standards,
and operating practices.
The federal government’s public employment work began in 1907 when the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization began to distribute immigrant labour among the states. In 1914 the Immigration Service developed the beginnings of a nationwide information system about employment opportunities. The entrance of the United States into World War I intensified the need for an organized public employment system.
A newly created unit in the federal Department of Labor, the United States Employment Service (USES), established a national network of community advisory boards on labour recruitment, but the activities of this unit were sharply curtailed by reduced appropriations at the end of the war. State and municipal offices
were left with the job of organizing the labour market. Unsuccessful attempts to establish a federal-state employment
service included the Kenyon-Nolan Bill (1919) and the Wagner
Bill (1931), vetoed by Pres. Herbert Hoover, who believed a federally administered agency was necessary to meet the overwhelming problems of the Great Depression. Finally, in 1933, the USES was reestablished by the Wagner-Peyser Act as a bureau of the Department of Labor. It was charged with encouraging the
establishment of state-administered employment offices and providing
for federal grants to defray operating costs. The law made
it the duty of the USES to “promote and develop a national
system of employment offices for men, women, and juniors,” The federal service was to prescribe minimum standards, develop uniform administration and statistical procedures, publish employment information, and promote a system of clearing labour between states.
Creation of a federal-state employment service in the midst of
a serious economic depression inevitably involved the new bureau
in developing emergency programs for public works and work
relief projects. The national reemployment service was set up
under the direction of the USES to refer workers to public works
and relief projects. The USES and the national reemployment
service were immediately involved in mass registration and referrals
of several million jobless workers.
Following enactment of the Social Security Act in 1935, the
functions of the employment service were enlarged because all
states that sought to participate in the federal-state unemployment
insurance program were required to provide that such insurance
benefits would be paid only to registered claimants through
a state public employment office. This new responsibility required
a work availability test for applicants of unemployment
insurance and forced a major expansion in both federal and state
services. As a result, within a few years after the enactment
of the enabling legislation in 1936, a state employment service
operating in collaboration with the USES had been established
in all states.
During World War II and the Korean War the nation relied
heavily upon the public employment services for the allocation of
human resources. Hundreds of thousands of workers were recruited for
wartime training programs; millions were placed in critical industries;
the wide-ranging activities of the employment service
provided employers and unions with the opportunity to see the
role of public employment offices in contributing to the stability
and improved functioning of local labour markets.
Public interest in manpower utilization and the organization of
the labour market continued to increase after World War II.
Recurring recessions, persistent unemployment, technological advances, changes in the composition of the labour force, increasing
educational requirements for jobs, decline in employment in certain
segments of the economy (e.g., railroads, coal mines, and
agriculture), changing patterns of consumer demand, and the
distress of areas experiencing exhaustion of natural resources or
the out-migration of industry forced reconsideration of the role
and services of the USES and the role that the government should
play in solving unemployment. Measures adopted included the
Area Redevelopment Act (1961, revised 1965), the Manpower
Development and Training Act (1962), the Vocational Education
Act (1963), and the Economic Opportunity Act (1964). In 1998 the Wagner-Peyser Act was amended, and the USES was folded into the Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration (DOLETA) as part of the One-Stop (later CareerOneStop) workforce program. The Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (2014) realigned the federal employment, training, and career development system for the 21st century, but much of its core mission remained unchanged. The program continues to make labour surveys, certify training needs, provide testing and counseling, expand job placement for persons trained, and provide information and guidance on occupational
needs.
