Heinz, formerly in full H.J. Heinz Company,  division and brand of the Kraft Heinz Company, a major manufacturer of processed foods and beverages that was formed by the 2015 merger of H.J. Heinz Holding Corporation and Kraft Foods Group. Heinz is known for its “57 Varieties” slogan, which was devised in 1896, though it marketed more than 5,700 products in the early 21st century. Heinz’s headquarters are in Pittsburgh.
The Heinz Company was founded in Sharpsburg, Pennsylvania, in 1869 by Henry John Heinz (1844–1919), who was later to become nationally known as the “Pickle King.” Heinz had become interested in selling food when he was a child; by age 16 he had several employees working to cultivate the hotbeds and gardens he had built and to deliver his produce to Pittsburgh grocers. His first company, a partnership with two other men, was formed to prepare and market horseradish. Although the company did not survive the business panic in 1875, Heinz reorganized it in 1876 and built it into a major national company by the end of the century. By 1905 it had become the H.J. Heinz Company, the largest producer of pickles, vinegar, and ketchup (catsup) in the United States. By 1919 the company had more than 6,000 employees and 25 factories. Heinz was an astute marketer of his products as well, and he set up a massive electric sign in New York City (1900) to advertise his firm’s relishes, condiments, and pickles (see advertising). Heinz was a progressive employer for his time and was one of the few food processors to support a federal Pure Food Act. The corporation was headed by members of the Heinz family until 1969.
In 1978 the Heinz Company acquired Weight Watchers International, Inc., a producer of low-calorie meals whose weight-loss program eventually became the largest of its kind in the United States. Soon afterward the company began a period of global expansion that continued through the early 21st century. Heinz acquired food-processing companies and established subsidiaries in China, Africa, central and eastern Europe, and the Pacific Rim. In 1999 Heinz sold Weight Watchers (later called WW), though it continued to market the brand. In 2002 the company sold several underperforming North American food and pet-food businesses, including StarKist seafood, to the Del Monte Food Company. Heinz completed a takeover of the Australian food and drink maker Golden Circle in 2008.
Heinz’s core products include ketchup, sauces, meals, snacks, and baby food. In 2015 Heinz’s holding company merged with Kraft Foods to form Kraft Heinz. Heinz subsequently became a division and brand within the newly formed conglomerate.
