InBev,  former international brewing company that was founded in 2004 through the merger of the Brazilian Companhia de Bebidas das Américas (AmBev) and the Belgian Interbrew SA. In 2008 it acquired Anheuser-Busch, and the resulting company was named Anheuser-Busch InBev.
Interbrew’s history dates to the 14th century, when the Den Hoorn Brewery was founded in Leuven. In 1717 it was purchased by master brewer Sebastiaan Artois, who changed its name to Artois. In 1987 Artois combined with another Belgian brewery, Piedboeuf, to become Interbrew. The company acquired a number of breweries throughout the world during the 1990s—including the large Canadian brewery Labatt in 1995—and had established itself as the world’s third largest brewer by the early 21st century.
AmBev, based in São Paulo, Brazil, was formed in 2000 through the merger of Companhia Cervejaria Brahma and Companhia Antarctica Paulista Indústria Brasileria de Bebidas e Conexos. Whereas these two companies had been primarily concerned with Latin American markets, the merger created the world’s fifth largest brewer, with AmBev drawing profits from such popular brands as Skol, Brahma, and Antarctica.
In 2004 Interbrew and AmBev merged to create InBev, the world’s largest brewer. The newly formed company—which was headquartered in Leuven, Belgium—produced more than 200 brands of beer, including Stella Artois, Bass, Hoegaarden, and Jupiler. In 2008, speculation emerged about a hostile takeover of the Anheuser-Busch Companies, Inc., the leading brewer in the United States, by InBev. The deal was met with resistance in the United States; some—including members of the Busch family—were concerned with the threat of job loss as well as the prospect of the iconic American brand coming under the control of a foreign corporation. In July 2008, however, Anheuser-Busch agreed to be purchased by InBev for approximately $52 billion, and InBev vowed not to shut down any of Anheuser-Busch’s American breweries. After the takeover was finalized in November 2008, the newly formed Anheuser-Busch InBev became the world’s largest brewer.
