Keiretsu, (Japanese: “series”)  large clusters of companies that dominated the Japanese economy between the 1950s and the early 2000s, characterized by cross-shareholding and long-term transactional relationships among their constituents, such as those between assemblers and suppliers. Keiretsu can best be understood in terms of an intricate web of economic relationships that links banks, manufacturers, suppliers, and distributors.
The constituent businesses of a keiretsu may be horizontally or vertically integrated. The leading firms that form the core of a keiretsu are linked horizontally by capital and transactional relationships, and each core company ties up with many subcontracting firms, which are in vertical relationships with the core companies. The firms that are vertically connected with the core companies through subcontracting contracts and that can obtain financial and technological support from the parent company are usually considered affiliated subcontracting companies.
Japan once had six major keiretsu—Mitsui, Mitsubishi, Sumitomo, Fuyo, Sanwa, and Dai-Ichi Kangyō Bank (DKB) Group—known as the “Big Six.” They developed in the second half of the 20th century from different historical origins. The first three were established shortly after World War II, following the U.S. occupation authorities’ dissolution of the family-owned conglomerates known as zaibatsu. The latter three were organized around the newly developing big banks in the 1950s and ’60s: Fuji Bank, Sanwa Bank, and Dai-Ichi Kangyō Bank. In addition to the Big Six, another group of keiretsu, termed the Independent Corporate Group, was made up of Toyota, Hitachi, Toshiba, and Sony.
A feature of the Big Six keiretsu was that each encompassed a central bank, a general trading company, an insurance company, an iron and steel company, and a chemical company. For example, the Mitsui Group included Sakura Bank as its main bank, the general trading company Mitsui & Company, Ltd., Mitsui Life Insurance Company, Mitsui Mining & Smelting and the Japan Steel Works, and Mitsui Chemicals. Each of the core firms had subcontracting companies under its control, and the subcontracting companies on their part were forced into competition with each other to obtain better contracts from the parent firm.
In the 1990s, during the decline of the Japanese stock market, stable shareholding among the core companies began to decline. As a result, the keiretsu began a process of 
dissolution and regrouping. For example, the Sakura and Sumitomo banks merged to form Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation in 2001. The subcontracting companies, for their part, began to be more market-oriented and to move away from keiretsu relationships.
