Lehnert v. Ferris Faculty Association,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court, on May 30, 1991, partly upheld and partly reversed (5–4) the judgment of a lower court that the service fees that a public-sector union is permitted to charge nonunion employees in the bargaining unit it represents need not be used only for negotiating and administering a collective bargaining agreement and indeed may be spent on activities that do not directly benefit the employees in that bargaining unit. In Lehnert v. Ferris Faculty Association, the Supreme Court attempted to balance the nonunion employees’ First Amendment rights to freedom of speech and freedom of association against the right of unions to collect fair compensation for services that they are legally required to provide to all employees regardless of their union membership status.
The state of Michigan’s Public Employment Relations Act provided that a duly selected union shall serve as the exclusive representative of public employees in a particular bargaining unit. The act, which applied to faculty members in all educational institutions in Michigan, permitted unions and state employers to enter into “agency shop” arrangements in which the unions acted as agent for all employees in the bargaining unit. Employees in agency shops are not required to join unions but are compelled to pay service fees that almost equal union dues, because nonunion employees benefit from union collective bargaining efforts just as much as union employees do. The primary purpose of such policies, of course, is to prevent nonunion employees from freeloading on union efforts. However, agency shop arrangements in public-sector unions raise First Amendment concerns because they require nonunion employees to contribute money to unions as a condition of government employment.
In Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, a 1977 case from K–12 education, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the agency shop provision in Michigan’s Public Employment Relations Act that related to Lehnert but also emphasized that unions in the public sector may not use the fees of nonunion employees for political purposes. The justices also highlighted important guidelines for lower courts to consider in the adjudication of future agency shop disputes. First, the court explained that compelling nonunion employees to pay a service fee prompts First Amendment concerns because unions support a wide range of social, political, and ideological viewpoints, any one of which might bring disapproval from individual employees. Under the First Amendment, employees have the right to speak and associate, or not to speak and associate, regarding union political activities.
Second, in Abood the Supreme Court noted that compulsory financial support of a public-sector union does not in and of itself violate the First Amendment rights of nonunion employees, because the advantage of peaceful labour relations fostered by agency shops normally supersedes the constitutional infringements that may occur. Third, in keeping with the principle that states may not condition public employment upon professed religious allegiance or association with a political party, the court concluded that public employers may not require “an employee to contribute to the support of an ideological cause he may oppose as a condition of holding a job” as a public educator.
Following the Supreme Court’s decision in Abood, the faculty association in Lehnert entered into an agency shop arrangement with Ferris State College in Michigan whereby nonunion faculty were required to pay a service fee equal to union dues. James P. Lehnert and other members of the Ferris State College faculty filed suit, claiming that the union’s use of their agency fees to pay for lobbying and other political activities not directly related to collective bargaining violated their rights to freedom of speech and association. The plaintiffs also claimed that the procedures that the union used to establish the amount of, collect, and account for their service fees were inadequate. A federal district court ruled that some, but not all, of the union expenditures were constitutionally chargeable to the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs appealed following a partial settlement, and, on review, the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed.
After agreeing to hear an appeal, the Supreme Court partially affirmed the earlier judgments in clarifying the relationship between nonunion employees and the unions representing their bargaining units. First, the court reasoned that faculty members, including those who did not belong to the union, could be charged a pro rata (proportional) share of the costs associated with activities of state and national union affiliates even if those activities did not directly benefit the bargaining unit at Ferris State College. Second, the court pointed out that union members could be charged for expenses that the union incurred in preparing for a proposed strike, even though it would have been illegal under Michigan state law.
Third, in accordance with existing agency shop jurisprudence, the Supreme Court determined that the union could not charge nonunion faculty for lobbying, electoral, and other political activities that did not relate to the collective bargaining agreement. In this regard, the court found that the state may not compel its employees to subsidize lobbying or other political activities that are outside the context of contract ratification. In order to ensure proper accounting and distribution of agency shop fees in the future, then, the court emphasized that unions in agency shops bear the burden of proving the proportion of chargeable expenses to total expenses for purposes of determining the amount the union may charge nonunion employees for services.
