Libbey Inc., originally New England Glass Company,  American glass company that is one of the world’s largest manufacturers of glass tableware. Its headquarters are in Toledo, Ohio.
Libbey was originally founded in 1818 as the New England Glass Company, in East Cambridge, Massachusetts. The company made a large variety of wares ranging from pocket bottles and tumblers to attractive art glasses by techniques of molding, mechanical pressing, cutting, and engraving. Some of the finest examples of blown glass were produced by this factory; the glass was characterized by its high lead content, simplicity of line, and careful finish. New England glass was also famous for its rich colours, especially a ruby red. Another specialty of great public appeal was silvered glass, used to make doorknobs and tableware in imitation of silver. Some of the company’s most successful art glasses included a peachblow glass called Wild Rose, which was an opaque coloured glass with a glossy finish shading from white to deep rose; the amberina glass, with pale amber and ruby tones; and the Pomona, which has a frosted surface and a light yellow colour.
In 1878 William L. Libbey assumed control of the company. After William’s death in 1883, his son Edward D. Libbey became the owner and moved the factory to Toledo, Ohio, in 1888. The company became known as the Libbey Glass Company in 1892. About this time it also secured a contract to produce glass lightbulbs for Edison General Electric. In 1893 the company participated in the World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago and earned considerable attention for its eye-catching pavilion. Thereafter it entered a period of prosperity and innovation; among the company’s inventions were automated machine processes that could make glass bottles, lightbulbs, and flat glass.
A poorly timed introduction of high-end art glass during the Great Depression proved to be a costly mistake for the company, and it was sold to Owens-Illinois Glass Company in 1935. In the wake of World War II, the Libbey brand discontinued handmade cut glass to focus on machine-made and heat-treated glassware. In 1993 the division was spun off into an independent venture again, as Libbey Inc. In the late 20th and early 21st centuries, the company acquired several international glassmakers and expanded its operations to include flatware production and a number of overseas factories.
