monetary policy,  measures employed by governments to influence economic activity, specifically by manipulating the supplies of money and credit and by altering rates of interest.
The usual goals of monetary policy are to achieve or maintain full employment, to achieve or maintain a high rate of economic growth, and to stabilize prices and wages. Until the early 20th century, monetary policy was thought by most experts to be of little use in influencing the economy. Inflationary trends after World War II, however, caused governments to adopt measures that reduced inflation by restricting growth in the money supply.
Monetary policy is the domain of a nation’s central bank. The Federal Reserve System (commonly called the Fed) in the United States and the Bank of England of Great Britain are two of the largest such “banks” in the world. Although there are some differences between them, the fundamentals of their operations are almost identical and are useful for highlighting the various measures that can constitute monetary policy.
The Fed uses three main instruments in regulating the money supply: open-market operations, the discount rate, and reserve requirements. The first is by far the most important. By buying or selling government securities (usually bonds), the Fed—or a central bank—affects the money supply and interest rates. If, for example, the Fed buys government securities, it pays with a check drawn on itself. This action creates money in the form of additional deposits from the sale of the securities by commercial banks. By adding to the cash reserves of the commercial banks, then, the Fed enables those banks to increase their lending capacity. Consequently, the additional demand for government bonds bids up their price and thus reduces their yield (i.e., interest rates). The purpose of this operation is to ease the availability of credit and to reduce interest rates, which thereby encourages businesses to invest more and consumers to spend more. The selling of government securities by the Fed achieves the opposite effect of contracting the money supply and increasing interest rates.
The second tool is the discount rate, which is the interest rate at which the Fed (or a central bank) lends to commercial banks. An increase in the discount rate reduces the amount of lending made by banks. In most countries the discount rate is used as a signal, in that a change in the discount rate will typically be followed by a similar change in the interest rates charged by commercial banks.
The third tool regards changes in reserve requirements. Commercial banks by law hold a specific percentage of their deposits and required reserves with the Fed (or a central bank). These are held either in the form of non-interest-bearing reserves or as cash. This reserve requirement acts as a brake on the lending operations of the commercial banks: by increasing or decreasing this reserve-ratio requirement, the Fed can influence the amount of money available for lending and hence the money supply. This tool is rarely used, however, because it is so blunt. The Bank of England and most other central banks also employ a number of other tools, such as “treasury directive” regulation of installment purchasing and “special deposits.”
Historically, under the gold standard of currency valuation, the primary goal of monetary policy was to protect the central banks’ gold reserves. When a nation’s balance of payments was in deficit, an outflow of gold to other nations would result. In order to stem this drain, the central bank would raise the discount rate and then undertake open-market operations to reduce the total quantity of money in the country. This would lead to a fall in prices, income, and employment and reduce the demand for imports and thus would correct the trade imbalance. The reverse process was used to correct a balance of payments surplus.
The inflationary conditions of the late 1960s and ’70s, when inflation in the Western world rose to a level three times the 1950–70 average, revived interest in monetary policy. Monetarists such as Harry G. Johnson, Milton Friedman, and Friedrich Hayek explored the links between the growth in money supply and the acceleration of inflation. They argued that tight control of money-supply growth was a far more effective way of squeezing inflation out of the system than were demand-management policies. Monetary policy is still used as a means of controlling a national economy’s cyclical fluctuations.
