Navistar International Corporation, formerly (until 1986) International Harvester Company,  leading American producer of medium- and heavy-duty trucks and for many years a major manufacturer of farm and construction equipment. The company is a direct descendant of the business activities of Cyrus McCormick, particularly his invention of the mechanical reaper in 1831. Headquarters are in Chicago.
International Harvester was incorporated in 1902, merging McCormick Harvesting Machine Company with four smaller machinery makers. Shortly after, the company pioneered in motorized trucks by introducing high-wheeled “auto-wagons” for farmers. By the 1930s Harvester had entered the construction-equipment field with crawler-type tractors for farm and industrial use. The company soon became one of the largest manufacturers of earth-moving equipment. The firm entered the consumer home-appliance market after World War II, but sales proved disappointing, and the only consumer products manufactured by the late 20th century consisted of such items as lawn and garden tractors.
The biggest part of the company’s business for decades was medium- and heavy-duty trucks, which long made it the leading manufacturer in this area. Other products included agricultural machinery, earth-moving equipment for the construction industry, and turbine-driven compressors, generators, and pumps for the energy business. After a devastating 172-day strike in 1979–80 that left its major product areas open to competitors, Harvester encountered economic difficulties and began cutting back its manufacturing and marketing operations in a number of overseas countries. In 1982 the company sold most of its American construction-equipment business, and in 1985 it disposed of most of its farm-equipment line at home and abroad to the J.I. Case subsidiary of Tenneco Inc. Under the terms of the latter sale, Harvester was obliged to change its name, which it did in 1986 to Navistar International Corporation. By that time its truck-manufacturing operations were basically its only business, though a huge one.
