Offshoring,  the practice of outsourcing operations overseas, usually by companies from industrialized countries to less-developed countries, with the intention of reducing the cost of doing business. Chief among the specific reasons for locating operations outside a corporation’s home country are lower labour costs, more lenient environmental regulations, less stringent labour regulations, favourable tax conditions, and proximity to raw materials.
The offshoring of jobs and infrastructure became a significant factor in global economic development in the mid-20th century. Companies initially focused their outsourcing efforts on low-skilled or unskilled manufacturing jobs and simple assembly tasks (see maquiladora). By the early 21st century, however, the work being exported increasingly included skilled jobs. As communications technologies advanced and educational opportunities increased, many developing countries were able to provide sophisticated labour forces. Corporations around the world began tapping these new workers to staff customer-call centres and to fill jobs in financial management and f (IT). In countries such as India, the Philippines, and Malaysia, a growing pool of university graduates in technology quickly became capable of managing complex tasks that included software engineering, computer chip design, and code writing.
A major factor driving IT offshoring has been the vast disparity in both salaries and cost of living between U.S. technology workers and their counterparts in less-developed countries. In the early 21st century, analysts estimated that the average Indian IT worker earned roughly 13 percent of his American counterpart’s salary. Similar factors spurred the growth of offshoring in the financial services industry and brought new jobs in banking, insurance, and securities trading to a global workforce newly qualified to handle the tasks.
Although offshoring has produced economic benefits, it has also created some problems: for example, work performed in remote locations may fail to meet the quality standards expected by a parent company; exploitation of workers may occur; and lower environmental standards, especially in developing countries, may damage the local environment or pose health threats. One of the more vocal criticisms of offshoring originates from workers in developed countries who claim that the number of jobs available to them has been reduced by the practice of hiring cheaper labour in other countries.
