Rules of origin,  in international trade, legal standards supporting the differential treatment of some products on the basis of their country or region of origin.
Rules of origin are used to make more precise any aspect of trade law or trade policy that treats goods differently depending upon their country of origin. For example, quotas, countervailing duties, and antidumping measures restrict goods imported from specific producing countries. Products exported by member states of the World Trade Organization (WTO) generally face lower import barriers in other member states than do the exports of countries that do not qualify for most-favoured-nation treatment. Many bilateral and regional trade agreements exempt the products of member countries from various requirements.
Rules of origin are needed in all such cases, because the identity of the producing country cannot be reliably inferred from the point of entry. Under the 1992 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), for example, Mexico, Canada, and the United States gradually eliminated duties on each other’s exports, while exports produced in other countries continued to face tariff barriers. Because NAFTA was designed primarily to benefit firms and workers in North America, it was clear that goods manufactured elsewhere could not be allowed to circumvent tariffs simply by being transshipped through one NAFTA member country on their way to another. Nor should it have been possible to classify such foreign goods as having been manufactured in a NAFTA country if in reality they received only perfunctory labeling, repackaging, or processing there for the purpose of qualifying for preferential treatment. However, in an era of global manufacturing, final products are frequently assembled from components originating in many different countries. At what point should foreign inputs that do not qualify for favourable treatment be deemed to have been transformed into a new product that does qualify? Precise legal standards—specific rules of origin—vary widely across countries, but most use an ad valorem criterion based on the  percentage of value added, typically ranging from between 35 and 60 percent and computed in a prescribed manner.
Rules of origin became increasingly controversial as the preferential tariff regions and antidumping arrangements that require them mushroomed. As a result, most international agreements now contain provisions for countries to negotiate specific criteria for specific products. For example, NAFTA adopted the rule that any tea that is fermented or packaged in a NAFTA country should be deemed to have satisfied the rule of origin, regardless of where it was originally grown.
The WTO expanded its perspective on rules of origin. The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which the WTO superseded, required that rules of origin be transparent and administered in a consistent, uniform, impartial, and reasonable manner. The WTO has sought to render those restrictions more precise and to harmonize rules across countries by building on the Agreement on Rules of Origin adopted by the GATT in 1994. Rules of origin can also be used to interpret statutes governing labeling requirements, such as “Made in…” stickers, and to assist in compiling bilateral trade statistics.
