Strike,  collective refusal by employees to work under the conditions required by employers. Strikes arise for a number of reasons, though principally in response to economic conditions (defined as an economic strike and meant to improve wages and benefits) or labour practices (intended to improve work conditions). Other strikes can stem from sympathy with other striking unions or from jurisdictional disputes between two unions. Illegal strikes include sit-down strikes, wildcat strikes, and partial strikes (such as slowdowns or sick-ins). Strikes may also be called for purely political reasons (as in the general strike).
In most industrialized countries, the right to strike is granted in principle to private-sector workers. Some countries, however, require that specific efforts toward settlement be made before a strike can be called, while other countries forbid purely political strikes or strikes by public employees.
Most strikes and threats of strikes are intended to inflict a cost on the employer for failing to agree to specific wages, benefits, or other conditions demanded by the union. Strikes by Japanese unions are not intended to halt production for long periods of time; instead, they are seen as demonstrations of solidarity. Occasionally, strikes have been politically motivated, and they sometimes have been directed against governments and their policies, as was the case with the Polish union Solidarity in the 1980s. Strikes not authorized by the central union body may be directed against the union leadership as well as the employer.
The decision to call a strike does not come easily, because union workers risk a loss of income for long periods of time. They also risk the permanent loss of their jobs, especially when replacement workers hired to continue operations during the strike stay on as permanent employees.
In the United States, this strike-breaking tactic was seldom used on a large scale before the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO) strike of 1981, when Pres. Ronald Reagan ordered the hiring of permanent replacement controllers. Most federal, state, and municipal unions in the United States are, by law, denied the right to strike, and the air traffic controllers’ strike was thus illegal. Laws administered by the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) govern the replacement of workers who go on strike, permitting the permanent replacement of workers only when an economic strike is called during contract negotiations. In other words, employers cannot lawfully hire permanent replacement workers during a strike over unfair labour practices. Nonetheless, the threat of job loss has created a sharp decline in the number and length of economic strikes in the United States. American unions have responded by devising new tactics that include selective strikes, which target the sites that will cause the company the greatest economic harm, and rolling strikes, which target a succession of employer sites, making it difficult for the employer to hire replacements because the strike’s location is always changing.
