Toyota Motor Corporation, Japanese Toyota Jidōsha KK,  Japanese parent company of the Toyota Group. It became the largest automobile manufacturer in the world for the first time in 2008, surpassing General Motors. Many of its about 1,000 subsidiary companies and affiliates are involved in the production of automobiles, automobile parts, and commercial and industrial vehicles. Headquarters are in Toyota City, an industrial city east of Nagoya, Japan.
In 1933 Toyoda Kiichiro founded what later became the Toyota Motor Corporation as a division of the Toyoda Automatic Loom Works, Ltd. (later Toyota Industries Corporation, now a subsidiary), a Japanese manufacturer founded by his father, Toyoda Sakichi. Its first production car, the Model AA sedan, was released in 1936. The following year the division was incorporated as the Toyota Motor Company, Ltd., headed by Kiichiro. (The company’s name was changed to Toyota, which has a more pleasing sound in Japanese.) Toyota subsequently established several related companies, including Toyoda Machine Works, Ltd. (1941), and Toyota Auto Body, Ltd. (1945). During World War II the company suspended production of passenger cars and concentrated on trucks. Faced with wrecked facilities and a chaotic economy in the aftermath of World War II, the company did not resume making passenger cars until 1947 with the introduction of the Model SA.
By the 1950s Toyota’s automobile production factories were back in full operation, and to gain competitiveness the company began a careful study of American automobile manufacturers, owing to perceived U.S. technical and economic superiority. Toyota executives toured the production facilities of corporations, including the Ford Motor Company, to observe the latest automobile manufacturing technology and in turn implemented it in their own facilities, yielding a nearly immediate increase in efficiency. In 1957 Toyota Motor Sales, U.S.A., Inc., was established, and the following year the company released the Toyopet sedan, its first model to be marketed in the United States; it was poorly received because of its high price and lack of horsepower. The Land Cruiser, a 4 × 4 utility vehicle released in 1958, was more successful. In 1965 the Toyopet, completely redesigned for American drivers, was re-released as the Toyota Corona, marking the company’s first major success in the United States.
During the 1960s and ’70s the company expanded at a rapid rate and began exporting large numbers of automobiles to foreign markets. Toyota acquired such companies as Hino Motors, Ltd. (1966), a manufacturer of buses and large trucks; Nippondenso Company, Ltd., a maker of electrical auto components; and Daihitsu Motor Company, Ltd. (1967). For several decades Toyota was Japan’s largest automobile manufacturer. The company continued to thrive in the American market as well, gaining a reputation for its low-cost, fuel-efficient, and reliable vehicles such as the Corolla, which was released in the United States in 1968.
The company took its present name in 1982, when Toyota Motor Company was merged with Toyota Motor Sales Company, Ltd. Two years later Toyota partnered with General Motors Corporation in the creation of New United Motor Manufacturing, Inc., a dual-brand manufacturing plant in California, where Toyota began U.S. production in 1986.
The company experienced significant growth well into the 21st century, with innovations such as its luxury brand, Lexus (1989), and the first mass-produced hybrid-powered vehicle in the world, the Prius (1997). In 1999 Toyota was listed on both the London Stock Exchange and the New York Stock Exchange. The company continued to expand to new markets—specifically targeting younger buyers with the launch of its Scion brand (2003) and unveiling the world’s first luxury hybrid vehicle, the Lexus RX 400h (2005).
However, the company subsequently faced significant financial challenges: plummeting sales stemming from the global financial crisis of 2008 as well as an international safety recall of more than eight million vehicles in 2010, which temporarily halted the production and sales of several of its top models. Beginning in 2014, millions of vehicles manufactured by Toyota and several other car companies were recalled by regulators in the United States because of potentially malfunctioning airbags produced by the Japanese automotive-parts supplier Takata. The recall was “the largest and most complex safety recall in U.S. history,” according to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
Today Toyota has assembly plants and distributors in many countries. In addition to automotive products, its subsidiaries manufacture rubber and cork materials, steel, synthetic resins, automatic looms, and cotton and woolen goods. Others deal in real estate, prefabricated housing units, and the import and export of raw materials.
