Transamerica Corporation,  major American diversified financial-services corporation. Headquarters are in the Transamerica Pyramid building in San Francisco. In July 1999 Transamerica was acquired by Aegon NV, an insurance company in the Netherlands.
The company, incorporated in 1928, originated as the parent of Bank of America, and for many years banking was its principal activity. In 1958, following government antitrust action, Transamerica was reorganized to separate its banking and nonbanking activities, and a new corporation, Firstamerica Corporation (now Western Bancorporation), was formed to take over the banks it controlled. (Bank of America had been divested earlier.) The company then began a program of expansion into insurance and other services and began disposing of some of its non-finance-oriented businesses.
Through subsidiaries, Transamerica provides services in insurance, sales financing, consumer and commercial loans, equipment leasing, mortgage banking, computer services, and mutual funds. Insurance, which includes life, property, casualty, and title insurance, is handled primarily through the subsidiaries Transamerica Insurance Company and Transamerica Occidental Life Insurance Company. Transamerica Financial Corporation, formerly Pacific Finance Loans, is one of the oldest consumer loan companies in the United States. In 1979 Transamerica entered the field of transportation-equipment leasing by acquiring Interway Corporation, which it renamed Transamerica Interway.
In the mid-1980s Transamerica began selling off the travel and manufacturing subsidiaries it had earlier acquired in order to concentrate on expanding its core of financial-service operations. In 1986 it sold Budget Rent-A-Car Corporation, a major car rental service, and Transamerica Delaval Inc. (Delaval Turbine before its acquisition), a manufacturing company specializing in turbines, compressors, and other precision-engineered products.
From 1963 to 1981 Transamerica was a major producer and distributor of motion pictures, records, and tapes through its subsidiary United Artists Corporation. It sold United Artists to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in 1981, following some losses on large-budget films, in order to concentrate on other interests.
