Value-added tax (VAT),  government levy on the amount that a business firm adds to the price of a commodity during production and distribution of a good.
The most widely used method for collecting VAT is the credit method, which recognizes and adjusts for the taxes paid on previously purchased inputs. The credit method allows the firm to deduct a credit for taxes that were paid, for example, at earlier stages in a multiple-step manufacturing process of a given item. Also known as the invoice method (because a credit is granted only on taxes that have been paid on invoiced purchases), it has largely replaced turnover taxes, which were criticized for levying a cumulative tax at every stage of manufacture.
It is generally assumed that the burden of the VAT, like that of other sales taxes, falls upon the final consumer. Although the tax is collected at each stage of the production-distribution chain, the fact that sellers receive a credit for their tax payments causes the tax, in effect, to be passed on to the final consumer, who receives no credit. The tax can be regressive (i.e., the percentage of income paid in tax rises as income falls), but most countries have at least partly avoided this effect by applying a lower rate to necessities than to luxury items.
In 1954 France became the first country to adopt the VAT on a large scale. It served as an improvement on the earlier turnover tax, by which a product was taxed repeatedly at every stage of production and distribution, without relief for taxes paid at previous stages. Although easier to administer, such a tax discriminated heavily against industries and sectors in which products were bought and sold several times, encouraging an undesirable concentration of economic power. After West Germany adopted the VAT in 1968, most other western European countries followed suit, largely as the result of a desire to harmonize tax systems.
Within the European Union (EU), all member states are required to administer VATs that conform to a prescribed model.
