Zip2,  former American technology company (1995–99) that was the first enterprise founded by Elon Musk. It provided a searchable business directory that could be described as an Internet version of the yellow pages telephone directory with maps included.
Musk conceived the idea of making it possible for computer users to find local businesses at a time when computers were not yet ubiquitous. He brought on his brother, Kimbal Musk, and a friend, Gregory Kouri, as partners. In 1995, after acquiring a disc containing a business directory, Musk persuaded Navteq, a provider of electronic navigable maps, to give him free mapping software. He then wrote the code necessary to put the two databases—business listing and map—together. Musk described the company’s mission by saying that everyone ought to be able to find the closest pizza parlour and to be able to figure out how to get there. Unable to persuade potential investors to give them financing, Musk and his partners lived in their office to keep expenses low. The company expanded its listing by convincing businesses to pay for inclusion, and, after about a year, in early 1996, Mohr Davidow Ventures agreed to invest some $3 million in Zip2 in exchange for majority ownership. In addition, Musk was replaced as CEO by a more experienced businessman, Richard Sorkin, but remained executive vice president and chief technology officer.
Under Sorkin, Zip2 began offering its platform to newspapers, allowing them to create local directories for their online subscribers. The New York Times was an early customer, and many other major newspapers and newspaper chains followed. By that time Zip2 also included an arts and entertainment guide and specific directories for different categories of businesses. However, Musk disagreed with Sorkin’s business policies. When Sorkin arranged in 1998 for Zip2 to merge with CitySearch, which provided a similar service, Musk organized a revolt and prevailed upon the board of directors to remove Sorkin as CEO. Sorkin was replaced by Derek Proudian. In 1999 Compaq Computer Corp. purchased Zip2 for $307 million, and Zip2 became a unit of the search engine AltaVista, which Compaq had recently acquired. Zip2’s online city guides added local breadth to AltaVista’s features.
