Ozark–Saint Francis National Forest,  forest areas mainly in central and northwestern Arkansas, U.S., but also including a segment along the Mississippi River in the eastern part of the state. The forest consists of several separate units embracing parts of the Ouachita and Boston mountains and the southern end of the Springfield Plateau. The westernmost part of Ozark National Forest reaches the Oklahoma border, while St. Francis National Forest constitutes the eastern segment.
Established in 1908, Ozark National Forest covers approximately 1,563 square miles (4,048 square km). It is drained by tributaries of the Arkansas River. Hardwood trees, mainly oak and hickory, form the primary vegetation, and the undergrowth includes dogwood, maple, and redbud. Animal life is plentiful and includes white-tailed deer, black bear, rabbits, bobwhite quail, and wild turkey. The main unit constitutes a roughly rectangular area extending west-east through the southern Boston Mountains and surrounded by smaller units; the park Buffalo National River lies north of its eastern half. There are five designated wilderness areas, four in the main unit (Upper Buffalo, Hurricane Creek, Richland Creek, and East Fork) and one (Leatherwood) in the smaller unit northeast of the main unit. In the northernmost section of the forest, 14 miles (23 km) northwest of the city of Mountain View, is Blanchard Springs Caverns, a three-level cave system with two levels accessible to visitors. Magazine Mountain, at an elevation of 2,753 feet (839 metres) the highest point in Arkansas, is located in the smaller unit south of the main part.
Saint Francis National Forest, established in 1960 and administered jointly with Ozark National Forest, consists of 33 square miles (85 square km) of bottomland hardwood trees. It is named for the St. Francis River, which, along with the Mississippi River, forms the forest’s eastern boundary. The northwestern portion of the forest is located on hilly Crowley’s Ridge. Popular fishing areas and hiking trails are found in and around Storm Creek Lake and Bear Creek Lake.
Six national scenic byways cross the forests, including Arkansas Highway 7, often considered the most beautiful drive in the state. The 230 miles (370 km) of hiking trails include the 165-mile (266-km) Ozark Highlands National Recreational Trail, which begins in the southwest corner of the main unit at Lake Fort Smith, winds eastward, and terminates in the northeastern corner at Buffalo River Trail in Buffalo National River. Six waterways within the forests are designated as national wild and scenic rivers.
