electrostatics,  the study of electromagnetic phenomena that occur when there are no moving charges—i.e., after a static equilibrium has been established. Charges reach their equilibrium positions rapidly, because the electric force is extremely strong. The mathematical methods of electrostatics make it possible to calculate the distributions of the electric field and of the electric potential from a known configuration of charges, conductors, and insulators. Conversely, given a set of conductors with known potentials, it is possible to calculate electric fields in regions between the conductors and to determine the charge distribution on the surface of the conductors. The electric energy of a set of charges at rest can be viewed from the standpoint of the work required to assemble the charges; alternatively, the energy also can be considered to reside in the electric field produced by this assembly of charges. Finally, energy can be stored in a capacitor; the energy required to charge such a device is stored in it as electrostatic energy of the electric field.
Static electricity is a familiar electric phenomenon in which charged particles are transferred from one body to another. For example, if two objects are rubbed together, especially if the objects are insulators and the surrounding air is dry, the objects acquire equal and opposite charges and an attractive force develops between them. The object that loses electrons becomes positively charged, and the other becomes negatively charged. The force is simply the attraction between charges of opposite sign. The properties of this force were described above; they are incorporated in the mathematical relationship known as Coulomb’s law. The electric force on a charge Q1 under these conditions, due to a charge Q2 at a distance r, is given by Coulomb’s law,
The bold characters in the equation indicate the vector nature of the force, and the unit vector r̂ is a vector that has a size of one and that points from charge Q2 to charge Q1. The proportionality constant k equals 10−7c2, where c is the speed of light in a vacuum; k has the numerical value of 8.99 × 109 newtons-square metre per coulomb squared (Nm2/C2). Figure 1 shows the force on Q1 due to Q2. A numerical example will help to illustrate this force. Both Q1 and Q2 are chosen arbitrarily to be positive charges, each with a magnitude of 10−6 coulomb. The charge Q1 is located at coordinates x, y, z with values of 0.03, 0, 0, respectively, while Q2 has coordinates 0, 0.04, 0. All coordinates are given in metres. Thus, the distance between Q1 and Q2 is 0.05 metre.
The magnitude of the force F on charge Q1 as calculated using equation (1) is 3.6 newtons; its direction is shown in Figure 1. The force on Q2 due to Q1 is −F, which also has a magnitude of 3.6 newtons; its direction, however, is opposite to that of F. The force F can be expressed in terms of its components along the x and y axes, since the force vector lies in the xy plane. This is done with elementary trigonometry from the geometry of Figure 1, and the results are shown in Figure 2. Thus,in newtons. Coulomb’s law describes mathematically the properties of the electric force between charges at rest. If the charges have opposite signs, the force is attractive; the attraction is indicated in equation (1) by the negative coefficient of the unit vector r̂. Thus, the electric force on Q1 has a direction opposite to the unit vector r̂ and points from Q1 to Q2. In Cartesian coordinates, this results in a change of the signs of both the x and the y components of the force in equation (2).
How can this electric force on Q1 be understood? Fundamentally, the force is due to the presence of an electric field at the position of Q1. The field is caused by the second charge Q2 and has a magnitude proportional to the size of Q2. In interacting with this field, the first charge, some distance away, is either attracted to or repelled from the second charge, depending on the sign of the first charge.
In the example, the charge Q1 is in the electric field produced by the charge Q2. This field has the valuein newtons per coulomb (N/C). (An electric field can also be expressed in volts per metre [V/m], which is the equivalent of newtons per coulomb.) The electric force on Q1 is given byin newtons. This equation can be used to define the electric field of a point charge. The electric field E produced by charge Q2 is a vector. The magnitude of the field varies inversely as the square of the distance from Q2; its direction is away from Q2 when Q2 is a positive charge and toward Q2 when Q2 is a negative charge. Using equations (2) and (4), the field produced by Q2 at the position of Q1 isin newtons per coulomb.
When there are several charges present, the force on a given charge Q1 may be simply calculated as the sum of the individual forces due to the other charges Q2, Q3,…, etc., until all the charges are included. This sum requires that special attention be given to the direction of the individual forces since forces are vectors. The force on Q1 can be obtained with the same amount of effort by first calculating the electric field at the position of Q1 due to Q2, Q3,…, etc. To illustrate this, a third charge is added to the example above. There are now three charges, Q1 = +10−6 C, Q2 = +10−6 C, and Q3 = −10−6 C. The locations of the charges, using Cartesian coordinates [x, y, z] are, respectively, [0.03, 0, 0], [0, 0.04, 0], and [−0.02, 0, 0] metre, as shown in Figure 3. The goal is to find the force on Q1. From the sign of the charges, it can be seen that Q1 is repelled by Q2 and attracted by Q3. It is also clear that these two forces act along different directions. The electric field at the position of Q1 due to charge Q2 is, just as in the example above,in newtons per coulomb. The electric field at the location of Q1 due to charge Q3 isin newtons per coulomb. Thus, the total electric field at position 1 (i.e., at [0.03, 0, 0]) is the sum of these two fields E1,2 + E1,3 and is given by
The fields E1,2 and E1,3 as well as their sum, the total electric field at the location of Q1, E1 (total), are shown in Figure 3. The total force on Q1 is then obtained from equation (4) by multiplying the electric field E1 (total) by Q1. In Cartesian coordinates, this force, expressed in newtons, is given by its components along the x and y axes by
The resulting force on Q1 is in the direction of the total electric field at Q1, shown in Figure 3. The magnitude of the force, which is obtained as the square root of the sum of the squares of the components of the force given in the above equation, equals 3.22 newtons.
This calculation demonstrates an important property of the electromagnetic field known as the superposition principle. According to this principle, a field arising from a number of sources is determined by adding the individual fields from each source. The principle is illustrated by Figure 3, in which an electric field arising from several sources is determined by the superposition of the fields from each of the sources. In this case, the electric field at the location of Q1 is the sum of the fields due to Q2 and Q3. Studies of electric fields over an extremely wide range of magnitudes have established the validity of the superposition principle.
The vector nature of an electric field produced by a set of charges introduces a significant complexity. Specifying the field at each point in space requires giving both the magnitude and the direction at each location. In the Cartesian coordinate system, this necessitates knowing the magnitude of the x, y, and z components of the electric field at each point in space. It would be much simpler if the value of the electric field vector at any point in space could be derived from a scalar function with magnitude and sign.
The electric potential is just such a scalar function. Electric potential is related to the work done by an external force when it transports a charge slowly from one position to another in an environment containing other charges at rest. The difference between the potential at point A and the potential at point B is defined by the equation
As noted above, electric potential is measured in volts. Since work is measured in joules in the Système Internationale d’Unités (SI), one volt is equivalent to one joule per coulomb. The charge q is taken as a small test charge; it is assumed that the test charge does not disturb the distribution of the remaining charges during its transport from point B to point A.
To illustrate the work in equation (5), Figure 4 shows a positive charge +Q. Consider the work involved in moving a second charge q from B to A. Along path 1, work is done to offset the electric repulsion between the two charges. If path 2 is chosen instead, no work is done in moving q from B to C, since the motion is perpendicular to the electric force; moving q from C to D, the work is, by symmetry, identical as from B to A, and no work is required from D to A. Thus, the total work done in moving q from B to A is the same for either path. It can be shown easily that the same is true for any path going from B to A. When the initial and final positions of the charge q are located on a sphere centred on the location of the +Q charge, no work is done; the electric potential at the initial position has the same value as at the final position. The sphere in this example is called an equipotential surface. When equation (5), which defines the potential difference between two points, is combined with Coulomb’s law, it yields the following expression for the potential difference VA − VB between points A and B:where ra and rb are the distances of points A and B from Q. Choosing B far away from the charge Q and arbitrarily setting the electric potential to be zero far from the charge result in a simple equation for the potential at A:
The contribution of a charge to the electric potential at some point in space is thus a scalar quantity directly proportional to the magnitude of the charge and inversely proportional to the distance between the point and the charge. For more than one charge, one simply adds the contributions of the various charges. The result is a topological map that gives a value of the electric potential for every point in space.
Figure 5 provides three-dimensional views illustrating the effect of the positive charge +Q located at the origin on either a second positive charge q (Figure 5A) or on a negative charge −q (Figure 5B); the potential energy “landscape” is illustrated in each case. The potential energy of a charge q is the product qV of the charge and of the electric potential at the position of the charge. In Figure 5A, the positive charge q would have to be pushed by some external agent in order to get close to the location of +Q because, as q approaches, it is subjected to an increasingly repulsive electric force. For the negative charge −q, the potential energy in Figure 5B shows, instead of a steep hill, a deep funnel. The electric potential due to +Q is still positive, but the potential energy is negative, and the negative charge −q, in a manner quite analogous to a particle under the influence of gravity, is attracted toward the origin where charge +Q is located.
The electric field is related to the variation of the electric potential in space. The potential provides a convenient tool for solving a wide variety of problems in electrostatics. In a region of space where the potential varies, a charge is subjected to an electric force. For a positive charge the direction of this force is opposite the gradient of the potential—that is to say, in the direction in which the potential decreases the most rapidly. A negative charge would be subjected to a force in the direction of the most rapid increase of the potential. In both instances, the magnitude of the force is proportional to the rate of change of the potential in the indicated directions. If the potential in a region of space is constant, there is no force on either positive or negative charge. In a 12-volt car battery, positive charges would tend to move away from the positive terminal and toward the negative terminal, while negative charges would tend to move in the opposite direction—i.e., from the negative to the positive terminal. The latter occurs when a copper wire, in which there are electrons that are free to move, is used to connect the two terminals of the battery to each other.
The electric field has already been described in terms of the force on a charge. If the electric potential is known at every point in a region of space, the electric field can be derived from the potential. In vector calculus notation, the electric field is given by the negative of the gradient of the electric potential, E = −grad V. This expression specifies how the electric field is calculated at a given point. Since the field is a vector, it has both a direction and a magnitude. The direction is that in which the potential decreases most rapidly, moving away from the point. The magnitude of the field is the change in potential across a small distance in the indicated direction divided by that distance.
To aid in becoming more familiar with the electric potential, a numerically determined solution is presented for a two-dimensional configuration of electrodes. A long circular conducting rod is maintained at an electric potential of −20 volts. Next to the rod, a long L-shaped bracket, also made of conducting material, is maintained at a potential of +20 volts. Both the rod and the bracket are placed inside a long hollow metal tube with a square cross section; this enclosure is at a potential of zero (i.e., it is at “ground” potential). Figure 6 shows the geometry of the problem. Because the situation is static, there is no electric field inside the material of the conductors. If there were such a field, the charges that are free to move in a conducting material would do so until equilibrium was reached. The charges are arranged so that their individual contributions to the electric field at points inside the conducting material add up to zero. In a situation of static equilibrium, excess charges are located on the surface of conductors. Because there are no electric fields inside the conducting material, all parts of a given conductor are at the same potential; hence, a conductor is an equipotential in a static situation.
In Figure 7, the numerical solution of the problem gives the potential at a large number of points inside the cavity. The locations of the +20-volt and −20-volt electrodes can be recognized easily. In carrying out the numerical solution of the electrostatic problem in the figure, the electrostatic potential was determined directly by means of one of its important properties: in a region where there is no charge (in this case, between the conductors), the value of the potential at a given point is the average of the values of the potential in the neighbourhood of the point. This follows from the fact that the electrostatic potential in a charge-free region obeys Laplace’s equation, which in vector calculus notation is div grad V = 0. This equation is a special case of Poisson’s equation div grad V = ρ, which is applicable to electrostatic problems in regions where the volume charge density is ρ. Laplace’s equation states that the divergence of the gradient of the potential is zero in regions of space with no charge. In the example of Figure 7, the potential on the conductors remains constant. Arbitrary values of potential are initially assigned elsewhere inside the cavity. To obtain a solution, a computer replaces the potential at each coordinate point that is not on a conductor by the average of the values of the potential around that point; it scans the entire set of points many times until the values of the potentials differ by an amount small enough to indicate a satisfactory solution. Clearly, the larger the number of points, the more accurate the solution will be. The computation time and the computer memory size requirement increase rapidly, especially in three-dimensional problems with complex geometry. This method of solution is called the “relaxation” method.
In Figure 8, points with the same value of electric potential have been connected to reveal a number of important properties associated with conductors in static situations. The lines in the figure represent equipotential surfaces. The distance between two equipotential surfaces tells how rapidly the potential changes, with the smallest distances corresponding to the location of the greatest rate of change and thus to the largest values of the electric field. Looking at the +20-volt and +15-volt equipotential surfaces, one observes immediately that they are closest to each other at the sharp external corners of the right-angle conductor. This shows that the strongest electric fields on the surface of a charged conductor are found on the sharpest external parts of the conductor; electrical breakdowns are most likely to occur there. It also should be noted that the electric field is weakest in the inside corners, both on the inside corner of the right-angle piece and on the inside corners of the square enclosure.
In Figure 9, dashed lines indicate the direction of the electric field. The strength of the field is reflected by the density of these dashed lines. Again, it can be seen that the field is strongest on outside corners of the charged L-shaped conductor; the largest surface charge density must occur at those locations. The field is weakest in the inside corners. The signs of the charges on the conducting surfaces can be deduced from the fact that electric fields point away from positive charges and toward negative charges. The magnitude of the surface charge density σ on the conductors is measured in coulombs per metre squared and is given bywhere ε0 is called the permittivity of free space and has the value of 8.854 × 10−12 coulomb squared per newton-square metre. In addition, ε0 is related to the constant k in Coulomb’s law by
Figure 9 also illustrates an important property of an electric field in static situations: field lines are always perpendicular to equipotential surfaces. The field lines meet the surfaces of the conductors at right angles, since these surfaces also are equipotentials. Figure 10 completes this example by showing the potential energy landscape of a small positive charge q in the region. From the variation in potential energy, it is easy to picture how electric forces tend to drive the positive charge q from higher to lower potential—i.e., from the L-shaped bracket at +20 volts toward the square-shaped enclosure at ground (0 volts) or toward the cylindrical rod maintained at a potential of −20 volts. It also graphically displays the strength of force near the sharp corners of conducting electrodes.
A useful device for storing electrical energy consists of two conductors in close proximity and insulated from each other. A simple example of such a storage device is the parallel-plate capacitor. If positive charges with total charge +Q are deposited on one of the conductors and an equal amount of negative charge −Q is deposited on the second conductor, the capacitor is said to have a charge Q. As shown in Figure 11, it consists of two flat conducting plates, each of area A, parallel to each other and separated by a distance d.
To understand how a charged capacitor stores energy, consider the following charging process. With both plates of the capacitor initially uncharged, a small amount of negative charge is removed from the lower plate and placed on the upper plate. Thus, little work is required to make the lower plate slightly positive and the upper plate slightly negative. As the process is repeated, however, it becomes increasingly difficult to transport the same amount of negative charge, since the charge is being moved toward a plate that is already negatively charged and away from a plate that is positively charged. The negative charge on the upper plate repels the negative charge moving toward it, and the positive charge on the lower plate exerts an attractive force on the negative charge being moved away. Therefore, work has to be done to charge the capacitor.
Where and how is this energy stored? The negative charges on the upper plate are attracted toward the positive charges on the lower plate and could do work if they could leave the plate. Because they cannot leave the plate, however, the energy is stored. A mechanical analogy is the potential energy of a stretched spring. Another way to understand the energy stored in a capacitor is to compare an uncharged capacitor with a charged capacitor. In the uncharged capacitor, there is no electric field between the plates; in the charged capacitor, because of the positive and negative charges on the inside surfaces of the plates, there is an electric field between the plates, with the field lines pointing from the positively charged plate to the negatively charged one. The energy stored is the energy that was required to establish the field. In the simple geometry of Figure 11, it is apparent that there is a nearly uniform electric field between the plates; the field becomes more uniform as the distance between the plates decreases and the area of the plates increases. It was explained above how the magnitude of the electric field can be obtained from the electric potential. In summary, the electric field is the change in the potential across a small distance in a direction perpendicular to an equipotential surface divided by that small distance. In Figure 11, the upper plate is assumed to be at a potential of Va volts, and the lower plate at a potential of Vb volts. The size of the electric field isin volts per metre, where d is the separation of the plates. If the charged capacitor has a total charge of +Q on the inside surface of the lower plate (it is on the inside surface because it is attracted to the negative charges on the upper plate), the positive charge will be uniformly distributed on the surface with the valuein coulombs per metre squared. Equation (8) gives the electric field when the surface charge density is known as E = σ/ε0. This, in turn, relates the potential difference to the charge on the capacitor and the geometry of the plates. The result is
The quantity C is termed capacity; for the parallel-plate capacitor, C is equal to ε0A/d. The unit used for capacity is the farad (F); one farad equals one coulomb per volt. In equation (12), only the potential difference is involved. The potential of either plate can be set arbitrarily without altering the electric field between the plates. Often one of the plates is grounded—i.e., its potential is set at the Earth potential, which is referred to as zero volts. The potential difference is then denoted as ΔV, or simply as V.
Three equivalent formulas for the total energy W of a capacitor with charge Q and potential difference V are
All are expressed in joules. The stored energy in the parallel-plate capacitor also can be expressed in terms of the electric field; it is, in joules,
The quantity Ad, the area of each plate times the separation of the two plates, is the volume between the plates. Thus, the energy per unit volume (i.e., the energy density of the electric field) is given by 1/2ε0E2 in units of joules per metre cubed.
The amount of charge stored in a capacitor is the product of the voltage and the capacity. What limits the amount of charge that can be stored on a capacitor? The voltage can be increased, but electric breakdown will occur if the electric field inside the capacitor becomes too large. The capacity can be increased by expanding the electrode areas and by reducing the gap between the electrodes. In general, capacitors that can withstand high voltages have a relatively small capacity. If only low voltages are needed, however, compact capacitors with rather large capacities can be manufactured. One method for increasing capacity is to insert between the conductors an insulating material that reduces the voltage because of its effect on the electric field. Such materials are called dielectrics (substances with no free charges). When the molecules of a dielectric are placed in the electric field, their negatively charged electrons separate slightly from their positively charged cores. With this separation, referred to as polarization, the molecules acquire an electric dipole moment. A cluster of charges with an electric dipole moment is often called an electric dipole.
Is there an electric force between a charged object and uncharged matter, such as a piece of wood? Surprisingly, the answer is yes, and the force is attractive. The reason is that, under the influence of the electric field of a charged object, the negatively charged electrons and the positively charged nuclei within the atoms and molecules are subjected to forces in opposite directions. As a result, the negative and positive charges separate slightly. Such atoms and molecules are said to be polarized and to have an electric dipole moment. The molecules in the wood acquire an electric dipole moment in the direction of the external electric field. The polarized molecules are attracted toward the charged object because the field increases in the direction of the charged object.
The electric dipole moment p of two charges +q and −q separated by a distance l is a vector of magnitude p = ql with a direction from the negative to the positive charge. An electric dipole in an external electric field is subjected to a torque τ = pE sin θ, where θ is the angle between p and E. The torque tends to align the dipole moment p in the direction of E. The potential energy of the dipole is given by Ue = −pE cos θ, or in vector notation Ue = −p · E. In a nonuniform electric field, the potential energy of an electric dipole also varies with position, and the dipole can be subjected to a force. The force on the dipole is in the direction of increasing field when p is aligned with E, since the potential energy Ue decreases in that direction.
The polarization of a medium P gives the electric dipole moment per unit volume of the material; it is expressed in units of coulombs per metre squared. When a dielectric is placed in an electric field, it acquires a polarization that depends on the field. The electric susceptibility χe relates the polarization to the electric field as P = χeE. In general, χe varies slightly, depending on the strength of the electric field, but for some materials, called linear dielectrics, it is a constant. The dielectric constant κ of a substance is related to its susceptibility as κ = 1 + χe/ε0; it is a dimensionless quantity. Table 1 lists the dielectric constants of a few substances.
The presence of a dielectric affects many electric quantities. A dielectric reduces by a factor K the value of the electric field and consequently also the value of the electric potential from a charge within the medium. As seen in Table 1, a dielectric can have a large effect. The insertion of a dielectric between the electrodes of a capacitor with a given charge reduces the potential difference between the electrodes and thus increases the capacitance of the capacitor by the factor K. For a parallel-plate capacitor filled with a dielectric, the capacity becomes C = Κε0A/d. A third and important effect of a dielectric is to reduce the speed of electromagnetic waves in a medium by the factor Square root of√K .
Capacitors come in a wide variety of shapes and sizes. Not all have parallel plates; some are cylinders, for example. If two plates, each one square centimetre in area, are separated by a dielectric with K = 2 of one-millimetre thickness, the capacity is 1.76 × 10−12 F, about two picofarads. Charged to 20 volts, this capacitor would store about 40 picocoulombs of charge; the electric energy stored would be 400 picojoules. Even small capacitors can store enormous amounts of charge. Modern techniques and dielectric materials permit the manufacture of capacitors that occupy less than one cubic centimetre and yet store 1010 times more charge and electric energy than in the above example.
Capacitors have many important applications. They are used, for example, in digital circuits so that information stored in large computer memories is not lost during a momentary electric power failure; the electric energy stored in such capacitors maintains the information during the temporary loss of power. Capacitors play an even more important role as filters to divert spurious electric signals and thereby prevent damage to sensitive components and circuits caused by electric surges.
