Infrared source,  in astronomy, any of various celestial objects that radiate measurable quantities of energy in the infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Such objects include the Sun and the planets, certain stars, nebulae, and galaxies. A number of known infrared sources can be observed at the wavelengths of visible light and in certain cases at radio and X-ray wavelengths as well.
The Sun emits roughly half its energy in the form of infrared rays, with the rest mainly as visible light. Its radiation heats up the planets and renders them bright infrared sources. Jupiter, Saturn, and Neptune also have their own internal heat source, which doubles their infrared brightness.
At short infrared wavelengths of about 2 micrometres, the brightest objects observed beyond the solar system are the large, cool red supergiant stars such as Betelgeuse in the constellation Orion. They are true infrared sources, but investigators have also detected stars emitting at these wavelengths that are not in fact cool. Such stellar objects are brilliant at all wavelengths and are naturally brightest in the visible or ultraviolet. The dust in the interstellar medium, however, blocks their radiation of shorter wavelengths, so that they can only be detected by their infrared emissions, which flow around the dust particles.
Most infrared sources that emit at wavelengths of 10–20 micrometres are clouds of dust warmed by neighbouring stars from the average ambient temperature of interstellar space (−270 °C) to about room temperature. Such sources fall into two categories. One type consists of a shell of dust ejected from a very old supergiant. The other is a denser patch of dust that lies within a nebula from which stars are forming and is heated by adjacent newly born stars. The disk of the Milky Way Galaxy includes many such regions of active star formation. A notable example is the Orion Nebula, an H II region (one of ionized hydrogen) in the constellation Orion. Interestingly, this nebula is associated with one of the most curious infrared sources yet discovered, the so-called Becklin–Neugebauer object. Located in a giant molecular cloud behind the Orion Nebula, it radiates very intensely in the infrared but scarcely at all in the optical. Many investigators hypothesize that the object is an incipient massive star.
Investigators have observed rapidly moving clouds of ionized gas near the nucleus of the Milky Way system at a wavelength of 10 micrometres. The velocities of these hot gaseous clouds strongly suggest the presence of a supermassive object, i.e., a black hole, at the galactic centre. Strong infrared emissions also are evident at the centres of many external galaxies, notably spiral systems with active nuclei (e.g., Seyfert galaxies). This emission provided evidence that the hot accretion disk surrounding a black hole is the source of the infrared radiation from such galaxies, as in the case of the Milky Way.
Infrared radiation of longer wavelength—about 100 micrometres—has been detected from dust diffusely spread throughout the Milky Way system. Measurements indicate that at least as much mass is present in this very cold dust as there is in the interstellar dust analyzed by scattered starlight in the visible portion of the spectrum.
