Musical sound,  any tone with characteristics such as controlled pitch and timbre. The sounds are produced by instruments in which the periodic vibrations can be controlled by the performer.
That some sounds are intrinsically musical, while others are not, is an oversimplification. From the tinkle of a bell to the slam of a door, any sound is a potential ingredient for the kinds of sound organization called music. The choices of sounds for music making have been severely limited in all places and periods by a diversity of physical, aesthetic, and cultural considerations. This article will analyze those involved in Western musical traditions.
The fundamental distinction usually made has been between tone and noise, a distinction best clarified by referring to the physical characteristics of sound. Tone differs from noise mainly in that it possesses features that enable it to be regarded as autonomous. Noises are most readily identified, not by their character but by their sources; e.g., the noise of the dripping faucet, the grating chalk, or the squeaking gate. Although tones too are commonly linked with their sources (violin tone, flute tone, etc.), they more readily achieve autonomy because they possess controlled pitch, loudness, timbre, and duration, attributes that make them amenable to musical organization. Instruments that yield musical sounds, or tones, are those that produce periodic vibrations. Their periodicity is their controllable (i.e., musical) basis.
The strings of the violin, the lips of the trumpet player, the reed of a saxophone, and the wooden slabs of a xylophone are all, in their unique ways, producers of periodic vibrations. The pitch, or high-low aspect, created by each of these vibrating bodies is most directly a product of vibrational frequency. Timbre (tone colour) is a product of the total complement of simultaneous motions enacted by any medium during its vibration. Loudness is a product of the intensity of that motion. Duration is the length of time that a tone persists.
Each of these attributes is revealed in the wave form of a tone. The pattern may be visualized as an elastic reed—like that of a clarinet—fixed at one end, moving like a pendulum in a to-and-fro pattern when set into motion. Clearly, this reed’s motion will be in proportion to the applied force. Its arc of movement will be lesser or greater depending upon the degree of pressure used to set it into motion. Once moving, it will oscillate until friction and its own inertia cause it to return to its original state of rest. As it moves through its arc the reed passes through a periodic number of cycles per time unit, although its speed is not constant. With these conditions prevailing, its motion through time could be charted by placing a carbon stylus on its moving head, then pulling a strip of paper beneath it at a uniform rate. The reed’s displacement to-and-fro diminishes in a smooth fashion as time passes (decreasing intensity). Each cycle of its arc is equally spaced (uniform frequency). Each period of the motion forms the same arc pattern (uniform wave content). If this vibratory motion were audible, it could be described as follows: it grows weaker from the beginning (diminishing loudness) until it becomes inaudible; it remains at a stable level of highness (steady pitch); and it is of unvarying tonal quality (uniform timbre). If the reed were a part of a clarinet and the player continued blowing it with unvaried pressure, loudness, pitch, and timbre would appear as constants.
Most musical tones differ from the demonstration tone (above) in that they consist of more than a single wave form. Any material undergoing vibratory motion imposes its own characteristic oscillations on the fundamental vibration. The reed probably would vibrate in parts as well as a whole, thus creating partial wave forms in addition to the fundamental wave form. These partials are not fortuitous. They bear harmonic relationships to the fundamental motion that are expressible as frequency ratios of 1:2, 3:4, etc. This means that the reed (or string or air column as well) is vibrating in halves and thirds and fourths as well as a whole. Another way of expressing this is that half the body is vibrating at a frequency twice as great as the whole; a third is vibrating at a frequency three times greater; etc.
These numerical relationships also are expressible by pitch relationships as the harmonic, or overtone, series, which is merely a representation of numerical ratios in terms of pitch equivalents. Depending upon its shape and substance, a vibrating mass performs motions that are the equivalents of these partial vibrations, whether it be the mass of a string, reed, woodblock, or air column. This means that most tones are composites: they consist of partial vibrations of the vibrating body as well as the vibrations of the whole mass. Although one can develop the acuity required to hear some of these overtones within a musical tone, the ear normally ignores them as separate parts, recognizing only a more or less rich tone quality within the fundamental pitch.
Although pure tones, or tones lacking other than a fundamental frequency, sometimes occur in music, most musical tones are composites. A typical violin tone is relatively rich in overtones while a flute tone sometimes approaches a pure tone. What the listener recognizes as “a violin tone” or “a trumpet tone” also is a product of the noise content that accompanies the articulation of any sound on the particular instrument. The friction of the bow as it is set into motion across the string, the eddies of air pressure within a horn’s mouthpiece, or the hammer’s impact on a piano string all add an extra dimension, a significant “noise factor,” to any manually produced tone. After articulation, however, it is the presence or absence of overtones and their relative intensities that determine the timbre of any tone. The violin and flute tones are distinguishable because their articulatory “noises” are quite different and their overtone contents are dissimilar, even when they produce the same pitch.
Musical tones of determined harmonic content can be produced by electronic vacuum tubes or transistors as well as by traditional manual instruments. Some electronic organs, for example, use single vacuum tubes whose frequency output can be varied through control of an adjustable transformer. Through ingenious mixing circuits a compound tone consisting of any predetermined overtone content can be produced, thereby imitating the sound of any traditional instrument. Composers of electronic music have utilized this capability to synthesize tones quite different from any available on traditional instruments, as well as tones similar to natural sounds. Electronic computers are capable of complete imitation of such sounds; the tone is broken down into its component parts, then synthesized through an auditory output circuit.
