Transmission electron microscope (TEM),  type of electron microscope that has three essential systems: (1) an electron gun, which produces the electron beam, and the condenser system, which focuses the beam onto the object, (2) the image-producing system, consisting of the objective lens, movable specimen stage, and intermediate and projector lenses, which focus the electrons passing through the specimen to form a real, highly magnified image, and (3) the image-recording system, which converts the electron image into some form perceptible to the human eye. The image-recording system usually consists of a fluorescent screen for viewing and focusing the image and a digital camera for permanent records. In addition, a vacuum system, consisting of pumps and their associated gauges and valves, and power supplies are required.
The source of electrons, the cathode, is a heated V-shaped tungsten filament or, in high-performance instruments, a sharply pointed rod of a material such as lanthanum hexaboride. The filament is surrounded by a control grid, sometimes called a Wehnelt cylinder, with a central aperture arranged on the axis of the column; the apex of the cathode is arranged to lie at or just above or below this aperture. The cathode and control grid are at a negative potential equal to the desired accelerating voltage and are insulated from the rest of the instrument. The final electrode of the electron gun is the anode, which takes the form of a disk with an axial hole. Electrons leave the cathode and shield, accelerate toward the anode, and, if the stabilization of the high voltage is adequate, pass through the central aperture at a constant energy. The control and alignment of the electron gun are critical in ensuring satisfactory operation.
The intensity and angular aperture of the beam are controlled by the condenser lens system between the gun and the specimen. A single lens may be used to converge the beam onto the object, but, more commonly, a double condenser is employed. In this the first lens is strong and produces a reduced image of the source, which is then imaged by the second lens onto the object. Such an arrangement is economical of space between the electron gun and the object stage and is more flexible, because the reduction in size of the image of the source (and hence the final size of illuminated area on the specimen) may be varied widely by controlling the first lens. The use of a small spot size minimizes disturbances in the specimen due to heating and irradiation.
The specimen grid is carried in a small holder in a movable specimen stage. The objective lens is usually of short focal length (1–5 mm [0.04–0.2 inch]) and produces a real intermediate image that is further magnified by the projector lens or lenses. A single projector lens may provide a range of magnification of 5:1, and by the use of interchangeable pole pieces in the projector a wider range of magnifications may be obtained. Modern instruments employ two projector lenses (one called the intermediate lens) to permit a greater range of magnification and to provide a greater overall magnification without a commensurate increase in the physical length of the column of the microscope.
For practical reasons of image stability and brightness, the microscope is often operated to give a final magnification of 1,000–250,000× on the screen. If a higher final magnification is required, it may be obtained by photographic or digital enlargement. The quality of the final image in the electron microscope depends largely upon the accuracy of the various mechanical and electrical adjustments with which the various lenses are aligned to one another and to the illuminating system. The lenses require power supplies of a high degree of stability; for the highest standard of resolution, electronic stabilization to better than one part in a million is necessary. The control of a modern electron microscope is carried out by a computer, and dedicated software is readily available.
The electron image is monochromatic and must be made visible to the eye either by allowing the electrons to fall on a fluorescent screen fitted at the base of the microscope column or by capturing the image digitally for display on a computer monitor. Computerized images are stored in a format such as TIFF or JPEG and can be analyzed or image-processed prior to publication. The identification of specific areas of an image, or pixels with specified characteristics, allows spurious colours to be added to a monochrome image. This can be an aid to visual interpretation and teaching and can create a visually attractive picture from the raw image.
