Carole Pateman,  (born December 11, 1940, Maresfield, Sussex, England), British political scientist and educator known for her contribution to democratic theory and feminist political theory.
After leaving school at 16 years of age and working in lesser clerical positions, Pateman decided to complete her education and entered Ruskin College in Oxford (1963–65), an independent adult-education school dedicated to working-class students. While at Ruskin, Pateman took the examination for the University of Oxford’s postgraduate diploma in political science and economics and was offered a place at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, where she then obtained bachelor’s (1967) and Doctor of Philosophy (1971) degrees. Though born and educated in England, Pateman had a truly international career, teaching in Europe, the United States, and Australia. Between 1980 and 1989 she taught at the University of Sydney as a reader in government, in addition to taking a series of visiting positions at Stanford University, Princeton University, and the Swedish Council for Research in the Humanities and Social Sciences. She became a professor of political science at the University of California, Los Angeles, in 1990 and was elevated to the rank of distinguished professor in 1993. She retired as professor emerita in the early 21st century.
Pateman’s early work exposed the elitist bent in liberal theory and promoted a participatory vision of democracy. In Participation and Democratic Theory (1970), she criticized leading theorists of democracy, such as Robert Dahl and Giovanni Sartori, for justifying elite power on the basis of the perceived apathy and incompetence of the many. Those theorists, Pateman demonstrated, engaged in circular logic and promoted a vicious cycle of democratic deficit, because they failed to appreciate the causal link between political participation (or the lack thereof) and civic capacity.
In her most famous work, The Sexual Contract (1988), Pateman challenged the liberal idea that the power of the state does not contradict the freedom of individuals because it is founded upon their consent. Social-contract theorists like Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau rejected the notion that political authority could be obtained by birthright or through violence; legitimate political authority, they argued, could be derived only from the consent of free and equal individuals. The problem with that philosophical fable, Pateman pointed out, is that the social contract imagined by Locke or Rousseau excludes the female half of the population. According to Pateman, the social contract is thus predicated upon a prior, sexual contract: the systematic subordination of women to men. For Pateman, the social contract and the sexual contract are not antithetical but complementary, even though the former professes to establish equality and freedom while the latter enforces inequality between the sexes. In the first place, the exclusion of women from the social contract confirms and perpetuates the sexual hierarchy found in institutions such as marriage. Secondly, sexual hierarchy is reinforced by the fact that it is represented as the natural order of things—i.e., as a nonpolitical fact. Thus, women are not merely absent from the social contract, but politics is defined in opposition to the activities and traits usually associated with womanhood. Although the social-contract tradition marks the end of a paternalistic model of political authority, Pateman argued, the liberation of the “sons” is based on and perpetuates the surbordination of their wives, sisters, and daughters. For all those reasons, Pateman claimed that the social contract did not supersede but merely transformed patriarchy, the system of male domination.
Pateman’s other important works included The Problem of Political Obligation: A Critical Analysis of Liberal Theory (1979), The Disorder of Women: Democracy, Feminism, and Political Theory (1989), and Contract & Domination (2007: written with Charles Mills). From 2010 to 2011 she was president of the American Political Science Association. She was a fellow of the Academy of Social Sciences in Australia (1980), the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1996), and the British Academy (2007). Her scholarship was recognized with many prestigious honours and awards, including the Johan Skytte Prize in Political Science (2012).
