Acanthaceae,  one of 24 families in the mint order (Lamiales) of flowering plants, containing approximately 220 genera and nearly 4,000 species distributed predominantly in tropical and subtropical regions of the world. The greater part of the Acanthaceae family are herbs or shrubs, but vines and trees occur as well. The range of habitats extends from marshes and estuaries to extremely dry situations, but most of these plants are found in damp tropical forests.
A diverse family, Acanthaceae has few universal characteristics among its members. Most have simple leaves arranged in opposite pairs, with cystoliths (enlarged cells containing crystals of calcium carbonate) in streaks or protuberances in the vegetative parts. The bisexual flowers are frequently bilaterally symmetrical and are usually enclosed by leaflike bracts, often coloured and large. Sepals and petals number five or four each and are often fused into tubular structures. There are usually two or four stamens that extend beyond the mouth of the flower, often with one to three staminodes (sterile stamens). The pistil is superior (i.e., positioned above the attachment point of the other flower parts) and generally consists of two fused carpels (ovule-bearing segments) enclosing two locules (chambers), each of which has two to many ovules in two rows along the central axis of the ovary. The fruits are often exploding capsules containing seeds borne on hooks on the placenta.
The group is mainly of horticultural interest and includes such ornamentals as bear’s-breech (Acanthus mollis), clockvine (Thunbergia), shrimp plant (Justicia brandegeana), and caricature-plant (Graptophyllum pictum). The largest genera include Justicia (600 species; now comprising former segregate genera such as Jacobinia and Beloperone), Reullia (355), Stobilanthes (350), Barleria (300), Aphelandra (170), Staurogyne (140), Dicliptera (150), Blepharis (130), Lepidagathis (100), Hygrophila (100), Thunbergia (90), and Dyschoriste (80). The small genus Avicennia contains at least eight species of ecologically important mangroves.
