Alfalfa,  (Medicago sativa), also called lucerne or purple medic,  perennial, cloverlike, leguminous plant of the pea family (Fabaceae), widely grown primarily for hay, pasturage, and silage. Alfalfa is known for its tolerance of drought, heat, and cold and for the remarkable productivity and quality of its herbage. The plant is also valued in soil improvement and is grown as a cover crop and as a green manure.
The plant, which grows 30–90 cm (1–3 feet) tall, arises from a much-branched crown that is partially embedded in the surface layer of soil. As the plant develops, numerous stems bearing trifoliolate leaves (compound leaves with three leaflets) arise from the crown buds. Racemes of small flowers arise from the upper axillary buds of the stems. In sunny regions with moderate heat, dry weather, and pollinating insects, these flowers can abundantly produce corkscrew-coiled legumes containing two to eight or more seeds. Similar to many other members of Fabaceae, alfalfa plants house symbiotic soil bacteria (rhizobia) in their root nodules to “fix” nitrogen from the air into the soil, thus making it accessible to other plants. When grown as a cover crop or as part of a crop rotation, alfalfa improves the soil nutrient levels and lessens the need for synthetic fertilizers.
The primary root of alfalfa can attain great depths, an adaptation for drought tolerance. In porous subsoils, taproots as long as 15 metres (50 feet) have been recorded in plants over 20 years of age. The roots of seedlings also grow rapidly, reaching soil depths of 90 cm (3 feet) after two months and 180 cm (6 feet) after five months. Newly established fields of alfalfa often survive severe summer drought and heat when other leguminous plants with shallower and more-branching roots succumb. These long taproots also improve soil quality by decreasing soil compaction.
Alfalfa has a remarkable capacity to rapidly regenerate new stems and leaves following cutting. As many as 13 crops of hay can be harvested in a single growing season because of this abundant regrowth. The frequency of harvest and the total seasonal yields depend largely on the length of the growing season, the adaptability of the soil, the abundance of sunshine, and especially the amount and distribution of rainfall or irrigation during the growing season. Green leafy alfalfa hay is very nutritious and palatable to livestock, containing about 16 percent proteins and 8 percent mineral constituents. It is also rich in vitamins A, E, D, and K.
Like all crops, alfalfa is beset by the hazards of climate, diseases, and insects. Among the more serious of these are winterkill, bacterial wilt disease, alfalfa weevil, lugus bugs, grasshoppers, spotted aphids, and leafhoppers. In humid areas and in irrigated areas, alfalfa stands of three or more years of age have often become badly thinned by infestations of the soil-borne bacterial wilt organism Phytomonas insidiosum.
