almond,  (Prunus dulcis),  tree native to southwestern Asia and its edible seed. A member of the family Rosaceae (order Rosales), Prunus dulcis is an economically important crop tree grown primarily in Mediterranean climates between 28° and 48° N and between 20° and 40° S, with California producing nearly 80 percent of the world’s supply. There are two varieties, sweet almond (P. dulcis variety dulcis) and bitter almond (P. dulcis variety amara). Sweet almonds are the familiar, edible type consumed as nuts and used in cooking or as a source of almond oil or almond meal. The oil of bitter almonds is used in the manufacture of flavouring extracts for foods and liqueurs, though prussic acid must first be removed. Almonds may be eaten raw, blanched, or roasted and are commonly used in confectionery baking. In Europe almonds are used to make marzipan, a sweet paste used in pastries and candy, and in Asia almonds are often used in meat, poultry, fish, and vegetarian dishes.  While more than 25 types of almonds are grown in California, Marcona and Valencia almonds come from Spain, and ferragnes are imported from Greece.
Almond trees are deciduous with a hardy dormancy. Typically growing 3–4.5 metres (10–15 feet) tall, the trees are strikingly beautiful when in flower; they produce fragrant, five-petaled, light pink to white flowers from late January to early April north of the Equator. The flowers are self-incompatible and thus require insect pollinators to facilitate cross-pollination with other cultivars. The growing fruit (a drupe) resembles a peach until it approaches maturity; as it ripens, the leathery outer covering, or hull, splits open, curls outward, and discharges the pit. Despite their common label, almonds are not true nuts (a type of dry fruit) but rather seeds enclosed in a hard fruit covering.
The sweet almond is cultivated extensively in certain favourable regions, though nut crops are uncertain wherever frosts are likely to occur during flowering. The Old World almond cultivation was characterized by small plantings mainly for family use; trees interplanted with other crops; variability in age, condition, and bearing capacity of individual trees; and hand labour, often with crude implements. Modern almond growers are typically more industrial, with vast orchards of at least three types of trees the same age. Mechanized tree shakers are often used to expedite harvesting, and many growers must rent honeybees during flowering season to pollinate their trees. Indeed, the annual pollination of the almonds in California is the largest managed pollination event in the world, with more than 1.1 million beehives brought to the state each year. Colony collapse disorder (CCD), which has led to a global decline of honeybee populations, threatens the multibillion dollar industry.
Bitter and sweet almonds have similar chemical composition. Both types contain between 35 and 55 percent of fixed oil (nonvolatile oil), and both feature the enzyme emulsin, which yields glucose in the presence of water. Bitter almonds have amygdalin, which is present only in trace amounts in sweet almonds, and the oil of bitter almonds contains benzaldehyde and prussic (hydrocyanic) acid. Almonds are high in protein and fat and provide small amounts of iron, calcium, phosphorus, and vitamins A, B complex, and E.
