Amaranthaceae,  amaranth family of flowering plants (order Caryophyllales) with about 175 genera and more than 2,500 species, mostly herbs and subshrubs, distributed nearly worldwide. A number of species, including beets and quinoa, are important food crops, and several are cultivated as garden ornamentals.
Members of the family can be annuals or perennials and commonly grow in saline soils. The simple leaves are sometimes succulent or hairy and are usually arranged alternately along the stems. The stems, roots, leaves, or flowers of many species are red in colour because of the presence of characteristic betalain pigments. The small flowers can be bisexual or unisexual and are often borne in dense spikes; several leaflike bracts usually are present below each flower. The fruit may be a capsule, utricle, nutlet, drupe, or berry. Many species in the family are C4 plants, meaning they photosynthesize with a special mechanism of carbon fixation; the family represents the largest collection of plants with that photosynthetic pathway.
Common garden ornamentals in the family include species of globe amaranth (Gomphrena) and cockscomb (Celosia); the genera Alternanthera and Iresine each have several species that are cultivated as bedding plants for their attractive and colourful leaves.
Food crops in the family include the various forms of beet (Beta vulgaris, including garden beets, chard, sugar beets, and mangel-wurzel), lamb’s quarters (Chenopodium album), and spinach (Spinacia oleracea). Some species—namely, Inca wheat, or love-lies-bleeding (Amaranthus caudatus), red amaranth (A. cruentus), and quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa)—are high-protein pseudo-grain crops of interest to agricultural researchers. Quinoa in particular, touted as a health food, grew in popularity worldwide during the early 21st century.
The largest genus, Amaranthus, contains about 70 species of herbs, including the ornamentals love-lies-bleeding, prince’s feather (A. hybridus), and Joseph’s coat (A. tricolor). The genus also contains many weedy plants known as pigweed, especially rough pigweed (A. retroflexus), prostrate pigweed (A. graecizans), and white pigweed (A. albus), which are common in waste areas throughout Europe and parts of the Americas.
