Apiales,  carrot order of flowering plants, containing some 5,489 species. There are seven families in the order, the three largest of which are Apiaceae (carrot, or parsley, family),  Araliaceae (ginseng family), and Pittosporaceae. Apiales belongs to the core asterid clade (organisms with a single common ancestor), or sympetalous lineage of flowering plants, in the euasterid II group of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group III (APG III) botanical classification system (see angiosperm).
Apiaceae, commonly known as the carrot, or parsley, family, contains about 434 genera and nearly 3,780 species. The family is distributed worldwide, though most species are concentrated in the north temperate zone. Apiaceae includes a broad array of important foods, herbs, and spices, as well as some poisonous species. Most members are aromatic herbs with alternate compound or cleft leaves that are sheathed at the base. The flowers are often arranged in a conspicuous umbel (a flat-topped cluster of flowers). Each small flower is usually bisexual, with five small sepals, five generally clawed petals, an enlarged disk at the base of the style, and an inferior ovary with two carpels. The fruits are ridged and composed of two parts that split open at maturity. Among the species cultivated for food or spice are Anethum graveolens (dill), Apium graveolens (celery), Carum carvi (caraway), Coriandrum sativum (coriander, or cilantro), Cuminum cyminum (cumin), Daucus carota (carrot), Foeniculum vulgare (fennel), Pastinaca sativa (parsnip), Petroselinum crispum (parsley), and Pimpinella anisum (anise). Other members are poisonous, including Cicuta maculata (water hemlock) and Conium maculatum (poison hemlock).
Araliaceae, the ginseng family, contains 43 genera and about 1,450 species. The family is mostly native to tropical regions, with species concentrated in Southeast Asia and tropical North and South America, but important members native to temperate regions include Panax (ginseng), Hedera (ivy), and Aralia (spikenard). Most members of the family are shrubs or trees, though there are a number of climbers and a few herbs. The family has large, usually alternate, compound leaves, five-parted flowers arranged in compound umbels, and fruits that are generally fleshy (berries or drupes). Some genera, such as the herbaceous Hydrocotyle (pennywort), were traditionally included in Apiaceae but are placed in Araliaceae under the APG III system.
Several members of Araliaceae are economically important. Ivies are grown as ornamental plants and houseplants. Tetrapanax papyriferum (rice-paper plant) is the source of rice paper, and the wood of several species, especially that of Dendropanax arboreum, provides timber. Schefflera (1,600 species) is the largest genus in the family and includes tropical ornamental and potted plant species such as S. actinophylla (umbrella tree, or octopus plant) and S. elegantissima (false aralia). Polyscias is also a widely cultivated tropical tree, with many variegated forms.
Ginseng root, from Panax ginseng, has been used since antiquity in China for the treatment of various diseases. Its North American relative, P. quinquefolius (American ginseng), is used in the United States as a stimulant. Aralia nudicaulis (wild sarsaparilla) has an aromatic root that is used as a substitute for sarsaparilla.
Pittosporaceae has six to nine genera and 200 species of trees, shrubs, and lianas native to tropical and warm temperate areas of the Old World, especially Australia. The largest genus is Pittosporum, with 140 species; some produce timber, but many are cultivated in warm climates as potted plants or street trees, such as P. tobira. Flowers of Pittosporaceae have a basally tubular corolla and well-developed sepals. The ovary is superior, with many ovules per carpel. This family is characterized by aromatic odours caused by triterpenoid ethereal oils, with some species featuring specialized chemical compounds such as coumarins, polyacetylenes, or arthroquinones.
The four smaller families in Apiales are Pennantiaceae, Griseliniaceae, Torricelliaceae, and Myodocarpaceae, which are woody species with separate male and female plants; their flowers are clustered at the ends of branches, and their fruits are single-seeded. Pennantia is the only genus in Pennantiaceae, with four species native to northeastern Australia, Norfolk Island, and New Zealand. Griselinia is the only genus in Griseliniaceae; its six species occur in New Zealand and southern South America.   Torricelliaceae has three genera: Torricellia, with three species native to the Himalayan region and western China; Aralidium, with one species in western Malesia; and Melanophylla, with seven species in Madagascar. Myodocarpaceae has 19 species in two genera, Delarbrea and Myodocarpus, all of which are located in New Caledonia.
