Apocynaceae,      the dogbane family (order Gentianales) of flowering plants, including about 400 genera and about 4,555 species of trees, shrubs, woody vines, and herbs. Members of the family are distributed primarily in tropical and subtropical areas of the world. Nearly all members of this family are poisonous, and many species are used medicinally because of the presence of cardiac glycosides and various alkaloids. A number are cultivated as ornamentals for their attractive flowers and foliage.
 Members of the family have milky, often poisonous, juice; smooth-margined leaves; and flowers in clusters (rarely solitary). Some species, notably those in the subfamily Asclepiadoideae, have pollen massed in bundles called pollinia. The fruit may be berry-like or fleshy but usually is a dry pod (follicle) that splits open at maturity, releasing many winged or tufted seeds.
     Garden ornamentals belonging to the family include periwinkle (Vinca), oleander (Nerium), yellow oleander (Thevetia), frangipani (Plumeria), Natal plum (Carissa), common milkweed (Asclepias syriaca), bloodflower (A. curassavica), butterfly weed (A. tuberosa), wax flower (Hoya carnosa), and crepe jasmine (Tabernaemontana divaricata). Several species of the genera Trachelospermum (especially star jasmine, T. jasminoides), Mandevilla, and Allamanda are attractive woody vines. Dogbane (Apocynum) and bluestar (Amsonia) are sometimes grown as ornamentals. The impala lily (Adenium multiflorum) is an ornamental shrub with star-shaped flowers and large underground tubers.
 The genera Adenium and Pachypodium are African succulents with alternately arranged leaves and strangely shaped trunks. Several succulent plants of the Asclepiadoideae subfamily, such as Hoodia, Huernia, and carrion flower (Stapelia), produce odours that are offensive to humans but attract pollinating flies.
Arrow poisons are obtained from many plants in the dogbane family, and the poisonous alkaloids of species belonging to the genera Strophanthus and Rauvolfia are used in medicines.
