asparagus,  (genus Asparagus),  genus of the family Asparagaceae with up to 300 species native from Siberia to southern Africa. Best known is the garden asparagus (Asparagus officinalis), cultivated as a vegetable for its succulent spring stalks. Several African species are grown as ornamental plants.
Asparagus species may be erect or climbing, and most of the species are more or less woody. The rhizomelike, or sometimes tuberous, roots give rise to conspicuous fernlike branchlets. True leaves are reduced to small scales. Many species are dioecious (individuals are either male or female), and the small greenish yellow flowers in the spring are followed by red berries in the fall. Members of the genus are characterized by the presence of cladodes, which are leaflike organs in the axils of the true leaves.
Garden asparagus, the most economically important species of the genus, is cultivated in most temperate and subtropical parts of the world. As a vegetable, it has been prized by epicures since Roman times. It is most commonly served cooked, either hot or in salad; the classic accompaniment is hollandaise sauce. In 2018 the world’s leading producers of asparagus were China, Peru, Mexico, Germany, and Thailand. Commercial plantations are not undertaken in regions where the plant continues to grow throughout the year, for the shoots become more spindly and less vigorous each year; a rest period is required. Where the climate is favourable and with proper care, an asparagus plantation may be productive for 10 to 15 years or longer. The best soil types for asparagus are deep, loose, light clays, with much organic matter, and light sandy loams. Asparagus will thrive in soils too salty for other crops, but acidic soils are to be avoided. The asparagus cutting season varies from 2 to 12 weeks, depending on age of the plantation and on climate.
In parts of France, most notably at Argenteuil, asparagus is customarily grown underground to inhibit development of chlorophyll. This white asparagus is prized for its tenderness and delicate flavour. In classic French culinary nomenclature, the word “Argenteuil” denotes an asparagus garnish.
Some poisonous species are prized for their delicate and graceful foliage. Florist’s fern (A. setaceus) is not a true fern and has feathery sprays of branchlets often used in corsages and in other plant arrangements. Sprenger’s fern (A. aethiopicus), African asparagus fern (or bridal creeper, A. asparagoides), and asparagus fern (A. densiflorus) are grown for their attractive lacy foliage and are common ornamentals.
Several species of Asparagus are threatened in their natural habitats. Habitat fragmentation in the Canary Islands has led to the listing of two species (A. fallax and A. nesiotes) as endangered and two (A. arborescens and A. plocamoides) as vulnerable. A. kiusianus of Japan, A. sekukuniensis of South Africa, and A. usambarensis of Tanzania are also listed as endangered, and a Spanish species, A. macrorrhizus, is critically endangered.
