Barrel cactus,  name for a group of more or less barrel-shaped cacti (family Cactaceae) native to North and South America. It is most often used for two large-stemmed North American genera, Ferocactus and Echinocactus. Various other barrel cacti include members of the genera Astrophytum, Echinopsis, Neolloydia, Sclerocactus, and Thelocactus.
Echinocactus comprises six species native to Mexico. Plants are more or less globose, usually growing to about 60 cm (2 feet) high and about 30 cm (1 foot) in diameter. The genus is distinguished primarily by its numerous wavy ribs and elongated fruits. The golden barrel cactus (E. grusonii) is a common desert ornamental, noted for its striking golden spines; the plant is an endangered species in the wild.
The nearly 30 species of the genus Ferocactus are found in dry environments of the southwestern United States and northern Mexico. They can reach about 3 metres (10 feet) high and about 60 cm in diameter, and the stems generally have strong stiff spines and prominent ribs. The flowers, yellow to orange and purplish and sometimes fragrant, are up to 8 cm (3 inches) across. Spines in Ferocactus may be up to 10 cm (4 inches) long.
The 19 species of Sclerocactus, which are sometimes called little barrels, have at least one hooked central spine. (All cacti with such curved spines may be called fishhook cacti, including some species of Ferocactus.) The flowers are mainly pink, yellow, and cream. The Mojave fishhook cactus (S. polyancistrus) is a cylindroid cactus up to 40 cm (16 inches) in height and 13 cm (5.1 inches) in diameter and has showy red and white spines and large flowers. Almost as large is the small-flowered fishhook cactus (S. parviflorus) native to the Colorado Plateau. The remaining species of small cacti grow in widely scattered colonies.
Neolloydia, comprising about 14 species, is native to the southwestern United States and much of Mexico. Spiny and globose to cylindroid, these cacti reach 40 cm (1.3 feet) in height and 12 cm (4.7 inches) in diameter. The genus is related to Sclerocactus, Thelocactus, and Turbinicarpus, and its taxonomy is contentious.
Thelocactus is a genus of a few to 30 species (depending on the authority) of small to medium-sized more or less spiny plants with tubercles (protuberances) distinct or coalescent into ribs. Several species are known as miniature barrel cacti. T. hexaedrophorus, with large blue tubercles, is an unusual pot plant. Some species have showy white, pink, or purple flowers and colourful spines.
