beet,  (Beta vulgaris),  any of the four cultivated forms of the plant Beta vulgaris (family Amaranthaceae), grown for their edible leaves and roots. Each of the four distinct types of B. vulgaris is used differently: (1) the common garden beet (also called beetroot or table beet) is cultivated as a garden vegetable; (2) Swiss chard (also called leaf beet or silver beet) is grown for its nutrient-rich leaves; (3) the sugar beet is commercially important as a major source of sugar; and (4) mangel-wurzel, or mangold, is a succulent feed for livestock.
Beets are most extensively grown in temperate to cool regions or during the cooler seasons. The growing season varies from 8 to 10 weeks for garden beets in favourable climates to 30 weeks for some mangel-wurzels. Beets grow best in deep loose soils that are high in organic matter; they respond well to chemical fertilizers and manures. Grown extensively under irrigation, beets tolerate a relatively high salt content of the soil but are sensitive to high acidity and to a low content of boron. Boron deficiency retards growth and causes black lesions in the root flesh.
The garden beet is primarily grown for the thick fleshy taproot that forms during the first season. In the second season a tall, branched, leafy stem arises to bear clusters of minute green flowers that develop into brown corky fruits commonly called seedballs. The taproot ranges in shape from globular to long and tapered. Skin and flesh colours are usually dark purplish red, though some are nearly white. Beet roots are a good source of riboflavin as well as folate, manganese, and the antioxidant betaine. Beet roots should be smooth, firm, and unblemished; medium-sized specimens are the most tender. They are frequently canned, either whole or cut up, and often are pickled, spiced, or served in a sweet-and-sour sauce. The leaves of garden beets can be cooked or eaten fresh if picked while young.
Swiss chard is a popular garden plant with edible leaves and stalks and is commonly eaten in many Mediterranean countries. The leaves are dark green, and stalks range in colour from white to yellow to red. Slightly bitter tasting, Swiss chard is usually cooked and is frequently used in soups. Beet greens, from both the garden beet and Swiss chard, are a source of riboflavin, iron, and vitamins A, C, and K.
The sugar beet is the most economically important of the four beet varieties. Developed in Germany in the 18th century, its European cultivation received important encouragement from Napoleon as a means of combating the British blockade of imported sugar. Capable of accumulating up to 22 percent sucrose in its root, sugar beets account for about one-third of the world’s sugar production.
Cultivation of the mangel-wurzel dates from prehistoric times. While primarily used as animal feed, mangel-wurzel has gained popularity as a garden vegetable, as both the root and the leaves are edible. The pale roots average 4 kg (9 pounds) each, though some have been reported up to 20 kg (44 pounds). Similar to sugar beets, mangel-wurzel has a high sucrose content.
