Bellflower,  (genus Campanula),  any of around 420 annual, perennial, and biennial herbs that compose the genus Campanula (family Campanulaceae). Bellflowers have characteristically bell-shaped, usually blue flowers, and many are cultivated as garden ornamentals. They are native mainly to northern temperate regions, Mediterranean areas, and tropical mountains.
Tall bellflower, or American bellflower (Campanula americana, formerly Campanulastrum americanum), is found in the moist woodlands of North America and has flowering spikes that may reach 2 m (6 feet) high with saucer-shaped flowers bearing long curved styles. Tussock bellflower, or Carpathian harebell (C. carpatica), has lavender to white bowl-shaped, long-stalked flowers and forms clumps in eastern European meadows and woodlands. Fairy thimbles (C. cochleariifolia), named for its deep nodding blue to white bells, forms loosely open mats on alpine screes. Bethlehem stars (C. isophylla), a trailing Italian species often grown as a pot plant, bears sprays of star-shaped violet, blue, or white flowers. Canterbury bell (C. medium), a southern European biennial, has large pink, blue, or white spikes of cup-shaped flowers. Peach-leaved bellflower (C. persicifolia), found in Eurasian woodlands and meadows, produces slender-stemmed spikes, 30 to 90 cm (12 to 35 inches) tall, of long-stalked outward-facing bells. Rampion (C. rapunculus) is a Eurasian and North African biennial grown for its turniplike roots and leaves, which are eaten in salads for their biting flavour. It produces ascending clusters of long-stalked lilac bells and has basal, broadly oval leaves that form a rosette around the stalk. Rover, or creeping, bellflower (C. rapunculoides) is a European plant that has become naturalized in North America and is named for its spreading rhizomes. Throatwort, or bats-in-the-belfry (C. trachelium), a coarse, erect, hairy Eurasian plant also naturalized in North America, bears clusters of lilac-coloured funnel-shaped flowers. Other cultivated Campanula species from Europe include Adria bellflower (C. garganica, sometimes classified as a variety of C. elatines); clustered bellflower (C. glomerata); milky bellflower (C. lactiflora); great bellflower (C. latifolia); and C. zoysii. See also harebell.
