cassava,  (Manihot esculenta), also called manioc, mandioca, or yuca,  tuberous edible plant of the spurge family (Euphorbiaceae) from the American tropics. It is cultivated throughout the tropical world for its tuberous roots, from which cassava flour, breads, tapioca, a laundry starch, and an alcoholic beverage are derived. Cassava probably was first cultivated by the Maya in Yucatán.
Two cyanide-producing sugar derivatives, known as cyanogenic glucosides, occur in varying amounts in most varieties. Indigenous peoples developed a complex refining system to remove the poison by grating, pressing, and heating the tubers. To safely prepare most small “sweet” varieties for use as a vegetable, the skin should be generously peeled off, the tubers must be well cooked, and the cooking water drained off. Some cassava tubers are also soaked beforehand to leach the harmful chemicals. The preparation of cassava flour is usually from larger “bitter” roots, which require significant work to remove the poisons, and can include long soaking times, fermentation, and exposing the cassava paste to the air for several hours. The poison (hydrocyanic acid) has been used for darts and arrows. Improper preparation can cause acute cyanide intoxication, and long-term exposure to the cyanogenic glucosides is associated with goitres, chronic pancreatitis, and a nerve disorder known as ataxic neuropathy.
Cassava is a perennial plant with conspicuous, almost palmate (fan-shaped) leaves resembling those of the related castor-oil plant but more deeply parted into five to nine lobes. The fleshy roots are reminiscent of dahlia tubers. Different varieties range from low herbs to branching shrubs and slender unbranched trees. Some are adapted to dry areas of alkaline soil and others to acid mud banks along rivers.
Cassava is a good source of dietary fibre as well as vitamin C, thiamin, folic acid, manganese, and potassium. The tubers have a mild nutty taste and are commonly eaten as root vegetables in stews or as side dishes. Food items such as the gelatinous fufu of West Africa and the bammy of Jamaica come from cassava. Additional cassava products include an alcoholic beverage known as kasiri that is made by Indians in South America, the powdery casabe cakes of Yucatán, and tapioca, the only cassava product on northern markets. Cooked cassava leaves can also be eaten and are an important ingredient in soups and stews in parts of Central Africa.
