Cycadeoidea,  a genus of extinct seed plants that was common worldwide during the Early Cretaceous Epoch (145 million to 100 million years ago). It was one member in a larger group, the order Bennettitales (known as the order Cycadeoidales in some classifications), which has been evolutionarily linked to angiosperms (flowering plants).
Superficially, Cycadeoidea resembled modern cycads. They possessed a squat bulbous or branched trunk covered in sturdy leaf bases and scales that protected the woody stem within. No mature leaves have ever been found attached to Cycadeoidea trunks. However, immature leaves were once pinnate (i.e., leaflets are attached directly to the leaf’s central axis) and resemble those of modern cycads, which were also common in the Cretaceous. Cycadeoid leaves were tough, like those of cycads, and this characteristic may have been an evolutionary response to herbivory (plant consumption by animals).
The reproductive structures of the Bennettitales, however, distinguish them from cycads. The cones of Cycadeoidea were embedded in the trunk with only the tips exposed between the leaf bases and contained both pollen and ovules. This arrangement differs from most gymnosperms but is similar to many flowering plants. Pollen was borne in sacks on a whorl of modified leaves that encircled the ovule-bearing structure. Ovules were clustered on a central structure and were separated from one another by sterile scales. The entire cone was encased in a whorl of petal-like modified leaves. This arrangement of bracts, pollen organs, and ovules led many paleobotanists to align the Bennettitales, including Cycadeoidea, with flowering plants. This link has been supported by the identification in Cycadeoidea of chemical markers typical of angiosperms.
The pollination of Cycadeoidea remains unclear. Some argued that the reproductive structures opened at maturity, allowing insects to pollinate, as is the case with cycads and many flowering plants. Others argued that Cycadeoidea cones remained closed at maturity, making them self-pollinated. Since the only open cones ever observed have been those bearing mature seeds, the latter opinion prevails. Some have further suggested that inbreeding, the result of exclusive self-pollination, contributed to the decline and extinction of Cycadeoidea in the Late Cretaceous.
