Dipsacales,  teasel or honeysuckle order of flowering plants, containing 46 genera and about 1,090 species, which are distributed worldwide but centred mainly in the Northern Hemisphere. The order is best known for its ornamental plants, such as honeysuckle (Lonicera), arrowwood and guelder rose (Viburnum), and scabious, or pincushion flower (Scabiosa).
Typically, plants in Dipsacales have opposite, often gland-toothed leaves, flowers in cymose (flat-topped) clusters, petals fused into a corolla tube (either regular or bilaterally symmetrical), and inferior ovaries. In most genera, petals are alike in shape, but some members of the order develop two-lipped flowers in which one half of the flower is the mirror image of the other half (bilateral symmetry). Most members of the order are shrubby, but there are a few herbaceous members as well.
The order has two families, Adoxaceae and Caprifoliaceae, and belongs to the asterid clade (organisms with a single common ancestor), or sympetalous lineage of flowering plants, in the campanulids group of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group IV (APG IV) botanical classification system (see angiosperm).
Adoxaceae—the elderberry, or moschatel, family— has five genera and 200 species. The three smallest genera (Adoxa, Sinadoxa, and Tetradoxa) are exclusively herbaceous, while the larger genera (Viburnum and Sambucus) are both woody and herbaceous. These latter genera are found mostly in the north temperate zone, but Viburnum also grows on some tropical mountains.
Most members of Adoxaceae have flat-topped inflorescences composed of numerous small flowers that produce fleshy drupes. These flowers are five-petaled, are radially symmetric (with many planes of symmetry), and feature lobed stigmas on a short style and a fleshy nectary atop the ovary. With the exception of Viburnum, which has simple leaves and flowers with three carpels (of which two abort), the other genera of Adoxaceae have compound leaves and five carpels.
The diversity of habitat found in Dipsacales is illustrated by the species of Viburnum growing naturally in eastern North America. Red-fruited squashberry (V. edule) inhabits moist woods from Labrador to Alaska, southward into Pennsylvania, Michigan, and Minnesota, and as far west as Colorado and Oregon. Arrowwood (V. dentatum) thrives not only in moist woods but also in swamps. Possumhaw (V. nudum) is largely limited to swamps of the eastern and southern coastal plains of the United States. In contrast, rusty blackhaw (V. rufidulum) and softleaf arrowwood (V. molle) prefer dry rocky woods or hills. Viburnum is also an important horticultural genus; some of its cultivated species include guelder rose (V. opulus), arrowwood (V. dentatum), and Chinese snowball (V. macrocephalum).
Sambucus is a relatively small genus of about 10 species of small trees and shrubs known as elderberries. Leaves are compound and opposite, and the small flowers produce clusters of small black, blue, or red berrylike drupes. Many species are cultivated ornamentally, and several produce fruits that are edible if cooked. European, or black, elderberry (Sambucus nigra) is commonly used in herbal medicine.
Muskroot (Adoxa moschatellina) is widely distributed in northern regions, though it is endangered in several areas. It is a low-growing perennial herb composed of a basal cluster of leaves and a single stem. It has a musky odour (as its name implies), and its cultivation is limited to rock gardens. The single species of Sinadoxa is listed as vulnerable in its native habitat, while the only species of Tetradoxa is endangered; both species are herbs native to China.
There are 42 genera and more than 890 species in the family Caprifoliaceae, and most of the species are distributed in temperate areas in the Northern Hemisphere. The plants of Caprifoliaceae differ from members of Adoxaceae in having bilaterally symmetric flowers with an elongate style, a generally capitate stigma, and a nectary formed by densely packed hairs along the lower inner part of the corolla tube. Caprifoliaceae are trees or herbs recognizable by their opposite leaves. They have an inferior ovary that produces fleshy fruits, often with few seeds or only a single seed. The bark in the woody taxa often comes off in thin flakes. The phylogeny (history of evolutionary development) of Caprifoliaceae has been contentious, and the family is broadly circumscribed. Each of its six informal clades was previously a discrete family, though molecular and morphological evidence has led to their collective grouping under Caprifoliaceae; they are sometimes identified as subfamilies.
 The Lonicera clade includes five genera and 220 species, mostly in northern temperate areas of East Asia and eastern North America. The largest genus, Lonicera has 180 species of shrubs and woody vines known as honeysuckles. Many Lonicera species, some of which are intensely fragrant, are cultivated, although the introduced L. japonica and several other species are serious invasive weeds in parts of the United States. Another widely cultivated genus is Symphoricarpos, with 10 species of deciduous shrubs, including snowberry (S. albus) and coralberry (S. orbiculatus).
Different honeysuckle species show marked differences in flower colour and the length of the corolla tube. This relates to a variety of different pollination mechanisms, from bees in short-flowered species to hawk moths in some nocturnally flowering long-tubed species and even to hummingbirds in some long-tubed red-flowered species in Mexico and the southern United States.
