Elm,  (genus Ulmus),  genus of about 35 species of forest and ornamental shade trees of the family Ulmaceae, native primarily to north temperate areas. Many are cultivated for their height and attractive foliage. Elm wood is used in constructing boats and farm buildings because it is durable underwater; it is also used for furniture.
Elm leaves are doubly toothed and often lopsided at the base. The petalless flowers appear before the leaves and are borne in clusters on jointed stems. The nutlike fruit, surrounded by a flat, sometimes hairy, winglike structure, is called a samara.
Many elm species are susceptible to Dutch elm disease, a devastating fungoid disease spread by bark beetles. Dutch elm disease has drastically reduced wild and cultivated elm populations throughout much of Europe and North America. Some species are also vulnerable to elm phloem necrosis. Resistant strains are preferred for planting.
Elms are also one of the preferred hosts of the Asian longhorned beetle (Anoplophora glabripennis), an invasive and damaging pest of hardwood trees in North America and parts of Eurasia.
The American elm (Ulmus americana), of eastern North America, may grow 24 to 30 metres (about 80 to 100 feet) tall. It has dark gray, ridged bark and elliptical leaves. Populations in the United States have been decimated by Dutch elm disease.
Slippery, or red, elm (U. rubra), a shorter species with a similar but smaller distribution, has a gluelike substance in the inner bark, which was formerly steeped in water as a remedy for throat ailments, powdered for use in poultices, and chewed as a thirst-quencher. Rock, or cork, elm (U. thomasii) has hard wood and twigs that often develop corky ridges.
Introduced species planted as ornamentals include Chinese elm (U. parvifolia), a small-leaved species with interesting mottled bark; English elm (U. procera), with a compact crown and deeply fissured bark; Wych elm (U. glabra), with smoother bark; and Camperdown elm (U. glabra camperdownii), a variety of Wych elm also known as umbrella elm because of its drooping branches. The fast-growing Siberian elm (U. pumila), a brittle-twigged weak-wooded tree, is sometimes planted for quick shade and for windbreaks.
