flax,  (Linum usitatissimum),  plant of the family Linaceae, cultivated both for its fibre, from which linen yarn and fabric are made, and for its nutritious seeds, called flaxseed or linseed, from which linseed oil is obtained. Though flax has lost some of its value as a commercial fibre crop owing to the availability of synthetic fibres, flaxseed has grown in popularity as a health food, and flax remains economically significant in a number of countries around the world, including China, Russia, and Canada.
Flax is a herbaceous annual. When densely planted for fibre, plants average 0.9 to 1.2 metres (3 to 4 feet) in height, with slender stalks 2.5 to 4 mm (about 0.10 to 0.15 inch) in diameter and with branches concentrated at the top. Plants cultivated for seed are shorter and many-branched. The leaves, alternating on the stalk, are small and lance-shaped. The flowers, borne on stems growing from the branch tips, have five petals, usually blue in colour but sometimes white or pink. The fruits are small dry capsules composed of five lobes.
The plant is adaptable to a variety of soils and climates but grows best in well-drained sandy loam and in temperate climates. In most areas planting of the same land with flax is limited to once in six years to avoid soil exhaustion. Cool moist growing seasons produce the most-desirable fibre.
A bast fibre, flax is one of the oldest textile fibres. Evidence of its use has been found in the prehistoric lake dwellings of Switzerland. Fine linen fabrics, indicating a high degree of skill, have been discovered in ancient Egyptian tombs. Phoenician traders apparently brought linen from the Mediterranean area to Gaul and Britain, and the Romans introduced linen manufacture throughout their empire. In the 17th century the German states and Russia were major sources of raw material, and the linen industry was established in the Netherlands, Ireland, England, and Scotland. In North America the expansion of the cotton industry reduced the importance of linen.
Harvesting the fibre usually takes place after the lower portion of the stalk has turned yellow but before the fruit is fully mature. The fibre is obtained by subjecting the stalks to a series of operations, including retting (the use of moisture and microorganisms to dissolve the tissues surrounding the fibres), drying, crushing, and beating.
Fibre colour ranges from buff to gray, with the best qualities creamy white. The fibre strands, which measure about 30 to 75 cm (12 to 30 inches) long, are made up of individual cylindrically shaped cells with fairly smooth surfaces. Fine grades of flax fibres are made into woven fabrics and laces for apparel and household furnishings. Lower grades are used for products requiring strength and the ability to withstand moisture—such as canvas, twine, fire hose, bagging, industrial sewing thread, and fishnet.
Linen is valued for its strength, lustre, durability, and moisture absorbency. It is resistant to attack by microorganisms, and its smooth surface repels dirt. It is stronger than cotton, dries more quickly, and is more slowly affected by exposure to sunlight. It can be bleached to a pure white but dyeing is somewhat difficult because the fibres are not readily penetrated. Although linen increases in strength when wet, the excessive use of alkalies in laundering can weaken the fibres. Low elasticity, imparting hard, smooth texture, also makes linen subject to wrinkling, which can be reduced by chemical treatment. Because linen absorbs and releases moisture quickly and is a good conductor of heat, linen garments have a cooling effect on the wearer.
Flaxseed is a rich source of the omega-3 fatty acid alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) and is high in a class of phytoestrogens known as lignans. It is also high in dietary fibre, protein, iron, calcium, manganese, thiamin, magnesium, phosphorus, and copper. The seeds can be eaten raw or toasted; added ground or whole to salads, morning cereal, and smoothies; or incorporated into baked goods.
Linseed oil, derived from the seeds, is used in the production of paints, printing inks, linoleum, varnish, and oilcloth. It has the highest level of ALA of any vegetable oil, and food-grade linseed oil is sometimes taken as a nutritional supplement. It also can be used in cooking, though it is somewhat unstable and goes rancid quickly.
