Ginkgophyte,  any member of the division Ginkgophyta, a group of gymnospermous plants of particular interest to paleobotanists. Two of the three genera of ginkgophytes, Ginkgoites and Baiera, are extinct. The third genus, Ginkgo, has only one member, Ginkgo biloba, commonly called the ginkgo tree. It is also known as the maidenhair tree because of the resemblance of its bilobed leaves to those of the maidenhair fern. G. biloba may be the oldest living seed plant, and it is regarded by some as one of the wonders of the world.
Fossil leaves with similar form and venation to the living Ginkgo have been found in the Jurassic Period (199.6 million to 145.5 million years ago). These fossils have been described from such geographically separated areas as Australia, western North America, Mongolia, Alaska, England, and central Europe. The fossils vary greatly in form and are usually described as species of the genus Ginkgoites. Almost the same degree of variation in leaf form can be found on a living Ginkgo tree, however. Some paleobotanists, therefore, have recommended the abandonment of the genus Ginkgoites and the recognition of several species of Ginkgo.
There is one type of ginkgophyte leaf in the fossil record that is generally regarded as a distinct form and is given the generic designation Baiera. The leaf is deeply lobed into four segments and lacks a stalk (petiole). Following the Mesozoic Era, Ginkgo declined progressively in its distribution, and some botanists believe that remote portions of southeastern China are the last natural home of the maidenhair tree. After the outer fleshy seed coat is removed, the seed kernel is used as food in China and Japan. For 3,000 years or longer, extracts of the Ginkgo leaf have been recommended in Chinese medicine as benefiting the heart and lungs. Ginkgo has been investigated for its effects in the treatment of asthma, toxic shock syndrome, and various circulatory disorders. In addition, it has been used by many individuals for its purported enhancement of memory function, which has been studied in hopes of finding a treatment or preventative for Alzheimer disease.
At maturity a Ginkgo tree can reach heights of 20 to 30 metres (65 to 100 feet). Young trees often have a central trunk with regular, lateral branching; in older trees the branching is irregular.
A conspicuous feature of Ginkgo is the possession of long branches and short, or spur, branches. Leaves are produced on long branches during the spring growth. In subsequent years, clusters of leaves are formed on the lateral short branches. Ginkgo is deciduous, and the leaves of some varieties turn a beautiful golden colour in the autumn. The colour varies to some extent among horticultural varieties. There is some plasticity in growth form in that a short branch may become a long branch or the tip of a long branch may be converted to a short branch. The interplay between these two types of branches accounts for the more irregular shape of the older trees. Branching appears to be controlled by the distribution of auxin, a naturally occurring plant hormone.
The trunk diameters of the older specimens of Ginkgo may become large as a result of secondary growth. The vascular cambium gives rise to secondary phloem and secondary xylem (wood) for the conduction of water and dissolved minerals. The growth activity of the vascular cambium is sustained in the trunk and long shoots and produces a rather hard wood with well-defined growth rings. The activity of the vascular cambium persists in short shoots, but only a limited amount of soft wood is produced each year.
One of the most distinctive features of G. biloba is the foliage leaf, which consists of a leaf stalk (petiole) and a fan-shaped dichotomously veined blade, or lamina. Although biloba (or bilobed) correctly describes the form of many Ginkgo leaves, there is a great range of variation in the degree of lobing and dissection among leaves of the same tree. Bilobed and undivided leaves occur on spur or short branches, while most of the leaves on the upper part of a long branch are divided by a deep sinus into two lobes, each of which may be further lobed. Multilobed leaves also occur on new branches (sucker shoots) arising from the tree trunk at ground level.
The dichotomous venation pattern in a leaf blade is a striking morphological characteristic of Ginkgo. Two vascular bundles extend through the petiole and give rise to two systems of dichotomously branched veins. This type of venation was also present in the leaves of extinct members of the Ginkgoales. Such a system of venation is often referred to as an open type, devoid of vein fusions. It has been shown, however, that vein unions may occur with some regularity.
