Henequen,  (Agave fourcroydes), also called Yucatan sisal or Cuban sisal,  fibre plant of the asparagus family (Asparagaceae), native to Mexico and Guatemala. Henequen fibre is an important leaf fibre and has been used since pre-Columbian times. The plant was introduced to Cuba in the 19th century and became the country’s chief fibre crop by the 1920s. Henequen fibre is made into twines and rope and may be used in agriculture and shipping. Coarse henequen-fibre fabrics, produced locally, are employed in such products as bags, hammocks, and shoe soles. The plant is closely related to sisal (Agave sisalana), another important fibre crop.
The plant stalk, growing to 1.8 metres (6 feet) in the wild, averages about 0.9 metre (3 feet) under cultivation. Its grayish green lance-shaped leaves, up to 1.8 metres (6 feet) long and 10–15 cm (4–6 inches) wide at the widest point, grow directly from the stalk, forming a dense rosette. The leaves are edged with sharp teeth and have a sharp terminal spine. The flower stalk, reaching a height of 6 metres (20 feet), bears sterile greenish white flowers about 7.6 cm (3 inches) across with an unpleasant odour. Like other Agave species, the plant dies after flowering. The flower stalk produces bulbils that can be planted, but commercial propagation is usually done by removing and replanting the clonal pups from the base of the plant stalk.
Henequen plants yield about 25 leaves annually from about the 5th through the 16th year after planting. As they reach their full length, the outer leaves are cut off close to the stalk. The fibre is freed by machine decortication, which crushes the leaf between rollers and scrapes the resulting pulp from the fibre. The fibre strands are then washed, dried in the sun, and brushed.The lustrous white or yellow fibre strands average about 1.2 to 1.5 metres (3.9 to 4.9 feet) in length. They have fairly good strength, an ability to stretch, and fair resistance to deterioration from microorganisms found in saltwater.
