Hornwort,  (division Anthocerotophyta), also called horned liverwort,  any of about 300 species of small nonvascular plants. Hornworts usually grow on damp soils or on rocks in tropical and warm temperate regions. The largest genus, Anthoceros, has a worldwide distribution. Dendroceros and Megaceros are mainly tropical genera. Hornworts have an ancient lineage and are thought to be some of the earliest plants to have evolved on land.
Traditionally, hornworts have been classified as bryophytes, together with mosses (division Bryophyta) and liverworts (division Marchantiophyta). In some classification systems, hornworts have been grouped as horned liverworts in the subclass Anthocerotidae (class Hepaticae), class Anthocerotopsida, order Anthocerotales. However, molecular evidence suggests that hornworts have an evolutionary history distinct from both mosses and liverworts, and the plants are now placed in their own taxonomic division, Anthocerotophyta. The classification of the group remains controversial, and the number of hornwort families, genera, and species is under revision.
The plants’ gametophytes (sexual generation) are typically flattened, irregularly lobulated (thallose) structures that are usually less than 2 cm (0.8–1.6 inches) in diameter. The sporophyte, or asexual generation, forms a tapered cylinder. The sporophyte is dependent on the attached gametophyte for nutrients and water. Most sporophytes grow to up to 5 cm (2 inches). The thallus, or flat, gametophyte, usually lacks a midrib. The sexual organs are sunk into the upper surface of the thallus. Rhizoids (rootlike structures) on the undersurface anchor the plant. Cavities in the thallus sometimes contain colonies of the blue-green alga Nostoc.
Hornworts differ from other bryophytes in having a region of continuous growth at the base of the sporophyte, and a large irregular foot. The stalk that attaches the foot to the spore-bearing capsule in liverworts is absent in hornworts.
Hornworts reproduce sexually by means of waterborne sperm, which travel from the male sex organ (antheridium) to the female sex organ (archegonium). A fertilized egg in a female sex organ develops into an elongate sporangium, which splits lengthwise as it grows, releasing the spores that have developed within it. Elaters (elongated cells that aid in spore dispersal) are usually irregular and multicellular.
