inflorescence,   in a flowering plant, a cluster of flowers on a branch or a system of branches. An inflorescence is categorized on the basis of the arrangement of flowers on a main axis (peduncle) and by the timing of its flowering (determinate and indeterminate).
In determinate (cymose) inflorescences, the youngest flowers are at the bottom of an elongated axis or on the outside of a truncated axis. At the time of flowering, the apical meristem (the terminal point of cell division) produces a flower bud, thus arresting the growth of the peduncle.
A cyme is a flat-topped inflorescence in which the central flowers open first, followed by the peripheral flowers, as in the onion (genus Allium).
A dichasium is one unit of a cyme and is characterized by a stunted central flower and two lateral flowers on elongated pedicels, as in the wood stichwort (species Stellaria nemorum).
In indeterminate inflorescences, the youngest flowers are at the top of an elongated axis or on the centre of a truncated axis. An indeterminate inflorescence may be a raceme, panicle, spike, catkin, corymb, umbel, spadix, or head.
In a raceme a flower develops at the upper angle (axil) between the stem and branch of each leaf along a long, unbranched axis. Each flower is borne on a short stalk, called a pedicel. An example of a raceme is found in the snapdragon (Antirrhinum majus).
A panicle is a branched raceme in which each branch has more than one flower, as in the astilbe (Astilbe).
A spike is a raceme, but the flowers develop directly from the stem and are not borne on pedicels, as in barley (Hordeum).
A catkin (or ament) is a spike in which the flowers are either male (staminate) or female (carpellate). It is usually pendulous, and the perianth may be reduced or absent, as in oaks (Quercus).
A corymb is a raceme in which the pedicels of the lower flowers are longer than those of the upper flowers so that the inflorescence has a flat-topped appearance overall, as in hawthorn (Crataegus).
In an umbel, each of the pedicels initiates from about the same point at the tip of the peduncle, giving the appearance of an umbrella-like shape, as in the wax flowers (Hoya).
A spadix is a spike borne on a fleshy stem and is common in the family Araceae (e.g., Philodendron). The subtending bract is called a spathe.
A head (capitulum) is a short dense spike in which the flowers are borne directly on a broad, flat peduncle, giving the inflorescence the appearance of a single flower, as in the dandelion (Taraxacum).
