Lamiaceae, formerly called Labiatae,  the mint family of flowering plants, with 236 genera and more than 7,000 species, the largest family of the order Lamiales. Lamiaceae is distributed nearly worldwide, and many species are cultivated for their fragrant leaves and attractive flowers. The family is particularly important to humans for herb plants useful for flavour, fragrance, or medicinal properties.
Most members of the family are perennial or annual herbs with square stems, though some species are woody shrubs or subshrubs. The leaves are typically simple and oppositely arranged; most are fragrant and contain volatile oils. The flowers are usually arranged in clusters and feature two-lipped, open-mouthed, tubular corollas (united petals) with five-lobed bell-like calyxes (united sepals). The fruit is commonly a dry nutlet.
Best known for its sharp fragrance is rosemary (Salvia rosmarinus), a Mediterranean species. Also Mediterranean is lavender (Lavandula officinalis), with fragrant blue to lavender flowers in leafless spikes. Hyssop (Hyssopus officinalis) was once used as a curative herb.
There are about 350 species in the genus Thymus, all of which are Eurasian. Wild thyme (T. praecox), with scented leaves, is a creeping plant that is native in Europe but naturalized in eastern North America. Its foliage and flower heads resemble those of garden thyme (T. vulgaris), the source of the kitchen herb.
Of the 150 tropical species of Ocimum, basil (O. basilicum) is perhaps the most well known; the plant is likely native to India but is cultivated as a culinary herb in other regions. The genus Origanum, native in Europe, includes 15 to 20 species, chief among them being marjoram (O. majorana) and oregano (O. vulgare).
Catnip, or catmint (Nepeta cataria), a Eurasian perennial, grows to about 1 metre (3.3 feet) and has downy heart-shaped leaves with an aroma that is stimulating to cats.
Betony (Stachys officinalis) was once regarded as a cure-all, and other plants of the genus Stachys, or the woundworts generally, had supposed value as folk remedies. Self-heal, or heal-all (Prunella vulgaris), provided another important source of herbal medicine. The 40 to 50 species of the genus Lamium are known as dead nettles; they are low weedy plants that are sometimes cultivated as medicinal plants.
Among the approximately 100 species of the genus Phlomis is Jerusalem sage (P. tuberosa), which rises to almost 2 metres (6.5 feet) and has clusters of purple flowers. It is native to Eurasia and is naturalized in North America. One of the 40 species of the African genus Leonotis, klip dagga, or lion’s ear (L. nepetifolia), is naturalized throughout the tropics; it has red-orange globe clusters of profuse flowers at the top of the 1- to 2-metre plants.  See also Coleus; Mentha; Monarda.
