Monocotyledon, byname monocot,  one of the two great groups of flowering plants, or angiosperms, the other being the eudicotyledons (eudicots). There are approximately 60,000 species of monocots, including the most economically important of all plant families, Poaceae (true grasses), and the largest of all plant families, Orchidaceae (orchids). Other prominent monocot families include Liliaceae (lilies), Arecaceae (palms), and Iridaceae (irises). Most of them are distinguished by the presence of only one seed leaf, or cotyledon, in the embryo contained in the seed. Eudicotyledons, in contrast, ordinarily have two cotyledons.
Monocots form a monophyletic group, meaning that they share a common evolutionary history. It is widely believed that the monocots were derived from primitive eudicots. Given that the various physical features of monocots are regarded as derived characteristics within the angiosperms, any plant more primitive than the monocots in these several respects would certainly be a eudicot. Some of the earliest known monocot fossils are pollen grains dating to the Aptian Age of the Early Cretaceous Epoch (125 million–113 million years ago). Molecular clock studies (which employ differences in DNA to estimate when a group split from its ancestors) suggest that monocots may have originated as early as 140 million years ago.
Evolutionary diversification among the monocotyledons appears to have been constrained by a number of fundamental features of the group, most notably the absence of a typical vascular cambium and the parallel-veined rather than net-veined leaves. Within these constraints, the monocots show a wide range of diversity of structure and habitat. They are cosmopolitan in their distribution on land. They also grow in lakes, ponds, and rivers, sometimes free-floating but more often rooted to the bottom. Some of them grow in the intertidal zone along the seashore, and a few are submerged marine plants rooted to the bottom in fairly shallow water along the shore.
Monocot plants are marked by seeds with a single cotyledon, parallel-veined leaves, scattered vascular bundles in the stem, the absence of a typical cambium, and an adventitious root system. Flower parts typically come in multiples of three, and the pollen grains characteristically feature a single aperture (or furrow).
The roots of a monocot lack a vascular cambium (the area of secondary xylem and phloem, or secondary vascular tissue, development) and therefore have no means of secondary thickening. In other structural respects, monocot roots are essentially similar to those of eudicots. Many eudicots have a taproot or several strong roots, with several orders of branch roots, all originating eventually from the embryonic root (radicle). The taproot or primary roots in such a system have a vascular cambium and are thickened by secondary growth. This kind of root system is not available to monocots. Instead, the primary root that originates from the radicle of the embryo soon aborts or is undeveloped so that no primary root is produced. The root system of monocots is thus wholly adventitious—i.e., the roots originate laterally from the stem or from the hypocotyl (the region of transition between the root and the stem in the embryo). The roots are all slender, and the plant is said to be fibrous-rooted.
Flowers of monocots differ from those of eudicots mainly in the number of parts of each kind. Monocot flowers most often have the parts in sets of three, occasionally four, but almost never five. The numbers are especially characteristic of the sepals and petals. The stamens and pistils may be numerous even when the perianth is trimerous (in sets of three), or the single ovary may have only two carpels instead of three. Often there are six stamens, representing two whorls of three.
