Moss,  (division Bryophyta),  any of at least 12,000 species of small nonvascular spore-bearing land plants. Mosses are distributed throughout the world except in salt water and are commonly found in moist shady locations. They are best known for those species that carpet woodland and forest floors. Ecologically, mosses break down exposed substrata, releasing nutrients for the use of more complex plants that succeed them. They also aid in soil erosion control by providing surface cover and absorbing water, and they are important in the nutrient and water economy of some vegetation types. Economically important species are those in the genus Sphagnum that form peat.
Mosses existed as early as the Permian Period (298.9 million to 252.2 million years ago), and more than 100 species have been identified from fossils of the Paleogene and Neogene periods (66 million to 2.6 million years ago). Muscites, Protosphagnum, Palaeohypnum, and other fossil mosses are similar in structure to modern genera. Extant species include the valvate mosses (subclass Andreaeidae) and peat mosses (subclass Sphagnidae). The large subclass Bryidae constitutes most species of mosses, but the subclass Polytrichidae also has some important members. Other, smaller subclasses are represented by only a few species.
Mosses differ from one another primarily in the structure and specialization of their sporangia (spore cases). The stemlike and leaflike structures of moss plants constitute the gametophytic (sexual) generation. The sporophytic (asexual) generation develops from the gametophyte and usually consists of a raised stalk, or seta, which terminates in the sporangium. The sporangium remains dependent on the gametophyte, to varying degrees, for water and nutrients. Mosses reproduce by branching and fragmentation, by regeneration from tiny pieces of leaves or stems, and by the production of spores. The spore, under favourable conditions, germinates and grows into a branching green thread (protonema). Ultimately, the gametophyte grows from a small bud produced by a cell of the protonema that divides and differentiates.
Many small plants bearing the name moss are in fact not mosses. The “moss” found on the north side of trees is often the green alga Pleurococcus. Irish moss (Chondrus crispus) is a red alga. Beard moss (Usnea species), Iceland moss (Cetraria islandica), oak moss (Evernia prunastri), and reindeer moss (Cladonia species) are lichens. Spanish moss (Tillandsia usneoides) is an air plant of the pineapple family (Bromeliaceae). Club mosses are fern allies in the family Lycopodiaceae.
