pandanus,  (genus Pandanus), also called screw pine,  any of some 600 tropical species of Old World trees and shrubs of the screw pine family (Pandanaceae). They grow along seacoasts and in marshy places and forests of tropical and subtropical regions, especially in Asia, Africa, and Oceania.
Pandanus species typically have slender palmlike stems and produce from their trunks and stems aerial prop roots that are often huge; those, together with their terminal crowns of swordlike leaves, give the plants a distinctive appearance. The genus is characterized by numerous long, narrow, parallel-veined, palmlike leaves with spiny margins and midribs that are produced in tufts at the branch tips in three or four close twisted ranks around the stem, forming the screwlike helices of leaves that give the common name screw pine to these plants. The flowers are simple, petal-less, usually densely clustered, and either male or female, the sexes being produced on different plants. The fruits of many species are heavy ball-shaped or conelike aggregates produced by the coalescence of the developing ovaries of many adjacent flowers. Hollow spaces inside the fruits enable them to float, thus aiding in distribution. Fruit-eating birds and bats also distribute the seeds of some species.
Much use is made of the leaves for thatching, mats, hats, ropes, twine, sails for small boats, baskets, and fibre products, especially of those from the thatch screw pine, or pandanus palm (Pandanus tectorius), which is native to Micronesia and Hawaii, and the common screw pine (P. utilis). Fibres are also obtained from the aerial roots.
The fleshy fruits and seeds of some species, including P. utilis and the Nicobar Islands breadfruit (P. leram), are edible. The leaves of pandan (P. amaryllifolius) are used in Southeast Asian cooking, notably in Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia. Thatch screw pine has flowers whose essence (called pandanus, or kewra, water) is used as a flavouring in North Indian foods.
A few species are grown as greenhouse subjects, including dwarf pandanus (P. pygmaeus) and thatch screw pine, which is a popular houseplant. The candelabrum tree (P. candelabrum) is grown as an outdoor ornamental in warm regions and may indicate the presence of diamond-bearing kimberlite in its native Africa.
