Pea,  (Pisum sativum), also called garden pea,  herbaceous annual plant in the family Fabaceae, grown virtually worldwide for its edible seeds. Peas can be bought fresh, canned, or frozen, and dried peas are commonly used in soups. Some varieties, including sugar peas and snow peas, produce pods that are edible and are eaten raw or cooked like green beans; they are popular in East Asian cuisines. The plants are fairly easy to grow, and the seeds are a good source of protein and dietary fibre.
While the origins of domesticated peas have not been definitely determined, the pea is one of the oldest cultivated crops. The wild plant is native to the Mediterranean region, and ancient remains dating to the late Neolithic Period have been found in the Middle East. European colonization introduced the crop to the New World and other regions throughout the globe. In the mid-1800s, peas in a monastery garden in Austria were famously used by the monk Gregor Mendel in his pioneering studies of the nature of heredity.
The pea plant is a hardy leafy annual with hollow trailing or climbing stems that reach up to 1.8 metres (6 feet) in length. The stems feature terminal tendrils that facilitate climbing and bear compound leaves with three pairs of leaflets. The reddish purple, pink, or white flowers, growing two to three per stalk, are butterfly-shaped. The fruit is a pod that grows to 10 cm (4 inches) long, splitting in half when ripe. Inside the pod, 5 to 10 seeds are attached by short stalks. The seeds are green, yellow, white, or variegated.
In the home garden, peas should be planted in fertile well-drained soil in an unshaded spot. The cool part of the growing season favours growth and development, and peas are sometimes grown in the winter and early spring in warmer climates. The most common diseases that affect peas are root rot, powdery mildew, and several viral diseases. Widely grown varieties include dwarf, half-dwarf, trailing, smooth-seeded, and wrinkled-seeded. Canning and freezing processes vary according to variety, plant size, shape and size of the pods, and period of maturation.
The black-eyed pea (Vigna unguiculata) is not a true pea. See cowpea.
