plant reproductive system,  any of the systems, sexual or asexual, by which plants reproduce. In plants, as in animals, the end result of reproduction is the continuation of a given species, and the ability to reproduce is, therefore, rather conservative, or given to only moderate change, during evolution. Changes have occurred, however, and the pattern is demonstrable through a survey of plant groups.
Reproduction in plants is either asexual or sexual. Asexual reproduction in plants involves a variety of widely disparate methods for producing new plants identical in every respect to the parent. Sexual reproduction, on the other hand, depends on a complex series of basic cellular events, involving chromosomes and their genes, that take place within an elaborate sexual apparatus evolved precisely for the development of new plants in some respects different from the two parents that played a role in their production. (For an account of the common details of asexual and sexual reproduction and the evolutionary significance of the two methods, see reproduction.)
In order to describe the modification of reproductive systems, plant groups must be identified. One convenient classification of organisms sets plants apart from other forms such as bacteria, algae, fungi, and protozoans. Under such an arrangement, the plants, as separated, comprise two major groups—the nonvascular bryophytes (mosses, hornworts, and liverworts) and the vascular tracheophytes. The vascular plants include the seedless lycophytes and ferns (both groups are considered lower vascular plants) and the two groups of seed plants, the gymnosperms and angiosperms.
A comparative treatment of the two patterns of reproductive systems will introduce the terms required for an understanding of the survey of those systems as they appear in selected plant groups.
Asexual reproduction involves no union of cells or nuclei of cells and, therefore, no mingling of genetic traits, since the nucleus contains the genetic material (chromosomes) of the cell. Only those systems of asexual reproduction that are not really modifications of sexual reproduction are considered below. They fall into two basic types: systems that utilize almost any fragment or part of a plant body and systems that depend upon specialized structures that have evolved as reproductive agents.
In many plant groups, fragmentation of the plant body, followed by regeneration and development of the fragments into whole new organisms, serves as a reproductive system.  It is common horticultural practice to propagate desirable varieties of garden plants by means of plant fragments, or cuttings. These may be severed leaves or portions of roots or stems, which are stimulated to develop roots and produce leafy shoots. Naturally fallen branches of willows (Salix) and poplars (Populus) root under suitable conditions in nature and eventually develop into trees. Other horticultural practices that exemplify asexual reproduction include budding (the removal of buds of one plant and their implantation on another) and grafting (the implantation of small branches of one individual on another).
Fragments of the plant bodies of liverworts and mosses regenerate to form new plants. In nature and in laboratory and greenhouse cultures, liverworts fragment as a result of growth; the growing fragments separate by decay at the region of attachment to the parent. During prolonged drought, the mature portions of liverworts often die, but their tips resume growth and produce a series of new plants from the original parent plant.
In mosses, small fragments of the stems and leaves (even single cells of the latter) can, with sufficient moisture and under proper conditions, regenerate and ultimately develop into new plants.
Throughout the plant kingdom, specially differentiated or modified cells, groups of cells, or organs have, during the course of evolution, come to function as organs of asexual reproduction. These structures are asexual in that the individual reproductive agent develops into a new individual without the union of sex cells (gametes). A number of examples of special asexual agents of reproduction from several plant groups are in this section.
Airborne spores characterize most nonflowering land plants, such as mosses, liverworts, and ferns. Although the spores arise as products of meiosis, a cellular event in which the number of chromosomes in the nucleus is halved, such spores are asexual in the sense that they may grow directly into new individuals, without prior sexual union.
Among liverworts, mosses, lycopods, ferns, and seed plants, few-to many-celled specially organized buds, or gemmae, also serve as agents of asexual reproduction.
The vegetative, or somatic, organs of plants may, in their entirety, be modified to serve as organs of reproduction. In this category belong such flowering-plant structures as stolons, rhizomes, tubers, corms, and bulbs, as well as the tubers of liverworts, ferns, and horsetails, the dormant buds of certain moss stages, and the leaves of many succulents. Stolons are elongated runners, or horizontal stems, such as those of the strawberry, which root and form new plantlets when they make proper contact with a moist soil surface. Rhizomes, as seen in iris, are fleshy, elongated, horizontal stems that grow within or upon the soil. The branching of rhizomes results in multiplication of the plant. The enlarged fleshy tips of subterranean rhizomes or stolons are known as tubers, examples of which are potatoes. Tubers are fleshy storage stems, the buds (“eyes”) of which, under proper conditions, can develop into new individuals. Erect, vertical, fleshy, subterranean stems, which are known as corms, are exemplified by crocuses and gladioli. These organs tide the plants over periods of dormancy and may develop secondary cormlets, which give rise to new plantlets. Unlike the corm, only a small portion of the bulb, as in lilies and the onion, represents stem tissue. The latter is surrounded by the fleshy food-storage bases of earlier-formed leaves. After a period of dormancy, bulbs develop into new individuals. Large bulbs produce secondary bulbs through development of buds, resulting in an increase in number of individuals.
In most plant groups, both sexual and asexual methods of reproduction occur. Some species, however, seem secondarily to have lost the capacity for sexual reproduction. Such cases are described below (see Variations in reproductive cycles).
