Pollen,  a mass of microspores in a seed plant appearing usually as a fine dust. Each pollen grain is a minute body, of varying shape and structure, formed in the male structures of seed-bearing plants and transported by various means (wind, water, insects, etc.) to the female structures, where fertilization occurs. In angiosperms, pollen is produced by the anthers of the stamens in flowers. In gymnosperms, it is formed in the microsporophylls of the microstrobili (male pollen cones). Pollen consists of one or more vegetative cells and a reproductive cell. A pollen grain itself is not the male gamete. In angiosperms and certain gymnosperms, the vegetative cell forms the pollen tube that grows to meet the unfertilized ovules, and the reproductive cell is the source of the sperm. (See also pollination.)
Most pollen grains consist of three distinct parts. The central cytoplasmic part is the source of nuclei responsible for fertilization. The other parts constituting the wall of the grain are an inner layer, the intine, and an outer layer, the exine. The intine consists, at least in part, of cellulose or hemicellulose. The outer and most durable layer, the exine, is very resistant to disintegration; treatment with intense heat, strong acids, or strong bases has little effect upon it. The constituents of the exine have been termed sporopollenins. The internal parts of the pollen grain are easily broken down, whereas the exine layer, and thus the general form of the pollen grain, is easily preserved in various kinds of sediments; the quality of preservation may vary with different environments.
Because of their high resistance to decay, their widespread dispersal by wind and water, and their abundant production by plants, pollen grains are very common constituents of geologic sediments, both recent and ancient. Because of these features, pollen grains have provided much information on the origin and geologic history of terrestrial plant life. Additionally, given their remarkably symmetrical structure and surface patterns, fresh and preserved pollen grains are readily recognizable under the microscope. Characteristics such as the exine sculpturing and the size and number of apertures through which the pollen tubes grow are useful as taxonomic tools. The structure of a pollen grain is oftentimes so distinctive that in some cases species may be identified by pollen grains alone. Nearly all angiosperm and gymnosperm plant families and many genera can be identified solely by their pollen grains. The study of pollen and spores is known as palynology.
Pollen is produced in such quantities that it is a significant component of the airborne constituents of Earth’s atmosphere, especially in areas over continents. The proteinaceous substance in many pollen grains (namely, ragweed and many grasses) induces an allergic reaction commonly known as hay fever. Frequently local governmental authorities publish pollen counts, estimates of the concentration of pollen grains in the air, for the purpose of indicating the relative discomfort that may be experienced by sufferers from hay fever and similar allergies.
