Rhododendron,  (genus Rhododendron),  diverse genus of about 1,000 species of woody flowering plants in the heath family (Ericaceae), notable for their attractive flowers and handsome foliage. Rhododendrons are native chiefly in the north temperate zone, especially in the moist acidic soil of the Himalayas and into Southeast Asia to the mountains of New Guinea. A number of species are cultivated as ornamentals.
Rhododendron, meaning “red tree,” refers to the red flowers and woody growth of some species, but rhododendrons range in habit from evergreen to deciduous and from low-growing ground covers to tall trees.  Some are matlike dwarf species only 10 cm (4 inches) high, such as prostrate rhododendron (R. prostratum) from Yunnan, China, while others are trees, such as tree rhododendron (R. arboreum), bearded rhododendron (R. barbatum), and the critically endangered big tree rhododendron (R. protistum variety giganteum) from Asia, some in excess of 12 metres (40 feet) high. Leaves are thick and leathery and are evergreen in all but the azalea species, some of which are deciduous. Flowers may be scented or not and are usually tubular to funnel-shaped and occur in a wide range of colours—white, yellow, pink, scarlet, purple, and blue.
The first species available for garden use, in the mid-1600s, was the hairy alpine rose (R. hirsutum), which may grow as high as 1 metre (3 feet). Large-leaved species (and their hybrids) from the Himalayan region have long been popular ornamental plants in temperate areas without extreme winter cold. A number of species known as azaleas were once placed in their own genus and many are cultivated for their attractive flowers.
Three species known as Labrador tea were also considered taxonomically distinct and were formerly placed in the genus Ledum. Bog Labrador tea (R. groenlandicum), marsh Labrador tea (R. tomentosum), and western Labrador tea (R. columbianum) are native to North America and have been used by native peoples to make tea.
The catawba rhododendron, or mountain rosebay (R. catawbiense), of the southeastern United States, is plentiful and a great flowering attraction in June in Great Smoky Mountains National Park. The hardy catawba hybrids are derived from R. catawbiense and allied species. The great laurel rhododendron, or rosebay rhododendron (R. maximum), overlapping in distribution with the catawba, ranges more northeasterly; it is often grown as an ornamental. Both can be small trees, up to 6 metres (20 feet) or taller. Rhodora (R. canadense), from northeastern North America, bears rosy-purple flowers before the leaves unfurl.
In the British Isles, common rhododendron (R. ponticum) has become an invasive species. Introduced in the late 18th century from Spain, Portugal, and, to a lesser extent, Turkey, this rhododendron forms impenetrable thickets in which virtually nothing else grows.
