Solanaceae,  the nightshade, or potato, family of flowering plants (order Solanales), with 102 genera and nearly 2,500 species, many of considerable economic importance as food and drug plants. Among the most important of those are potato (Solanum tuberosum); eggplant (S. melongena); tomato (S. lycopersicum); peppers (various Capsicum species); tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum and N. rustica); belladonna (Atropa belladonna); the poisonous jimsonweed (Datura stramonium) and nightshades (S. nigrum, S. dulcamara, and others); and many garden ornamentals, such as the genera Browallia, Brugmansia, Brunfelsia, Cestrum, Datura, Lycium, Nicotiana, Nierembergia, Petunia, Salpiglossis, Schizanthus, Solandra, Solanum, and Streptosolen.
Members of the Solanaceae family are found throughout the world but are most abundant and widely distributed in the tropical regions of Latin America, where about 40 genera are endemic. Very few members are found in temperate regions, and only about 50 species are found in the United States and Canada combined. The genus Solanum contains almost half of all the species in the family, including all the species of wild potatoes found in the Western Hemisphere. The poisonous alkaloids present in some species of the family have given the latter its sombre vernacular name of “nightshade.”
Members of the family are annuals, biennials, or perennials and are usually herbs, though some species grow as shrubs or small trees. The leaves are generally simple and alternately arranged. The family is characterized by solitary or clustered flowers with sepals and petals, five in number and fused; five stamens; and a superior ovary (i.e., one situated above the attachment point of the other flower parts), composed of two fused carpels (ovule-bearing segments) and obliquely placed in the flower upon a basal disk of tissue. The style (upper end of the ovary) is simple and bears a two-lobed stigma, the pollen-receptive surface. The flowers are usually conspicuous and are visited by insects. The fruit is usually a berry or a capsule.
