spurge,  (genus Euphorbia),  large and diverse genus of flowering plants in the family Euphorbiaceae, comprising at least 2,100 species. Many spurge species are important as ornamentals, as sources of drugs, or as agricultural weeds and invasive species. The genus takes its common name from a group of annual herbs used as purgatives, or spurges, mainly the 1-metre- (3.3-foot-) tall European caper spurge (Euphorbia lathyris), seeds of which were once used for their laxative effect. The diverse worldwide genus includes many species in arid parts of Africa and India that resemble cactus plants.
Euphorbia plants vary from flat creeping herbs to shrubs and trees. Some are thorny succulents that resemble true cacti, but, unlike cacti, euphorbias have a milky, often poisonous sap. The unusual floral structures feature a single female flower consisting of a single female reproductive structure, the pistil, surrounded by numerous male flowers of one stamen each. All these reduced flowers are enclosed in a cup-shaped leaflike structure with five lobes and a gland on each, called a cyathium. Fruits are explosive three-seeded capsules.
The cactuslike kinds include spined, succulent (fleshy), and angled 15-metre- (49-foot-) tall trees such as candelabrum tree (E. candelabrum) and E. nyikae from East Africa, as well as spined and angled succulent shrubs such as cow’s horn (E. grandicornis) from southern Africa and mottled spurge (E. lactea) from the East Indies, both of which are grown as hedges in areas with a mild climate.
Succulent but unthorned and with upright, 6-metre (20-foot), fingerlike, much-branched stems is milkbush (E. tirucalli) from India, used in Africa and many tropical places as a hedge for huts or cattle enclosures. Wax plant (E. antisyphilitica), from Mexico, has similar but unbranched, rodlike, gray-green, mostly naked, 1-metre (3.3-foot) stems from the surface of which comes an important wax used for polishes, candles, lubricants, and paper waterproofing.
The somewhat climbing, thorned, leafy, woody-stemmed crown of thorns (E. milii) from Madagascar is a popular houseplant in temperate areas and a good source of colour in tropical gardens.
What is probably the most appreciated of the tropical euphorbias is the poinsettia (E. pulcherrima) from southern Mexico and Guatemala, which has scarlet bracts (leaflike structures attached just below flowers) and is associated with Christmas. Another species associated with Christmas in southern Mexico and Central America, where it is native, is the shrub pascuita (E. leucocephala), 1.5 to 4 metres (5 to 13 feet) tall, which is covered much of the winter with a mist of small white bracts. In some varieties the leaves are dark red. The scarlet plume (E. fulgens), from Mexico, a 90-cm- (3-foot-) tall shrub with slender stems and scarlet bract clusters, is sometimes grown as a pot plant and in mild-winter areas as a garden shrub.
Perennial ornamentals of temperate climes include: cypress spurge (E. cyparissias), from Europe, a globe-shaped plant with needlelike foliage that is covered with golden bracts in spring; Mediterranean spurge (E. characias, subspecies wulfenii), from Europe, 0.9 to 1.2 metres (3 to 4 feet) tall with greenish yellow heads on bluish foliage; cushion spurge (E. epithymoides), from Europe, a 30.5-cm (12-inch) globe of gold to chartreuse that blooms in spring; and E. griffithii, from the Himalayas, the fireglow variety of which has fire-orange heads in early summer.
Annual ornamentals include snow-on-the-mountain (E. marginata), native in the North American West; and many varieties of fire-on-the-mountain (E. heterophylla), from the eastern and central United States to Peru, with red-marked, poinsettia-like, green bracts and leaves of varied shape on 90-cm- (35-inch-) tall plants.
Important as weeds are flowering spurge (E. corollata), of the middle and eastern United States; the leafy spurge (E. escula), naturalized from Europe in the northern United States and adjacent Canada; spotted spurge (E. maculata); prostrate spurge and the related European petty spurge (E. peplus); and sun spurge (E. helioscopia). The weedy North American prostrate spurge (E. supine) is commonly found growing out of sidewalk cracks.
Some botanists previously divided the euphorbias into various now-defunct genera, including Chamaesyce, Poinsettia, Tithymalus, Tithymalopsis, and Dichrophyllum.
