Stevia,  (Stevia rebaudiana), also called sweet leaf,  flowering plant in the aster family (Asteraceae), grown for its sweet-tasting leaves. The plant is native to Paraguay, where it has a long history of use by the Guaraní people. The leaves contain a number of sweet-tasting chemicals known as steviol glycosides, which can be used fresh or dried to sweeten beverages or desserts or can be commercially processed into powdered noncaloric sweeteners. Steviol glycosides, particularly the chemicals stevioside and rebaudioside A, can be more than 300 times sweeter than table sugar and are nonglycemic (i.e., they do not affect blood glucose levels). Touted as a healthier alternative to sugar, stevia sweeteners grew in popularity worldwide in the early 21st century.
Stevia is a tender perennial herb that reaches 30.5–80 cm (1–2.5 feet) in height. The oblong aromatic leaves are 2.5 cm (1 inch) long with a prominent midrib and are arranged oppositely along the stems. The small tubular flowers have five white petals and are borne in terminal clusters; the flowers are usually removed to improve the flavour of the leaves. Germination from seed is difficult, and most plants are grown from cuttings. The plant requires rich well-drained soil and thrives in warm humid climates.
Stevia leaves have been used for more than 1,500 years by the Guaraní people. Traditionally, the plant was used to sweeten yerba maté and other teas, and it had a number of applications in folk medicine. The first scientific record of the plant dates to 1899, when Swiss botanist Mosè Giacomo Bertoni (known in Spanish as Moisés Santiago Bertoni) announced his discovery of the sweet-tasting plant and named it Eupatorium rebaudianum. In the early 1970s Japanese scientists developed the first commercial stevia-derived sweetener, which quickly gained popularity in that country. After an initial ban because of carcinogen concerns, specific glycoside extracts were approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2008. The European Union approved stevia sweeteners in 2011.
