titan arum,  (Amorphophallus titanum), also called corpse flower,  herbaceous flowering plant of the arum family (Araceae), known for its massive foul-smelling inflorescence (cluster of flowers). The plant is endemic to the steep hillsides of rainforests in western Sumatra but is cultivated in botanic gardens worldwide. The unusual short-lived flower structure is the largest unbranched inflorescence of any plant and smells of rotting flesh. Usually taking 4–10 years or more between flowerings, a titan arum is often a major tourist attraction when in bloom.
Like other members of the arum family, the massive inflorescence of the titan arum consists of an inner flower spike, known as a spadix, surrounded by a petal-like collar known as a spathe. The large furrowed spathe is green to cream-coloured on the outside and tightly encloses the spadix before opening to reveal its deep crimson to purple interior. The upper, visible half of the spadix is smooth and yellowish to brown in colour, and the entire spadix can reach more than 3 metres (9.8 feet) in height. Although the inflorescence develops over several months, with its growth peaking at a rate of up to 15 cm (6 inches) a day, it only blooms for around 24–48 hours. Hundreds of unisexual flowers are borne toward the bottom of the spadix within a protective chamber formed by the spathe and mature separately to reduce self-pollination; the dense cream-coloured male flowers are located above the pink to orange female flowers. While in bloom, the structure generates heat, more than 90 °F (32 °C), and produces its characteristic carrion odour to attract flesh flies and carrion beetles for pollination. The fertilized flowers develop into bright red to orange spherical fruits, and the spathe and the upper spadix collapse away to facilitate their dispersal, commonly by rhinoceros hornbills (Buceros rhinoceros) and other animals. Eventually the remaining structure withers and the plant goes dormant.
During the years that the plant does not flower, it usually produces a single, treelike leaf, some 4.6–7 metres (15–23 feet) tall. The petiole (leaf stalk) is speckled with white patches and typically features three branches topped with numerous large leaflets. Most of the food it produces is stored in a massive underground corm and is later used to fuel the rapid growth of the inflorescence or a new leaf following a period of dormancy. The corm can weigh around 70–90 kg (154–200 pounds) and is the largest in the plant kingdom. After 12–18 months of photosynthesis, the leaf dies back, and the plant goes dormant. Typically several leaf cycles are completed before the plant has enough stored energy to flower again.
The largest single flower belongs to another carrion flower of Indonesia, the unrelated monster flower (Rafflesia arnoldii). The largest branched inflorescence is that of the talipot palm (Corypha umbraculifera), native to India and Sri Lanka.
