Waxplant,  (genus Hoya),  also spelled wax plant,   genus of more than 200 species of perennial plants in the dogbane family (Apocynaceae). Members of the genus are found throughout tropical Asia and parts of Australia. Several are popular as greenhouse plants or window plants.
 Waxplants are perennial evergreen vines or twining shrubs. Some species are epiphytic or can grow on rocks. They are usually slow-growing with simple, entire, leathery leaves. The long-lasting flowers are commonly borne in showy clusters. The flowers are small, stiff, waxy, and star-shaped, usually in shades of white to pink.
Several species of Hoya are commonly grown as houseplants and are sometimes known as wax vines. Porcelain flower (Hoya carnosa) has several cultivated varieties with white to rosy-pink flowers; one such variety, the Hindu rope vine, has twisted distorted leaves that may be variegated cream, yellow, and pink. The miniature waxplant (H. lanceolata bella) is more compact and has smaller leaves and purple-centred white flowers. Common wax flower (H. australis) is native to Australia and has fragrant flowers. Another species, H. bilobata, is endemic to the Philippines and has some of the smallest flowers of any member of the genus.
The name “waxplant” is also used for any of a number of unrelated plants that are waxy in some respect. The wax begonia (see begonia) is a waxy-leaved bedding and pot plant. The wax-leaved privet, or white wax tree, is a landscape plant used in warm climates. The wax tree (Toxicodendron succedaneum) is a Japanese tree grown for its waxy berries and stem juices that yield a natural lacquer. The wax vine, or cape ivy (Senecio macroglossus), which has thick waxy succulent leaves, is used as a ground cover in warm regions and as a basket plant indoors, especially in its variegated form. A succulent, the wax-rosette (Echeveria× gilva), is noted for its cluster of waxy leaves.
The Geraldton waxplant (Chamelaucium uncinatum), in the myrtle family (Myrtaceae), from Australia, is a heathlike shrub with waxy white, pink, or lilac flowers. Plants sometimes called wax flower include Anthurium and Stephanotis.
