Zingiberaceae,  the ginger family of flowering plants, the largest family of the order Zingiberales, containing about 56 genera and about 1,300 species. These aromatic herbs grow in moist areas of the tropics and subtropics, including some regions that are seasonably dry.
Members of the family are perennials that frequently have sympodial (forked) fleshy rhizomes (underground stems). They may grow to 6 metres (20 feet) in height. A few species are epiphytic—i.e., supported by other plants and having aerial roots exposed to the humid atmosphere. The rolled-up sheathing bases of the leaves sometimes form an apparent short aerial stem.
The commonly green sepals differ in texture and colour from the petals. Bracts (leaflike structures) are spirally arranged, and the flower clusters are spiral and conelike. The Zingiberaceae flower resembles an orchid because of its labellum (two or three fused stamens) joined with a pair of petal-like sterile stamens. Nectar is present in the slender flower tubes. The brightly coloured flowers may bloom for only a few hours and are thought to be pollinated by insects. One genus, Etlingera, exhibits an unusual growth pattern. The floral parts grow below ground except for a circle of bright red, petal-like structures that emerge from the ground, yet the leafy shoots rise to 5 metres (16.4 feet).
Many species are economically valuable for their spices and perfume. The dried thick rhizome of turmeric (Curcuma longa) is commonly ground for culinary, medicinal, and cosmetic uses. The seeds of Elettaria cardamomum are the source of cardamom. Ginger is obtained from the fresh or dried rhizomes of Zingiber officinale, and a number of ornamental gingers are grown for their attractive flowers and foliage. Several species of shellflower (Alpinia) are cultivated as ornamentals. Ginger lily (Hedychium) produces beautiful flowers that are used in garlands and other decorations.
Major genera include Alpinia (200 species), Etlingera (110 species), Curcuma (100 species), Globba (100 species), Zingiber (100), Renealmia (75), Riedelia (75), Amomum (65), Aframomum (60), Boesenbergia (60), Hedychium (50), Hornstedia (50), and Meisteria (42).
