Basso continuo, also called continuo, thoroughbass, or figured bass,  in music, a system of partially improvised accompaniment played on a bass line, usually on a keyboard instrument. The use of basso continuo was customary during the 17th and 18th centuries, when only the bass line was written out, or “thorough” (archaic spelling of “through”), giving considerable leeway to the keyboard player, usually an organist or harpsichordist, in the realization of the harmonic implications of the bass in relation to the treble part or parts. A low melody instrument, such as a viola da gamba, cello, or bassoon, usually served to reinforce the bass line, and the keyboard player received additional guidance in most instances from figures placed above the bass notes, a kind of musical shorthand indicating the intervallic constitution of the chords in question.
Basso continuo composition was a logical outgrowth of the monodic revolution (c. 1600), which declared the supremacy of the treble in opposition to the textural homogeneity of Renaissance polyphony. The harmonic substance of multivoiced music was now literally contracted into an instrumentalist’s two hands; the immediate repercussions for both sacred and secular music prompted Agostino Agazzari as early as 1607 to publish a manual of instructions, Del sonare sopra ’l basso (“On Playing upon the Thoroughbass”).
According to J.F. Daube’s General-Bass (1756), the style of improvised accompaniment was brought to its height by J.S. Bach: “He knew how to introduce a point of imitation so ingeniously in either right or left hand and how to bring in so unexpected a countertheme, that the listener would have sworn that it had all been composed in that form with the most careful preparation.” Basso continuo was thus not merely a convenient shorthand; it gave zest to the accompaniment by inviting the performer to draw on his capacity for spontaneous improvisation.
In figured bass notation the intervals are counted from the bass up. For example, 7/3 above G indicates a chord built on G containing the intervals of a seventh (G–f) and a third (G–b), that is, G–b–(implied d)–f. The performer can manipulate the spacing of the chord but normally does not play above the solo part. The figures are kept to a minimum, indicating only the most characteristic intervals as well as accidentals (nonimplicit sharps, flats, or naturals). Normally only the main harmonies, and not the passing harmonies, are indicated. Passing notes are added by the performer.
Basso continuo realization can vary from simple harmonization to extensive explorations of harmony and counterpoint. A “full accompaniment” may require as many notes as the fingers can accommodate, and in such cases the rules forbidding consecutive fifths and the like are waived, except as they apply to the two outside (bottom and top) parts.
