Key,  in music, a system of functionally related chords deriving from the major and minor scales, with a central note, called the tonic (or keynote). The central chord is the tonic triad, which is built on the tonic note. Any of the 12 tones of the chromatic scale can serve as the tonic of a key. Accordingly, 12 major keys and 12 minor keys are possible, and all are used in music. In musical notation, the key is indicated by the key signature, a group of sharp or flat signs at the beginning of each staff.
The concept of key is fundamental to the system of tonality (the organization of notes, chords, and keys around a centrally important tone), the basis of most Western art music from about 1700 to the 20th century and beyond. A short piece of music, such as a song or dance, may demonstrate only a single key and is said to be in that key; longer pieces usually change key, even many times, but are organized and unified within a principal key that predominates at important points. A composition, particularly an instrumental work, may be identified with a key designation; Beethoven’s Symphony No. 2 in D Major (1802), for example, has three of its four movements beginning and ending with explicit harmony in D major (the second movement is in A major, for contrast).
Different keys are closely or distantly related according to the number of notes their diatonic scales share; C major and G major, for instance, have six of their seven notes in common (differing only in F♮ and F♯) and thus are closely related. In contrast, the distantly related keys of C major and C-sharp major have no note names in common. The relationships between keys are at the heart of the tonal system, and the listener’s ability to perceive different keys and the process of changing between them (called modulation) adds immeasurably to their significance in musical structure.
The circle of fifths is an efficient way to visualize keys, key signatures, and relationships between keys. Beginning at C, the top position, and proceeding clockwise, the keynotes ascend by perfect fifths (as in the tonic–dominant relationship). Each advance adds a sharp to the key—or, equivalently, subtracts a flat. At F-sharp major, the key with six sharps, the circle shifts enharmonically to G-flat major, the key with six flats (they sound and look the same on a keyboard instrument). Each minor key is also entered on the circle, in the same position as its relative major. Thus the circle of fifths clearly depicts the two most important relationships in tonal harmony: tonic–dominant and minor–relative major.
The broader term tonality is sometimes used loosely for key, e.g., “The first movement of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony exhibits a strong C-minor tonality.”
