Lauda, also spelled Laude (Italian: “canticle, hymn of praise”), plural Laude, or Laudi,  a type of Italian poetry or a nonliturgical devotional song in praise of the Virgin Mary, Christ, or the saints.
The poetic lauda was of liturgical origin, and it was popular from about the mid-13th to the 16th century in Italy, where it was used particularly in confraternal groups and for religious celebrations. The first lauda in Italian was St. Francis’ moving canticle in praise of “Sir Brother Sun,” “Sister Moon,” “Brother Wind,” “Sister Water,” “Brother Fire,” and “Mother Earth”—a work that has been called Laudes creaturarum o Cantico del Sole (“Praises of God’s Creatures or the Canticle of the Sun”). Another outstanding early master of the lauda was the gifted 13th-century Franciscan poet Jacopone da Todi, who wrote many highly emotional and mystical laudi spirituali (“spiritual canticles”) in the vernacular. Jacopone is also the reputed author of a famous Latin lauda, the Stabat mater dolorosa, which, with another 13th-century lauda in Latin, the Dies irae, has been part of Roman Catholic liturgy for centuries.
Laude were frequently written in ballata form for recitation by religious confraternities, their content usually consisting of exhortations to a moral life or of events in the lives of Christ and the saints. These recitations evolved into dialogues and eventually became part of the Italian version of the miracle play, the sacra rappresentazione, a form of religiously inspired drama, which became secularized during the Renaissance. Later in the Renaissance some laude were written for musical settings.
Laude songs were first associated with the early Franciscan friars (early 13th century); later, confraternities, or Laudisti, to encourage devotional singing were founded in Florence and the rest of northern Italy.
Although there were many writers of lauda poetry, the composers were often unknown. Laude were simple and popular in style. Their musical form depended on that of the period, and at times folk melodies were used to set lauda texts. The earliest laude, from the 13th century, were monophonic (single-line) compositions. By the 16th century the laude appear in polyphonic (several-voice) settings, usually in chordal style. Collections of laude from the secular Congregazione dell’Oratorio, founded by St. Philip Neri (d. 1595), are extant, because the singing of laude formed an essential part of their meetings. The 16th-century lauda was important as a step in the development of the oratorio. The lauda remained important in Italian devotional life until the 19th century.
