Meantone temperament,  system of tuning keyboard instruments, most prevalent from the early 16th century through the 18th century. Meantone temperament was oriented around major thirds (a musical interval, such as C–E, covering four semitones). Keyboards were tuned so that the major third would be the same distance in pitch from (i.e., halfway between) the outer two pitches (e.g., the root and the fifth). Meantone tuning accomplished this by flattening the fifth (by roughly 5.38 cents), making it slightly smaller than a natural fifth. When a series of four meantone fifths was tuned (C–G; G–d; d–a; a–e′) and the excess octaves (here, between C and e′) were removed, the result was a pure, or natural, major third (c–e′).
Meantone temperament provided an alternative to just intonation, which derived the proper tuning of all the intervals in the scale by various additions and subtractions of perfect natural fifths and thirds (in tune with the fifths and thirds found in the natural harmonic series, perceivable as faint overtones above a fundamental note). This process resulted in whole tones of two sizes. When, say, an instrument tuned in C was played in G, the large and small whole tones were in the wrong order, and the instrument sounded sourly out of tune. Meantone tuning, on the other hand, substituted a single, mean whole tone.
Various combinations of meantone fifths were used to determine the correct tuning of each of the keyboard’s 12 notes per octave. The result was a notably pleasing sonority for triads (the predominant chord type, consisting of a root, a third, and a fifth, as c–e–g). In the tuning of the black keys, however, notes such as F♯ and G♭, which share the same key, did not have the same pitch. A given black key could thus serve only for one of its two possible notes, the usual choices being C♯, E♭, F♯, G♯, and B♭ (three sharps and two flats). If an instrument was played in a key requiring an alternative note, say A♭ instead of G♯, a strong dissonance, known as the “wolf,” resulted. This disadvantage led in the 18th century to the replacement of meantone tuning by equal temperament. It persisted in England, however, into the mid-19th century and was revived in the 20th and early 21st centuries for specialized use.
