Mozarabic chant, also called Visigothic chant or ancient Spanish chant,  Latin liturgical chant of the Christian church on the Iberian Peninsula from its beginnings about the 5th century until its suppression at the end of the 11th century in favour of the liturgy and Gregorian chant of the Roman Catholic Church. The term Mozarabic was applied to Christians living under Islamic rule in Iberia after ad 711; the use of Mozarabic is thus something of a misnomer, since the rite was practiced before the arrival of Muslims as well as in territories that were never captured by them or were recaptured from them over the course of the centuries.
The recapture by Christian forces in 1085 of Toledo, the seat of the Spanish church, occasioned the rite’s formal suppression in favour of Roman Catholic practice. A few parishes were allowed to continue to practice the rite, and there remained in the 21st century a Mozarabic chapel in the cathedral of Toledo. The rite practiced there, however, is the result of the attempted restoration of the Mozarabic rite by Francisco Cardinal Jiménez de Cisneros about 1500 and differs significantly from that preserved in the great majority of early manuscripts.
The chant is preserved in a few dozen manuscripts of the 9th through 11th centuries. The musical notation consists of neumes, similar to those found elsewhere in the West, that do not represent pitch or rhythm precisely. Thus, except for a handful of melodies preserved in a later notation, the chant can no longer be performed. The melodies of the Cisneros restoration were evidently newly composed.
The musical notation of the early manuscripts is quite elaborate, and thus, along with the forms of the Latin texts, it enables conclusions about the nature of the musical forms employed, even in the absence of any ability to transcribe it into modern notation. The outline of the liturgy and the types of melodies entailed for both the mass and the divine office in the Mozarabic rite are similar to those of other early Western Christian rites, such as the Gallican (with which it has the closest ties) and the Ambrosian, as well as of the Roman rite. Although the forms are similar, the Mozarabic melodies are not based on the system of eight modes of the Gregorian chant and thus provide a window on the state of Latin liturgical chant in the West before the importation of the eight-mode system from the Byzantine chant about the 8th century.
