overture,  musical composition, usually the orchestral introduction to a musical work (often dramatic), but also an independent instrumental work. Early operas opened with a sung prologue or a short instrumental flourish, such as the trumpet “Toccata” that opens Claudio Monteverdi’s Orfeo (1607). Subsequent 17th-century operas were sometimes preceded by a short instrumental piece called a sinfonia or sonata. The first significant use of a full-scale overture, however, was made by Jean-Baptiste Lully, in works such as his opera Thésée. His musical form, known as the French overture, opens with a slow section in dotted rhythms, followed by a quick section in fugal, or imitative, style; it often concluded with a slow passage that sometimes was expanded into a full third section—either a repetition of the initial slow section or a dance form such as a minuet or gavotte.
Lully’s overture form was widely copied, by composers of not only opera (Henry Purcell in Dido and Aeneas) but also oratorios (G.F. Handel in the Messiah). Lully’s use of a dance form to conclude an overture influenced the development of the orchestral suite, in which a French overture is followed by a series of dances. J.S. Bach’s four orchestral “Overtures” are examples of this form of suite, which persisted into the mid-18th century.
The Italian overture became firmly established after 1680 in the operas of Alessandro Scarlatti. It is in three sections, the first and third in quick time and the second in slow time (allegro-adagio-allegro). It provided the model for the earliest symphonies, which consisted of three movements. The works of both C.P.E. Bach and Jiří Antonín Benda contain Italian overtures.
A more modern form of the opera overture was established by Christoph Gluck, who in the dedication of his opera Alceste (1767) declared that the overture should prepare the audience for the plot of the play. In Alceste and in Iphigénie en Tauride, the overtures, instead of closing before the curtain rises, merge into the music and the mood of the opening act. Richard Wagner used a similar technique, though only in his later operas, such as Tristan und Isolde. Mozart in his overtures also set the emotional tone of the drama to follow. In his Don Giovanni and Die Zauberflöte (The Magic Flute) he alludes to themes from the operas. Similar thematic anticipation occurs in the works of Beethoven, Wagner, and Carl Maria von Weber.
Another trend, particularly in French operas by Daniel Auber and François Boieldieu (early 19th century), was established by the overture made up of a potpourri of tunes from the opera—a form common in musical comedies and operettas. In Italy during the same period, the overture simply served to attract the audience’s attention; Gioachino Rossini, for example, often used one overture for more than one opera.
Many 18th- and 19th-century overtures were derived from the sonata form. But toward the end of the 19th century the overture was often replaced by a short prelude in free form preparing the opening scene—as in Wagner’s Lohengrin and Giuseppe Verdi’s Aida. The introductions to Claude Debussy’s Pelléas et Mélisande and Benjamin Britten’s Peter Grimes consist only of a few bars of music. In Pietro Mascagni’s Cavalleria rusticana the prologue is an aria sung in front of the curtain.
The concert overture, based on the style of overtures to romantic operas, became established in the 19th century as an independent, one-movement work, which took either the classical sonata form or the free form of a symphonic poem. Examples of such works include Felix Mendelssohn’s Hebrides overture and Elliott Carter’s much later Holiday overture. Concert overtures were also written for performance on special occasions, e.g., Johannes Brahms’s Academic Festival Overture. Other works, such as Beethoven’s overture to Goethe’s Egmont, originally were intended to be performed as an introduction to a spoken play.
