Pop ballad,  form of slow love song prevalent in nearly all genres of popular music. There are rock ballads, soul ballads, country ballads, and even heavy metal ballads.
The ballad was originally a narrative folk song (and the term is still sometimes used this way by contemporary folk musicians—as in Bob Dylan’s “Ballad of a Thin Man”), but by the end of the 19th century, the term ballad described the sentimental song of the Victorian parlour. Such songs (“After the Ball,” for example) determined the success of the new sheet music and phonograph industries and remained at the heart of European and American popular music throughout the 20th century not only in sales terms but as the pop form that has best expressed a public mood or emotion. It became normal for music hall, radio, and television comics to conclude their performances with a crowd-binding sentimental song, and such heart-tugging numbers have been equally significant for the success of stage and film musicals. Jazz musicians of all eras have used the ballad as the takeoff point for improvisation. The continuity of the ballad from the pop to the rock era is marked not only by the Beatles’ “Yesterday” but by the remarkable way in which their fellow Liverpudlians Gerry and the Pacemakers established Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein’s “You’ll Never Walk Alone” as the most sung song in the stands of football (soccer) stadiums in Britain.
The ballad, then, remained central to rock’s appeal, despite the music’s association with up-tempo aggressive realism. Even punk and heavy metal acts, like music hall comedians before them, discovered the use (and sales appeal) of the ballad to unify their audience into an emotional community. The original rock and rollers drew on established pop ballad traditions, whether Italian (the Neapolitan ballad was passed down from Enrico Caruso through Mario Lanza and Dean Martin to Elvis Presley) or American (rock and roll balladeers such as Roy Orbison and Charlie Rich gave Tin Pan Alley sentiment a new, melancholy edge). But the rock ballad as such is derived from soul music and, in particular, from Ray Charles, whose gospel reading of a country song, “I Can’t Stop Loving You” (1962), became the blueprint for generations of rock balladeers. Charles’s emotional sincerity was marked by vocal roughness and hesitation (unlike the Italian balladeers), and, if his tempo was slow, it was nevertheless insistent.
Charles had a direct effect on such singers as Tom Jones and Joe Cocker (whose voice was soon featured regularly on film soundtracks, providing the closing credit uplift), but his most lasting influence was on lighter-toned singer-songwriters such as Elton John and Billy Joel, who drew also on rock’s lyrical pretensions (and had a major impact on younger performers such as George Michael). An equivalent line of influence can be traced from female soul singers such as Dionne Warwick and Gladys Knight through Anita Baker and Whitney Houston to Mariah Carey and Céline Dion. The power of the rock ballad in articulating private feeling as public emotion was dramatically illustrated by Elton John’s performance of “Candle in the Wind” at the funeral of Diana, princess of Wales, in 1997, the recorded version of which became the best-selling single of all time.
