symphony,  a lengthy form of musical composition for orchestra, normally consisting of several large sections, or movements, at least one of which usually employs sonata form (also called first-movement form).
Symphonies in this sense began to be composed during the so-called Classical period in European music history, about 1740–1820. The early part of this period and the decade immediately preceding it are sometimes called pre-Classical, as are the symphonies written before about 1750. During the 19th century, which included the Romantic period, symphonies grew longer, and composers concerned themselves with ways of unifying the movements; extramusical programs and new approaches toward tonality (the major-minor system of chord progressions) were among the solutions to the problems of large-scale symphonic form. Late in the century, symphonies—and orchestras—had grown to such an extent that reaction set in, culminating in the Neoclassical movement of the early 20th century, in which composers turned again toward principles of balance and formal discipline, using new techniques to achieve dynamic coherence. Economic considerations forced a reduction in the size of orchestras and amount of rehearsal time available to mid-20th-century composers, further justifying a return to less extravagant symphonic thinking.
Throughout the 19th century, however, a number of outstanding symphonists were able to reconcile the demands of fashion with strict musical logic. These composers represent the mainstream of symphonic activity, and their works remained models for much 20th-century activity in the genre. Throughout the following article two concerns predominate: a survey of the chief symphonic works and composers and consideration of the evolution of symphonic thought.
The word symphōnia was used by the Greeks in reference to notes sounding together in harmony and by extension meant an “ensemble” or “band” rather than a musical form. The word implies a pleasant concord of different notes and has been used in fields other than music to denote a pleasing combination of various elements. In the New Testament Gospel According to Luke (King James Version), symphōnia is translated as “musick,” as distinct from choroi, “dancing.” In the Middle Ages the name was given to several musical instruments, among them a double-headed drum, bowed stringed instruments, a large hurdy-gurdy, and bagpipes. Mention is made in 1582 of eine Symphonie, evidently a stringed keyboard instrument.
From the mid-16th century, symphonia (and related spellings) is a term often found in titles in which it simply indicated ensemble music, whether for instruments with voices or either alone. A collection of madrigals published in Antwerp in 1585 is entitled Symphonia angelica…raccolta per Huberto Waelrant. Later notable examples are the Sacrae symphoniae of the Venetian composer Giovanni Gabrieli (Book I, 1597; Book II, 1615), collections of elaborate instrumental and vocal music, often for multiple choirs; and the Symphoniae sacrae of his celebrated German pupil, Heinrich Schütz (1629, 1647, 1650). Schütz’s collection reveals his debt to the colourful and brilliantly orchestrated Italian style in works ranging from several voices to large polychoral compositions with solo parts and instruments. His countryman Samuel Scheidt’s 70 Symphonien auf Konzerten-Manier (1644) likewise combine instrumental and vocal ensembles to enrich the texture and heighten the drama of his music.
Symphonies for instruments alone during the early Baroque era (c. 1600–30) occur as independent pieces and as introductions or interludes in theatrical productions. The Italian Biagio Marini’s sinfonia La Orlandia (1617) is a duet for violin or cornetto (a wind instrument with finger holes and cup-shaped mouthpiece) and continuo in five brief contiguous sections, distinguished by contrasting metres and new melodic material in each section. (The continuo is a harmonic accompaniment improvised over the written bass line, usually played on a keyboard instrument and a bass viol or other bass melody instrument.) Early operas often include instrumental symphonies. Jacopo Peri’s Euridice (first performed 1600) includes a sinfonia for three flutes; Claudio Monteverdi’s lavish musical drama Orfeo (1607) is punctuated with five richly scored sinfonias, while a sinfonia da guerra (“sinfonia of war”) accompanies a staged battle in his Il ritorno d’Ulisse in patria (The Return of Ulysses to his Country; 1641). Each act of Stefano Landi’s opera Il Sant’Alessio (1632) opens with a sectional sinfonia. Many other opera and oratorio composers used short descriptive or introductory sinfonias, often of sectional form with contrasting metres and tempos.
It remained for a Neapolitan, Alessandro Scarlatti (1660–1725), to formalize the overture to his operas as a fast–slow–fast sinfonia avanti l’opera, as in his opera Dal male il bene (1681; “Good from Evil”). The so-called Italian overture of this and later works, scored for strings and continuo, has been widely considered to contain the germ of the later three-movement symphony. In contrast with the more contrapuntal (based on interwoven melodic lines) French overture, which begins with a pompous slow movement and continues in a fugal section (involving imitation of a melody among several voices), the Italian style is immediately tuneful and predominantly homophonic (chordal) in texture. The first fast movement may be trivial; its symmetrical phrasing is unexpressive. The contrasting second movement may be more lyrical, perhaps anticipating tunes heard later in the opera. The last movement, sometimes a minuet, is an exuberant curtain raiser. This format spread quickly outside Italy, even to France. Jean-Philippe Rameau’s Zoroastre (1749), for example, includes such a fast–slow–fast overture. Rameau, indeed, was considered an exponent of the Italian style, particularly in his lucid harmonic treatment. This late Baroque concern with tonal clarity prefigured the attitudes of early Classical symphonists. Among the devices used to assure clarity are melodies constructed of arpeggiated (“harplike,” or broken) chords and passages in unison or in parallel thirds or sixths (sequences of harmonies formed by thirds, such as C–E or D–F, or sixths, such as C–A or D–B). These features are not common in Baroque music that is strictly contrapuntal in texture.
While the opera overture settled into a form that eventually inspired early symphonists, the term sinfonia, or symphony, as yet had no formal definition. As late as 1771 the Encyclopædia Britannica, reflecting ancient Greek usage, defined symphony merely as “…a consonance or concert of several sounds agreeable to the ear, whether vocal or instrumental, called also harmony.” Sinfonia was used interchangeably with concerto, consort, overture, suite, and so on. Commonly, a brief instrumental interlude, as in a song, was called a symphony, even into the 19th century. In the late Baroque era (c. 1700–50) the term was applied to such dissimilar pieces as Johann Sebastian Bach’s didactic Three-Part Inventions for keyboard, called Sinfonien in the 1723 copy, and the orchestral “Pastoral Symphony,” a quasi-descriptive interlude in George Frideric Handel’s Messiah (composed 1741), said to have been based on an Italian shepherd bagpipe tune and very much in the tradition of earlier descriptive symphonies in opera.
Bach’s Sinfonia VII in E Minor and Sinfonia XI in G Minor are interesting in that in each piece the opening material recurs at the end. In Sinfonia VII this repetition is merely suggested, but in Sinfonia XI the last eight measures of the piece virtually duplicate the first eight. The whole intermediate body of these pieces develops the motivic material presented at the beginning, and the initial material is transformed contrapuntally and harmonically. In the closing bars the tension thus aroused resolves and the rhythmic drive reins in. This suggestion of an expository unit moving from the home key to a different key, followed by an extended development that explores still more remote keys and the motivic and contrapuntal implications of the beginning, concluding with a recapitulation in which the energy of the development is somewhat dissipated by a return to the opening material, prefigures the sonata form of the Classical symphonists. Bach uses this technique in some of his instrumental concerto movements; the concertos have other elements in common with early symphonies, especially in the mood of their lyric slow movements and fast duple-metre finales.
The word sinfonia was applied to a trio sonata for flute, oboe, and continuo in Johann Joseph Fux’s Concentus Musico-instrumentalis (1701), a collection of suites each comprising a number (as many as 15) of bipartite (two-section) dances and descriptive pieces. An intellectual and influential Viennese court composer, Fux departed in this sinfonia from the typical 17th-century suite, which is merely a collection of contrasting dances in the same key. The work falls into two major divisions, both comprising three short movements; the key scheme is F major, D minor, F major—F major, D minor, F major, and the last three movements have programmatic titles. Here is not merely a collection of various dances but a conscious attempt to relate movements tonally and thereby create larger hierarchic units. F major and D minor are closely related keys, and it would not be possible to omit a single movement without destroying the symmetry of the whole (not that either group of three, or even each dance, does not sound good by itself). By means of this simple, balanced harmonic structuring, Fux advanced beyond the looser architecture of the typical suite, and, by framing a minor-key movement between two movements in the same related major key, he anticipated the overall form of many early symphonies.
Both Fux and Bach were products of the evolution of tonal harmony, a system of key relations which brought with it the possibility of basing large-scale forms not only on melodic variation or counterpoint, as earlier, but on harmonic tension and modulation. (Modulation, unlike simple change of key, implies the establishment of a new tonic, or tonal centre, by means of progression through a number of related keys.) The wide-ranging modulations and affective harmonic progressions of German Baroque composers depended on equal temperament, a system that permits exploration of keys distant from the tonic without the necessity of retuning to accommodate the remote harmonies. Bach exploited this system to the utmost, as did many of his North German contemporaries, but their rich harmonic palette was foreign to the south, where many important symphonists arose. Concerned less with powerful emotions (Affekten) and more with clarity, the southerners avoided intricate counterpoint and convoluted harmonic progressions, preferring a restricted chord vocabulary and clear-cut symmetrical phrasing dominated by tuneful melody.
Besides the suite and opera overture, the short humorous intermezzo, which originated in Naples and flourished about 1685–1750, strongly influenced pre-Classical symphonists. Neapolitan composers, headed by Alessandro Scarlatti, concerned themselves in the intermezzo with dramatic, comic interplay between two singers in two or three short acts made up of arias, recitatives, and duets. Because the texts demanded clear articulation and careful declamation, they influenced the melodic phrase structure, giving rise to repeated-note figures and brief rhythmic or melodic motives. These phrases normally fall into two-measure units. Counterpoint was abandoned, for it tended to obscure the text, and harmonies became simple and slow-moving. Intermezzo melodies abound in ornaments, sudden accents, syncopation (displaced accents), and playful leaps reflecting the text declamation and lack the broad, spun-out arch and driving rhythm of typical Baroque melodies. Rather, they are made up of short motives joined one to another and give rise to frequently articulated phrase groups. This word-derived idiom furnished the melodic impulse of the early symphonies.
