Syrian chant,   generic term for the vocal music of the various Syrian Christian churches, including Eastern Orthodox churches such as the Jacobites and Nestorians, and the Eastern churches in union with Rome—e.g., the Maronites (mostly in Lebanon) and the Chaldeans, who are dissidents from the Nestorians. To these should be added some branches of nearly all of these groupings in the province of Malabār, India.
Knowledge of Syrian liturgical music before the last century is very limited. Inferences may be made about some older principles of musical performance, for Syrian influences on neighbouring peoples were strong; Syrian practices, for example, spread among the Greeks in the Byzantine Empire. Before its conquest by the Muslims (mid-7th century), Syria was one of the earliest and most important Christian lands in the Middle East.
Although the responsorial chanting (alternation between a soloist and a choir) found in Eastern and Western liturgies may have originated in Hebrew temple ritual, it is considered probable that antiphonal singing (alternation between two choirs) is of Syrian origin, and Syrian sources are among the earliest to document its existence. Syrian poetry and poetic forms also influenced the development of Byzantine religious poetry, establishing patterns of poetic forms that were emulated by the Greeks and other groups. Even the Byzantine oktōechos, a theoretical concept of eight modes according to which melodies were classified (see ēchos), is now viewed as an exportation from Syria, where it was known by the 6th century. It is probable that throughout the Middle East there have been similar premises for musical composition and that the basic approach to liturgical music was and is through a small number of melodic formulas. These serve as melodic skeletons, as starting points for improvisation by singers. The concept of the melodic formula is fairly elastic: it is not an unchangeable pattern but rather a theme that is subject to variations in which the basic skeleton is always recognizable, even when numerous melodic additions make immediate recognition difficult. Most of the singers are professional chanters, frequently inheriting their positions from their fathers.
It is thought by some that the subtle tonal and rhythmic intricacies encountered in modern performances of Syrian chant are remnants of a sophisticated musical tradition rooted in the early centuries of Christianity; others view the same traits as elements of Turkish influence imported into Syria in the late European Middle Ages.
