Whole-tone scale,  in music, a scalar arrangement of pitches, each separated from the next by a whole-tone step (or whole step), in contradistinction to the chromatic scale (consisting entirely of half steps, also called semitones) and the various diatonic scales, such as the major and minor scales (which are different arrangements of whole and half steps).
Two mutually exclusive whole-tone scales are formed by choosing alternate notes of the chromatic scale (which has 12 notes per octave). Thus, the whole-tone scale comprises six degrees per octave. 
Because there are no semitones, all thirds are major, and thus all triads are augmented. Whole-tone harmony, with its similarly structured chords and absence of semitones, lacks the harmonic contrasts and resolutions of the major-minor system and its different keys; with whole-tone harmony, the sense of key centre depends instead on repetition and melodic emphasis. In Western art music, the whole-tone scale is associated with the decline of functional harmony in the late 19th century.
The first composers to begin experimenting with the chromatic alterations that imply whole-tone harmony within a generally tonal framework were Franz Liszt and Russian composers such as Mikhail Glinka, Modest Mussorgsky, and Aleksandr Borodin; these were followed in the early 20th century by the more attenuated tonal experiments of Anatoly Lyadov, Aleksandr Scriabin, and Vladimir Rebikov. Whole-tone patterning, with no leading tones or dominant harmony, became a distinctive aspect of the music of the French composers Claude Debussy, Paul Dukas, and others at the turn of the 20th century. Whole-tone harmony thus became a means of suspending or dissolving the perception of tonality in music of this period. Some outstanding examples incorporating extensive whole-tone harmony are Debussy’s “Voiles” (1909; Préludes, Book 1, No. 2) and “Cloches à travers les feuilles” (1907; Images, 2nd series, No. 1), as well as Dukas’s opera Ariane et Barbe-Bleue (1907).
