Lawrence Kohlberg,  (born October 25, 1927, Bronxville, New York, U.S.—died January 17, 1987, Boston, Massachusetts), American psychologist and educator known for his theory of moral development.
Kohlberg was the youngest of four children of Alfred Kohlberg, a successful silk merchant of Jewish ancestry, and Charlotte Albrecht Kohlberg, a Protestant and a skilled amateur chemist. When the couple divorced in 1932 after 11 years of marriage, each of the children was required by a court order to choose which parent he or she would live with. The two younger children chose their father and the older ones chose their mother.
Kohlberg graduated from Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts, in 1945. After serving in the U.S. merchant marine, he worked on a ship that had been hired by Haganah, the Zionist military organization, to smuggle Jewish war refugees into Palestine, past the British blockade. The ship was intercepted, however, and Kohlberg was imprisoned in a British internment camp in Cyprus. Returning to the U.S. in 1948, he enrolled at the University of Chicago, where he completed a B.A. in psychology in one year and a Ph.D. in psychology in 1958. He subsequently held teaching positions at various institutions before settling at Harvard University in 1968.
While pursuing his doctoral degree, Kohlberg became interested in Jean Piaget’s work on the moral development of children. According to Piaget, children naturally progress from a form of moral reasoning based on the consequences of an act (e.g., punishment) to one that takes the actor’s intentions into account. Kohlberg interviewed 72 lower- and middle-class white boys, presenting each with a moral dilemma: whether it would be permissible for a poor man to steal medicine for his dying wife. The children’s responses became the basis of his six-stage theory of moral development.
In stages 1 and 2, which he called preconventional, the child conceives of right acts as those that enable him to avoid punishment (stage 1) or to make a good or fair deal (stage 2). In the conventional stages, 3 and 4, right acts are those that gain the approval of others (stage 3) or that consist of doing one’s duty or following society’s rules (stage 4). Finally, in the postconventional stages, 5 and 6, the child is guided by respect for laws and moral rules (stage 5)—though he recognizes them as somewhat arbitrary and not always valid—or by abstract ethical principles such as justice and equality (stage 6). According to Kohlberg, stage 6 is only rarely achieved.
Kohlberg’s theory was highly influential, especially in psychology and education. No other account had provided such a detailed explanation of children’s moral development. Moreover, during a time when most psychologists were behaviorists, Kohlberg’s work broke new ground by concentrating on cognitive phenomena. His theory also received much criticism, however, most notably from the American psychologist Carol Gilligan, who argued that it ignored the distinct patterns of moral development exhibited by girls.
In 1971, while doing research in Belize, Kohlberg reportedly contracted a parasitic infection that caused him to be physically ill and depressed through much of the rest of his life. In 1987, he committed suicide.
