Self-actualization,  in psychology, a concept regarding the process by which an individual reaches his or her full potential. It was originally introduced by Kurt Goldstein, a physician specializing in neuroanatomy and psychiatry in the early half of the 20th century. As conceived by Goldstein, self-actualization is the ultimate goal of all organisms. He saw all behaviors and drives as manifestations of this overarching motivation. It was American psychologist Abraham H. Maslow, however, who popularized self-actualization. He defined it more narrowly and diverged from Goldstein in his conception of when and how self-actualization can emerge as a motivator. Similar to Goldstein, Maslow saw self-actualization as the fulfillment of one’s greatest potential. In his discussions of self-actualization, however, he was referring solely to people, rather than all organisms. In addition, his theory asserts that the drive to self-actualize will only emerge as a motivator once a variety of more basic needs are met.
Self-actualization is at the pinnacle of what Maslow defined as a hierarchy of human needs. In this hierarchy, lower needs (described as "pre-potent" needs) typically must be met before higher needs emerge. Physiological needs are the most primary in this hierarchy. Although Maslow declined to make a list of physiological needs, citing the nearly endless contributors to physical homeostasis, "food" was his prime example. Maslow suggested that if an individual is starving or near starving, he or she is essentially defined by that hunger. In most cases, an individual with extreme hunger will eschew higher needs, such as love and belonging, to fulfill the body’s need for nourishment.
Once physiological needs are met, the next level of need—safety—immediately rises to consciousness and begins to drive behavior. Thus, the need for food may be forgotten or suddenly seem trivial compared with the need for physical protection, provided the individual continues to have a steady food supply. This cycle of need, fulfillment, and forgetting occurs at every stage of the hierarchy.
Maslow asserted that average adults in affluent, organized societies have few safety needs under typical conditions. Most have little need to worry about physical attacks or fires, for example. Thus, safety needs in these individuals are expressed in subtle ways, such as the desire for savings accounts and steady jobs. However, Maslow noted that safety needs drive individuals in less stable conditions, such as those living in low socioeconomic conditions or under wartime conditions. He also suggested that certain mental health conditions reflect, in part, safety needs. He argued that individuals with neurotic or compulsive tendencies are psychologically similar to children in their sense of danger. However, although children truly are dependent on others for safety, the neurotic individual only feels as if this is the case. Likewise, just as children seek to avoid unpredictable events because of the danger they might present, people with compulsive behaviors try to make the world orderly and predictable to avoid perceived danger.
Love needs are next in Maslow’s hierarchy. These include friendship, family, and sexual love, as well as the desire to be accepted by peer groups and to receive affection. To meet love needs, individuals must be positioned to both give and receive love. Maslow, like many theorists, psychologists, and psychiatrists, suggested that the failure to fulfill love needs is at the root of much of modern psychopathology.
Near the top of Maslow’s hierarchy are esteem needs. These needs include the desire for competence, high self-regard, respect, a sense of strength, and general self-worth. Maslow noted that if these needs are not met, an individual either becomes deeply discouraged or develops maladjusted methods for coping with feelings of inferiority and worthlessness. Only after these needs—physiological, safety, love, and esteem—are met can an individual begin to be motivated by the need for self-actualization.
Maslow argued that, to be truly happy, painters need to paint, writers need to write, musicians need to play. This is self-actualization. However, he also noted that even if all other needs are met, self-actualization does not emerge as a motivator in all cases. When it does, it can take many forms, depending on individual talents and values, for example. Often the urge is creative, as in the case of artists or writers; however, it might also take the form of maximizing the quality of one’s relationships or perfecting the physical form through athletics and good health. Maslow noted that self-actualization is one of the least studied and understood needs, because of its relative rarity. It is the exception rather than the rule, he stated, for an individual’s other needs to be so sufficiently met that self-actualization can emerge as a motivator.
However, there are numerous examples of individuals living in states of poverty, loneliness, and low self-esteem who nonetheless seem to self-actualize through their work. Examples include Vincent van Gogh, whose life and suicide suggest a deep well of unmet needs, and Anne Frank, whose universally acclaimed diary was written in, and facilitated by, conditions of extreme danger. Maslow’s theory is not insensible to these obvious exceptions. He noted that in certain people the creative urge is so strong that it outweighs other needs, including those considered to be pre-potent in most individuals. He did not go so far as to say that in some cases self-actualization occurs because of hardship but admitted that it may occur despite unmet needs. Questions remain, then, about individuals who seem to self-actualize in direct response to need-threatening conditions.
