Ernst Moritz Arndt,  (born Dec. 26, 1769, Schoritz bei Gartz, Rügen, Swed.—died  Jan. 29, 1860, Bonn, Ger.), prose writer, poet, and patriot who expressed the national awakening in his country in the Napoleonic era.
Arndt was educated at Stralsund, Greifswald, and Jena and qualified for the Lutheran ministry. At the age of 28 he rejected his clerical career and for 18 months travelled through Europe. On his return to Germany the sight of ruined castles along the banks of the Rhine River moved him to bitterness against the French who had destroyed them. He described the impressions of this journey in Reisen durch einen Theil Deutschlands, Ungarns, Italiens, und Frankreichs in den Jahren 1798/99, 6 vol. (1801–04; “A Journey Through Parts of Germany, Hungary, Italy, and France in the Years 1798–99”).
In 1800 Arndt settled in Greifswald as assistant lecturer in history and in 1803 published Germanien und Europa, in which he proclaimed his views on French aggression. His subsequent Versuch einer Geschichte der Leibeigenschaft in Pommern und Rügen (1803) is, as the title suggests, a history of serfdom in Pomerania and Rügen that resulted in its abolition three years later by the Swedish king Gustav IV. In 1806 Arndt was appointed to the chair of history at the University of Greifswald and published the first part of his Geist der Zeit (Spirit of the Times, 1808), in which he called on his countrymen to shake off the French yoke. To escape the vengeance of Napoleon, he took refuge in Sweden, from where he continued to communicate his patriotic ideals to his countrymen in pamphlets, poems, and songs.
Arndt returned to Germany in 1809. He was summoned to St. Petersburg, Russia, in 1812 to assist in the organization of the final struggle against France. Here he continued to write political poetry that extolled patriotic themes. When the University of Bonn was founded in 1818, Arndt was appointed to the chair of modern history. In this year appeared the fourth part of his Geist der Zeit, in which he criticized the reactionary policy of the German powers. The boldness of his demands for reform offended the Prussian government, and in 1820 he was suspended. He was reinstated in 1840 by King Frederick William IV of Prussia and was appointed rector of the university the following year. After the revolutionary outbreak of 1848, he took his seat as one of the deputies to the Frankfurt National Assembly. He took part in the deputation that offered the imperial crown to Frederick William, but, indignant at the king’s refusal to accept it, he retired from public life.
Not all of Arndt’s lyrical poems were inspired by political ideas, nor was he a merely chauvinistic figure. Many of the works in his Gedichte (1804–18, complete ed. 1860; “Poems”) are religious poems of great beauty.
Other important works are his autobiography, Erinnerungen aus dem äusseren Leben (1840; “Recollections from the External Life”), the most valuable source of information for Arndt’s life; and Meine Wanderungen und Wandelungen mit dem Reichsfreiherrn Heinrich Karl Friedrich von Stein (1858; “My Travels and Saunterings with the Baron Heinrich Karl Friedrich von Stein”). Notable editions of his works are those of H. Meisner and R. Geerds, 16 vol. (1908), and of A. Leffson and W. Steffens, 12 vol. (1912).
