Charles Schulz,  (born November 26, 1922, Minneapolis, Minnesota, U.S.—died February 12, 2000, Santa Rosa, California), American cartoonist who created Peanuts, one of the most successful American comic strips of the mid-20th century.
Schulz, the son of a barber, studied cartooning in an art correspondence school after graduating in 1940 from high school. He served in the army from 1943 to 1945 and returned first as an instructor with the art school and then as a freelance cartoonist with the St. Paul Pioneer Press and the Saturday Evening Post (1948–49). He created the Peanuts strip (originally entitled Li’l Folks) in 1950, introducing a group of three-, four-, and five-year-old characters based upon semiautobiographical experiences. The main character is Charlie Brown, who represents a sort of “everyman,” a sensitive but bland and unremarkable child. Schulz channeled the loneliness that he had experienced in his army days and the frustrations of everyday life into Charlie Brown, who is often made the butt of jokes. One of Schulz’s initial themes arose from the cruelty that exists among children. The character of Snoopy, a beagle hound with frustrated dreams of glory, is often portrayed as being wiser than the children. Other characters include Sally, Charlie Brown’s little sister; the tyrannical and contrary “fussbudget,” Lucy; her younger brother, Linus, who drags his security blanket wherever he goes; and Schroeder, whose obsession is playing Beethoven on a toy piano.
The Peanuts comic strip was adapted to television and to the stage, and Schulz wrote the screenplays for two feature-length animated films. He was coauthor of Charlie Brown, Snoopy and Me (1980). The 3-D computer-animated The Peanuts Movie, based on his comic strips, was released in 2015.
In 1999 Schulz was diagnosed with colon cancer, and he announced his intention to retire in order to conserve his energies for his treatment program. Ironically, he died in his sleep the night before his final comic strip was published.
