Elektra,  American comic strip superhero created for Marvel Comics by writer and artist Frank Miller. The character first appeared in Daredevil no. 168 (January 1981).
Elektra Natchios was introduced as the college love of Matt Murdock, alter ego of the crime fighter Daredevil. She retreats from her boyfriend and society after the assassination of her father, a Greek envoy. She embarks on a quest to find purpose in her life, eventually receiving martial arts training from the teacher who instructed Murdock. Elektra then allies herself with the Hand, a cult of ninjas that give her life direction. Armed with a pair of three-pronged weapons called sai, the crimson-clad warrior becomes an executioner for hire. Single-handedly dispatching throngs of enemies, Elektra can ricochet her sai off walls with staggering accuracy.
Elektra’s saga continued throughout intermittent issues of Miller’s Daredevil run, as well as in a solo story by Miller in Marvel’s black-and-white anthology magazine, Bizarre Adventures. Readers learned that she still loves Murdock, affording her character emotional complexity beyond her brutality. That bond is challenged by their respective missions: Elektra is committed to serve as the executioner for the villainous Kingpin, while the heroic Daredevil is pledged to stop her. In Daredevil no. 181 (April 1982) Elektra is mortally wounded by the assassin Bullseye, a rival within the Kingpin’s organization. She crawls to Murdock’s home and dies in his arms.
Elektra was soon resurrected, however, returning to life as a result of a mystical ceremony in Daredevil no. 190 (January 1983). The four-issue The Elektra Saga (1984) repackaged her early Daredevil appearances, and it was followed by the visually dazzling Elektra: Assassin (1986–87). Published by Marvel imprint Epic Comics, the series teamed Miller with artist Bill Sienkiewicz to present an eight-issue prequel to Elektra’s Daredevil appearances. Sienkiewicz’s experimental art style and Miller’s scathing political commentary made Elektra: Assassin a controversial milestone for Marvel.
Throughout the 1990s Marvel consistently maintained a presence for the character. A four-issue Elektra miniseries was published in 1995, followed by an ongoing monthly comic in 1997. Daredevil guest-starred in the first issue, and Bullseye surfaced shortly thereafter, but the series was canceled after just 19 issues. Marvel writers were allowed to explore more explicit themes with the character in the early 21st century, when Elektra appeared in the company’s Marvel Knights and MAX imprints. After costarring with the immensely popular X-Man Wolverine in the three-issue Elektra & Wolverine: The Redeemer (2001), Elektra once again headlined her own appropriately violent series.
Elektra’s profile received another boost with the release of the live-action movie Daredevil (2003), starring Ben Affleck in the lead. Daredevil appropriated much of Miller’s material from his first run on the comic book, including the hero’s relationship with Elektra, portrayed by actress Jennifer Garner. Garner returned in the title role for the spin-off Elektra (2005), but the film was received poorly by both critics and moviegoers.
