Fantastic Four,  American team of comic strip superheroes, created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby for Marvel Comics in 1961, that brought an element of realism to the genre unique for its time. A cornerstone of Marvel’s universe of characters, the Fantastic Four remains one of the most popular superhero teams in comic book history.
The Fantastic Four no. 1 (November 1961) introduced a quartet of new characters: Dr. Reed Richards, a pompous scientist; Sue Storm, his lovely and somewhat reserved fiancée; Sue’s hotheaded teenaged brother Johnny Storm; and Richards’s beefy longtime friend pilot Ben Grimm. The foursome commandeered an untested spaceship of Richards’s design from the U.S. military in a frantic but unsanctioned effort to beat the Soviets into space. In orbit, the craft was flooded by cosmic rays that genetically altered its passengers. Upon returning to Earth, the quartet discovered that they had been forever changed: Sue could fade in and out of view and eventually developed the ability to project force fields as the Invisible Girl (later Invisible Woman); Grimm mutated into the rock-skinned powerhouse dubbed the Thing; Richards became the rubber-limbed Mr. Fantastic; and Johnny erupted into flame, blazing through the skies as the Human Torch. Richards persuaded the group to join forces as the Fantastic Four, but the group’s dynamics made them more than a team: they were a family, albeit a dysfunctional one.
Fantastic Four (“The” was dropped from the title in issue no. 16) quickly became a triumph for Marvel, and an array of fearsome foes appeared and reappeared, including the oafish Mole Man, the Golden Age antihero Namor the Sub-Mariner, the alien Super-Skrull, and the towering Galactus, who gained sustenance by absorbing the life forces of planets. No menace was more persistent than Doctor Doom, whose hideously scarred face was hidden behind an ominous iron mask. This despotic mastermind—originally Richards’s scientific colleague Victor von Doom—habitually returned to plague the group and to engage Richards in intellectual battles, always with dire consequences.
In Fantastic Four Annual no. 3 (1965), Reed and Sue were married in a wedding that was interrupted by a cadre of criminals, and a few years later their son, Franklin, was born. The Richards family was far from traditional, however: Franklin displayed dangerous reality-altering superpowers, and Mr. Fantastic repeatedly ignored his family by spending days holed up in his laboratory. The challenges of superheroic married life would become a recurring theme in the comic, no more so than when Sue and Reed’s second child was stillborn, despite all of Reed’s efforts to save her.
By the late 1960s the Fantastic Four’s acclaim had extended beyond comic books. Fantastic Four (1967–68), an animated television series produced by Hanna-Barbera, borrowed heavily from the Lee/Kirby comics. Despite its short run, the cartoon spurred a flurry of merchandising and served as an early crossover success for Marvel. A dispute involving story contributions divided the team of Lee and Kirby, and in the 1970s both vacated the comic. A variety of creators ventured in and out of the title, some making minor contributions to the canon and others leaving a larger mark. The Thing headlined the long-running team-up title Marvel Two-in-One (1974–83), and members came and went from the team, being temporarily replaced by such heroes as Power Man, Crystal, and Medusa.
The Human Torch was optioned for an unrealized live-action film, precluding his inclusion in the Fantastic Four’s second animated series, The New Fantastic Four (1978) on the NBC television network. Johnny Storm was replaced in the show by a comical robot named H.E.R.B.I.E., and the program lasted only a single season, owing at least in part to the relatively low quality of its animation. Writer and artist John Byrne’s run during the 1980s on The Fantastic Four comic book (nos. 232–292, July 1981–July 1986) featured such memorable events as the induction of the She-Hulk as a temporary member and the evolution of the once-meek Invisible Girl into the forceful and liberated Invisible Woman.
The 1990s did not bode well for the Fantastic Four. Convoluted plot lines impeded series continuity, and sales dropped as readers sought out stories that were grittier and, on the whole, more violent than those involving Marvel’s first family. In the 2000s the Human Torch was spun off into his own series, and Fantastic Four was restored to its former glory by writer Mark Waid and artist Mike Wieringo. A decision by Marvel to remove the two creators in 2003 was met by such overwhelming backlash from readers that the move was soon reversed. An alternate-universe title featuring a younger version of the team, Ultimate Fantastic Four, premiered in early 2004.
The live-action Fantastic Four movie was released by Twentieth Century Fox in 2005, and its sequel, Fantastic Four: Rise of the Silver Surfer, followed in 2007. A new animated TV series, Fantastic Four: World’s Greatest Heroes, premiered in 2006 on cable television. In spite of these successful ventures into other media, sales of the Fantastic Four comic were moribund. Writer Jonathan Hickman took over the title in 2009, revitalizing the stalled book with a critically acclaimed three-year story arc that capitalized on the franchise’s traditional strengths: cosmic scale, super science, and family interaction. Twentieth Century Fox attempted to reboot its cinematic franchise with Fantastic Four (2015), but the film, derived in part from the first arc in the Ultimate Fantastic Four series, received a harsh reception from critics.
