Gil Kane , pseudonym of Eli Katz,  (born April 6, 1926, Riga, Latvia—died Jan. 31, 2000, Miami, Fla., U.S.),  Latvian-born American comic book artist whose innovative and dramatic style and precise drawing technique brought new life and vibrancy to such classic superheroes as Spider-Man, Green Lantern, Captain Marvel, the Incredible Hulk, and the Atom—in addition to characters he created, such as Morbius the Living Vampire and Iron Fist—during what became known as the “Silver Age” of comics.
Kane moved to the United States with his parents when he was three years old. He became enthralled by the coloured comic pages in the Sunday newspapers and by comic books after they debuted in 1933. When he was a teenager, he took a job erasing pencil lines and drawing borders for the comic publisher MLJ. Kane worked for National Allied Publications (later DC Comics), Timely (later Marvel) Comics, and other publishers before enlisting in the army (1944–45) to serve in World War II. In 1954 the adoption of the Comics Code—a self-regulating measure designed to curtail the depictions of violence and sex that were prevalent in the horror, romance, and crime books of the day—almost spelled an end to the comics industry. Many publishers who wished to survive turned to the superheroes of comics’ “Golden Age.”
Kane drew new versions of the classic DC characters Green Lantern (1959) and the Atom (1961), Golden Age mainstays who were reimagined for the emerging Silver Age of comics. Kane’s work, which was marked by a subtle naturalism and economy of line that set him apart from other artists of his time, was a rich addition to the visual vocabulary of the comics medium. Along with Jack Kirby, Steve Ditko, and Carmine Infantino, Kane emerged as one of the most important influences of the early Silver Age. After his groundbreaking work at DC, he branched into a number of other projects, including the Flash Gordon newspaper strip for King Features Syndicate. In the 1970s Kane was a regular cover artist at Marvel, and his run as an artist on The Amazing Spider-Man included a story involving the murder of the title character’s love interest, Gwen Stacy. In a medium where the permanent demise of a prominent character was virtually unheard of, Kane’s understated pencils made the panels depicting Gwen’s death some of the most memorable in comics history.
Despite the huge amount of work he produced in his half-century-long career, Kane usually inked his own drawings rather than leave the work for assistants (as most comic book artists did), in order to maintain the integrity of his designs. Kane also wrote and illustrated the magazine-format comic His Name Is Savage (1968) and the graphic novel Blackmark (1971); the latter served as one of the earliest examples of the graphic novel format to appear in the American market. He drew the newspaper comic strip Star Hawks from 1977 to 1981, illustrated paperback books and records, and cowrote (with John Jakes) the novel Excalibur! (1980). During the 1980s Kane worked on some animated television series, notably Superman and his projects in the 1990s included comic book adaptations of Richard Wagner’s The Ring of the Nibelung (1990, with Roy Thomas) and of the motion picture Jurassic Park (1993).
