Green Lantern,  American comic strip superhero created for DC Comics by artist Mart Nodell and writer Bill Finger. The character first appeared in All-American Comics no. 16 (July 1940).
Alan Scott, the first hero to be known as the Green Lantern, discovers what appears to be a green railroad lantern after a train accident. The lantern, actually a piece of a mystical orb known as the Starheart, instructs Scott to make a ring out of a fragment of its material. The ring would transform thought into reality as long as he touched the lantern once every 24 hours. Indeed, the power ring enables Scott to fly and manifest objects made of “green flame” at will, and it was only limited by an inability to affect objects made of wood.
Initial stories featured ordinary criminals as antagonists, but the Green Lantern’s roster of villains soon expanded to include the Sportsmaster, whose assortment of bats and mallets capitalized on the ring’s weakness against wood, and Solomon Grundy, a giant reanimated corpse inspired by a children’s nursery rhyme. In addition to appearing in more than 80 issues of All-American, Scott also starred in his own Green Lantern solo comic for eight years, and in many issues of All Star Comics as one of the principal members of the Justice Society of America until that comic’s cancellation in 1951. Scott continued to appear throughout the 1960s as part of the Justice Society and remained a member of the group in its many subsequent revivals, rebirths, and relaunches.
Following the successful revamp of the Flash in 1956, DC editor Julius Schwartz, along with writer John Broome and artist Gil Kane, ushered the Green Lantern into the so-called “Silver Age” of comics. The new Green Lantern premiered in Showcase no. 22 (October 1959), with a new history. Test pilot Hal Jordan chances upon the crashed spaceship of an emerald-garbed, red-skinned alien named Abin Sur. With his dying breath, the alien passes his ring to Jordan, whereupon he becomes transformed into an identically clothed superhero. Like his predecessor, this Green Lantern could use the ring to make his thoughts reality, and he too needed a lantern to recharge the ring. Like the “Golden Age” Green Lantern, Jordan’s power ring had a weakness, but this time it was unable to affect anything coloured yellow. When the Lantern recharged his ring every day, he recited an oath that soon became his mantra: “In brightest day, in blackest night, no evil shall escape my sight. Let those who worship evil’s might, beware my power—Green Lantern’s light!”
This later Green Lantern was but one of many ring-wielding superheroes across the universe—members of a sort of intergalactic police force. The Green Lanterns were picked by small, blue-skinned aliens known as the Guardians of Oa to uphold justice and defeat evil. The Green Lantern stories were dynamic and inventive, often revolving around some alien menace or scientific conundrum. Principal villains included the rogue Green Lantern Sinestro, Star Sapphire, Black Hand, and the Tattooed Man.
Green Lantern started appearing in his own self-titled comic in 1960, and he soon became a regular member of the Justice League of America. Kane developed into one of comics’ most exciting artists, but, when he left the title in 1970, Green Lantern’s popularity dropped. Eventually the decision was made to pair Jordan with the Green Arrow in a retitled Green Lantern/Green Arrow comic, featuring the creative team of writer Denny O’Neil and artist Neal Adams. Beginning with issue no. 76 (April 1970), O’Neil and Adams tapped into the radical politics of the era and the growth of the counterculture. The Green Lantern was portrayed as the arch-establishment figure, who was constantly challenged by the antiestablishment firebrand, the Green Arrow. As the voice of the streets, O’Neil and Adams introduced the concept of “relevance” to comics, tackling social topics such as race relations, Native American rights, women’s liberation, pollution, consumerism, and drug abuse.
Despite enormous media interest, numerous industry awards, and Adams’s skilled draftsmanship, sales were never strong, and the comic was canceled in 1972. Appearances in The Flash eventually led to the revival of the Green Lantern series in 1976, and it continued in various guises until 1988. Green Arrow left the comic in 1979, and in 1986 the book was retitled Green Lantern Corps to reflect the increasing number of Green Lanterns that had popped up over the years, many of them enjoying success in their own right.
The expanding roster of Green Lanterns included Guy Gardner, a foul-tempered antihero who became a member of the Justice League in the 1980s. John Stewart, an African American hero who first appeared in the O’Neil and Adams period, periodically took over the lead role in the Green Lantern comic from the 1980s through the early 21st century. Young artist Kyle Rayner was inducted into the corps in Green Lantern vol. 2, no. 50 (March 1994), and served as DC’s main Green Lantern for much of the next decade. Even alien Green Lanterns achieved a degree of fame, with the pug-faced Kilowog joining the Justice League in the 1990s.
Meanwhile, Jordan, having seen his home city destroyed, went mad and attacked the Guardians of Oa. Under the mental influence of an evil entity called Parallax, Jordan blazed a path of destruction across the universe before he was eventually defeated by a collection of heroes. Jordan sacrificed his life to reignite Earth’s sun, but he was resurrected several years later as a spirit of vengeance known as the Spectre. Alive and sane once more, Hal Jordan reassumed the mantle of the Green Lantern in the comics series Green Lantern: Rebirth (2004–05), written by Geoff Johns and drawn by Ethan Van Sciver. Johns oversaw the massive “Sinestro Corps War” (2007–08), “Blackest Night” (2009–10), and “Brightest Day” (2010–11) crossover events. Those stories introduced eight additional “Lantern Corps,” each associated with a different colour and emotion or metaphysical concept. As part of its “New 52” continuity reboot in September 2011, DC Comics launched four new Green Lantern-related comics series: Green Lantern, starring Hal Jordan; Green Lantern Corps, featuring Guy Gardner and John Stewart; Green Lantern: The New Guardians, starring Kyle Rayner; and Red Lanterns, about the rage-fueled Red Lantern Corps, led by Atrocitus.
Green Lantern made appearances in numerous animated features; indeed, the long-running Justice League cartoon (2001–06) provided the John Stewart incarnation of the character with what was arguably its widest exposure. A live-action Green Lantern (2011) film starring Ryan Reynolds as Hal Jordan met with a tepid response from critics and disappointing box office results.
