Guardians of the Galaxy,  American superhero team created for Marvel Comics by writer Arnold Drake and artist Gene Colan. The group debuted in Marvel Super-Heroes no. 18 (January 1969).
The idea of comrades-in-arms struggling against tyranny has long been a mainstay of fiction and folklore. The Guardians of the Galaxy carry this tradition into the 31st century, where human civilization has fallen under the dominion of the Badoon, a hostile race of sentient alien reptiles. A disparate group of freedom fighters from points across the solar system and beyond unites to combat the Badoon. Charlie-27, a human who has been genetically enhanced with increased strength and endurance to withstand the rigours of life in a Jupiter colony, returns from off-world duty to discover his Jovian home overrun by Badoon forces. He teleports to Pluto and encounters that world’s only survivor, Martinex, a crystalline human who was genetically altered to survive the frigid Plutonian environment. The pair attempt to hinder the Badoon war effort by sabotaging Pluto’s industrial infrastructure before teleporting to Earth, where they meet Vance Astro, a 20th-century astronaut who emerged from cryogenic suspension with powerful psychokinetic abilities, and Yondu, a humanoid native of Alpha Centauri. The quartet adopts the collective name the Guardians of the Galaxy and embarks on a mission to drive the Badoon from their strongholds across the galaxy.
After their debut story arc, the Guardians did not surface again until Marvel Two-in-One no. 5 (September 1974), under the creative direction of writer Steve Gerber and artist Sal Buscema. In a story that takes place several years after the events of the original series, Captain America, the Fantastic Four’s Thing, and the Defenders are transported from the 20th century to aid the Guardians. Together they help drive the Badoon from Earth’s solar system and the adjacent regions of space. The 20th-century heroes are returned to their era, and the Guardians undertake an interstellar journey of discovery and adventure. During these wanderings, the group encounters and inducts Nikki, a human woman genetically engineered to survive the heat of her home world, Mercury, and Starhawk, an alien being of immense power whose physical body is shared by a pair of adoptive siblings from Arcturus IV. Beginning in 1976, in the pages of Marvel Presents, the Guardians explored the galaxy and defended it from the Badoon and other superpowered menaces but sluggish sales led to the cancellation of the series the following year.
The Guardians reached their highest 1970s readership levels when they time-traveled to the 20th century to aid the Avengers during “the Korvac Saga” (1978). The cosmic epic, primarily written by Jim Shooter and drawn by George Pérez, teamed the Guardians with the Avengers in a battle against Korvac, a being of immense power who sought to remake the universe into a utopia of his own creation. In spite of the prominent role played by the Guardians in one of the most significant stories in Marvel history, the group made only infrequent guest appearances over the next decade.
Writer and artist Jim Valentino brought the team back into print with Guardians of the Galaxy in 1990. The book returned the Guardians to their native 31st-century setting and explored the motivations of the team’s individual members. The group became less a gang of ragtag freedom fighters and more a band of explorers and adventurers, with stories that blended Avengers-type team superheroics and Star Trek-style space opera. After Valentino’s departure from Marvel for Image Comics, Guardians of the Galaxy continued under writer Michael Gallagher and concluded in 1995 with issue no. 62. The Guardians appeared as guest stars throughout the 1990s in various Marvel titles, and a spin-off of the team headlined the four-issue miniseries Galactic Guardians (1994).
The writing team of Dan Abnett and Andy Lanning, who were largely responsible for the revival of Marvel’s “cosmic” comic properties, introduced a new team, set in the present day, in Guardians of the Galaxy vol. 2, no. 1 (May 2008). This new generation of Guardians included galactic adventurer Star-Lord; Bug, a character derived from the 1970s toy-based comic The Micronauts; Adam Warlock, a synthetic being with vast energy-manipulation powers; Drax the Destroyer, a cosmically enhanced warrior tasked with the destruction of the mad god Thanos; Gamora, an assassin known as the most dangerous woman in the galaxy; Groot, a treelike alien possessing spectacular regenerative powers; Jack Flag, a former protégé of Captain America; Mantis, a martial artist with a range of mental abilities; Rocket Raccoon, an anthropomorphic raccoon who began as a less-than-subtle Beatles reference but became a fan favourite as the team’s tactician and weapons expert; Nova, a member of a corps of interstellar peacekeepers; and Cosmo, a Soviet space dog whose experimental capsule drifted off course, leaving him imbued with telepathic and psychokinetic powers. This new series and the original one were linked through the presence of Vance Astro, now known as Major Victory, who also appeared as a member of the revamped team. The second Guardians of the Galaxy series concluded in April 2010.
The book was launched a third time in 2013 under writer Brian Michael Bendis. This iteration of the team included Angela, an angelic bounty hunter originally created by Neil Gaiman in the pages of Spawn, and Iron Man. Guardians of the Galaxy, a film based on the Abnett and Lanning run, was released to widespread popular and critical acclaim in 2014; a sequel followed in 2017. The Guardians traveled to Earth to join other members of the Marvel Cinematic Universe in the blockbusters Avengers: Infinity War (2018) and Avengers: Endgame (2019).
