John T. McCutcheon, in full John Tinney McCutcheon,  (born May 6, 1870, South Raub, Indiana, U.S.—died June 10, 1949, Lake Forest, Illinois), American newspaper cartoonist and writer particularly noted for cartoons in which Midwestern rural life was treated with gentle, sympathetic humour.
After receiving his degree in 1889 from Purdue University, Lafayette, Indiana, McCutcheon went to Chicago, where he became a cartoonist on the Chicago Morning News. In the 14 years he was with the paper, its name changed from News to News-Record to Chicago Record and finally to Record-Herald. He frequently illustrated the stories of the humorist George Ade. McCutcheon’s first political cartoons were published during the presidential campaign of 1896. As a correspondent, he covered the Spanish American War, the Philippine insurrection, and the South African (Boer) War.
At the Record McCutcheon began a series of pictures and text describing life in the fictional Illinois town he called Bird Center. The series, continued when he joined the Chicago Tribune in 1903, stressed the wholesome values of small-town life. A collection of the Bird Center cartoons was published in 1904. Three years after joining the Tribune he was sent on a tour of Asia. In 1909 he went on a big-game hunt in Africa with the naturalist Carl Akeley, and for part of the time he was with Pres. Theodore Roosevelt’s safari, which he reported for the Tribune. He later covered World War I, from the German and later from the Allied fronts.
As a cartoonist, McCutcheon portrayed the American scene for the Tribune for more than 40 years. Perhaps his most famous cartoon was “Injun Summer,” first printed on September 30, 1907. The top half of the drawing shows a small boy and his grandfather looking over an Indiana cornfield. In the bottom half, shocks of corn were transformed into tepees and the field into an Indian camp by the boy’s imagination. “Injun Summer” became a regular fall feature in the Tribune. He received a Pulitzer Prize in 1932 for a cartoon dealing with bank failure. John McCutcheon’s Book (1948), by Franklin J. Meine and John Merryweather, contains a collection of McCutcheon’s drawings. His autobiography is Drawn from Memory (1950).
