Li’l Abner,  American newspaper comic strip that ran from 1934 until 1977, chronicling the absurdities of daily life in the fictional Appalachian town of Dogpatch.
Li’l Abner was created in 1934 by cartoonist Al Capp. The comic strip abounded in stereotypes of Appalachia. Its title character, Abner Yokum, was a handsome, muscle-bound hillbilly, as lazy as he was dull witted. Like Abner, most of the men of Dogpatch were cast as essentially useless to society; all the real work was done by the “wimmenfolk.” One such woman was the curvaceous and beautiful yet hard-working Daisy Mae Scragg, who was hopelessly in love with Abner and pursued him fruitlessly for years before they finally married in 1952; they produced a child, Honest Abe, in 1953. Another was Abner’s mother, Mammy, the unofficial mayor of Dogpatch, who smoked a corncob pipe and kept the Yokum household running while her lazy, illiterate husband, Pappy, did little more than lie about.
Some story ideas recurred many times over the strip’s four decades. The strip-within-a-strip Fearless Fosdick, which Abner liked to read, was a parody of Dick Tracy; it became a sensation in its own right. A notable celebration in Dogpatch was the annual Sadie Hawkins Day, on which the women of the town were allowed to marry any bachelor they could chase down and capture; a day of role reversal in which females asked males to dances was widely adopted at college campuses throughout the United States.
The Li’l Abner strip was distinguished by the characters’ outrageously exaggerated hillbilly slang, featuring humorously phonetic spelling and turns of phrase such as “amoozin’ but confoozin’” and “natcherly.” Capp used Li’l Abner to comment satirically on American life and politics, spoofing ruthless capitalists in the early years before turning his wit on hippies and antiwar activists as his views grew more conservative later in life. He retired his creation in 1977, two years before his death. Since then, Li’l Abner has been reprinted at various times.
