Marvelman, also called Miracleman,  British comic strip superhero created by Mick Anglo in 1954. The character is regarded by many to be the first British superhero.
In post-World War II Britain, comics were booming. Publisher Len Miller was doing well reprinting the adventures of American hero Captain Marvel—until 1954, when Fawcett Publications, having spent years battling lawsuits from rival DC Comics, agreed to stop publishing the adventures of Captain Marvel. Left without a main character, Miller commissioned writer and artist Mick Anglo to create a substitute hero. Much as Captain Marvel assumed his superheroic persona by uttering the word “Shazam!” newspaper reporter Mike Moran became Marvelman when he said “Kimota!” (“atomic” phonetically backward). He was accompanied on many of his adventures by Kid Marvelman and Young Marvelman, and he faced an assortment of evil geniuses, aliens, and strange thugs. As tastes changed, sales declined, and in 1963 the last Marvelman adventure was published.
In 1981 Dez Skinn, formerly of Marvel Comics’ British publishing division, embarked on a plan to create a new anthology of creator-owned comics. Impressed with a proposal by writer Alan Moore, Skinn commissioned the first new Marvelman story in a generation for Warrior no. 1 (March 1982). Moore’s Marvelman, combined with detailed art by Garry Leach and Alan Davis, offered a radical departure from superhero convention. The story, which anticipated Moore’s groundbreaking graphic novel Watchmen (1986–87), imagined the effect that superpowered individuals would have on the real world. The strip became Warrior’s most popular feature, but creative, financial, and legal problems led not only to the end of Marvelman in Warrior but to the eventual closing of the magazine itself. Marvelman had won critical and popular recognition in Britain and had attracted attention in the United States, but it was now out of a home.
Skinn approached U.S. publishers about the Warrior properties, but both DC and Marvel declined Marvelman. Pacific Comics eventually agreed to publish the series but went bankrupt before it could appear. Pacific’s assets were bought by Eclipse Comics, and Marvelman finally had a publisher again. After a controversial name change to avoid litigation from Marvel Comics, Moore’s new Miracleman no. 1 debuted in August 1985. The series was an immediate success. While Moore’s stories were widely praised, two issues raised concern in the United States. Issue no. 9 (July 1986) featured explicit scenes of childbirth, resulting in some retailers refusing to carry the book. The brutality of Miracleman no. 15 (November 1988)—in which Kid Miracleman destroys half of London and kills scores of people—was noted as one of the most violent mainstream comics published to that date. As he left the series, Moore gave his successor a storytelling challenge: Miracleman had now reshaped planet Earth into a utopia, presiding over it as the leader of a godlike pantheon.
Handpicked by Moore, writer Neil Gaiman took to the challenge with relish. Gaiman had planned three story arcs called “The Golden Age,” “The Silver Age,” and “The Dark Age.” Gaiman’s scripts were interpreted by artist Mark Buckingham, who used a different illustration style for every story. Issues 17–22 (June 1990–August 1991) constituted “The Golden Age,” profiling the people in the new utopia and showing how they viewed or interacted with Miracleman. Issue no. 24 (August 1993) was the final Miracleman from Eclipse, however, as the company closed shortly thereafter.
In April 1996 Image Comics cocreator Todd McFarlane bought Eclipse’s assets, planning to bring back several of the properties, including Miracleman. Questions regarding the ownership of Marvelman/Miracleman would leave the character in legal limbo for more than a decade. Gaiman and Buckingham claimed ownership of a portion that had been ceded to them by Moore and Leach, Davis retained the republishing rights to the artwork that he had contributed to Moore’s run, and MacFarlane ostensibly owned the percentage of the rights that had been held by Eclipse. Despite this uncertainty, McFarlane featured Mike Moran in cameo scenes in his comic Hellspawn, and he also released limited-edition artwork of Miracleman as well as Miracleman statues.
The legal battle between Gaiman and McFarlane, which focused primarily on a dispute over the ownership of a trio of characters that Gaiman had cocreated for McFarlane’s Spawn series, failed to resolve the uncertainty. In a development that surprised many, it was revealed that Skinn had never actually acquired the rights to Marvelman from creator Mick Anglo. Anglo, in turn, sold them to Marvel Comics in 2009, and the company promptly changed the character’s name from Miracleman back to Marvelman. Marvel subsequently reprinted a number of early Marvelman stories. The legal status of the Moore and Gaiman issues remained murky until October 2013, when Marvel announced that it would republish this long out-of-print material and allow Gaiman and Buckingham to complete their long-delayed story.
