Ralph Steadman,  (born May 15, 1936, Wallasey, Cheshire, England), British artist and cartoonist known for his provocative, often grotesque, illustrations frequently featuring spatters and splotches of ink and for his collaboration with American author and journalist Hunter S. Thompson.
While Steadman was serving in the Royal Air Force (1954–56), he learned technical drawing, took a correspondence drawing course, and made many efforts to sell cartoons to newspapers. He sold his first cartoon to the Manchester Evening Chronicle in 1956. When he was discharged, he moved to London, where he intended to make a living as an artist. He found work at the Kemsley Newspaper Group, took drawing lessons with art teacher Leslie Richardson, and spent his free time drawing studies at the Victoria and Albert Museum (V&A). After rejecting him many times, Punch magazine not only accepted one of his drawings but featured it on the cover in 1961.
Though his earliest work did not reflect the biting style he became known for, Steadman’s content always had a satirical bent. Once he began working in a more-provocative mode, many publications deemed his material too offensive to print. In 1961 the U.K. political and current events magazine Private Eye was launched, and Steadman’s drawing Plastic People, which Punch had rejected, was printed in its 11th issue. Throughout the 1960s Steadman continued to focus on his academic art training. From 1961 to 1965 he studied at the London School of Printing and Graphic Arts (now the London College of Communication at the University of the Arts London).
Feeling a lack of freedom in London to publish the kind of work he was producing, Steadman began traveling back and forth to the United States in search of a more-hospitable publishing environment. He began publishing his work in Rolling Stone. During one of those trips in 1970, Steadman met Thompson through Scanlan’s Monthly, an irreverent and short-lived publication. Thompson and Steadman together produced a story on the Kentucky Derby, the first of many collaborations. Thompson introduced Steadman to what he called “gonzo” journalism, a new form of highly personal reportage. This no-holds-barred approach to expression spoke to Steadman in a profound way. The next year he illustrated Thompson’s best-known work, Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (1972), a story based on Thompson’s drug-induced experiences traveling across America to Las Vegas with his attorney in the 1960s. Steadman’s illustrations and imagery were adapted for a 1998 film of the same name, starring Johnny Depp. Neither the novel nor the film was a critical success when it was released, but both have since become cult classics.
Steadman had steady work as a political cartoonist with a variety of publications in the U.K. and U.S. throughout the late 1960s and ’70s, but he had garnered a reputation for producing controversial and sometimes unprintable content. His depictions of politicians (and humans, in general) were dark, even grotesque, and, with their exaggerated physical features, they revealed hidden truths and horrors, mostly about politics, corporate greed, and violence. Steadman often cited a particularly cruel headmaster from his youth as the reason for his distrust of authority. He also felt a strong compulsion to change the world, which he had hoped to do in some small way, by making political art with strong messages.
Steadman worked with pen and brush in ink, also using acrylic and oil paint, etching, silk screen, and collage. His training in technical drawing is evident in his precise treatment of machinery and human and animal anatomy. His creative process was organic and often began with a blot of ink on a white page. He treated unintended marks as opportunities to take his work in a different direction.
His work appeared in countless publications, among them The New Yorker, The New York Times, The Independent, The Guardian, and The Observer. He illustrated a number of literary classics, notably Alice in Wonderland, Animal Farm, Treasure Island, and Fahrenheit 451. He created the art for Flying Dog Brewery (Maryland); cover art for records by musicians such as the Who (1967), Frank Zappa (1997), and Slash (2010); and the artwork for Taylor Mac’s play Gary: A Sequel to Titus Andronicus (2019) and the Thompson documentary Freak Power: The Ballot or the Bomb (2020). He also wrote a libretto for British composer Richard Harvey’s eco-oratorio, Plague and the Moonflower (1989), which was performed in a number of cathedrals in England. Steadman wrote several books, including Sigmund Freud (1979), I, Leonardo (1983), The Grapes of Ralph: Wine According to Ralph Steadman (1992), and Still Life with Bottle: Whiskey According to Ralph Steadman (1997). A traveling retrospective showing 50 years of his work opened in 2018 with stops in London and Washington, D.C.
