Scott Adams,  (born June 8, 1957, Windham, New York, U.S.), American cartoonist who captured the malaise of the modern workplace in his comic strip Dilbert.
Adams was valedictorian of his high-school class (because, he said, "the other 39 people in my class couldn’t spell valedictorian") and went on to earn a B.A. in economics from Hartwick College, Oneonta, New York, in 1979 and an M.B.A. from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1986. From 1979 to 1986 he was employed at Crocker National Bank in San Francisco (while working as a teller, Adams was robbed twice at gunpoint). From 1986 until June 1995 he worked for Pacific Bell in San Ramon, California, in a number of jobs involving technology and finances.
The character Dilbert, a composite of Adams’s coworkers over the years, first appeared in Adams’s business presentations. The comic strip Dilbert was first published in 1989, and by the 21st century it had been syndicated to some 2,000 newspapers, was being read in 70 countries, and had an official Web site on the Internet. Its lead character, a computer programmer and engineer for a high-tech company with no apparent purpose, was buffeted daily by the illogical projects and business decisions of his clueless boss and the corporation’s equally inept management. Dilbert, readily recognized by his perpetually curled necktie, survived the indignities of his existence with the assistance of his pet, Dogbert, who often seemed to have his own self-serving agenda. A few years after Dilbert appeared, Adams began publishing his e-mail address in the strip. He personally read and answered each message, and he credited his correspondents with suggesting many of the situations that Dilbert encountered.
Adams published numerous books, including Dilbert compilations and job-related works. He also wrote How to Fail at Almost Everything and Still Win Big: Kind of the Story of My Life (2013) and Win Bigly: Persuasion in a World Where Facts Don’t Matter (2017); the latter included his explanation for why Donald Trump won the 2016 presidential election.
