Supergirl,  American comic strip superhero created for DC Comics by writer Otto Binder and artist Al Plastino. The character first appeared in Action Comics no. 252 (May 1959).
When DC Comics ushered in the Silver Age of comic books in 1956 with the introduction of a new iteration of the Flash, the renewed interest in superheroes led to a flood of new characters as well as variations on established ones. Binder, who had created the hugely popular teenage-girl hero Mary Marvel for Fawcett Comics in 1942, gauged public interest in a female counterpart for Superman in Superman no. 123 (August 1958). In that story, Superman’s pal Jimmy Olsen briefly wishes into existence a “Super-Girl” whose powers mirror those of Superman. Reader response was positive, and less than a year later “the Supergirl from Krypton” made her debut. Discovering a rocket that resembled the one that had carried him to Earth, Superman opened it to find an ebullient golden-haired teen named Kara, a survivor from his home world of Krypton. When that planet exploded, Kara’s entire hometown of Argo City survived, hurled to safety on a chunk of planetary debris. Soon, however, the populace of the floating city began to suffer from exposure to Kryptonite, a radioactive mineral that sickened Kryptonians and deprived them of their powers. Kara’s father, Zor-El—brother of Superman’s biological father, Jor-El—rocketed his daughter to Earth to join her cousin.
Superman concealed Kara’s existence from the world, disguising her with a brunette wig and covertly instructing her on the use of her powers. Taking the Earth name Linda Lee, Supergirl resided at an orphanage in Midvale, a suburb that was a short distance from Superman’s home in Metropolis. She was eventually adopted by Fred and Edna Danvers, a couple cast from the same mold as Superman’s adoptive Earth parents, the Kents. Three years of real time after her arrival on Earth, Supergirl was introduced to the world by Superman in a televised ticker-tape parade in Action Comics no. 285 (February 1962).
Throughout the 1960s Supergirl starred in the backup story in Action Comics and was sometimes featured on the book’s cover along with her top-tiered cousin. Unmistakably, the character was created with the intention of attracting female readers, and while many boys shunned DC’s Wonder Woman title, they read Supergirl’s stories at least in part because they shared space in Action Comics with the immensely popular Man of Steel. Supergirl soon had a supporting cast that included boyfriend Dick Malverne, Streaky the Supercat (an Earth cat that received superpowers after being accidentally exposed to “X-Kryptonite”), and Comet the Super-Horse (a centaur from ancient Greece who had been turned into an immortal superpowered horse by the sorceress Circe). Supergirl also frequently appeared alongside the Legion of Super-Heroes, a group of superpowered teens from the 30th century, and she was romantically involved with team member Brainiac 5. Her stories were generally lighthearted, dealing with teenage heartache or a campus-based mystery. In June 1969 Supergirl assumed the lead spot in Adventure Comics before moving to the eponymous Supergirl (1972–74), but she failed to establish a large-enough audience to maintain a solo title for long. Still, DC Comics kept the character in print in one fashion or another, trading on her licensing potential through a variety of products targeting young girls.
Supergirl was featured prominently in the Superman Family anthology series (1974–82), but writer Marv Wolfman suggested that the character could be killed in his 12-issue comic book opus Crisis on Infinite Earths (1985–86), to give more emotional weight to the continuity-reshaping series. Some company executives balked at the idea, as Supergirl was about to make her Hollywood debut in the wake of a trio of successful Superman films. The theatrical Supergirl (1984), featuring Helen Slater in the title role and Faye Dunaway as the scenery-chewing antagonist, flopped at the box office, however, sealing Supergirl’s fate. In Crisis on Infinite Earths no. 7 (October 1985), Supergirl valiantly sacrificed herself to save other heroes. By the end of that series, Kara Zor-El had been removed from DC’s relaunched mythology; she would not appear again until 2004.
In 1986 writer and artist John Byrne offered a fresh perspective on the Superman mythos in his six-issue Man of Steel series, and by 1988 a new Supergirl had been introduced. Genetically engineered by a heroic Lex Luthor from an alternate universe, that Supergirl, originally called Matrix, was dispatched to Metropolis to recruit Superman’s aid in battling a trio of rogue Kryptonians. Making Earth her adopted planet, the new Supergirl found her career fraught with change. She merged her body with that of the dying Linda Danvers, became an angel with fiery wings, was separated from Danvers, and battled an assortment of supernatural foes in the relaunched Supergirl (1996–2003) comic.
In Supergirl no. 75 (2002), a parallel universe version of the Kryptonian Supergirl briefly appeared, and in Superman: The 10-Cent Adventure (2003), yet another Supergirl—this one claiming to be the daughter of Superman and Lois Lane—surfaced. The latter was eventually revealed to be a creation of perennial Superman villain Brainiac. Those frequent reinventions made the character’s backstory so confusing that it was inaccessible even for a dedicated reader. That may be why, in May 2004, DC brought back a contemporary version of the “real” Kara Zor-El in issue no. 8 of the hit Superman/Batman series. That story line, by writer Jeph Loeb and artist Michael Turner, reintroduced Kara into official continuity and was adapted into the direct-to-video animated film Superman/Batman: Apocalypse (2010). A new Supergirl comic series began in 2005 and ran until 2011, when DC rebooted its entire comic line. Supergirl relaunched under DC’s “New 52” banner, but that title was canceled in 2015 as part of the company’s “Convergence” crossover.
Although Supergirl historically had mixed success with headlining her own comic, she frequently appeared in other media. One version of Supergirl was introduced on television in 1998, in Superman: The Animated Series (1996–2000). The DC Comics editorial policy at that time dictated that Superman was the only survivor of Krypton, so that Supergirl, named Kara In-Ze, was not Superman’s cousin but came from Argo, a neighbouring planet. That Supergirl also appeared on the animated Justice League Unlimited (2001–06). Laura Vandervoort portrayed the original Kara Zor-El in numerous episodes of the live-action TV series Smallville from 2007 to 2011. In October 2015 the live-action Supergirl television series premiered on CBS with Melissa Benoist in the title role.
