Asō Tarō,  (born September 20, 1940, Iizuka, Fukuoka prefecture, Japan), Japanese Liberal-Democratic Party (LDP) politician who served as prime minister of Japan from September 24, 2008, to September 16, 2009. He succeeded Fukuda Yasuo. In 2012 Asō became deputy prime minister and finance minister.
Asō, the son of a business tycoon, was closely linked to the political and imperial hierarchy of Japan. He was a grandson of Yoshida Shigeru, who served as prime minister in the late 1940s and early ’50s; his father-in-law was Suzuki Zenkō, prime minister in 1980–82; and his sister was married to a cousin of the emperor Akihito. Asō graduated (1963) from Gakushuin University and later studied at Stanford University and the University of London. He joined Asō Industry in 1966 and within six years had advanced to president and CEO of the Asō Cement Co., Ltd.
Asō left the family business in 1979 after he was elected to the lower house of the Diet (parliament). He rose through the ranks of the LDP, holding a variety of party and government posts. In October 2005 Prime Minister Koizumi Jun’ichirō appointed Asō to head the Foreign Ministry, a role he retained under Koizumi’s successor, Abe Shinzo, before leaving in August 2007. As foreign minister, Asō built a reputation as a strong conservative and nationalist who endorsed the U.S.-Japan alliance and took a hard line on North Korea and China. He was known to support labour reforms, regional decentralization that would give greater autonomy to Japan’s prefectures, and increased taxes to fund the national pension plan.
Following Fukuda’s resignation from office in early September 2008, Asō began seeking the presidency of the LDP, a post that he had been unable to gain in three previous attempts; on September 22 he succeeded, gaining an overwhelming majority of votes from his LDP peers. He became prime minister two days later, the first Roman Catholic to hold the office.
Asō cultivated a populist image, especially among young Japanese. He was a champion marksman who had represented Japan in skeet shooting at the 1976 Olympic Games in Montreal. In addition, he was a great fan of manga and worked to promote the popular Japanese graphic literary form outside Japan. It was hoped by LDP officials that his charisma and cheerful demeanour could restore voter confidence in the party, which had lost the election to the upper house of the Diet in 2007.
Soon after Asō won the premiership, however, Japan became a victim of the international financial crisis that was spreading at the end of 2008, and the country’s economy descended into a recession. The revelation that Asō Industry had used prisoner labour during World War II—a charge that the prime minister had long denied—contributed to his failing popularity. In early 2009 Asō suffered another setback when his finance minister resigned after appearing at a public function seemingly intoxicated. All this culminated in the overwhelming defeat of the LDP in a series of local elections in July 2009. In response, Asō called for a general election, set for August 30. The landslide victory of the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) over the LDP that day marked the end of more than a half century of  almost uninterrupted political dominance by the LDP. In mid-September Asō stepped down as prime minister and, accepting blame for the LDP’s poor showing, also resigned as party president.
After the LDP won the 2012 general election—earning Abe a second stint as prime minister—Asō was named deputy prime minister and finance minister.
