The Atom,  American comic strip superhero created for DC Comics by writer Bill O’Connor and artist Ben Flinton. The character first appeared in All-American Comics no. 19 (October 1940).
Al Pratt, the first hero to adopt the mantle of the Atom, was a college student tired of being teased about his diminutive stature. In an effort to impress his sweetheart Mary James, he trains with former boxing champ Joe Morgan and soon becomes immensely strong. Adding a blue cowl and cape to a brown-and-yellow singlet reminiscent of those worn by circus strongmen, the Atom starts a one-man crusade against crime and injustice.
Without doubt, the Atom was one of the most-uncomplicated characters of the so-called Golden Age of comics. He had no superpowers, teenaged sidekicks, or gimmicky weapons. What the strip had, particularly when drawn by artist Joe Gallagher, was a sort of down-to-earth honesty, as the hero took on a variety of hoodlums and gangsters in a succession of short punchy yarns. Considering how basic the feature’s premise was, it is perhaps surprising that the Atom was to prove so enduring, but he outlasted many of his more-flamboyant colleagues. He starred in more than 50 issues of All-American Comics before moving to Flash Comics. He would become an enduring member of the Justice Society of America in All Star Comics, appearing in almost every story until that comic’s demise in 1951. By that time he had undergone a radical revamp in which he acquired “atomic strength” and sported a new costume, topped off with a fin on his head.
Al Pratt’s Atom was next seen in the 1960s, but only as an occasional participant in Justice Society adventures, perhaps because another Atom had been created in his absence. Following the success of the relaunched versions of the Flash and Green Lantern, DC editor Julius Schwartz was looking for another Golden Age character to revamp when artist Gil Kane brought in some new designs for the Atom. Kane was inspired by Doll Man, a Golden Age character created by Will Eisner, and his Atom update could shrink himself down to an almost microscopic size. Over three issues of Showcase in 1961 and 1962, Schwartz, Kane, and writer Gardner Fox introduced physics professor Ray Palmer, whose experiments with fragments of a white dwarf star enabled him to shrink almost at will. Palmer donned a red-and-blue superhero costume and embarked on a clandestine career as a crime fighter.
Schwartz and Fox had solid backgrounds in science fiction, and the Atom’s adventures were frequently based on some sort of scientific conundrum or another, be it a natural disaster or a trip back in time to meet Jules Verne or Edgar Allan Poe. When shrunk, the Atom had increased physical strength, but he could not compete with costumed titans such as Superman or Wonder Woman. Thus, his villains, such as the human-plant hybrid Floronic Man and the time-jumping Chronos, also tended to be lesser threats. The feature as a whole, though beautifully illustrated, was ultimately rather dry, and, after 38 issues of his own title and 7 more co-headlining with Hawkman, the Atom was relegated to a backup slot in Action Comics.
Throughout the 1960s and ’70s, the Atom was a regular member of the Justice League of America, and that seemed to be enough for most fans, few of whom were clamouring for a new Atom comic. It was perhaps surprising, then, when DC released Sword of the Atom (1983), a miniseries by Kane writer Jan Strnad that took Palmer in a radically new direction. After learning that his wife is having an affair, Palmer flies to the Amazon, where he becomes a member of a tribe of diminutive yellow-skinned barbarians. That new story, which continued throughout the 1980s, owed more to Conan the Barbarian than to standard superhero fare, and it was surprisingly well written. A subsequent monthly series (1988) was a more-pedestrian retread of the 1960s version, and it was cancelled after just 18 issues.
The 1990s crossover event Zero Hour unexpectedly transformed the middle-aged Palmer into a teenager, and he was promptly recruited by the Teen Titans. In 1997 the Justice League was relaunched with its original 1960s lineup and included the Atom, with his temporary youthful transformation apparently forgotten by the comic’s creators. Palmer also featured prominently in the much-maligned Identity Crisis (2004), a crossover that was widely criticized for courting controversy for its own sake.
Palmer vanished after the events of Identity Crisis, and young professor Ryan Choi became the new Atom in Brave New World (2006). He subsequently starred in his own comic series, The All New Atom (2006–08), which was written by Gail Simone for most of its 25-issue run. Palmer eventually returned, and he and Choi worked together in a number of high-profile DC crossovers. Choi was seemingly killed in the series Brightest Day (2010–11), but he resurfaced during the events surrounding the Convergence (2015) crossover.
Outside of comics, the Ray Palmer version of the Atom was featured in the animated television series Justice League Unlimited (2001–06). The Choi version appeared in several episodes of the animated series Batman: The Brave and the Bold (2008–11). Ray Palmer joined DC’s shared television universe in 2014 as a recurring character on Arrow (2012–20).
