Beltway sniper attacks,  shooting spree in the Washington, D.C., area that killed 10 people and injured 3 over a three-week period in October 2002. The shooters, John Muhammad and Lee Boyd Malvo, chose targets seemingly at random and brought daily life in the area to a virtual standstill.
The attacks began on October 2, 2002, when a bullet shattered the window of a craft store in Aspen Hill, Maryland, narrowly missing a cashier. Less than an hour after that incident, a 55-year-old man was shot and killed while walking across a parking lot in Wheaton, Maryland. Although the shootings were not initially recognized as being connected, law-enforcement authorities soon realized that those two acts of violence were just the first of what would be more than a dozen linked shootings over the next 23 days.
By the end of the day on October 3, five more victims had been shot and killed in the Washington metropolitan area. Investigators determined that bullets from several of the first seven shootings were fired from the same weapon—a high-powered .223-calibre rifle. On the morning of October 7, a 13-year-old boy was shot and injured in front of his middle school in Bowie, Maryland. Muhammad and Malvo left a tarot card with a note to law enforcement written on it, but it contained no specific demands. More than 30 different law-enforcement agencies at the local, state, and federal levels would ultimately work together to track, identify, and capture the parties responsible for the attacks.
Other than conflicting reports of a white van, a white box truck, and a dark Chevrolet Caprice near the scenes of the incidents, police had no clear leads. Criminal profilers predicted that the sniper was most likely a white male, but that assumption was based largely on the characteristics of past serial killers and not the sniper case itself. From October 9 to October 14, two men and a woman were killed in separate incidents in northern Virginia. On October 19 a 13th shooting occurred at a restaurant in Ashland, Virginia. Law-enforcement officials found a second note at the crime scene, demanding money and instructing the police to call at a certain time and place. The phone number provided in the note was not valid, but technicians at the U.S. Secret Service crime lab were able to match the handwriting to the tarot card left at the scene of an earlier shooting.
Police received additional information in the form of phone calls to local police stations and a Federal Bureau of Investigation hotline. The most important tip, however, came from the shooters themselves, in a call to a Roman Catholic priest in Ashland, Virginia. For reasons unknown to investigators, the shooters detailed their crimes to the priest and asked him to advise the police to look into a September 2002 robbery-homicide at a liquor store in Montgomery, Alabama. Evidence recovered from the Montgomery crime scene was linked to Lee Boyd Malvo, a 17-year-old from Jamaica who had been fingerprinted in December 2001 by the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service. Further investigation found that Malvo had been seen traveling with a man named John Muhammad, a Persian Gulf War veteran who had qualified as an expert marksman. Additionally, Muhammad and Malvo had been observed target shooting at a residence in Tacoma, Washington, further linking them to the sniper case. The predictions of criminal profilers were shown to be wildly incorrect, as the suspected snipers were an African American man and a Caribbean teenager.
A warrant was issued for Muhammad on a federal firearms violation, and the police identified the make, model, and license plate number of the Chevrolet Caprice he was driving. The police released the description of the car to the media on October 23, and later that evening a motorist reported that the vehicle was at a rest stop off Interstate 70 near Frederick, Maryland. Within hours, law-enforcement personnel descended upon the car, found Muhammad and Malvo sleeping inside, and took them into custody. A search of the car uncovered a Bushmaster XM-15 assault rifle—a semiautomatic version of the M4 carbine used by the U.S. Army—as well as a concealed firing port cut into the car’s trunk. Modifications had been made to the car’s back seat so that a shooter could lie prone and fire, undetected, from inside the car.
Although their crimes spanned numerous jurisdictions—investigators eventually tied the pair to nearly a dozen additional shootings prior to the D.C. spree—Muhammad and Malvo were prosecuted in Virginia, a state where Malvo would have been eligible for the death penalty. In November 2003 Muhammad was convicted on murder and weapons charges, and he ultimately received a death sentence for his role in the sniper killings. After all of his appeals had been exhausted, he was executed by lethal injection in November 2009. Malvo was found guilty of murder, terrorism, and firearms charges in December 2003, and he was sentenced to life in prison without parole. As part of a deal with prosecutors, Malvo later pled guilty in additional cases but was spared the possibility of a death sentence by a 2005 U.S. Supreme Court ruling that declared capital punishment for juvenile offenders to be unconstitutional.
The sniper attacks were atypical in a number of respects. Typically, serial killers target one type of person so that the victims share a common characteristic. Muhammad and Malvo, however, shot both men and women, with no clear regard for the race or the age of the victims. The unpredictable nature of the shootings instilled high levels of fear into the citizens of the Washington, D.C., area. Perhaps even more unusual was the successful civil action pursued in the wake of the attacks. With the assistance of the Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence, two survivors of the shootings and the families of six slain victims brought suits against Bushmaster Firearms, the manufacturer of the rifle used in the attacks, and the Tacoma, Washington, gun store from which the rifle had been stolen. While not admitting fault, Bushmaster and the gun store reached a $2.5 million settlement with the plaintiffs. The National Rifle Association was among those who subsequently lobbied successfully for the passage of the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act, a 2005 law that largely indemnified gun manufacturers and dealers from future liability suits.
