Black September, Arabic Aylūl al-Aswad, also called Black September Organization (BSO),  breakaway militant faction of the Palestinian organization Fatah. The group was founded in 1971 to seek retribution on Jordan’s military and to assassinate Jordan’s King Hussein after they forcefully confronted the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) during an attempt to seize power from the monarch in September 1970. The name Black September was chosen to commemorate that violent Hashemite-Palestinian clash, during which thousands of Palestinians were either killed or expelled and the PLO was driven out of Jordan. Before its official dissolution in 1974, the faction also participated in attacks against Israeli and Western targets worldwide, notably the massacre of members of Israel’s Olympic team at the 1972 Summer Games in Munich.
Black September apparently formed within Fatah, the PLO group led by Yāsir ʿArafāt. Black September apparently received its orders from the Fatah security apparatus, but some scholars contend that its linkages to Fatah were kept hidden to allow Fatah to maintain its stance of not interfering in the internal matters of Arab countries. Others, however, argue that the faction eventually became a radical split from the more-moderate Fatah.
Eleven Israelis and a West German policeman were killed in the attack at the 1972 Olympic Summer Games in Munich. In response, Israel ordered its national intelligence agency, the Mossad, to kill senior Black September and PLO operatives. The Mossad conducted several operations, including the 1973 killing of three Black September members in Beirut, the 1973 killing of a Moroccan waiter in Lillehammer, Norway (who, it turned out, was apparently blameless), and the 1979 killing of Ali Hassan Salameh, the “Red Prince” (who was thought to have masterminded several deadly attacks, including that at Munich in 1972).
Several other attacks were ascribed to Black September. The group assassinated Jordan’s Prime Minister Wasfi al-Tel in November 1971 following the PLO eviction from Jordan the previous June. Black September was implicated in several acts of terrorism in 1972, including acts of sabotage in the Netherlands and West Germany in February, the hijacking of a Belgian aircraft flying from Austria to Israel in May, and the sending of letter bombs to Israeli embassies worldwide—one of which killed a diplomat in London in September. Operations continued in 1973 with an attack on the Saudi embassy in Khartoum, Sudan, in March; several hostages were taken, and Cleo A. Noel, the U.S. ambassador to Sudan, his deputy, and a Belgian diplomat were killed. In August a pair of young Black September members attacked passengers waiting to board a flight to New York in Athens, Greece, killing 3 people and wounding more than 50. (The pair sought to attack passengers bound for Tel Aviv, but that flight had boarded before they arrived.)
In December 1974 Black September was dissolved by Fatah, possibly as a response to the pressure placed on Black September by the Mossad. Most of its membership was reassigned to other Palestinian groups.
