The Order,  American white supremacist group known for its assassination of Jewish radio talk-show host Alan Berg in 1984.
The Order’s founder, Robert Jay Mathews, became involved with the movement to protest U.S. federal income taxes in the 1970s. Mathews saw taxation as a conspiracy by the federal government to take money from white Christian Americans and put it in the hands of Jews. After his arrest for falsifying tax forms in 1973, he became disenchanted with the movement because he received no support from his fellow members during the period between his arrest and trial. Mathews retained links with white supremacists through meetings of the Aryan Nations and the National Alliance. In October 1983 at his family compound in Metaline Falls, Washington, Mathews and eight other men—some neo-Nazi militants and others participants in the racist Christian Identity movement—took an oath to work toward a white supremacist society. Although Mathews preferred the name Brüder Schweigen (“Silent Brotherhood”) for the group, it was so closely modeled on a fictional organization called The Order, in William Pierce’s The Turner Diaries (1978), that several of its members (as well as authorities) adopted this name.
To finance their group, members of The Order turned to crime. Initially they targeted pimps, drug dealers, and anybody else they judged had no morals, convincing themselves they were doing God’s work. In December 1983 they escalated their criminal activities to counterfeiting and bank robbery. Although they stole tens of thousands of dollars, the group found those funds insufficient to bankroll a full-scale revolution. After experiencing limited success with their forays into counterfeiting, the group expanded their robbery targets to include armoured cars. The Order stole more than $4 million over a five-month span in 1984, but a gun left at the scene of one of the robberies would implicate the group in the crime spree.
In May 1984 The Order committed its first murder, when members killed Walter West, an Aryan Nations member who was judged to have become a security threat. The following month the group targeted Berg because he was Jewish and a vocal opponent of right-wing extremism. Members of The Order ambushed Berg at his home, shooting him more than a dozen times. The Order had a target list that included Morris Dees, the cofounder of the Southern Poverty Law Center, and television producer Norman Lear. None of those other assassinations were carried out.
The Order’s ultimate downfall began when Thomas Martinez, a member of the group, was arrested in Philadelphia for passing counterfeit money shortly after the Berg assassination. To avoid prosecution, Martinez cooperated with authorities, and in November 1984 he tricked Mathews into meeting with him in Portland, Oregon. There the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) captured another member of The Order, but Mathews managed to escape.
Several members of The Order fled with Mathews to Whidbey Island in Puget Sound, where they composed a declaration of war on the U.S. government. The FBI eventually tracked them to the island in December 1984, but not before most of them had managed to escape. A handful remained with Mathews and eventually surrendered to the FBI. Mathews himself refused to surrender, keeping agents at bay with submachine gun fire for more than 30 hours. Hoping to resolve the stalemate, agents fired flares into the house where he was hiding, and Mathews died in the subsequent blaze.
The death of Mathews spelled the end of the group, and by March 1986 all members of The Order had been captured. Eventually 11 members negotiated plea bargains, and 10 were convicted of racketeering and conspiracy under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO). Until that time, RICO had been used mostly to prosecute organized-crime figures. Sentences ranged from 30 to 150 years. One member, Bill Soderquist, was granted complete immunity for his cooperation with law enforcement. Martinez was sentenced to probation and was eventually paid $25,000 for his role in the investigation.
