Tokyo subway attack of 1995,  coordinated multiple-point terrorist attack in Tokyo on March 20, 1995, in which the odourless, colourless, and highly toxic nerve gas sarin was released in the city’s subway system. The attack resulted in the deaths of 12 (later increased to 13) people, and some 5,500 others were injured to varying degrees. Members of the Japan-based new religious movement AUM Shinrikyo (since 2000 called Aleph) were soon identified as the perpetrators of the attack.
Prior to the March 20 incident, members of AUM had been involved in several deadly crimes that went unsolved by Japanese authorities until they began investigating the subway gas attack. In the first of these, in November 1989, a lawyer and his family were murdered in Yokohama. The lawyer had represented families attempting to recover their children from the cult. In June 1994 sarin was used in an attack in Matsumoto in Nagano prefecture, about 110 miles (175 km) northwest of central Tokyo. There the agent was released from a truck parked near a building complex, killing seven (an eighth victim died in 2008) and injuring some 500 others. It was later revealed that the gassing had been staged in an attempt to kill three judges who were presiding over a court case there that had been brought against AUM; the judges survived, although all were injured in the attack. In addition, AUM was linked to a failed attempt on March 15, 1995, to release a toxin in a Tokyo train station.
On the morning of March 20, five men entered the Tokyo subway system, each with bags of sarin. Each boarded a separate subway line, their trains all headed toward the Tsukiji Station in central Tokyo. At virtually the same time, each attacker dropped his bags of sarin on the floor of the train and punctured them before exiting the train and station and leaving the scene in a waiting getaway car. As the liquid in the bags started to vaporize, the fumes began affecting the passengers. The trains continued on toward the centre of the city, with sickened passengers leaving the cars at each station. The fumes were spread at each stop, either by emanating from the tainted cars themselves or through contact with liquid contaminating peoples’ clothing and shoes. Many of the individuals who were overcome by exposure to sarin during the attack were those who came into contact with the agent while trying to assist those who already had been stricken. Among the victims were two subway employees who died attempting to dispose of punctured sarin bags at the Kasumigaseki Station.
As authorities began their investigation into the attack, they quickly began making connections between this gassing and the earlier incidents, and suspicion quickly focused on AUM Shinrikyo. Two days after the incident, police mounted a massive raid on the AUM offices in Tokyo and its laboratory headquarters at Kamikuishiki in Yamanashi prefecture, in the process seizing numerous canisters of toxic chemicals used to manufacture sarin. In May AUM leader Asahara Shoko (Matsumoto Chizuo) and more than a dozen other cult leaders were arrested in nationwide raids.
Although Asahara denied that his sect had been involved in the gas attacks, several of his followers later admitted that AUM members had participated in the Tokyo and Matsumoto incidents and implicated the sect in the 1989 killing of the lawyer and his family. It was also revealed that AUM had attempted the failed attack of March 15 and was involved in a string of murders of members or those thought to be enemies of the cult. Eventually, about 200 members of the leadership and rank and file were arrested, and scores were convicted of the gassings and other violent acts. The trials of AUM members continued into the early 21st century, with 13 people receiving death sentences. In 2004, after an eight-year trial, Asahara was convicted of a series of crimes (including having masterminded the subway attack) and was one of those sentenced to death. His appeal of the conviction and sentence was denied in 2006. Asahara and six other senior members of AUM were executed on July 6, 2018.
Three AUM members wanted in connection with the cult’s crimes remained fugitives for more than a decade and a half. The first, Hirata Makoto, surrendered to Tokyo police at the end of 2011. Kikuchi Naoko, the second of the three, was arrested in early June 2012 in Sagamihara, Kanagawa prefecture. Less than two weeks later the third fugitive, Takahashi Katsuya, was apprehended in Tokyo. Takahashi was the most-wanted of the trio, as he had been Asahara’s bodyguard and was suspected of having driven one of the getaway cars in the subway attack; he received a life sentence for his role in the crime.
