British Surrealism,  manifestation in Great Britain of Surrealism, a European movement in visual art and literature that flourished between World Wars I and II and a deliberate attempt to unite the conscious and unconscious in the creation of art. British Surrealism in its organized, communal form was a short-lived and somewhat local phenomenon of the 1930s and ’40s, limited mostly to groups in the cities of London and Birmingham, but it had a deep impact on British culture.
Although David Gascoyne, the foremost poet of the movement, emphasized the native sources of British Surrealism—adducing Jonathan Swift, Edward Young, Matthew Gregory (“Monk”) Lewis, William Blake, and Lewis Carroll—he penned the “First English Surrealist Manifesto” (1935) in French in Paris, and it was published in the French review Cahiers d’art. Gascoyne had been drawn to Paris after having read Decadent, Symbolist, and Surrealist French poetry. In the early 1930s he aimed to liaise between London-centred artists and the recently emergent French Surrealists, meeting many of them in what became known as Atelier 17, English printmaker and painter Stanley William Hayter’s Parisian studio. Gascoyne decided to create in England a branch of the movement when by chance he met one of British Surrealism’s most prominent future flag bearers, Roland Penrose, in the streets of Paris in the company of French poet Paul Éluard.
In June 1936 the New Burlington Galleries in London opened the first International Surrealist Exhibition, also offering conferences by Éluard, André Breton, English poet and critic Herbert Read, and the then Paris-based Spanish artist Salvador Dalí. It was at this conference too that the Welsh poet Dylan Thomas engaged in his own Surrealist happening: walking around the galleries, he served as host, offering viewers a cup of boiled string and asking with theatrical politeness if they would prefer their cup strong or weak. While Thomas was never formally affiliated with the British Surrealists, it was his work and that of other similarly unaffiliated poets that widened their influence. Thomas’s surprising and eccentric metaphoric cascades as well as his Freudian exploration of sexuality, strangeness, dreams, and childhood find a precedent in the movement’s general tenets and preoccupations.
While the British movement retained a steadfast adherence to Bretonian Surrealist principles from first to last, it did experience internal tensions caused by the rejection in France of Surrealist members such as Louis Aragon and especially Éluard on ideological and aesthetic grounds. These various allegiances to individual French artists eventually led to a split in the London group. Its final signed declaration, published in 1947 by the Galerie Maeght in Paris, was the subject of some internal dissent. Four years later, when the London Gallery—which served as the London group’s headquarters—closed, the group was formally dissolved as a large cohesive unit. The Surrealists based in Birmingham, who had been initially skeptical of what they saw as the London group’s looser ties to French Surrealism, continued as an informal grouping until the 1950s.
The chief artists in the Birmingham Surrealist coterie were Conroy Maddox, John Melville, Emmy Bridgwater, Oscar Mellor, and Desmond Morris (also an anthropologist). Having sprung up in the 1930s, the Birmingham group flowered independently of the London group, its members going so far as to refuse to show their work at the 1936 International Surrealist Exhibition; they claimed that a number of the London artists contributing had anti-Surrealist lifestyles. Some members of the Birmingham Surrealists did attend the exhibition, however, in order to make contact with French participants such as Breton.
One of Breton’s most important poems, “L’Union libre” (1931), can be said to have had a considerable influence on British Surrealist poetry in its use of kaleidoscopic analogy but also in the sexual and conjugal implications of its title. In July 1937 a number of Surrealists, including Éluard, Penrose, Eileen Agar, Leonora Carrington, Max Ernst, and Man Ray, met in Cornwall, changing names and partners on the occasion for a day and a night. The same experience was reiterated in France later that year with Pablo Picasso and Dora Maar, thus assuring various forms of cross-pollination between the two countries. Free Unions–Unions Libres (1946) was also the title given to a review edited by Simon Watson Taylor. Its first and only issue published poems, texts, and drawings by French and British Surrealists as an attempt to promote interest in Surrealism in the aftermath of World War II.
Although the British Surrealist movement was by no means slavishly derivative of its Paris-based models, references to France and French art are frequent within its art and poetry, especially in the works of members initially established in Birmingham. There were also numerous allusions to, and subversions of, English and American culture and the ancient mythologies of Europe and Africa in the writings of the London group. While writers and visual artists in England adopted all the games and techniques invented in Paris under the auspices of continental Surrealism, Indian-born British artist Ithell Colquhoun went on to invent a number of other techniques, including entoptic graphomania (dots made on or around blemishes on a blank sheet of paper; lines are then made to join the dots together) and parsemage (an automatic technique in which dust from charcoal or chalk is powdered onto water and then skimmed off by passing paper or cardboard beneath the surface of the water).
The influence of British Surrealism in Great Britain reached far beyond World War II, and central to that influence was ongoing engagement with the movement’s French antecedents. Maddox’s “The Playground of the Salpêtrière”—a title he applied to both a poem (1940) and a painting (1975)—are two of the better-known examples. Created in the early 1980s, Anthony Earnshaw’s pictorial reworkings of Ubu, the principal character of Alfred Jarry’s play Ubu roi (1896) and one of French Surrealism’s iconic mascots, provide more evidence of continuing English interaction with the Parisian origins of the movement.
Surrealist poetic techniques are palpable in the work of many British poets of the later 20th century and early 21st century, including Peter Porter, Peter Redgrove, and Penelope Shuttle. The so-called Martian school of poetry was also founded on eccentric, defamiliarizing imagery pioneered by Surrealists of the 1930s.
A number of British Surrealist painters went on to make fruitful contact with artists in Mexico (Carrington), the United States (Maddox), and France (Colquhoun) through the second half of the 20th century. Surrealist painting can also be said to have had an influence on such English artists as Stanley Spencer and Paula Rego, even though these painters do not qualify primarily as Surrealists.
