Chan painting, Wade-Giles romanization Ch’an,  school of Chinese painting inspired by the “meditative” school of Buddhism called, in Chinese, Chan (Japanese: Zen). Although Chan originated in China with an Indian monk, Bodhidharma, it came to be the most Chinese of Buddhist schools. The ideals of the school later frequently found expression in a special kind of art, typically composed of broad surfaces of ink monochrome that suggest the sudden, intuitive, and individual awareness—without the secondary aid of either teacher or sacred text—that comes to the Chan devotee in moments of illumination.
Given the emphasis upon individual achievement desired by the school, there is no single style of Chan painting; the most notable of the early Chan painters in China were masters of the Five Dynasties (907–960) period, including Guan Xiu and Shi Ke in Sichuan. Other famous Chan painters, especially in the Southern Song (1127–1279) period, include Muqi Fachang and Liang Kai. These two painters were accomplished artists within the by-then traditional subject matter of landscape; yet they are also known to have produced seemingly spontaneous paintings of more obvious Chan inspiration, which include representations of great patriarchs of the school as well as disarmingly simple depictions of fruits or flowers. Chan art is suggestive rather than literally representational, though it sometimes includes subjects such as the bodhisattva Guanyin (in a white robe) and meticulously drawn and coloured portraits of great masters and historical figures. Chinese painters of post-Song times often had contact with Chan thought, but there is little in their art that can be directly related to the experience.
The Chinese have not particularly revered Chan painting. Its often brilliant ink displays have, however, attracted the Japanese. In the Muromachi (1338–1573) period, Chan painting and the philosophy behind it began to have a pervasive influence, stimulating arts ranging from painting and architecture to flower arrangement, and from haiku poetry to the tea ceremony.
