Cuzco school,  the group of European and indigenous painters active in Cuzco, Peru, from the 16th through the 18th century. The term refers not to an easily identifiable style from a single period of history but instead to the artists of multiple ethnicities who worked in various styles throughout the history of the Viceroyalty of Peru in and around Cuzco. Situated high in the Andes, Cuzco had been the capital of the Inca empire and had become the headquarters for each of the religious orders in the viceroyalty. European artists began working in Cuzco shortly after Spanish colonization of the city in the 1530s. They introduced the styles they had learned in their native countries to indigenous artists who had traditionally painted ceramics and murals in a geometrically abstract style.
One of the first European painters in Cuzco, Juan Iñigo de Loyola, who arrived in 1545, trained indigenous artists in the style of Spanish Mannerism. Several of the most influential painters of the period, though, were Italian, including Bernardo Bitti, a Jesuit who spent several lengthy periods in Cuzco. Bitti, who had first visited Cuzco in 1583, often collaborated with fellow Jesuit Pedro de Vargas. Other Mannerist painters whose work shaped that of 16th- and 17th-century Cuzco were Mateo Pérez de Alesio and Angelino Medoro.
Despite the dominance of European styles, a number of Cuzco painters were of Inca origin, and their art often incorporated indigenous elements. Diego Quispe Tito, for example, worked in a unique style that incorporated elements of Italian Mannerism and Flemish painting with depictions of local landscapes full of decorative birds. Quispe Tito, born in 1611, worked in a small village outside Cuzco, where he developed his individual style, as is evident in a series of paintings of the life of St. John the Baptist made for the Church of San Sebastian in 1663.
An anonymous 17th-century indigenous painter made a series of paintings that document the procession of Corpus Christi in Cuzco (c. 1674–80). These paintings depict each of the local parishes headed by their native leaders in traditional Inca dress. The careful rendering of members of the procession and the audience captures the cultural diversity of 17th-century Cuzco.
Baroque painting never fully replaced Mannerism in 17th-century Cuzco. Among those artists who did engage the Baroque style was the late 17th-century indigenous painter Basilio de Santa Cruz Pumacallao. The Virgin of Belén, for example, reveals Santa Cruz’s use of dynamic composition and rich colouring.
The 18th century saw the rise of the “mestizo style.” Toward the end of the 17th century, indigenous artists had left Cuzco’s guild of painters and had begun working in independent workshops. There they incorporated to an even greater degree local stylistic elements and created a uniquely Cuzqueño style. Among the artists who worked in this style were Francisco de Moncada and Marcos Zapata. Religious themes continued to dominate, but the Inca past, and in particular, portraits of Inca kings, remained popular subject matter.
Throughout the history of the Cuzco school, mural painting flourished alongside easel painting as means of decorating the numerous churches constructed. Many of the mural painters were of Inca origin. The work of Tadeo Escalante stands out as an example of the mestizo style. His murals of the Church of Huaro (1802), including a depiction of Hell, utilize Baroque dynamism at the same time that they freely interpret space and perspective.
