Herāt school,   15th-century style of miniature painting that flourished in Herāt, western Afghanistan, under the patronage of the Timurids. Shāh Rokh, the son of the Islāmic conqueror Timur (Tamerlane), founded the school, but it was his son Baysunqur Mīrzā (died 1433) who developed it into an important centre of painting, bringing to his court artists from all over Persia and Afghanistan. The school grew in importance until 1507, when Herāt was sacked by the Uzbeks.
Although paintings were occasionally done on silk, illustrations for manuscripts, usually poems, were more common. The literature popular at the time, therefore, largely governed the subject matter of Herāt school paintings. Many scenes from the Persian epic Shāh-nāmeh (“Book of Kings”) by the poet Ferdowsī (died 1020) survive, as well as illustrations from the later works of Neẓāmī, Saʿdī, and Jāmī.
The Herāt style drew on numerous traditions, including the Tabriz and Shīrāz schools (qq.v.) of painting. The most important influence, however, was the concept of perspective (q.v.), introduced by the Mongols and developed by the Jalāyirid school from mid-14th century to around 1400. In the miniatures of the Herāt school, numerous figures, in groups or singly, are shown on various planes, one above the other, using the entire picture area. The juxtaposition of figures and elements of scenery one above the other produced the effect of one appearing to be behind the other.
The figures of the earlier Herāt school are stylized—tall and thin with oblong heads and pointed beards—but are painted in a variety of positions. Above all they are animated, always taking part in the action of whatever scene is represented. Artists of the Herāt school display a highly developed sense of composition combined with a fondness for descriptive detail. The colours, gay but not strident, are worked in subtle gradations. An illustration from Khwāju Kermānī’s Mas̄navī (1430–40; British Museum) shows a remarkable variety of blues and greens and demonstrates the delicately refined brushwork for which the Herāt school is famous.
The later school of Herāt was dominated by the figure of Behzād (q.v.), patronized by the ruler Ḥusayn Bayqarah (reigned 1469–1506). In a harmonious, imaginative, and dramatic style, Behzād painted individuals rather than characterizations. A 1489 copy of the poet Saʿdī’s Būstān (National Library, Cairo) contains illustrations that are outstanding among Behzād’s works. 
