Precisionism,  smooth, sharply defined painting style used by several American artists in representational canvases executed primarily during the 1920s. While Precisionism can be seen as a tendency present in American art since the colonial period, the style of 20th-century Precisionist painters had its origins in Cubism, Futurism, and Orphism. Unlike the artists affiliated with the latter movements, the Precisionists did not issue manifestos, and they were not a school or movement with a formal program. During the 1920s, however, many of them exhibited their works together, particularly at the Daniel Gallery in New York City. Among the artists associated with Precisionism were Charles Demuth, Charles Sheeler, Ralston Crawford, Preston Dickinson, Niles Spencer, and Georgia O’Keeffe.
Favourite subjects for these artists included skylines (both urban and rural), buildings and machinery, the industrial landscape of factories and smokestacks, and the country landscape of grain elevators and barns. Because the Precisionists used these motifs primarily to create formal designs, there is a certain amount of abstraction in their works. Precisionism is thus not an art of social criticism; when the Precisionist artist painted the city street, factory, or farm landscape, he was not making a comment on the environment depicted. Precisionism is a “cool” art, which keeps the viewer at a distance; the artist’s attitude seems to be one of complete detachment, which he achieves largely by smoothing out his brushstrokes, erasing, as it were, his personal handwriting. Moreover, the scenes are always devoid of people or signs of human activity. The light of a Precisionist painting is idealized—brilliant and sharply clear—as in Sheeler’s Upper Deck (1929). The forms chosen in these works are frequently geometric, either inherently, as in the cylinders of the cowls and motors of Upper Deck and the grain elevators of Demuth’s My Egypt (1927), or because the artist exaggerates these qualities through Cubist techniques.
The Precisionists’ style greatly influenced Pop artists. Demuth’s painting I Saw the Figure 5 in Gold (1928) was particularly influential, in both technique and imagery, on the works of proto-Pop artist Jasper Johns and Pop artist Robert Indiana.
