Pskov school,   school of late medieval Russian icon and mural painting that grew up in the Russian city of Pskov in the late 12th century and reached its highest development, especially in icon painting, in the 14th through the early 16th centuries. Pskov and the larger city of Novgorod both remained free of Mongol rule in the two centuries following the invasions of Russia in the mid-13th century and thus preserved and transformed the Byzantine artistic tradition that was the basis of Russian art. Pskov evolved a vital and highly accomplished school of its own.
The earliest evidence of an independent style at Pskov is the fresco decoration of the Mirozhsk monastery, executed by Greek and local painters in 1156. Although painted in a static, formal, archaic manner close in style to Byzantine prototypes, these frescoes show a particularly sombre and intense emotionalism that goes beyond even the typical Russian emphasis on emotional expression. In addition there are integral elements of the later, more developed Pskovian icon style: a classical monumentality, a skillful use of intense colour, and a strong rhythmic quality of composition, all of which distinguish it from Novgorod’s more prosaic, anecdotal art.
In the course of the 13th and early 14th centuries, especially after the introduction of the iconostasis—a screen standing before the sanctuary on which a large group of icons could be hung—icon painting assumed predominance over fresco. Pskov perfected an extremely forceful style of icon painting that to the end of its development combined a remarkably skillful expression with a somewhat archaic, even naive, manner of presentation. Pskov’s isolation from Greek influence is especially reflected in the persistent inclusion of local peasant types and decorative motifs from folk art. At the same time, the Pskov school adopted the conventions of small, elongated, graceful figures and delicate detail that by the 14th century had become characteristic of Russian art, subjecting these outward forms to an intensification of the peculiar local qualities already discernible in the early frescoes. The early monumentalism led to a simplified, explicitly rhythmic composition in large colour masses dominated by fiery orange-red and a deep “Pskovian” olive green. This composition, which was particularly suited to the dark church interiors of this far-northern city, exaggerated the generally contemplative character of Russian icon painting into a sombre, almost oppressive poignancy.
In 1510 Moscow, having conquered much of central Russia, annexed Pskov as part of the growing national state; thereafter the Pskov school gradually lost its independent significance. See also Novgorod school; Moscow school.
