Shīrāz school,   in Persian miniature painting, styles of a group of artists centered at Shīrāz, in southwestern Iran near the ancient city of Persepolis. The school, founded by the Mongol Il-Khans (1256–1353) in mid-14th century, was active through the beginning of the 16th century. It developed three distinct styles (examples of which are in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City).
An early painting, dated 1341, is a leaf from the Persian poet Ferdowsī’s epic Shāh-nāmeh (“Book of Kings”), depicting Prince Seyāvūsh in a polo match. The work displays as much emphasis on drawing as on painting, with colours washed in. The numerous figures, set on one level, are large and fill the picture plane. The painting represents little development past the early Mongol styles. The main asset of the early artists was their keen decorative sense in colour and design.
The school reached maturity in about 1410–20, under the Timurids (the dynasty of the Islāmic conqueror Timur, founded 1370). The paintings have a dreamlike and very personal quality. Fewer figures are represented, and they are elongated and stylized in pose and gesture. Faces are expressionless and remote. A system of perspective is introduced. Landscapes, which replace solid-colour backgrounds, are represented in fantastic shapes and colours, thus adding to the dream effect. Pale blues, pinks, grays, and white dominate. When the Shīrāz school was coming of age, however, it was overshadowed by the Herāt school (q.v.) at the seat of the Timurid court.
The third phase of the school began in mid-15th century when the Turkmen tribes took Shīrāz. The Turkmen rulers admired Persian culture and continued the patronage of the arts. Major changes in the Shīrāz style were a return to intense colouring, a heavy use of black, and an enrichment of landscapes. Figures became expressive but no more realistic. A leaf from Ibn Husām’s Khavaran-nāmeh, dated about 1480, reflects the new style. Although no longer as important as it had been under the Timurids, the Shīrāz school continued to be among the most interesting styles of Islāmic miniature painting through the first part of the 16th century.
