Suprematism, Russian suprematizm,  first movement of pure geometrical abstraction in painting, originated by Kazimir Malevich in Russia in about 1913. In his first Suprematist work, a pencil drawing of a black square on a white field, all the elements of objective representation that had characterized his earlier, Cubo-Futurist style—a distinctly Russian offshoot movement blending Cubism and Futurism—had been eliminated. Malevich explained that “the appropriate means of representation is always the one which gives fullest possible expression to feeling as such and which ignores the familiar appearance of objects.” Referring to his first Suprematist work (Black Square, 1915), he identified the black square with feeling and the white background with expressing “the void beyond this feeling.”
Although his early Suprematist compositions most likely date from 1913, they were not exhibited until 1915, the year he edited the Suprematist manifesto (Ot kubizma i futurizma k suprematizmu: Novy zhivopisny realizm, published 1916; in English “From Cubism and Futurism to Suprematism: New Painterly Realism”) with the assistance of several writers, most notably the poet Vladimir Mayakovsky. In those first Suprematist works—consisting of simple geometrical forms such as squares, circles, and crosses—Malevich limited his palette to black, white, red, green, and blue. By 1916–17 he was presenting more complex shapes (fragments of circles, tiny triangles); extending his colour range to include brown, pink, and mauve; increasing the complexity of spatial relationships; and introducing the illusion of the three-dimensional into his painting. His experiments culminated in the White on White paintings of 1917–18, in which colour was eliminated, and the faintly outlined square barely emerged from its background. At a one-man exhibition of his work in 1919 (“Tenth State Exhibition: Non-objective Creation and Suprematism”), Malevich announced the end of the Suprematist movement.
Suprematism had a few adherents among lesser-known artists, such as Ivan Klyun, Ivan Puni, and Olga Rozanova. While not affiliated with the movement, Russian painter Wassily Kandinsky showed the influence of Suprematism in the geometrization of his forms after 1920. This geometrical style, together with other abstract trends in Russian art, was transmitted by way of Kandinsky and the Russian artist El Lissitzky to Germany, particularly to the Bauhaus, in the early 1920s.
