The Raft of the Medusa,  painting (1819) by French Romantic artist Théodore Géricault depicting the survivors of a shipwreck adrift and starving on a raft. Géricault astonished viewers by painting, in harrowing detail, not an antique and noble subject but a recent gruesome incident.
The French Revolution greatly stimulated interest in the depiction of contemporary events, but, after the fall of Napoleon in 1815, few artists were disposed to depict such subjects. Géricault was something of an exception, but he was separated from his immediate predecessors both by temperament and by the sincerity of his approach. Individual suffering rather than collective drama is vividly portrayed in  The Raft of the Medusa. The large painting (13.75 × 23.5 feet [4.91 × 7.16 metres]) depicts the aftermath of the 1816 wreck of the French Royal Navy frigate the Medusa, which ran aground off the coast of Senegal. Because of a shortage of lifeboats, some 150 survivors embarked on a raft and were decimated by starvation during a 13-day ordeal, which descended into murder and cannibalism. Only a handful remained when they were rescued at sea.
The shipwreck had scandalous political implications in France—the incompetent captain, who had gained the position because of connections to the Bourbon Restoration government, fought to save himself and senior officers while leaving the lower ranks to die—and so Géricault’s picture of the raft and its inhabitants was greeted with hostility by the government. The work’s macabre realism, its treatment of the raft incident as epic-heroic tragedy, and the virtuosity of its drawing and tonalities combine to give the painting great dignity and carry it far beyond mere contemporary reportage. The portrayal of the dead and dying, developed within a dramatic, carefully constructed composition, addressed a contemporary subject with remarkable and unprecedented passion.
Géricault showed the work at the 1819 Salon, an annual exhibition of contemporary French art at the Louvre. It was awarded a gold medal, but many critics decried the grisly subject and repellant realism. Disappointed by the reception of The Raft of the Medusa, Géricault took the painting to England in 1820, where it was received as a sensational success. After the painter’s death in 1824, Louvre director the comte de Forbin purchased the work from Géricault’s heirs for the museum.
