Venetian school,   Renaissance art and artists, especially painters, of the city of Venice. Like rivals Florence and Rome, Venice enjoyed periods of importance and influence in the continuum of western European art, but in each period the outstanding Venetian characteristic has remained constant, a love of light and colour.
The founder of the dynasty of painters that was most important in Venice during the early Renaissance was Jacopo Bellini (c. 1400–70), a pupil of Gentile da Fabriano. Two of his sketchbooks are preserved, and there is reason to suspect that many of the compositions made famous by his sons Gentile (c. 1429–1507) and Giovanni (c. 1430–1516) and his son-in-law Andrea Mantegna (1431–1506) were derived from him. Gentile Bellini has the distinction of having been for a time (1479–81) painter to the court of Mehmed II in Constantinople, and he also visited Rome, where he filled a now-lost album with studies. Giovanni Bellini was the most important teacher of his generation and included among his pupils were Giorgione (1477–1510), Titian (1488/90–1576), Jacopo Vecchio (c. 1480–1528), and Sebastiano del Piombo (c. 1485–1547). In short, he instructed the painters of the High Renaissance in Venice. Giovanni Bellini, as well as being the foremost painter in the Republic, was one of the most inventive and original. He was receptive to the interest in landscape that was so integral a part of the contemporary Flemish works then arriving in Venice, and in his many Madonna paintings he used bits and pieces of the natural world to vary and embroider his theme. Bellini’s late style is pure High Renaissance. He managed to make a transition that few masters of his generation achieved. Although the circle around Bellini was the most successful and progressive, there were other painters such as Vittore Carpaccio (1460–1525/26), and painter families such as the Vivarini and, later, the Bassano who were not as closely allied to him yet were also an integral part of the Venetian school.
The early death of the mysterious Giorgione deprived the Venetian school of its most promising master. There are few paintings by him, and even some of those are thought to have been finished by Titian or Sebastiano del Piombo. His remaining works are filled with a hazy, brownish light that serves to enhance the romance of their moodiness.
Upon Giovanni Bellini’s death, Titian became painter to the Republic and the dominant force in Venetian painting for the next half century. His rich colours and painterly technique were widely imitated. Although interested in both religious and classical subjects, Titian was most sought after for his psychologically penetrating portraits. In 1533 he was knighted and made court painter to the emperor Charles V.
The last masters of this phase of the Venetian school—Jacopo Tintoretto (c. 1518–94) and Paolo Veronese (1528–88)—were strongly influenced by Titian. Tintoretto was most interested in Titian’s use of dramatic light and the depiction of heightened emotion. He made use of the rapidly receding diagonals and dramatic foreshortenings popular among Mannerist painters but brought to these elements the Venetians’ love of light as a means of defining form and heightening the sense of drama. Veronese is best known for the rich colour and inter-weaving compositions that he learned from Titian and used in large paintings crowded with figures.
The last period of significance for the Venetian school occurred in the 18th century, during which time several painters of quality arose who enjoyed international reputations: Canaletto (1697–1768), Giovanni Battista Tiepolo (1696–1770), and Francesco Guardi (1712–93). Tiepolo was the last important Venetian figure painter and one of the greatest decorative artists of the Rococo. Canaletto and Guardi developed a tradition of landscape painting based on views of Venice.
