John Frank Stevens,  (born April 25, 1853, near West Gardiner, Maine, U.S.—died June 2, 1943, Southern Pines, North Carolina), American civil engineer and railroad executive who, as chief engineer of the Panama Canal from late 1905 to April 1907, laid the basis for that project’s successful completion.
Stevens, who had only limited formal education, became an engineer through practical experience and independent study. His career in railroad construction began in 1875, and he advanced steadily. In 1895 he was appointed chief engineer of the Great Northern Railway; during his tenure the line was modernized and expanded by more than 1,000 miles (1,600 km). He went on to serve as chief engineer and later vice president of the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railway Company. In 1905 he was appointed chief engineer of the Isthmian Canal Commission and thus became responsible for both the engineering and construction of the Panama Canal.
At the time of Stevens’s appointment, the United States had made little progress over earlier French attempts, and the project seemed to lack direction. Cognizant of the technical reasons for the French failure, he upgraded and greatly expanded the network of railways serving the project. To bring order to the work, Stevens approached the job as if it were a massive railroad undertaking where large volumes of goods—in this case, earth—had to be moved on a tight schedule. His organizational and planning skills proved invaluable in getting the project moving. But, at the same time, the future of the project was threatened by outbreaks of yellow fever and malaria. Stevens halted construction work until both diseases were brought under control, and in 1906, after the Isthmus was made safe, work resumed with vigour. Stevens took a number of steps to make the Canal Zone livable for American workers. He improved the food supply and set about a massive project of building worker housing. Most important, he was instrumental in persuading President Theodore Roosevelt of the feasibility of a high-level canal using a combination of locks and a dammed lake. The sea-level canal favoured by a majority of the commission’s members would have required moving additional massive amounts of earth and rock, would have cost more, and would have taken longer to complete. Roosevelt’s resolution of this question in Stevens’s favour permitted work to proceed toward a specific goal.
Stevens appeared to grow frustrated by his strenuous and demanding post and resigned in April 1907; he never revealed his exact reasons, saying they were strictly personal. He was succeeded by George W. Goethals. Stevens subsequently served as an executive as well as an engineering consultant for several American railroads.
