Amish, also called Amish Mennonite,  member of a Christian group in North America, primarily the Old Order Amish Mennonite Church. The church originated in the late 17th century among followers of Jakob Ammann.
Jakob Ammann (c. 1644–c. 1730) was a Mennonite leader whose controversial teachings caused a schism among his coreligionists in Switzerland, Alsace, and southern Germany. Ammann insisted that any excommunicated Mennonite church member should be shunned socially and that anyone who lied should be excommunicated. Following Jesus’ example, he introduced foot washing into the worship service and taught that church members should dress in a uniform manner, that beards should not be trimmed, and that it was wrong to attend services in a state church. Although Ammann sought reconciliation with the Mennonites, he continued to insist that all who had been excommunicated should be avoided, and therefore his attempts at reconciliation failed. Amish communities sprang up in Switzerland, Alsace, Germany, Russia, and Holland, but emigration to North America in the 19th and 20th centuries and assimilation with Mennonite groups gradually eliminated the Amish in Europe.
The Amish began emigrating to North America early in the 18th century; they first settled in eastern Pennsylvania, where a large settlement remains. Schism and disruption occurred after 1850 because of tensions between the “new order” Amish, who accepted social change and technological innovation, and the “old order,” or traditional, Amish, who largely did not. During the next 50 years, about two-thirds of the Amish formed separate, small churches of their own or joined either the Mennonite Church or the General Conference Mennonite Church.
Most traditional Amish are members of the Old Order Amish Mennonite Church. In the early 21st century there were about 250,000 Amish living in more than 200 Old Order Amish settlements in the United States and Canada; the largest were located in Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Iowa, Illinois, and Kansas, and others were found in Wisconsin, Maine, Missouri, and Minnesota. Their settlements are divided into church districts, autonomous congregations of about 75 baptized members. If the district becomes much larger, it is again divided, because members meet in each other’s homes. There are no church buildings. Each district has a bishop, two to four preachers, and an elder; but there are no general conferences, mission groups, or cooperative agencies.
Humility, family, community, and separation from the world are the mainstays of the Amish. Everyday life and custom are governed by an unwritten code of behaviour called the Ordnung, and shunning (Meidung) remains an integral way in which the community deals with disobedient members. In formal religious doctrine, the Amish differ little from the Mennonites. Holy Communion is celebrated twice each year, and foot washing is practiced by both groups. Persons are baptized when they are admitted to formal membership in the church, about the age of 17 to 20 years. Religious services are conducted in High German, and Pennsylvania Dutch (see Pennsylvania German)—an admixture of High German, various German dialects, and English—is spoken at home and is common in daily discourse. The services are held on a rotating basis in family homes and barns. A large wagon, filled with benches for the service and dishes and food for the meal that follows, will often be pulled to the host’s property. In most Amish homes a special place is reserved alongside the Bible for the Martyr’s Mirror, a book chronicling Amish history and honouring the many Amish, Mennonite, and Anabaptist forebears who died for their faith. The Budget, established in 1890, is the national newspaper serving the many Amish and Mennonite communities; it is published in Sugarcreek, Ohio.
The Amish are best known for their plain clothing, most of it self-made, and nonconformist lifestyle. Men and boys wear broad-brimmed black hats, dark-coloured suits, straight-cut coats without lapels, broadfall pants, suspenders, solid-coloured shirts, and black socks and shoes. Their shirts may fasten with conventional buttons, but their coats and vests fasten with hooks and eyes. Men grow beards after they marry but are forbidden to have mustaches. Old Order Amish women and girls wear bonnets, long full dresses with capes over the shoulders, shawls, and black shoes and stockings; their capes and aprons are fastened with straight pins or snaps. Amish women never cut their hair, which is worn in a bun, and they are not allowed to wear jewelry of any kind. The Amish attire, which is essentially that of 17th-century European peasants, reflects their reluctance to change, their respect for tradition, and their interpretation of biblical strictures against conforming to the ways of the world (e.g., Romans 12:2).
The Old Order Amish shun personal home-based telephones but will occasionally use a communal one. They also eschew automobiles. They ride bicycles and drive horse-drawn buggies instead, though many of them will, on occasion and in emergencies, ride in cars, trains, and buses operated by others. Although the buggies are traditional boxlike vehicles, they are not always black, as commonly thought; some of them are white, gray, or even yellow, and many Amish and Mennonite groups can be distinguished by their chosen colour of buggy. The buggies may also be equipped with such modern conveniences as heaters, windshield wipers, and upholstered seats. The use of electricity, however, is strongly avoided, as it is a prime connection to the world that could lead to temptations and worldly amenities detrimental to the community and family life; occasional exceptions to this ban have involved Amish who must use electric flashers on their buggies in order to drive legally in their communities and certain farm equipment that could not be operated without a minimal amount of electricity and without which the community’s economic livelihood would be threatened; for example, certain milking equipment may be impossible to operate without some electricity, and electric fences may be deemed critical for keeping cattle. Bottle gas is often used to operate appliances, even barbecue grills, and gas-pressured lanterns and lamps might be used for indoor lighting. The New Order Amish permit the use of electricity, the owning of cars, and telephones in the home.
The Amish are considered excellent farmers, growing and storing the majority of their food and purchasing in stores only staples such as flour and sugar. The Old Order Amish refuse to use most modern farm machinery, preferring the sweat of their brow over the ease of modern conveniences. What modern machinery they do use will often be operated not by electricity but by an alternative power source. The Amish are famous for their barn raisings. These cooperative efforts often involve hundreds of men, as well as scores of women who feed the workers. These custom-made barns are a constant reminder of Amish tradition, community, industry, and craft. The hex signs that often adorn the barns—the round geometric emblems painted to ward off evil—are synonymous with the agricultural communities of the “Pennsylvania Dutch.”
The Amish typically accept the photographing of their way of life, but they forbid photos of themselves, believing such things are graven images in violation of the Second Commandment. For this same reason the dolls young Amish girls play with are traditionally faceless. Musical instruments are also forbidden by the Old Order Amish, as playing these, they believe, would be a “worldly” act contrary to the critical Gelassenheit: that spirit of humility, modesty, and informality that lies at the heart of the Amish way of life and which the Amish believe was exemplified by Jesus Christ; other Amish may play an instrument in private, such as the accordion or harmonica, but never in public. Singing, however, is important to Amish life, whether at work or at play, at home or in church. Selections from the Ausband (their hymnal) are commonly sung. Group singing is always in unison and never harmonized. Hymn singing is popular on Sunday evenings, especially among young Amish, and on these occasions a separate hymnal (with “faster tunes”), called the “thin book,” is used.
Amish quilts, meticulously stitched by groups of Amish girls and women, are popular with tourists and highly praised by collectors. The quilting bees are a form of socialization and relaxation for Amish women, and the group effort reflects the Amish virtues of community and cooperation. The quilts can be intricate in design with colourful patterns but may not contain representational images, which are considered fancy and prideful. The selling of quilts, handmade crafts such as hex signs, and their famous baked goods such as friendship bread and shoofly pie is a common source of income for Amish families. The Amish recipes of Elizabeth Coblenz (died 2002) were syndicated in hundreds of newspapers, and her cookbooks are internationally famous.
Amish children typically attend one-room schools run by the community, and they attend school only through the eighth grade; this eighth-grade limit in the United States was deemed acceptable by a 1972 Supreme Court ruling. Instruction is in English and concentrates on the basics of reading, writing, and math. Amish history and practical farming and homemaking skills are also taught. As in many of the separatist branches of Protestantism, convincing the children of believers to stay in the faith community can often be a challenge. If a young man joins a Mennonite church or other less exacting religion, the Amish will often say “he got his hair cut.” If a young person abandons the faith altogether, they say that person “went English.”
The quiet, reserved manner that the Amish try to maintain does not prevent them from partaking of common pastimes and games. Volleyball and softball are popular with many Amish families, but they are played strictly for enjoyment and not in a spirit of competition. Flower gardens, if kept simple, are also permissible. Once the daily chores are finished and the children’s schoolwork completed, Amish families will often read or sing together in the evenings, before going to bed early in preparation for their next day’s chores.
The Amish are not involved in state or national politics, and, as pacifists, they do not serve in the military. They also disavow social security and most types of insurance, often pooling their resources to help Amish families in need, but they will visit doctors, dentists, and opticians. As has often been said, the Amish are in the world but not really of it, as they try, in their simple and placid ways, to maintain the greatest possible separation from the rest of society.
