Bulgarian Orthodox Church,  one of the national churches of the Eastern Orthodox communion.
Christianity was introduced to Bulgaria in 864 by Khan (Tsar) Boris I with an archbishop appointed from Constantinople. In Macedonia, the city of Ohrid (now in North Macedonia) became an active mission centre. St. Clement of Ohrid, a disciple of the missionary saints Cyril and Methodius, trained a large number of Slavs for the ministry, thus preparing the ground for a national church. Although Boris’s son Symeon proclaimed his archbishop as patriarch, it was not until after Symeon’s death (927) that Constantinople recognized a Bulgarian patriarchate in the capital of Preslav (now Veliki Preslav). Under Basil II Bulgaroctonus, the church became an archbishopric, Greek in character, with its centre in Ohrid.
The Bulgarian patriarchate was revived in the city of Tŭrnovo (now Veliko Tŭrnovo) in 1235 by Tsar Ivan Asen II, but with the fall of Tŭrnovo to the Turks (1393), the last patriarch, Eftimi, was exiled and the patriarchate ceased to exist. For nearly five centuries Bulgaria was under Turkish domination, and the church was administered by the patriarch of Constantinople through a Greek clergy. The struggle for an independent Bulgarian church, begun late in the 18th century, culminated in the establishment in 1870 of a Bulgarian exarchate. But the ecumenical patriarch of Constantinople declared the newly formed church schismatic (1872) and did not recognize it until 1945; the patriarchate was revived in 1953.
In 1949 a unilateral state law on religious associations restricted church activities and submitted them to tight state control. The government also supported a “progressive” association of priests who opposed bishops. The political transition that occurred in eastern Europe in the 1990s as a result of the demise of the Soviet Union eased, but did not completely remove, the friction between the church and the government. The constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria guarantees freedom of religion yet also recognizes Orthodoxy as Bulgaria’s “historical religion.”
About 6.7 million Bulgarians, 85 percent of the population, are officially registered as belonging to the Bulgarian Orthodox Church. The church has 12 dioceses and more than 2,000 priests. A theological academy in Sofia and minor seminaries train candidates for the priesthood. The church publishes a weekly newspaper, Tsrkoven vestnik (“Church Herald”), and a monthly periodical, Dukhovna kultura (“Spiritual Culture”).
