Cassino, Latin Casinum,  town, Lazio (Latium) regione, central Italy. Cassino lies along the Rapido River at the foot of Monte (mount) Cassino, 87 miles (140 km) southeast of Rome. It originated as Casinum, a town of the ancient Volsci people on a site adjacent to the modern town, on the lower slopes of the mountain. Casinum passed under Roman control in 312 bc and thereafter prospered. It became a bishopric in the 5th century ad but suffered badly from successive barbarian incursions. In 529 St. Benedict of Nursia established the nucleus of his famous monastery on the summit of Monte Cassino. A remnant of the city below lingered on until it was abandoned by the remaining inhabitants about 866 for the present site, originally called Eulogomenopolis, later San Germano, and since 1871 Cassino. The settlement was strengthened in the 9th century by the building of the Rocca Ianula (fortress), where in 1139 Pope Innocent II was besieged and captured by Roger II of Sicily, and where in 1230 Pope Gregory IX made peace with the Holy Roman emperor Frederick II. It was sacked by French troops in 1799.
The Benedictine monastery, stormed by the Lombards in 589, the Saracens in 884, and the Normans in 1030 and temporarily deserted, was each time refounded on the original site. The parent house of Western monasticism, it was during the Middle Ages an outstanding centre of the arts and of learning. Paul the Deacon (c. 720–799) wrote his history of the Lombards there, founding a long tradition of historical scholarship; and the radical reconstruction of the abbey in the 11th century by the abbot Desiderius (later Pope Victor III) was a major event in the history of Italian architecture. In 1349 the buildings suffered from a severe earthquake, and the church and monastery were almost entirely rebuilt in the 16th and 17th centuries.
During World War II (1944) Cassino was a key point in the German winter defensive line (Garigliano-Sangro) blocking the Allied advance to Rome. At the beginning of January 1944 the U.S. 5th Army won a position facing Cassino across the Garigliano River. Heroic fighting by Allied troops met heroic German resistance in three savage battles. On February 15 the Allies bombed and demolished the Benedictine monastery, erroneously believing that the Germans had occupied and fortified it. Actually, the Germans were able to remove both the monks and the treasures of the abbey; and, after the bombardment ceased, they in fact occupied and fortified the ruins. A month later Allied aircraft dropped 1,400 tons of bombs on Cassino, leaving the town so heaped with rubble that tanks could not operate until bulldozers cleared paths for them. Finally in mid-May the Allies did break through German lines and, joined a few days later by forces bursting out of the Anzio beachhead, were able to take Rome. German and Allied war cemeteries, still visited by thousands annually, mark the scenes of the fighting.
After the war, both the town and the abbey were rebuilt on their previous sites, the town on a completely new plan, the abbey following substantially the lines of its predecessor. Little or nothing of the abbey’s decorative detail was recoverable, but the famous bronze doors, cast in Constantinople for the abbot Desiderius in 1066, were found and restored. The archives, library, and some paintings were saved. Of ancient Casinum the only monuments of note are the amphitheatre, the theatre, and the ruins of the Cappella del Crocifisso, a Roman mausoleum converted into a church in the 10th century. Of the medieval town little more than the site of the upper town, clustered around the ruins of Rocca Ianula, can be discerned.
An agricultural and commercial centre, Cassino manufactures toys. Pop. (2006 est.) mun., 32,603.
