Church of Finland, in full Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland, Finnish Suomen Evankelis-luterilainen-kirkko,  national church of Finland, which changed from the Roman Catholic to the Lutheran faith during the Protestant Reformation in the 16th century. Christianity was known in Finland as early as the 11th century, and in the 12th century Henry, bishop of Uppsala (Sweden), began organizing the church there. He suffered a martyr’s death and eventually became Finland’s patron saint. Through the influence of Sweden (which ruled in Finland from the 13th century until 1809), Finland gradually accepted Christianity.
When Lutheranism was adopted by Sweden, it was also introduced into Finland and was declared the official religion of the country in 1593. The outstanding Finnish reformer was Mikael Agricola, who had studied at Wittenberg, where Martin Luther was a professor. Consecrated the first Lutheran bishop of Turku (1554), Agricola published several religious works, including a Finnish translation of the New Testament (1548).
During the 17th century the Finnish church, like the German and other Scandinavian Lutheran churches, was influenced primarily by Lutheran orthodoxy. In the 18th century the dominating influence was Pietism, the movement that began in Germany and emphasized personal religious experience and reform. Three revival movements during the 19th century caused many Finns to develop a deeper commitment to the church. In the 20th century a larger percentage of the people took part in church activities than was common in other Scandinavian countries.
The Church of Finland is divided into nine dioceses, each headed by a bishop, with the archbishop of Turku as the presiding bishop of the church. The church general synod, which meets twice a year and is composed of both clergy and lay church members, is the church’s highest legislative body. There are facilities for theological education at the University of Helsinki and at the Swedish University in Turku.
The church’s relationship with the state was defined by a church law in 1869. The state gives financial support to the church, and the president of the republic and the Parliament must approve the church laws proposed by the church assembly. The former policy that bishops be appointed by the president of Finland from candidates proposed by the general synod was changed in 2000 to make the vote of the synod final.
Since 1922 a Finnish citizen can legally withdraw from the national church and belong to no church or to another church. However, more than 80 percent of Finns, or some 4.4 million people, are members of the Church of Finland.
