Dutch Reformed Church, Afrikaans Nederduitse Gereformeerde Kerk (NGK),  South African denomination that traces its beginnings to the Reformed tradition of the first white settlers who came to South Africa from the Netherlands in the mid-17th century. It is the main church of the Afrikaans-speaking whites, and its present membership covers a large percentage of the Republic of South Africa’s white population. Two smaller Reformed denominations are sometimes grouped as Dutch Reformed churches—namely, the more liberal Dutch Reformed Church (Nederduits Hervormde Kerk; NHK) and the more conservative Reformed Church of South Africa (Gereformeerde Kerk van Suid-Afrika). The NGK consists of all synods and is governed by a general synod that meets every four years. Headquarters are in Pretoria. The church claims nearly 1.3 million members in more than 1,200 congregations. It subscribes to the traditional Reformed doctrinal standards.
The turbulent history of the church is closely intertwined with that of the country. While its 1857 synod resolved it is “desirable and scriptural (that) wherever possible our members from among heathen be received and incorporated in our existing congregations,” subsequent resolutions led to the establishment of so-called daughter churches, notably the Dutch Reformed Church in Africa (also known as the Bantu Church) in 1859, the Dutch Reformed Mission Church (for Coloured, or racially mixed, persons) in 1881, and the Indian Reformed Church in Africa in 1947. The NGK until 1986 supported the government’s policy of apartheid (separate development for the races) and had commissioned several studies to develop theological justification for it. Their findings were rejected by Reformed churches in Europe and the United States, and the NGK was excluded from membership in the World Alliance of Reformed Churches (WARC) at Ottawa in August 1982. At the same time, the WARC pronounced apartheid to be a heresy in violation of the Scriptures. The NGK withdrew from the World Council of Churches in 1961 and severed relations with the Netherlands Reformed Church in the Netherlands in 1978. In 1986, however, the Dutch Reformed Church denounced its own former attempts at the biblical justification of apartheid, and in 1989 it condemned apartheid as a sin. In 1994 discussions concerning a merger began with the Reformed Church in Africa, the Dutch Reformed Church in Africa, and the Uniting Reformed Church in South Africa (Verenigende Gereformeerde Kerk in Suider-Afrika). While progress was also made in 2006, unification did not take place.
