Episcopal Church in Scotland,  independent church within the Anglican Communion that developed in Scotland out of the 16th-century Protestant Reformation.
The development of Protestantism in Scotland went through confusing periods, with control alternating between the Presbyterian Party (those who believed in the presbyterian form of church government) and the Episcopal Party (those who believed the church should be governed by bishops). After the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660, the two parties merged into a modified episcopacy, which might have united the church and nation if the two parties had not again separated after the accession of William and Mary (1689). Since the Episcopalians had taken an oath of allegiance to King James II, they felt that they could not in good conscience transfer their allegiance to William and Mary when James was deposed. Thus, Presbyterianism was established as the national religion (1690) of Scotland. The Episcopal Church in Scotland is the direct descendant of those churches that remained loyal to the episcopal tradition, and its bishops are the direct successors of those consecrated to Scottish sees after the Restoration.
In the 18th century the Episcopal Church in Scotland suffered because of involvement in the rebellions of 1715 and 1745 of the Jacobites (those who remained loyal to James II, the exiled Stuart king, and his heirs). Penal laws against the church almost eliminated it. Repeal of the laws in 1792 marked a turning point, and the church began to revive. It subsequently supported foreign missions, especially in South Africa and India, and social welfare work at home.
The Scottish Communion Office, based on the liturgy in the service book imposed on Scotland by Charles I in 1637, was prepared in 1764. In the 1920s a revision of the entire prayer book was begun, and the complete Scottish prayer book was produced in 1929. This was essentially a revision of the English Book of Common Prayer of 1662.
The church is divided into seven dioceses, each headed by a bishop. The seven bishops elect one of their number as primus (presiding bishop). Lay members take an active part in the church through the Representative Church Council, which handles financial matters, and through the General Synod, authorized in 1961 and presided over by the presiding bishop, which considers liturgical and canonical matters.
