Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA),  the largest Lutheran church in North America. The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America was formed in 1988 by the merger of two major Lutheran denominations, the American Lutheran Church and the Lutheran Church in America, along with the much smaller Association of Evangelical Lutheran Churches. The new church cut across ethnic lines and was designed to give Lutherans a more coherent voice in ecumenical discussions with other Christian churches in the United States.
The constituent churches that formed the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America had themselves a long history of growth, mergers, and consolidations. The Lutheran Church in America, for example, was created in 1962 by the merger of four Lutheran churches: the American Evangelical Lutheran Church, the Augustana Evangelical Lutheran Church, the Finnish Evangelical Lutheran Church (Suomi Synod; organized by Finnish immigrants in 1890), and the United Lutheran Church in America.
Lutheran immigrants to the United States in the 17th and 18th centuries organized congregations that combined in various synodical organizations. In 1820 several of them met to draw up a constitution for a confederation to be known as the General Synod. As Lutheranism expanded, additional synods were formed, and by 1860 the General Synod had a membership of about 164,000, or two-thirds of the Lutherans in the United States.
Cooperative efforts were limited, however, by polarized positions on slavery and the American Civil War, which caused the Southern synods to leave the General Synod and establish their own General Synod in 1863. Further disruption was caused by controversy over the Lutheran confessions. Some of the more conservative synods left the General Synod in 1866 and organized in 1867 the General Council, a federation of 11 synods that accepted the Unaltered Augsburg Confession.
Animosities among the three groups gradually subsided, and cooperative activities increased. In 1917 a joint committee of the three general synods, meeting to plan a 400th anniversary celebration of the Reformation, also took up the possibility of organizing a United Lutheran Church in America (ULCA). To this end, a constitution was prepared and accepted in 1918 by all three groups. The Augustana Synod left the General Council, however, and refused to enter the union.
From the time of its founding the ULCA worked for the union of all Lutheran groups in the United States and cooperated with other Lutherans and with ecumenical groups, such as the World Council of Churches. In 1962 it merged with the three other Lutheran groups to form the Lutheran Church in America.
The American Lutheran Church (ALC) also arose from various mergers. It was created in 1961 by the merger of three churches: the (original) American Lutheran Church, the Evangelical Lutheran Church, and the United Evangelical Lutheran Church. In 1963 the ALC was joined by the Lutheran Free Church (organized in 1897 by a group that left the United Norwegian Lutheran Church).
The original American Lutheran Church (1930–60) had been organized in Toledo, Ohio, by the merger of three Lutheran synods composed primarily of members of German descent. These were (1) the Evangelical Lutheran Joint Synod of Ohio and Other States, organized in 1818, (2) the Lutheran Synod of Buffalo, organized in 1845 in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, by German immigrants living primarily around Buffalo, New York, and Milwaukee, who began leaving Prussia in 1838 because they refused to take part in a union of Lutheran and Reformed churches ordered by the king of Prussia in 1817, and (3) the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Iowa and Other States, organized in 1854 in Iowa by Lutheran missionary pastors from Germany who wished to serve the German immigrants in the American Midwest.
The Evangelical Lutheran Church was organized in the United States in 1917 as the Norwegian Lutheran Church by the merger of three synods composed of members of Norwegian descent. The United Evangelical Lutheran Church originated in 1896 in Minneapolis, Minnesota, from the merger of two American churches whose members were largely of Danish descent.
After years of discussions with the United Lutheran Church in America and the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod, the American Lutheran Church merged with the Evangelical Lutheran Church and the United Evangelical Lutheran Church to form the American Lutheran Church.
The Association of Evangelical Lutheran Churches, the third of the churches that constitute the ELCA, arose from secession rather than from merger. In 1976 a group of ecumenical-minded church leaders formed a new denomination after breaking away from the conservative Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod.
The ELCA is a member of both the National Council of Churches and the World Council of Churches and participates in ecumenical endeavours. It has declared itself in full communion with the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), the Reformed Church in America, and the United Church of Christ since 1997; the Moravian Church and the Episcopal Church in the United States of America since 1999; and the United Methodist Church since 2009. Under these arrangements the ELCA and each of the churches with which it is in full communion recognize the authority of each other’s clergy and performance of the sacraments of baptism and holy communion, and members of each church are free to worship in the other.
Like other mainline U.S. churches in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, the ELCA has participated in discussion and debate regarding the issue of sexual orientation. Since the 1991 Churchwide Assembly (the general meeting of ELCA congregations), the ELCA has affirmed that homosexuals are “individuals created by God” who are welcome to participate in congregational life. Subsequent assemblies resolved that human sexuality is an issue that warrants study and theological reflection. The church has not drafted policy about the performance or blessing of same-sex unions. After rejecting a resolution in 2005 that would have allowed the ordination of homosexuals in noncelibate monogamous relationships, the Churchwide Assembly in 2009 voted to permit church members in “lifelong, monogamous, same-gender relationships” to join the clergy. In response, more than 200 congregations left the ELCA the following year. Former ELCA members were among the founders in 2010 of the new North American Lutheran Church (NALC), which claimed 18 founding congregations and quickly attracted others.
The ELCA has 65 synodical leaders known as bishops who are elected to six-year terms. In 2021 the church elected its first openly transgender bishop, Megan Rohrer, to serve its Sierra Pacific synod. Rohrer was the first transgender person to hold the role of bishop in any major American Christian denomination.
In the first decade of the 21st century the ELCA reported nearly five million members and more than 10,500 congregations. Headquarters are in Chicago.
In 1986 a sister organization, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada (ELCIC), was formed from the merger of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Canada and the Lutheran Church in America–Canada Section. In the first decade of the 21st century the ELCIC reported nearly 200,000 members and more than 600 congregations. Its headquarters are in Winnipeg, Manitoba.
