New Church, also called Swedenborgians,  church organized in the General Conference of the New Church, the General Convention of the New Jerusalem in the U.S.A., and the General Church of the New Jerusalem. Its members are followers of the theology of Emanuel Swedenborg, the 18th-century Swedish scientist, philosopher, and theologian. Swedenborg did not himself found a church, but he believed that his writings would be the basis of a “New Church,” which he related to the New Jerusalem mentioned in the biblical Book of Revelation.
Shortly after Swedenborg’s death, a group of his followers in England decided to establish a separate church. In 1788 the first building for New Church worship was opened in Great East Cheap, London, and was rapidly followed by others. In 1789 a conference met in the London church, and, except for 1794–1806 and 1809–14, the General Conference of the New Church has met annually.
Swedenborg’s writings on religion were introduced into the United States in the 1780s. The first society was organized in Baltimore in 1792, and the first American ministers were ordained in 1798. The General Convention of the New Jerusalem in the U.S.A. was founded in 1817 in Philadelphia. Differences of interpretation within the convention led to the formation in 1897 of a separate group, the General Church of the New Jerusalem.
Worship in the Swedenborgian churches is almost always liturgical. Preaching of the Scriptures is based on Swedenborg’s teaching that Scripture should be interpreted spiritually. Baptism and the Lord’s Supper are the two sacraments of the church. To the established Christian festivals is added New Church Day (June 19).
Church government in the three New Church groups varies. The British General Conference and the U.S. General Convention annually appoint a general council, which, with a ministerial council, is the controlling authority. The General Church is episcopal. Candidates for the ministry, apart from those trained in Africa for service there, normally pass through a full-time four-year course in one of the two U.S. colleges (in Cambridge, Mass., and Bryn Athyn, Pa.) or in Woodford Green, Essex, Eng., before being ordained.
The three groups have extensive mission operations, with emphasis on Africa. New Church societies, generally small, are found in many parts of the world. Australia has its own conference, closely allied to that in Britain. The New Church groups in continental Europe are nearly all assisted from the United States.
