Orthodox Church of Czechoslovakia,   autocephalous, or ecclesiastically independent, member of the Eastern Orthodox communion, created in 1951 by the patriarchate of Moscow.
There was no unified Orthodox organization in Czechoslovakia before World War II. In the 19th century some Czechs formed an Orthodox church and by 1910 numbered more than 1,000 persons. With the disintegration of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1918, an Orthodox church was formed in Bohemia and Moravia by the Serbian patriarch of Belgrade, who consecrated Bishop Gorazd of Prague as the first independent bishop of the Czechs and established the diocese of Mukačevo (1921) for the Carpatho-Russians. In 1930 an important group of Eastern rite Catholics of Carpatho-Russia, who had left the Orthodox Church in 1643, and the clergy and laity of the Czechoslovak church returned to Orthodoxy. All the work of the Czech church, however, was forcibly discontinued, and the church was disbanded during World War II, when Bishop Gorazd and four Orthodox clergy were executed by the Nazis for alleged connections with the resistance movement. Only the eparchy of Mukačevo continued in eastern Slovakia.
After World War II, eastern Carpatho-Russia, with Mukačevo, was annexed by the Soviet Union, and the Serbian patriarch released his own faithful to the Russian church. At the same time, about 10,000 Czechs of Orthodox faith returned to Czechoslovakia after having emigrated under the Austrian monarchy to Volhynia (northwestern Ukraine). After the 1950 Prešov conference, another substantial group of Eastern-rite Catholic laymen and clergy decided to return to the Orthodox Church. The church grew sufficiently to make possible the establishment of four indigenous bishoprics: Prague, Olomouc, Prešov, and Michalovce. Thereupon, the Russian Orthodox Church immediately acknowledged the autocephalous status of the Orthodox Church of Czechoslovakia.
During the liberalization of the Communist regime under the government of Alexander Dubček in 1968, an identification between Orthodoxy and Russian influence in Czechoslovakia caused a large number of former Eastern rite Catholics to return to the Roman communion, and the Greek Catholic Church came into official existence again, reducing the membership and the prestige of the Orthodox Church. 
