Presbyterian Church in Ireland,   church organized in 1840 by merger of the Secession Church and the Synod of Ulster. In 1854 the Synod of Munster merged into the church.
Presbyterianism in Ireland, except for scattered Puritan groups, began with the plantation of Ulster by King James I in 1610. He hoped to provide a strong Protestant population in Ireland that would support his policies. He therefore provided land that had belonged to the Irish for Scottish and English settlers. Thousands of Scots responded to the offer of land, but their situation in Ireland was often difficult. They were resented by the Irish Catholics, and the English government’s policies toward them were inconsistent. At first the Scottish Presbyterians in Ireland were considered part of the established Church of Ireland (Anglican), but changes in policy under King Charles I (reigned 1625–49) forced them out of the established church, and they eventually formed their own organizations. A rebellion against the English by Irish Catholics occurred in 1641, and thousands of Protestants in Ireland were killed. Partial toleration was granted to the Presbyterians in Ireland by the English government under King William III (reigned 1689–1702), but, until 1869, when complete religious toleration was granted, their harsh situation led hundreds of thousands of the Scots-Irish to migrate to North America.
Controversies among Presbyterians in Scotland usually had their counterparts in Ulster. Seceders appeared in 1741 and organized in 1750; Reformed Presbyterians came in 1752 and organized in 1792. The Synod of Ulster was the main Presbyterian body, but it did not include the Presbyterians in Dublin and south and west Ireland, which formed the Synod of Munster. All of these groups, except the Reformed Presbyterians, who continued as a small church, eventually united in the Presbyterian Church in Ireland.
Severe doctrinal controversies occurred among Irish Presbyterians in the 18th and 19th centuries, and during each of them a group that became Unitarian left the church. As a result, the Irish Presbyterians became very conservative in theology. By mid-20th century, however, the Presbyterian Church in Ireland was restudying some of its strict attitudes and was showing interest in national and international problems.
The partition of Ireland in 1921 into Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland did not cause the church serious difficulties since most of its members were in Northern Ireland.
