Reformed Church in America,  church that developed from the Dutch settlements in New Netherlands (New York) in the 17th century. The Dutch Reformed Church was the first Reformed church of continental European background in North America. During the period of Dutch sovereignty over New Netherlands, it was the established church of the colony. When the English seized the colony in 1664, they gave assurances that the Dutch Reformed Church would be allowed freedom from English control and that it would be permitted to continue under the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the classis (church governing body) of Amsterdam. Under this control the church grew slowly. In 1679 the classis of Amsterdam allowed a colonial classis to form, but with restricted powers.
Early in the 18th century new movements influenced the church: colonial self-consciousness, declining interest in things Dutch, the Great Awakening religious revival, and increasing interest in cooperating with other churches, especially the Presbyterians. The Dutch Church split into two factions. One, a colonial party, desired greater freedom from the classis of Amsterdam, free use of the English language in worship, a local college for the training of ministers, and support of revivals in the churches. The conservative Dutch party, however, wished to retain Dutch authority and influence, including pastors trained in the Netherlands and the use of the Dutch language in worship services. The colonial party soon predominated. In 1766 it founded Queen’s College, later Rutgers University, at New Brunswick, N.J. The two factions reunited in 1771 under a plan that left ultimate authority in Holland but gave great local autonomy. After the American Revolution, the church became wholly independent under a new constitution (drafted 1784–92). The name Reformed Protestant Dutch Church was changed in 1867 to Reformed Church in America.
A large migration of Dutch people to the United States in the mid-19th century increased church membership. Most of the immigrants settled in Michigan and other Midwestern areas, and the church therefore had two integrally related though rather distinct groups, centred in New York and New Jersey and in the Midwest. The older, eastern section of the church, more removed from its ethnic origins, was much less conservative than the newer, Midwestern section.
The standards of faith are the Heidelberg Confession, the Belgic Confession, and the Canons of Dort. Several attempts at union between the Reformed Church in America and other Reformed or Presbyterian groups in the United States were made between the early-19th and the mid-20th century. None has been successful. The national offices are in New York. Membership in 2005 was estimated at almost 270,000 in nearly 900 congregations.
