Romanian Orthodox Church,  the largest autocephalous, or ecclesiastically independent, Eastern Orthodox church in the Balkans today. It is the church to which the majority of Romanians belong, and in the late 20th century it had a membership of more than 16 million.
Christianity first reached Dacia (roughly coextensive with modern Romania) under the Roman Empire at least as early as the 4th century ad. By the late 9th century, the Vlachs (i.e., ethnic Romanians) appear to have accepted a Slavonic liturgy and Bulgarian ecclesiastical jurisdiction. The first ecclesiastical metropolitanates for the Romanian provinces were not created until the 14th century, however, and Church Slavonic remained the liturgical language until the 17th century, when Romanian began to replace it. The translation of Scripture and liturgical texts into Romanian was not completed until the 19th century.
The Romanian Orthodox Church helped to keep alive a sense of national identity both under Ottoman Turkish rule and, in Transylvania, under Hungarian rule. In Transylvania the church was accorded no recognition in the post-Reformation settlement, and consequently, by an act of union in 1698, a large proportion of the Romanian Orthodox clergy and laity in Transylvania accepted papal jurisdiction, becoming Eastern-rite Roman Catholics. They were reaccepted into the Romanian Orthodox Church in 1950 after their church had been suppressed [1948] by the communist government.
The Romanian Orthodox Church proper, in the meantime, became an important factor in the eventual emancipation of ethnic Romanians in Transylvania and in the integration of the greater Romania that came into being after 1918. An outstanding figure was the first metropolitan of Transylvania, Andreiu Saguna, who in 1868 authored a constitution that would influence the development of the entire Romanian church after 1918.
The present Romanian patriarchate was created in 1925, uniting the Romanian Orthodox population of the former Austro-Hungarian Empire with the autocephalous Romanian church established in Moldavia and Walachia in 1865 and recognized by the ecumenical patriarchate of Constantinople (now Istanbul) in 1885. The liturgical language of the modern Romanian church is Romanian. The church is divided into 14 dioceses.
After World War II, the communist regime in Romania never formally separated church and state, and it allowed the church to maintain two theological faculties, in Bucharest and in Sibiu, as well as six seminaries. There were also many active monasteries and several ecclesiastical and theological publications. In spite of these advantages, the church was tightly controlled by the state, and the remarkable revival of monastic life that occurred in communist Romania was severely limited by the government after 1958.
In the 1990s, after the fall of Romania’s communist dictatorship,  churches and seminaries reopened. Church leaders proposed building a new cathedral in Bucharest, and the Romanian government built new churches in ethnically Hungarian areas of Romania, provoking criticism. The number of members is estimated at nearly 19 million.
