Ruthenian Catholic Church, also called Carpatho-Rusyn Catholic Church or Ruthenian Church,  an Eastern Catholic Christian church of the Byzantine rite, in communion with the Roman Catholic Church since the Union of Uzhhorod (or Uzhgorod) in 1646.
Eastern Catholic churches generally have been associated with a national or ethnic group, preserving patterns of church organization, liturgy, and language as their traditions developed separately from those of Western Christian churches. In the early 14th century the Ruthenians, or Rusyns, an Eastern Slavic people, settled on the southern side of the Carpathian Mountains in territory that extended from present-day Ukraine to present-day Slovakia. Although they belonged to Eastern Orthodox churches, most of them were under Catholic-Hungarian rule. Under the Union of Uzhhorod, 63 Orthodox Ruthenian priests representing many Ruthenians under Catholic rule accepted the authority of Rome and became Catholic, though they were allowed to maintain their liturgical language (Old Church Slavonic) and traditions. A diocese was established in Mukacheve (residence in Uzhhorod) in 1651 and another in Prešov in 1818.
A considerable number of Ruthenians immigrated in the 19th and early 20th centuries to the United States, especially to Pennsylvania, where the church still has a small presence, including its American headquarters and seminary. After World War I many European Ruthenians who had been absorbed by the new state of Czechoslovakia adopted Russian Eastern Orthodoxy, with which they felt a greater ethnic affinity. The Ruthenian parishes that remained in Hungarian territory after Hungary and Austria were separated were brought under an apostolic exarchate (self-governing ecclesiastical jurisdiction) of the Hungarian Catholic Church; in the 1940s the parishes were put under the authority of the bishop of Hajdúdorog, and parishioners began using Hungarian instead of Slavonic.
In 1949 the Soviet Union seized the territory of Subcarpathian Ruthenia from Hungary and suppressed the diocese of Mukacheve. The diocese of Prešov, which shared territory with the Slovak Catholic Church, was integrated into the Russian Orthodox Church in the same year. Soviet authorities also forcibly assimilated many Ruthenian Catholics outside Prešov into the Russian Orthodox Church or the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, depending upon where in the territory they lived. After the fall of communism in Czechoslovakia in 1989 and that country’s division into two independent states—the Czech Republic and Slovakia—in 1993, Ruthenian Catholics in the Czech Republic began pushing for separate recognition of their church, and in 1996 Pope John Paul II formed an apostolic exarchate in the Czech Republic.
In the first decade of the 21st century, the Ruthenian Catholic Church comprised three separate ecclesiastical jurisdictions—the Czech Republic, the United States, and Ukraine—with varying degrees of autonomy.  In the United States the Ruthenian Catholic Church is represented by the Metropolia of Pittsburgh, a self-governing church since 1969 under the metropolitan archbishop of Pittsburgh. The eparchy of Mukacheve oversees Ruthenian Catholics in Ukraine and is under the direct authority of Rome. In the first decade of the 21st century, there were more than 500,000 members in those three countries.
