United Methodist Church,  in the United States, a major Protestant church formed in 1968 in Dallas, Texas, by the union of the Methodist Church and the Evangelical United Brethren Church. It developed from the British Methodist revival movement led by John Wesley that was taken to the American colonies in the 1760s. In 2018 the church’s global membership exceeded 12.5 million people. See alsoMethodism.
The autonomous Methodist Episcopal Church was organized in 1784 in Baltimore, Maryland, with Thomas Coke and Francis Asbury as superintendents (later called bishops). The church grew rapidly, but various schisms developed. In 1830 a dissenting group organized the Methodist Protestant Church, a nonepiscopal church. The slavery question caused a larger disruption, and in 1845 in Louisville, Kentucky, southern Methodists organized the Methodist Episcopal Church, South.
Movements toward reunion of the Methodists began in the 1870s but advanced slowly. In 1939 the Methodist Church was organized by union of the Methodist Episcopal Church; the Methodist Episcopal Church, South; and the Methodist Protestant Church. The merger in 1968 that formed the United Methodist Church brought together the Methodist Church, primarily of British background, and the Evangelical United Brethren Church, primarily of German background but very similar to the Methodists.
Women were given limited clergy rights in 1924 and were accepted for full ordination in 1956. In 1980 the United Methodist Church elected its first woman bishop, and it has elected more since.
In 2019, at a special session of the General Conference, leaders voted to affirm the traditional stance against homosexuality, and a proposal to allow individual churches autonomy in decisions regarding gay clergy and same-sex marriage was voted down. As a result of the significant division within the denomination following this vote, in early 2020 church leaders proposed splitting the church to resolve the debate.
The church is episcopally governed; the bishops are elected by the Jurisdictional Conferences, which, like the General Conference, meet every four years. Each episcopal area has an Annual Conference and District Conferences, each with its superintendent. The episcopal areas are combined into five jurisdictions that cover the country.
Formerly, ministers were ordained first as a deacon, then as an elder. Since 1996, when the transitional diaconate was abolished, ministers have been ordained as either a deacon or an elder. Both are permanent clergy orders that are distinct in character but equal in authority.
