United Evangelical Lutheran Church of Germany, German Vereinigte Evangelisch-Lutherische Kirche Deutschlands (VELKD),  union of 10 Lutheran territorial churches in Germany, organized in 1948 at Eisenach, E.Ger. The territorial churches were those of Bavaria, Brunswick, Hamburg, Hanover, Mecklenburg, Saxony, Schaumburg-Lippe, Schleswig-Holstein, and Thüringia. The territorial churches of Württemberg and Oldenburg did not join. The Lutheran territorial church of Lübeck joined the united church in 1949, and then in 1967 Eutin joined. Also in 1967 Mecklenburg, Saxony, and Thüringia withdrew from the union and formed the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in the German Democratic Republic (East Germany). 
The Lutheran, Reformed, and United, or Union (a combination of Lutheran and Reformed), territorial churches in Germany had developed out of the changes in church life and organization and the various religious and political settlements brought about by the 16th-century Protestant Reformation. Until 1918 the prince of each German territory was the head of the church in his territory, which was either Lutheran, Reformed, or United. After the defeat of Germany in World War I, the German Empire was replaced by the German Republic, and the churches were no longer state churches headed by princes. They reorganized themselves into self-governing churches, but they remained independent territorial churches. Attempts to attain closer union were made, and during the Nazi era (1933–45) the churches cooperated in various ways to resist the German government’s efforts to gain control over them. After World War II ended, the Lutheran churches were able to complete their long-sought union by forming the VELKD.
Although the member territorial churches retained considerable autonomy, the VELKD considers itself a united church rather than a federation of churches. Each of the member churches is headed by a bishop, and all the bishops are members of the bishops’ council of the VELKD. A presiding bishop is elected to head the united church. In addition, a general synod, which meets annually, an executive committee, and an administrative office make up the church government.
The VELKD cooperates with the Evangelical Church in Germany (Evangelische Kirche in Deutschland; EKD), which is a federation of Lutheran, Reformed, and United territorial churches organized in 1948. It is also a member of the Lutheran World Federation and of the World Council of Churches.
