Beijing, Wade-Giles romanization Pei-ching, conventional Peking,  city, province-level shi (municipality), and capital of the People’s Republic of China. Few cities in the world have served for so long as the political headquarters and cultural centre of an area as immense as China. The city has been an integral part of China’s history over the past eight centuries, and nearly every major building of any age in Beijing has at least some national historical significance. The importance of Beijing thus makes it impossible to understand China without a knowledge of this city.
More than 2,000 years ago, a site north of present-day Beijing was already an important military and trading centre for the northeastern frontier of China. In 1267, during the Yuan (Mongol) dynasty (1206–1368), a new city built northeast of the old—called Dadu—became the administrative capital of China. During the first five decades of the subsequent Ming dynasty (1368–1644), Nanjing (Nanking) was the capital, and the old Mongol capital was renamed Beiping (Pei-p’ing; “Northern Peace”); the third Ming emperor, however, restored it as the imperial seat of the dynasty and gave it a new name, Beijing (“Northern Capital”). Beijing has remained the capital of China except for a brief period (1928–49) when the Nationalist government again made Nanjing the capital (although the capital was removed to Chongqing [Chungking] during World War II); during that time Beijing once again resumed the old name Beiping.
The city remained the most flourishing cultural centre in China despite the frequent political changes in the country throughout the early decades of the 20th century; Beijing’s importance was fully realized, however, only when the city was chosen as the capital of the People’s Republic in 1949, and this political status has added much vitality to it. Indeed, few cities have ever had such rapid growth in population and geographic area, as well as in industrial and other activities. Combining both historical relics of an ancient culture and new urban construction, ranging from fast-food franchises to plush hotels for foreign tourists and corporate travelers, it has become a showplace of modern China and one of the world’s great cities. Renewed international attention focused on Beijing after it was chosen to host the 2008 Summer Olympic Games. Area city, 1,763 square miles (4,567 square km); Beijing municipality, 6,500 square miles (16,800 square km). Pop. (2006 est.) city, 8,580,376; (2009 est.) urban agglom., 12,214,000; (2010) Beijing municipality, 19,612,368.
Although much of Beijing’s older and more picturesque character has been destroyed in the drive since 1949 to modernize and industrialize, some parts of the city are still redolent of the past. Many fine monumental buildings, old restaurants, and centres of traditional Chinese arts and crafts remain, and the central government has taken measures to prevent the city core from being further industrialized. Broad new boulevards, replete with even newer commercial ventures, have displaced the colourful stalls and markets for which the city was once famous, but the neighbourhood life of old Beijing can still be glimpsed in the narrow hutongs (residential alleys), with their tiny potted-plant gardens, enclosed courtyards, and (decreasingly) coal-burning stoves—some of which are still guarded by carved stone lions at their gates.
People in Beijing commute by subway, bus, automobile, or bicycle and on hot summer evenings sit outside their apartment blocks to catch cooling breezes and to chat. The citizenry has a wide range of leisure pursuits, particularly those considered good for health. The ancient art of tai chi chuan (taijuquan; Chinese boxing) is widely practiced, singly or in groups, along roadsides and in parks. Locals as well as tourists are attracted to the many nearby historical sites, such as the Summer Palace, the tombs of the Ming emperors, and the Great Wall. Older people, especially the men, like to huddle in tiny restaurants and tea shops. Young people are drawn to the city’s many cafés and nightclubs, where the entertainment can range from DJ-run dance music to Chinese rock bands.
For all the vicissitudes of its history, Beijing continues to be a source of great pride for its inhabitants. Their obsessions are, as they have been for centuries, food and knowledge: they eat heartily when they have the means and read voraciously. Food stalls on the streets, selling a variety of cooked treats, are well patronized, as are newspaper and magazine kiosks. The ambition of most families is to provide their offspring with a higher education or, if not that, a good job.
