Buenos Aires,  city and capital of Argentina. The city is coextensive with the Federal District (Distrito Federal) and is situated on the shore of the Río de la Plata, 150 miles (240 km) from the Atlantic Ocean. Buenos Aires is one of Latin America’s most important ports and most populous cities, as well as the national centre of commerce, industry, politics, culture, and technology. According to tradition, Spanish colonizer Pedro de Mendoza established the first settlement there, which he named Nuestra Señora Santa María del Buen Aire (“Our Lady St. Mary of the Good Air”). Buenos Aires locals are referred to as porteños (“people of the port”) because so many of the city’s inhabitants historically arrived by boat from Europe. Area city, 78 square miles (203 square km); Greater Buenos Aires, 1,500 square miles (3,885 square km). Pop. (2001) city, 2,776,138; Greater Buenos Aires, 12,046,799; (2010) city, 2,890,151; (2019 est.) Greater Buenos Aires, 15,172,700.
The Argentine poet and philosopher Ezequiel Martínez Estrada (1895–1964) called Buenos Aires “The Head of Goliath,” a metaphor that likened the imbalance of the city’s relation with the rest of the country to that of a large-headed giant with a feeble body. The city’s wealth and influence overshadow the life of the rest of the country, but Buenos Aires also presents Argentina with its severest economic and social problems. This dichotomy has made Buenos Aires a centre for political and social unrest.
This grandiose city with wide avenues and a vibrant cosmopolitan flair is more generally European than Latin American in character. Having little colonial architecture and few landmark buildings, Buenos Aires is chiefly a city of distinctive neighbourhoods that have their own meeting places, generally coffeehouses or bars. This is a tradition rooted in the colonial period, when the centre of each neighbourhood was a general store and bar known as a pulpería. These neighbourhoods provide a sense of community for people who live in an urban sprawl that by the early 21st century was growing twice as fast as the country as a whole.
The energy and bustle of modern Buenos Aires is most evident in the city centre—the locus of entertainment, shopping, and café-going. Porteños relish politics, football (soccer), and the city’s cultural offerings. At night Buenos Aires’s boites (nightclubs) swell with revellers dancing the tango, the emotional dance that originated in the lower-class areas of the city and that is said to reflect the essence of the soul of the porteño.
The city of Buenos Aires is located at the northeastern edge of the flat plain known as the Pampas, which occupies the agricultural heartland of Argentina. It is situated at the point where the Paraná River delta widens to become the Río de la Plata estuary. The eastern and northern limits of the metropolitan area are defined by the Río de la Plata, and the city’s most prominent physical characteristics are the numerous small rivers that flow through its periphery. The centre of the city lies on a bluff overlooking the Río de la Plata, and to the south flows a small river, the Riachuelo, the banks of which mark the other higher ground in the city. The rest of the city is laid out on the floodplains of the rivers, virtually without significant elevations.
