Cologne, German Köln,  fourth largest city in Germany and largest city of the Land (state) of North Rhine–Westphalia. One of the key inland ports of Europe, it is the historic, cultural, and economic capital of the Rhineland.
Cologne’s commercial importance grew out of its position at the point where the huge traffic artery of the Rhine (German: Rhein) River intersected one of the major land routes for trade between western and eastern Europe. In the Middle Ages it also became an ecclesiastical centre of significance and an important centre of art and learning. This rich and varied heritage is still much in evidence in present-day Cologne, despite the almost complete destruction of the Inner City (Innenstadt) during World War II. Cologne is the seat of a university and the see of a Roman Catholic archbishop. Its cathedral, the largest Gothic church in northern Europe, was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1996; it is the city’s major landmark and unofficial symbol. Area city, 156 square miles (405 square km). Pop. (2006 est.) 989,766.
Cologne is situated about 21 miles (34 km) northwest of Bonn and 25 miles (40 km) southeast of Düsseldorf. It lies 210 feet (65 metres) above sea level, just below where the Rhine enters the fertile North German Plain. The river at this point is navigable to seagoing vessels. The immediate surroundings of Cologne are varied. The picturesque hills of the Bergisches Land lie to the east, while on the west is another group of hills forming a chain called the Ville. The North German Plain stretches away to the north and northwest, and the Rhine Valley winds to the southeast toward Bonn.
The greatest distance across the city from west to east is about 17 miles (27 km) and from north to south about the same. There are 85 districts, divided into nine Bezirke (city areas). Most of the city lies on the left (west) bank of the river, but it also incorporates a cluster of suburbs on the right bank, some of which were annexed in 1975. The climate of the region is temperate but humid. Average temperatures in the Cologne area are 36 °F (2 °C) in January and 64 °F (18 °C) in July.
The semicircular shape of the Inner City was originally determined by a defensive wall, 4 miles (6 km) long, that was completed in about 1200. The wall enclosed several formerly separate parishes and afforded protection for some 35,000 to 40,000 people. (At that time Cologne was bigger than Paris.) The flat side of the semicircle was formed by the Rhine. In the 1880s the medieval fortifications were demolished and replaced by a chain of ring roads, called the Ringstrassen.
Although Cologne has spread far beyond the confines of the Ringstrassen, its focal point is still within this area, the Inner City. There are found the main shopping and business streets—such as the Hohe Strasse (north-south) and Schildergasse (west-east), both of which have been closed to motor vehicles—as well as the city’s historic buildings. Several bridges span the river at Cologne; five of them were rebuilt after World War II, and the rest were postwar additions.
A large proportion of Cologne’s area consists of parkland, woods, lakes, sports facilities, and open areas. Two major park systems follow roughly the concentric patterns of old fortifications around the Innenstadt. The first is just outside the Ringstrassen and includes (from north to south) zoological and botanical gardens, the Stadtgarten, and the Volksgarten. The second, the Outer Greenbelt, is a wooded area that stretches for miles around the western and southern edge of the city and contains extensive recreation grounds and the Müngersdorfer Stadium. On the right bank of the river is the Rhine Park, a large green area adjacent to the KölnMesse, a convention centre with halls for fairs and exhibitions. Also located on the right bank is a covered multiuse arena offering space for sporting events and musical concerts.
