Havana, Spanish La Habana,  city, capital, major port, and leading commercial centre of Cuba. It also constitutes one of Cuba’s 15 provinces: Ciudad de la Habana (City of Havana).
The city is located on La Habana (Havana) Bay on the island’s north coast. It is the largest city in the Caribbean region and has one of the great treasuries of historic colonial preserves in the Western Hemisphere. Prior to 1959, when Fidel Castro came to power, it was a mecca for tourists from the United States, who were drawn by the city’s many attractions, which included climate and nightlife in addition to history. During the following years, however, despite its continued importance as the island’s major economic hub, Havana lost much of its lustre, because Castro’s socialist government redirected the country’s resources primarily toward the improvement of conditions in rural Cuba. Havana thus deteriorated, even though rehabilitation projects began in the 1980s. The city’s Old Havana (La Habana Vieja) district and its fortifications were designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1982. Area city (province), 281 square miles (728 square km). Pop. (2002) Old Havana, 96,753; city (province), 2,201,610; (2011 est.) Old Havana, 91,066; city (province), 2,154,454.
Havana’s location along a magnificent deep-sea bay with a sheltered harbour made the city a prime location for economic development from Spanish colonial times in the early 16th century. Cuba is endowed with a number of such harbours, but Havana’s on the north coast was prized above the others by the early Spanish colonizers. With land on both sides of the harbour, the port was easily defended. The early colonists erected a number of fortifications in the area that withstood most invaders. In colonial times Havana was the first landfall for Spanish fleets coming to the New World, and it became a staging area, first, for the conquest of the Americas by Spanish conquistadores and, later, for the economic and political domination of the hemisphere by Spain. The city early became a cosmopolitan centre with sprawling fortifications, cobblestone plazas, and buildings with ornamental facades and ornate iron balconies. Today’s Havana mixes these structures with a variety of conventional modern buildings.
Havana’s rich cultural milieu included not only Spaniards from diverse regions of the Iberian Peninsula but other European peoples as well. The small native Indian population of Cuba was not a significant factor in the Havana area and, in any case, was largely decimated in its early contact with the Spanish. The colonial years brought a large influx of Black slaves from Africa who, after the end of slavery in the late 19th century, began flocking to Havana. Today’s Havana is a mix of white Spanish stock, Black ethnic groups, and significant mulatto strains.
The city extends mostly westward and southward from the bay, which is entered through a narrow inlet and which divides into three main harbours: Marimelena, Guasabacoa, and Atarés. The sluggish Almendares River traverses the city from south to north, entering the Straits of Florida a few miles west of the bay.
The low hills on which the city lies rise gently from the deep blue waters of the straits. A noteworthy elevation is the 200-foot- (60-metre-) high limestone ridge that slopes up from the east and culminates in the heights of La Cabaña and El Morro, the sites of colonial fortifications overlooking the bay. Another notable rise is the hill to the west that is occupied by the University of Havana and the Prince’s Castle.
Havana, like much of Cuba, enjoys a pleasant year-round climate that is tempered by the island’s position in the belt of the trade winds and by the warm offshore currents. Average temperatures range from 72 °F (22 °C) in January and February to 82 °F (28 °C) in August. The temperature seldom drops below 50 °F (10 °C). Rainfall is heaviest in October and lightest from February through April, averaging 46 inches (1,167 mm) annually. Hurricanes occasionally strike the island, but they ordinarily hit the south coast, and damage in Havana is normally less than elsewhere in the country.
Walls as well as forts were built to protect the old city, but by the 19th century Havana had already grown beyond the original barriers. The city first spread to the south and west. Expansion to the east was facilitated later by the construction of a tunnel under the entrance to the bay; such suburbs as La Habana del Este were subsequently able to be developed.
Several broad avenues and boulevards stretch across the city. One of the most picturesque is the Malecón, which extends southwestward along the coast from the port entrance to the Almendares River, under which it passes via a tunnel, emerging on the other side in Miramar as Avenida Quinta. Roughly paralleling the Malecón in the Vedado neighbourhood is Linea, another long avenue that passes under the river. Among other thoroughfares of note are Avenida del Puerto, Paseo Martí (or Prado), Avenida Menocal (Infanta), and Avenida Italia.
Contemporary Havana can essentially be described as three cities in one: Old Havana, Vedado, and the newer suburban districts. Old Havana, with its narrow streets and overhanging balconies, is the traditional centre of much of Havana’s commerce, industry, and entertainment as well as being a residential area. It is richly endowed with historic buildings, representing architectural styles from the 16th through the 19th century. Covering some three square miles and hugging the harbour, Old Havana includes Spanish colonial structures, towering Baroque churches, and buildings in Neoclassic style, as well as commercial property and less pretentious homes on the fringes.
To the north and west a newer section, centred on the uptown area known as Vedado, has become the rival of Old Havana for commercial activity and nightlife. This part of the city, built largely in the 20th century, contains attractive homes, tall apartments, and offices along wide, tree-lined boulevards and avenues. It is also the location of many hotels that before 1959 were frequented by U.S. tourists. Central Havana, sometimes described as part of Vedado, is mainly a shopping district that lies between Vedado and Old Havana.
A third Havana is that of the more affluent residential and industrial districts that spread out mostly to the west. Among these is Marianao, one of the newer parts of the city, dating mainly from the 1920s. Some of the suburban exclusivity was lost after the revolution, many of the suburban homes having been expropriated by the Castro government to serve as schools, hospitals, and government offices. Several private country clubs were converted to public recreational centres.
From colonial times Havana has been noted for its parks and plazas. Habaneros, as its residents are called, gather day and night under the sprawling trees of these many green areas. Through colonial times and almost to the end of the 19th century, the Plaza de Armas in Old Havana was the centre of Cuban life. Its most famous building, completed in 1793, is the Palace of the Captains General, an ornate structure that housed the Spanish colonial governors and, from 1902, three Cuban presidents. The building is now a museum.
In the 1980s many parts of Old Havana, including the Plaza de Armas, became part of a projected 35-year multimillion-dollar restoration project. The government sought to instill in Cubans an appreciation of their past and also to make Havana more enticing to tourists in accordance with the government’s effort to boost tourism and thus increase foreign exchange.
One of the first buildings to be restored was the Cathedral of Havana, the church of Havana’s patron saint, San Cristóbal (St. Christopher); it was constructed in the 18th century by the Jesuit order. Located near the waterfront, its ornate facade is regarded by art historians as one of the world’s finest examples of Italian Baroque design. The restoration work left the cathedral looking much as it did when originally completed.
The expansive Plaza de la Revolución, west of Old Havana, was the site of Fidel Castro’s major speeches as president, which were delivered before crowds of, it is estimated, up to a million citizens. The plaza is distinguished by some of the city’s most-imposing architecture. Surrounding the towering monument to José Martí, leader of Cuban independence, are such modern structures as the National Government Centre, the headquarters of the Communist Party of Cuba and the armed forces, and various government ministries. In Central Havana are more traditional buildings, including the white-domed former National Capitol, now housing the Cuban Academy of Sciences; the Museum of the Revolution, housed in the old Presidential Palace; and the National Museum of Art.
Another restoration project was centred on the old Spanish fortifications that dominate Havana’s harbour and, for a time in the 17th and 18th centuries, made Havana the most-fortified city in Spanish America. The most famous and impressive of these is Morro Castle (Castillo del Morro), completed in 1640. It became the centre of the network of forts protecting Havana, and, with La Punta Fortress (Castillo de la Punta), dominated the actual entrance to the harbour. The oldest fortification, La Fuerza (Castillo de la Fuerza), was begun in 1565 and completed in 1583. Its site at the Plaza de Armas was that of an even older fort erected by Hernando de Soto in 1538 and later destroyed by French pirates.
