Tel Aviv–Yafo, Yafo also spelled Jaffa or Joppa, Arabic Yāfa,  major city and economic centre in Israel, situated on the Mediterranean coast some 40 miles (60 km) northwest of Jerusalem. Tel Aviv was founded in 1909 as a Jewish garden suburb of the ancient Mediterranean port of Jaffa (now Yafo), with which it was joined in 1950. By the beginning of the 21st century the modern city of Tel Aviv had developed into a major economic and cultural centre. Tel Aviv is headquarters for a number of government ministries, including the Ministry of Defense, as well as other public organizations, such as the Histadrut (General Federation of Labour). Most of the foreign embassies in Israel are also located in the city. In addition, most of Israel’s large corporations are headquartered in Tel Aviv.
Tel Aviv’s rapid growth and emergence as a prominent centre was largely due to its advantageous location. Proximity to the old city of Jaffa (whose port served as the gateway to Jerusalem, farther inland) and a Jewish rural-agricultural hinterland were important in Tel Aviv’s early stages, as was its status as the first modern Jewish city in Palestine. In the mid-1930s Tel Aviv surpassed Jerusalem as the largest city in Palestine (after 1948, the State of Israel). In the mid-1970s, however, Jerusalem exceeded Tel Aviv, which continues to be the country’s second largest city. Tel Aviv forms the core of Israel’s largest metropolitan area, representing more than two-fifths of Israel’s population. Despite some decrease in its share of Israel’s population, the economic and cultural prominence of the Tel Aviv metropolitan area continue to grow. Area city, 20 square miles (52 square km); metropolitan area, 586 square miles (1,518 square km). Pop. (2008) city, 402,600; metropolitan area, 3,233,500.
Tel Aviv’s character is frequently contrasted to that of Jerusalem. Tel Aviv is depicted as the city “that never stops,” a thriving, vibrant, modern, dynamic, and multicultural city, one generally characterized as tolerant, secular, and liberal, while also materialistic and hedonistic—a city of the present, lacking deep historical roots. Jerusalem, by contrast, is seen as eternal and holy, conservative, and an arena for major conflicts within Israeli society, including that between Israelis and Palestinians. It has been said by some that “while Jerusalem prays, Tel Aviv plays.”
In the past Tel Aviv was negatively portrayed as a city that lacked character and was unpleasantly humid, ugly, and prematurely aging, with decaying buildings covered in peeling stucco and small business blocks of stained concrete. However, these representations lost much ground during the last quarter of the 20th century, partly the result of substantial beautification efforts—the most significant of which included a new orientation toward the beach, an area that had decayed for decades. Whereas past perceptions marked Tel Aviv as the stronghold of the non-pioneering segment of Israeli society, later views have come to acknowledge Tel Aviv’s importance as the engine of the Israeli economy, and its rich cultural and entertainment amenities have been increasingly appreciated. Emerging civic pride has been based on the quality of life offered in the city and its metropolitan area.
Tel Aviv is located on Israel’s central coastal plain along about 9 miles (15 km) of shoreline. The old city of Jaffa is situated on a promontory bounded by the Mediterranean coastline to the west and north; its small bay was the location of a port in ancient times. Sand dunes and marshy areas made access difficult from the south and southeast. Lying northeast of Yafo, Tel Aviv is built over three low ridges of soft sandstone hills that run almost parallel to the coastline. A narrow belt of small sand dunes covering the westernmost of these ridges expands inland where gaps in the relief occur. More sandstone ridges lie to the east, and the suburban, built-up area now spreads beyond them into the rich agricultural land of the coastal plain. The Yarqon (Yarkon) River bounds the central part of Tel Aviv to the north. The river was severely polluted by sewage and other waste during the latter half of the 20th century, and cleanup efforts since the 1990s have worked to rehabilitate the Yarqon and draw recreation back to its banks. Ayalon Stream—dry for much of the year, though it has caused floods in the past—flows northward to the Yarqon; it delimits central Tel Aviv to the east and forms a canal in the median of the Netivei Ayalon, a freeway that cuts through Tel Aviv from south to north. A portion of the Tel Aviv–Yafo municipality extends east of the Ayalon, and a larger part extends north of the Yarqon River.
Tel Aviv has a typical Mediterranean climate with distinct summer and winter seasons and less distinct intermediate seasons. The weather is mild, with no major natural hazards. The long summers are warm and  humid and are without rain. Temperatures in August, the warmest month, reach an average maximum of 86 °F (30 °C) and an average minimum of 75 °F (24 °C); temperatures exceeding 95 °F (35 °C) are rare owing to the moderating effect of the sea. Winters are cool and pleasant, with temperatures in January, the coolest month, averaging a maximum of 64 °F (18 °C) and a minimum of 50 °F (10 °C), with temperatures seldom falling below 41 °F (5 °C). Precipitation is largely confined to winter months (primarily November to March), with the mean annual precipitation averaging about 21 inches (530 mm). Snow is an unusual occurrence in Tel Aviv, which experienced only one significant snowfall in the 20th century.
