Aftershock,  any of several lower-magnitude earthquakes that follow the main shock of a larger earthquake. An aftershock results from the sudden change in stress occurring within and between rocks and the previous release of stress brought on by the principal earthquake. Aftershocks occur in rocks located near the epicentre or along the fault that harboured the principal quake. Although the shaking intensity associated with most aftershocks is small compared with that of the principal earthquake, many are large enough to hamper rescue efforts by further destabilizing buildings and other structures and can be stressful for local residents coping with the damage and loss of life wrought by the principal quake.
The sudden release of energy resulting from the fracturing of rocks relieves much of the stress at the earthquake’s focus; however, much of this energy is transferred to nearby rock. This transference either creates stresses where none existed before or increases the stress within or between rocks. When the sudden buildup of stress is great enough to fracture these rocks, thereby relieving the stress between them, a series of smaller tremors are produced.
Small tremors that follow an earthquake are considered aftershocks if they originate within the fault harbouring the earthquake or if they occur outside the fault within one full fault length (the measurement of the fault end to end) from the earthquake’s epicentre. (This measure will vary according to the length of the fault.) Aftershocks decrease in magnitude and frequency over time. Overall, this decay is inversely proportional to the amount of time passing since the principal earthquake. Once the rate at which these tremors occur has declined to pre-earthquake levels, the sequence of aftershocks ends. The typical aftershock sequence may be as short as a few weeks or as long as a few decades. Some aftershock sequences, however, may last centuries, such as the sequence resulting from the New Madrid earthquakes of 1811–12, which continues to the present.
In general, aftershocks are most severe and happen more frequently in the hours and days that follow an earthquake. Larger earthquakes tend to produce larger aftershocks. When attempting to predict the decrease in moment magnitude (the measure of the total amount of energy released during an earthquake) between the principal earthquake and the largest aftershock, seismologists often refer to Båth’s Law, which notes that the average difference in size between the two events is 1.2 orders of magnitude. The actual difference in size, however, ranges from 0.1 to 3 orders of magnitude. Small aftershocks occur with a greater frequency than large ones; however, aftershock frequency falls off with the passage of time.
Although aftershocks tend to be weaker events relative to the power of the main quake, some aftershocks have caused significant damage. One of the most devastating aftershocks was a magnitude-7.1 event that struck the city of Luanxian, China, on July 28, 1976. Some hours earlier, a magnitude-7.5 earthquake had struck the nearby city of Tangshan. The aftershock was responsible for additional damage and casualties, as well as for delaying efforts to free people already trapped beneath rubble. There are also examples of large aftershocks’ causing more damage and loss of life than the earthquakes they are associated with. One of the most famous was the magnitude-6.3 aftershock that struck Christchurch, N.Z., on Feb. 22, 2011. Because of the aftershock’s shallow focus and the location of the tremor’s epicentre within Christchurch’s metropolitan area, it proved to be more devastating and deadly than the principal quake, which was centred in a rural area.
