Basilosaurid,  any member of the family Basilosauridae, an early group of whales that lived from the middle Eocene to the late Oligocene Epoch (about 41 million to 23 million years ago). Basilosaurids occurred worldwide during most of their history, and important fossils have been recovered in Egypt and the southern United States. Their diversity was highest during the Eocene Epoch. The only known fossils dated to the Oligocene have been found in Peru and New Zealand. The basilosaurids have a closer affinity to living whales than any other extinct group. However, the first basilosaurid specimen—Basilosaurus, whose Latin name is translated “king lizard”—was originally classified as a lizard when it was first described.
Basilosaurids had flukes similar to those of modern whales, but they differed from living whales in having triangle-shaped teeth, small hind limbs, and an elongated body with an extended tail.  The largest basilosaurids may have been as long as 25 metres (82 feet). The remains of some representatives of the genus Basilosaurus measured approximately 17 metres (about 56 feet) in length; the skulls of these animals averaged approximately 1.5 metres (about 5 feet) long. The tail made up as much as three-quarters of the total body length of Basilosaurus.
The hind limbs of basilosaurids were not connected to the rest of the skeleton and were likely too small to have assisted in swimming. The earliest whales—which were thought to have evolved from terrestrial ancestors in the order Artiodactyla (a group that contains living pigs, hippopotamuses, and even-toed ungulates), most likely the raoellid artiodactyls (aquatic artiodactyls from South Asia that lived during the Eocene)—had relatively long back legs and were probably amphibious in their lifestyle. Basilosaurids, however, were the first widespread truly aquatic group of whales. They were too large to have hauled themselves out of the water, and they possessed forelimbs that were too specialized for swimming to have supported them on land. The hind limbs of basilosaurids consisted of a femur (thighbone), a patella (kneecap), tibia and fibula, ankle bones, and toes. Although the pelvis was characterized by a reduced ilium (the bone that connects to the sacrum, which forms the base of the vertebral column, in terrestrial animals), it possessed a proportionally large pubis. Whether the hind limbs were functional is unclear; well-formed joints and evidence of muscle attachments on the bones suggest that they may have been functional, but they also may have been completely atrophied. In addition, the hind limbs may have been used as claspers to help guide the long bodies of the males and females into position for mating.
Basilosaurids are usually referred to as archaeocetes, the ancient whales, but in modern classifications they are members of the Pelagiceti, the fully aquatic whales. Basilosaurid genera are separated into four subfamilies: Dorudontinae, Basilosaurinae, Kekenodontinae, and Stromeriinae. The earliest dorudontines were the earliest basilosaurids, with long skulls and relatively short bodies. Basilosaurines are the archetypal basilosaurids, with elongated vertebrae and long tails. The kekenodontines consist of the single genus Kekenodon, which was only poorly known and is the only basilosaurid dating from the Oligocene Epoch. Stromerius nidensis was described in 2007 and dated to the late Eocene of Egypt; it is the only species classified in subfamily Stromeriinae.
