Carboniferous Period,  fifth interval of the Paleozoic Era, succeeding the Devonian Period and preceding the Permian Period. In terms of absolute time, the Carboniferous Period began approximately 358.9 million years ago and ended 298.9 million years ago. Its duration of approximately 60 million years makes it the longest period of the Paleozoic Era and the second longest period of the Phanerozoic Eon. The rocks that were formed or deposited during the period constitute the Carboniferous System. The name Carboniferous refers to coal-bearing strata that characterize the upper portion of the series throughout the world.
The Carboniferous Period is formally divided into two major subdivisions—the Mississippian (358.9 to 323.2 million years ago) and the Pennsylvanian (323.2 to 298.9 million years ago) subperiods—their rocks recognized chronostratigraphically as subsystems by international agreement. In Europe, the Carboniferous Period is subdivided into the Dinantian and succeeding Silesian subsystems, but the boundary between those divisions is below the internationally accepted Mississippian-Pennsylvanian boundary.
 The Early Carboniferous (Mississippian) world is characterized by Laurussia, a series of small cratonic blocks that occupied the Northern Hemisphere, and Gondwana, an enormous landmass made up of present-day South America, Africa, Antarctica, Australia, and the Indian subcontinent in the Southern Hemisphere. Lithospheric plate movement brought the continents close together on one side of the globe. The orogenies (mountain-building events) taking place during the Devonian Period had formed the “Old Red Sandstone” continent. The principal landmass of Laurussia was made up of present-day North America, western Europe through the Urals, and Balto-Scandinavia. Much of Laurussia lay near the paleoequator, whereas the cratons of Siberia, Kazakhstania, and most of China existed as separate continents occupying positions at high latitudes. During this time, the Tethys Sea separated the southern margin of the Old Red Sandstone continent completely from Gondwana.
By Late Carboniferous (Pennsylvanian) times, plate movements had brought most of Laurussia into contact with Gondwana and closed the Tethys. Laurussia and Gondwana became fused by the Appalachian-Hercynian orogeny (mountain-building event), which continued into the Permian Period. The position of the landmass that would become the eastern United States and northern Europe remained equatorial, while the China and Siberia cratons continued to reside at high latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere.
The distribution of land and sea followed fairly predictable limits. The continental interiors were terrestrial, and no major marine embayments apparently existed. Upland areas of the continental interiors underwent substantial erosion during the Carboniferous. Shallow seas occupied the continental shelf margins surrounding the continents. Fringe areas of Carboniferous continents may very well have become the continental interiors of the present day. Deeper troughs (geosynclines) lay seaward of the continental masses, and their sedimentary record is now characterized by mountains.
During the Carboniferous Period, the climate of various landmasses was controlled by their latitudinal position. Since prevailing wind patterns were similar to those on Earth today, tropical conditions characterized the equatorial regions; the midlatitudes were dry, and higher latitudes were both cooler and moist. Although both western Europe and Balto-Scandinavia resided in latitudes low enough to produce evaporite (minerals in sedimentary rock deposits of soluble salts resulting from the evaporation of water) deposits in shallow continental settings, only North America occupied an equatorial setting during the Mississippian. Wetter areas on other continental blocks in higher latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere began to form coal swamps during this time.
In contrast, the bulk of Gondwana was below 30° South latitude and experienced colder conditions that allowed the formation of continental glaciers. These glaciations were similar to those occurring in the Northern Hemisphere during the Pleistocene Epoch. Coeval (parallel) continental glaciations did not occur in the high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, probably because the landmasses were too small to sustain large ice fields.
Paleogeography continued to control climates into Pennsylvanian times. As sea-level cyclicity became more pronounced, the equatorial settings changed from carbonate shelves to coal basins. Continental glaciation expanded in Gondwana, allowing glaciers to extend into lower latitudes that otherwise might have formed coal swamps. As mountains developed toward the close of the Pennsylvanian, rain-shadow effects became more influential, inhibiting the process of coal deposition in the basins of western Europe. Flora of the Carboniferous followed the same climatic gradients as glacial deposits. Fossil plants found in areas located in high latitudes during the Carboniferous exhibit seasonal growth rings, while those of the presumed equatorial coal swamps lack such rings, as do modern tropical trees.
