Fossil record,  history of life as documented by fossils, the remains or imprints of organisms from earlier geological periods preserved in sedimentary rock. In a few cases the original substance of the hard parts of the organism is preserved, but more often the original components have been replaced by minerals deposited from water seeping through the rock. Occasionally the original material is simply removed while nothing is deposited in its place; in this case, all that remains is a mould of the shape of the plant or animal. A brief treatment of the fossil record follows. For full treatment, see geochronology.
In some places, such as the Grand Canyon in Arizona, it is possible to recognize a great thickness of nearly horizontal strata representing the deposition of sediment on the seafloor over many hundreds of millions of years. It is often observed that each layer in such a sequence contains fossils that are distinct from those of the layers that are above and below it. In such sequences of layers in different places, the same, or similar, fossil floras or faunas occur in the identical order. By comparison of overlapping sequences, it is possible to build up a continuous record of faunas or floras that have progressively more in common with present-day life-forms as the top of the sequence is approached.
Study of the fossil record has provided important information for at least three different purposes. The progressive changes observed within an animal group are used to describe the evolution of that group. In general, but not always, successive generations tend to change morphologically in a particular direction (e.g., the progressive acquisition or loss of specific features), and these changes are often interpreted as better adaptation (through preferential selection of beneficial mutations) to a particular environment.
Fossils also provide the geologist a quick and easy way of assigning an age to the strata in which they occur. The precision with which this may be done in any particular case depends on the nature and abundance of the fauna: some fossil groups were deposited during much longer time intervals than others.
Fossil organisms, furthermore, may provide useful information about the climate and environment of the site where they were deposited and preserved. Certain species of coral, for example, require warm shallow water; certain plants require warm swampy conditions such as are found today in the Florida Everglades, South America’s Pantanal, and Botswana’s Okavango delta. Thus, when rocks containing fossils of this kind are found in rocks of the present-day polar regions, there is a strong presumption that the crust on which they were deposited has shifted its position on the surface of Earth since that time.
