Granite,  coarse- or medium-grained intrusive igneous rock that is rich in quartz and feldspar; it is the most common plutonic rock of the Earth’s crust, forming by the cooling of magma (silicate melt) at depth.
Because of its use as paving block and as a building stone, the quarrying of granite was, at one time, a major industrial activity. Except for tombstones, however, for which there is a continuing demand, the present production of granite is geared to the fluctuating market for curbing in highway construction and veneer used in the facing of large industrial and commercial buildings.
Granite may occur in dikes or sills (tabular bodies injected in fissures and inserted between other rocks), but more characteristically it forms irregular masses of extremely variable size, ranging from less than eight kilometres (five miles) in maximum dimension to larger masses (batholiths) that are often hundreds or thousands of square kilometres in area.
The principal constituent of granite is feldspar. Both plagioclase feldspar and alkali feldspar are usually abundant in it, and their relative abundance has provided the basis for granite classifications. In most granite, the ratio of the dominant to the subdominant feldspar is less than two. This includes most granites from the eastern, central, and southwestern United States, southwestern England, the Fennoscandian (Baltic Shield) area, western and central France, Spain, and many other areas. Granites in which plagioclase greatly exceeds alkali feldspar are common in large regions of the western United States and are thought to be characteristic of the great series of batholiths stretching from Alaska and British Columbia southward through Idaho and California into Mexico. Granites with a great excess of alkali feldspar over plagioclase are known from New England; they occur in smaller bodies at numerous sites in British Paleogene and Neogene rocks and in the Oslo region of Norway, but their most extensive development is in northern Nigeria.
Rocks containing less than 20 percent quartz are almost never named granite, and rocks containing more than 20 percent (by volume) of dark, or ferromagnesian, minerals are also seldom called granite. The minor essential minerals of granite may include muscovite, biotite, amphibole, or pyroxene. Biotite may occur in granite of any type and is usually present, though sometimes in very small amounts. The sodic-amphiboles and pyroxenes (riebeckite, arfvedsonite, aegirine) are characteristic of the alkali granites. If neither feldspar is in great excess, neither amphibole nor pyroxene is likely to be an essential constituent; the other minerals will then ordinarily be either biotite or muscovite, or both.
There are two major source regions for producing molten granite: igneous and sedimentary protoliths (source rocks). These result in I-type granitoids, derived from igneous protoliths and containing moderate amounts of Al2O3 and high amounts of Na2O, and S-type granitoids, derived from sedimentary protoliths and containing high amounts of Al2O3 and relatively low amounts of Na2O. Amphibole and pyroxene are more common in I-type granitoids, while S-type granitoids may have garnet, cordierite, and sillimanite. Both types of granitoids may also contain biotite and muscovite.
