Hydrologic sciences,  the fields of study concerned with the waters of Earth. Included are the sciences of hydrology, oceanography, limnology, and glaciology.
In its widest sense, hydrology encompasses the study of the occurrence, movement, and physical and chemical characteristics of water in all its forms within Earth’s hydrosphere. In practice, hydrologists usually restrict their studies to waters close to the land surface of Earth. Water in the atmosphere is usually studied as part of meteorology. Water in the oceans and seas is studied within the science of oceanography, water in lakes and inland seas within limnology, and ice on the land surface within glaciology. Clearly there is some overlap between these major scientific disciplines; both hydrologists and meteorologists, for example, have contributed to the study of water movement in the lower boundary layers of the atmosphere. All are linked by the fundamental concept of the water cycle (or hydrologic cycle), according to which the waters of the sea are evaporated, are subsequently condensed within the atmosphere, fall to Earth as precipitation, and finally flow in the rivers back to the sea.
Water is the most abundant substance on Earth and is the principal constituent of all living things. Water in the atmosphere plays a major role in maintaining a habitable environment for human life. The occurrence of surface waters has played a significant role in the rise and decline of the major civilizations in world history. In many societies the importance of water to humankind is reflected in the legal and political structures. At the present time, rising populations and improving living standards are placing increasing pressures on available water resources. There is, in general, no shortage of water on Earth’s land surface, but the areas of surplus water are often located far from major centres of population. Moreover, in many cases these centres prove to be sources of water pollution. Thus, the availability and quality of water are becoming an ever-increasing constraint on human activities, notwithstanding the great technological advances that have been made in the control of surface waters.
Hydrology deals with that part of the water cycle from the arrival of water at the land surface as precipitation to its eventual loss from the land either by evaporation or transpiration back to the atmosphere or by surface and subsurface flow to the sea. It is thus primarily concerned with waters close to the land surface. It includes various component disciplines of a more specialized nature. Hydraulics is concerned with the mechanics and dynamics of water in its liquid state. Hydrography is the description and mapping of the bodies of water of Earth’s surface (including the oceans), with a particular concern for navigation charts. Hydrometry involves measurements of surface water, particularly precipitation and streamflow. Hydrometeorology focuses on water in the lower boundary layer of the atmosphere. Groundwater hydrology and hydrogeology have to do with subsurface water in the saturated zone, while soil water physics involves the study of subsurface water in the unsaturated zone. Engineering hydrology is concerned with the design of man-made structures that control the flow and use of water.
Underlying all the hydrologic sciences is the concept of water balance, an expression of the water cycle for an area of the land surface in terms of conservation of mass. In a simple form the water balance may be expressed as
S = P − Q − E − G,
where S is the change of water storage in the area over a given time period, P is the precipitation input during that time period, Q is the stream discharge from the area, E is the total of evaporation and transpiration to the atmosphere from the area, and G is the subsurface outflow. Most hydrologic studies are concerned with evaluating one or more terms of the water balance equation. Because of the difficulties in quantifying the movement of water across the boundaries of an area under study, the water balance equation is most easily applied to an area draining to a particular measurement point on a stream channel. This area is called a catchment (or sometimes a watershed in the United States). The line separating adjacent catchments is known as a topographical divide, or simply a divide. The following sections describe the study of the different elements of the catchment water balance and the way in which they affect the response of catchments over time under different climatic regimes.
Precipitation results from the condensation of water from the atmosphere as air is cooled to the dew point, the temperature at which the air becomes saturated with respect to water vapour. The cooling process is usually initiated by uplift of the air, which may result from a number of causes, including convection, orographic effects over mountain ranges, or frontal effects at the boundaries of air masses of different characteristics. Condensation within the atmosphere requires the presence of condensation nuclei to initiate droplet formation. Some of the condensate may be carried considerable distances as cloud before being released as rain or snow, depending on the local temperatures. Some precipitation in the form of dew or fog results from condensation at or near the land surface. In some areas, such as the coastal northwest of the United States, dew and fog drip can contribute significantly to the water balance. The formation of hail requires a sequence of condensation and freezing episodes, resulting from successive periods of uplift. Hailstones usually show a pattern of concentric rings of ice as a result.
Direct measurements of precipitation are made by a variety of gauges, all of which consist of some form of funnel that directs the infalling water to some storage container. Storage gauges simply store the incident precipitation, and the accumulated water is usually measured on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis. Recording gauges allow rates of precipitation to be determined.
Rainfall volumes are usually converted to units of depth—volume per unit area. Measurements obtained from different types of rain gauges are not directly comparable because of varying exposure, wind, and splash effects. The most accurate type of gauge is the ground-level gauge, in which the orifice of the gauge is placed level with the ground surface and surrounded by an antisplash grid. Rain gauge catches decrease as the orifice is raised above the ground, particularly in areas subject to high winds. In areas of significant snowfall, however, it may be necessary to raise the rain gauge so that its orifice is clear of the snow surface. Various shields for the gauge orifice have been tried in an effort to offset wind effects. Wind effects are greater for snow than for rain and for small drops or light rainfall than for large drops.
An impression of the spatial distribution of precipitation intensity can be achieved through indirect measurements of precipitation, in particular radar scattering. The relationship between rainfall intensity and measured radar signals depends on various factors, including the type of precipitation and the distribution of drop size. Radar measurements are often used in conjunction with rain gauges to allow on-line calibration in converting the radar signal to precipitation amounts. The radar measurements are, however, at a much larger spatial scale. Resolution of 5 to 10 square kilometres is common for operational systems. Even so, this provides a much better picture of the spatial patterns of precipitation over large catchment areas than has been previously possible. The use of satellite remote sensing to determine rainfall volumes is still in its early stages, but the technique appears likely to prove useful for estimating amounts of precipitation in remote areas.
The measurement of inputs of snow to the catchment water balance is also a difficult problem. The most basic technique involves the snow course, a series of stakes to measure snow depths. Snowfalls can, however, vary greatly in density, depending primarily on the temperature history of snow formation. Accumulated snow changes its density over time prior to melting. Snow density can be measured by weighing a sample of known volume taken in a standard metal cylinder. Other techniques for measuring snowfall include the use of snow pillows, which record the changing weight of snow lying above them, or the use of rain gauges fitted with heating elements, which melt the snow as it falls. These techniques are subject to wind effects, both during a storm event and between events because of redistribution of snow by the wind.
Summary statistics on precipitation are usually produced on the basis of daily, monthly, and annual amounts falling at a given location or over a catchment area. The frequency at which a rainfall of a certain volume occurs within a certain period is also important to hydrologic analysis. The assessment of this frequency, or the recurrence interval of the rainfall from the sample of available data, is a statistical problem generally involving the assumption of a particular probability distribution to represent the characteristics of rainfalls. Such analyses must assume that this distribution is not changing over time, even though it has been shown that in some areas of the world climatic change may cause rainfall statistics to vary. It has long been speculated that rainfalls may exhibit cyclic patterns over long periods of time, and considerable effort has been expended in searching for such cycles. In some areas the annual seasonal cycle is of paramount importance, but demonstrations of longer periodicities have not proved of general applicability.
Patterns of rainfall intensity and duration are of great importance to the hydrologist in predicting catchment discharges and water availability and in dealing with floods, droughts, land drainage, and soil erosion. Rainfalls vary both within and between rainstorms, sometimes dramatically, depending on the type and scale of the storm and its velocity of movement. Within a storm, the average intensity tends to decrease with an increase in the storm area.
On a larger scale, seasonal variations in rainfall vary with climate. Humid temperate areas tend to have rainfalls that are fairly evenly distributed throughout the year; Mediterranean areas have a winter peak with low summer rainfalls; savanna areas have a double peak in rainfall; and equatorial areas again have a relatively even distribution of rainfall over the course of the year. Average annual rainfalls also vary considerably. The minimum recorded long-term average is 0.76 millimetre at Arica, Chile; the maximum 11,897.36 millimetres at Tutunendo, Colombia. The maximum recorded rainfall intensities are 38 millimetres in one minute (Barot, Guadeloupe, 1970); 1,870 millimetres in a single day (Cilaos, Réunion, 1952); and 26,461 millimetres in one year (Cherrapunji, India, 1861).
