Ida,  (Darwinius masillae),  nickname for the remarkably complete but nearly two-dimensional skeleton of an adapiform primate dating to the middle Eocene Epoch (approximately 47 million years ago). It is the type specimen and the only known example of Darwinius masillae, a species assigned to the adapiform subfamily Cercamoniinae. The specimen, a juvenile female, was named for the daughter of Norwegian paleontologist Jørn Hurum. He was one of the scientists involved in the original description of the specimen. It was so named because his daughter had reached a similar developmental stage during the study.
The specimen was originally hailed by members of the scientific team who described it as a potential “missing link” between primitive primates and anthropoids (that is, the group that includes monkeys, apes and humans). Most scientists, however, regard Darwinius as a typical member of the expansive adapiform evolutionary radiation. Adapiforms are one of the earliest and most primitive known groups of fossil primates. Most scientists consider adapiforms as basal members of the suborder that includes lemurs and lorises, which are distantly related to humans and other anthropoids.
The fossilized remains of Ida were unearthed by one or more unknown collectors around 1983 at Grube Messel, a UNESCO World Heritage site near Darmstadt, Ger. The specimen was discovered by splitting the fossiliferous Messel oil shale in which Ida was originally entombed into two pieces, each of which contained part of the nearly complete skeleton. The less complete part was artificially embellished and eventually sold to the Wyoming Dinosaur Center in Thermopolis, Wyo., in 1991. Its more complete counterpart was kept in a private collection for many years before being sold in 2007 to the Natural History Museum of the University of Oslo in Norway.
Because it is based on a single juvenile specimen, the precise affinities of D. masillae are problematic. The establishment of lower-level taxonomic relationships among adapiforms heavily relies upon details of adult dental anatomy, but Ida retains most of her deciduous (or milk) teeth in place. What is known of Ida’s dentition suggests that Darwinius is closely related to contemporaneous adapiforms from Germany and elsewhere in western Europe, such as Europolemur and Godinotia.
Ida is regarded as a female because a baculum (or os penis) is absent from this virtually complete skeleton. There is ample evidence from Ida’s postcranial skeleton to indicate a highly arboreal lifestyle. Functionally important traits include the presence of nails rather than claws on all fingers and toes, an opposable big toe (or hallux) that was well adapted for grasping, and mobile limbs that were capable of wide ranges of motion in three dimensions. As such, Darwinius has been interpreted as a generalized arboreal quadruped that was not particularly specialized for leaping. Its relatively large orbits, which delimit the size of the eyeballs, suggest that it may have been nocturnal. Estimates of adult body mass range from 600 to 900 grams (21.1 to 31.7 ounces), similar to that of the extant lesser bamboo lemur (Hapalemur griseus).
