Mary Anning,  (born May 21, 1799, Lyme Regis, Dorset, Eng.—died March 9, 1847, Lyme Regis), prolific English fossil hunter and amateur anatomist credited with the discovery of several dinosaur specimens that assisted in the early development of paleontology. Her excavations also aided the careers of many British scientists by providing them with specimens to study and framed a significant part of Earth’s geologic history. Some scientists note that fossils recovered by Anning may have also contributed, in part, to the theory of evolution put forth by English naturalist Charles Darwin.
Anning was one of two surviving children born to cabinetmaker and amateur fossil collector Richard Anning and his wife, Mary Moore. The family relied on the sale of fossils collected from seaside cliffs near their home along England’s Channel coast as a source of income. After Richard’s death in 1810, the family mainly relied on charity. Mary, her brother, Joseph, and their mother, who were skilled fossil collectors themselves, supplemented their meagre resources by selling fossils of invertebrates, such as ammonoids and belemnoids, to collectors and scholars. In 1817 the fossils attracted the attention of British fossil collector Lieut. Col. Thomas Birch, who assisted the family financially by purchasing a number of specimens. Later he auctioned off his collection and donated the proceeds to the Anning family during a particularly desperate period in their lives.
Over the course of her life, Anning also discovered the remains of several large vertebrates embedded in the cliffs of Lyme Regis. The cliffs, which date from the late Triassic to early Jurassic periods (some 229 million to 176 million years ago), a time when the area was submerged and located closer to the Equator, contain the fossil-rich limestone and shale of the Blue Lias formation. In 1810 her brother found the first known Ichthyosaurus specimen; however, she was the one who excavated it, and some sources also give her credit for the discovery. British physician Everard Home described the specimen shortly thereafter in a series of papers. Her most famous find occurred in 1824 when she uncovered the first intact Plesiosaurus skeleton. The specimen was so large and well preserved that it attracted the attention of French zoologist Georges Cuvier, who doubted the finding until he saw the drawings of the specimen in a paper by English geologist and paleontologist William Daniel Conybeare. After Cuvier authenticated the discovery, the scientific community began to recognize the paleontological value of the fossils recovered by Mary Anning and her family.
News of Anning’s fossil excavations made her a celebrity and prompted paleontologists, collectors, and tourists to descend on Lyme Regis to buy from her. She went on to recover additional Ichthyosaurus and plesiosaur skeletons from the cliffs. She uncovered a pterosaur in 1828, which became known as Pterodactylus (or Dimorphodon) macronyx. It was the first pterosaur specimen found outside Germany. In 1829 she excavated the skeleton of Squaloraja, a fossil fish thought to be a member of a transition group between sharks and rays.
Anning taught herself geology, anatomy, paleontology, and scientific illustration. Despite her lack of formal scientific training, her discoveries, local area knowledge, and skill at classifying fossils in the field earned her a reputation among paleontology’s male and largely upper-class ranks. Her later hunting expeditions sometimes included famous scientists of the time, including British geologist and minister William Buckland and British anatomist and paleontologist Richard Owen, who proposed the term Dinosauria in 1842. She also corresponded with and sold fossils to other leading scientists, such as Cuvier and English geologist Adam Sedgwick.
Nevertheless, Anning was not given full credit for many of the fossils she excavated. Collectors donating specimens to institutions tended to be credited with their discovery. Of the many specimens she found and recovered, several were described in prestigious journals without even a mention of her name. However, some famous scientists of the time, such as British geologist Henry De la Beche and British paleontologist Gideon Mantell, did credit her in their work.
Toward the end of her life, Anning collected annuities from the British Association for the Advancement of Science and the Geological Society of London, which were set up in recognition of her contributions to science. After she died of breast cancer in 1847, the president of the Geological Society eulogized her in his annual address, even though the first women would not be admitted to the organization until 1904. In 2010 she was recognized by the Royal Society as one of the 10 most influential women scientists in British history.
