Ocean acidification,  the worldwide reduction in the pH of seawater as a consequence of the absorption of large amounts of carbon dioxide (CO2) by the oceans. Ocean acidification is largely the result of loading Earth’s atmosphere with large quantities of CO2, produced by vehicles and industrial and agricultural processes. Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution about 1750, roughly one-third to one-half of the CO2 released into Earth’s atmosphere by human activities has been absorbed by the oceans. During that time period, scientists have estimated, the average pH of seawater declined from 8.19 to 8.05, which corresponds to a 30 percent increase in acidity.
Some scientists estimate that the pace of ocean acidification since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution has been approximately 100 times more rapid than at any other time during the most recent 650,000 years. They note that concentrations of atmospheric CO2 between 1000 and 1900 ce ranged between 275 and 290 parts per million by volume (ppmv). In 2010 the average concentration was 390 ppmv, and climatologists expect the concentration to rise to between 413 and 750 ppmv by 2100, depending on the level of greenhouse gas emissions. With additional CO2 transferred to the oceans, pH would decline further; under worst-case scenarios, seawater pH would drop to between 7.8 and 7.9 by 2100.
Marine scientists are concerned that the process of ocean acidification constitutes a threat to sea life and to the cultures that depend on the ocean for their food and livelihood. Increases in ocean acidity reduce the concentration of carbonate ions and the availability of aragonite (a significant source of calcium carbonate) in seawater. Marine scientists expect that coral, shellfish, and other marine calcifiers (that is, organisms that use carbonates) will be less able to obtain the raw materials that they use to build and maintain their skeletons and shells. These scientists also note that rising ocean acidity presents a number of other physiological problems to different groups of marine organisms and that such problems could threaten the stability of marine food chains.
The acidity of any solution is determined by the relative concentration of hydrogen ions (H+). A larger concentration of H+ ions in a solution corresponds to higher acidity, which is measured as a lower pH. When CO2 dissolves in seawater, it creates carbonic acid (H2CO3) and liberates H+, which subsequently reacts with carbonate ions (CO32−) and aragonite (the stable form of calcium carbonate) to form bicarbonate (HCO3−). At present seawater is extremely rich in dissolved carbonate minerals. However, as ocean acidity increases, carbonate ion concentrations fall.
The absorption of CO2 largely results from the dissolution of the gas into the upper layers of the ocean, but CO2 is also brought into the oceans through photosynthesis and respiration. Algae and other marine photosynthesizers take in CO2 and store it in their tissues as carbon. Carbon is then passed to zooplankton and other organisms through the food chain, and these organisms can release CO2 to the oceans through respiration. In addition, when marine organisms die and fall to the ocean floor, CO2 is released through the process of decomposition.
Under the worst-case scenarios outlined above, with seawater pH dropping to between 7.8 and 7.9, carbonate ion concentrations would decrease by at least 50 percent as acids in the seawater reacted with them. Under such conditions, marine calcifiers would have substantially less material to maintain their shells and skeletons. Laboratory experiments in which the pH of seawater has been lowered to approximately 7.8 (to simulate one projected oceanic pH for the year 2100) have shown that such organisms placed in these environments do not grow as well as those placed in environments characterized by early 21st-century levels of seawater acidity (pH = 8.05). As a result, their small size places them at higher risk of being eaten by predators. Furthermore, the shells of some organisms—for instance, pteropods, which serve as food for krill and whales—dissolve substantially after only six weeks in such high-acid environments.
Larger animals such as squid and fishes may also feel the effects of increasing acidity as carbonic acid concentrations rise in their body fluids. This condition, called acidosis, may cause problems with the animal’s respiration as well as with growth and reproduction.
In addition, many marine scientists suspect the substantial decline in oyster beds along the West Coast of the United States since 2005 to be caused by the increased stress ocean acidification places on oyster larvae. (It may make them more vulnerable to disease.)
Physiological changes brought on by increasing acidity have the potential to alter predator-prey relationships. Some experiments have shown that the carbonate skeletons of sea urchin larvae are smaller under conditions of increased acidity; such a decline in overall size could make them more palatable to predators who would avoid them under normal conditions. In turn, decreases in the abundance of pteropods, foraminiferans, and coccoliths would force those animals that consume them to switch to other prey. The process of switching to new food sources would cause several predator populations to decline while also placing predation pressure on organisms unaccustomed to such attention.
Many scientists worry that many marine species, some critical to the proper functioning of marine food chains, will become extinct if the pace of ocean acidification continues, because they will not have sufficient time to adapt to the changes in seawater chemistry. The world’s coral reefs, which provide habitat to many species and are often regarded by ecologists as centres of biodiversity in the oceans, could decline and even disappear if ocean acidification intensifies and carbonate ion concentrations continue to fall.
The deeper waters of the ocean are naturally more acidic than the upper layers, since CO2 that dissolves at the surface descends with dense, cold water as part of the thermohaline circulation. The acidic lower layers of the ocean are separated from the upper layers by a boundary called the “saturation horizon.” Above this boundary there are enough carbonates present in the water to support coral communities. In midlatitude waters and in waters closer to the poles, many so-called cold-water coral communities are found at depths that range from 40 to 1,000 metres (about 130 to 3,300 feet)—as opposed to their warm-water counterparts, the tropical coral reefs, which are rarely found below 100 metres (330 feet). Since about the year 1800, studies have shown, increased acidity has raised the saturation horizon about 50 to 200 metres (about 160 to 660 feet) in midlatitude and polar waters. This change is enough to threaten cold-water coral communities, and some scientists fear that additional communities will be placed at risk if the boundary approaches the surface of the ocean. A decline in cold-water marine calcifiers would result in a decline in reef building, and other marine organisms that depend on corals for their habitat and food would decline as well. Scientists also predict that, if ocean acidification were to increase worldwide, warm-water coral communities, which often supply food and tourism revenue to people who live near them, would suffer similar fates.
In addition, scientists predict that the reduction of marine phytoplankton populations due to rising pH levels in the oceans will produce a positive feedback that intensifies global warming. Marine phytoplankton produce dimethyl sulfide (DMS), a gas that serves as the most significant source of sulfur in Earth’s atmosphere. Sulfur in Earth’s upper atmosphere reflects some of the incoming solar radiation back into space and thus keeps it from warming Earth’s surface. Models predict that DMS production will decrease by about 18 percent by 2100 from preindustrial levels, which will result in additional radiative forcing corresponding to an atmospheric temperature increase of 0.25 °C (0.45 °F).
