olivine,  any member of a group of common magnesium, iron silicate minerals.
Olivines are an important rock-forming mineral group. Magnesium-rich olivines are abundant in low-silica mafic and ultramafic igneous rocks and are believed to be the most abundant constituent of the Earth’s upper mantle. Olivine also occurs in high-temperature metamorphic rocks, lunar basalts, and some meteorites. The name olivine derives from the unusual yellow-green to deep bottle-green colour of the magnesium-iron olivine series. Typically the name olivine is given to members of the forsterite-fayalite solid-solution series. In addition to these magnesium and ferrous iron end-members, the olivine group contains manganese (tephroite), calcium-manganese (glaucochroite), calcium-magnesium (monticellite), and calcium-iron (kirschsteinite) end-members (Table). Gem-quality forsterite olivine is known as peridot. Because of its high melting point and resistance to chemical reagents, magnesium olivine is an important refractory material—i.e., it can be used in furnace linings and in kilns when other materials are subjected to heat and chemical processes.
The composition of most olivines can be represented in the system Ca2SiO4-Mg2SiO4-Fe2SiO4 (Figure 1). The most abundant olivines occur in the system from forsterite (Mg2SiO4) to fayalite (Fe2SiO4). Most of the naturally occurring olivines are intermediate in composition to these two end-members and have the general formula (Mg, Fe)2SiO4. Members of the series monticellite (CaMgSiO4) to kirschsteinite (CaFeSiO4) are rare. Minor elements such as aluminum, nickel, chromium, and boron can substitute in olivine.
The name forsterite is restricted to those species with no more than 10 percent iron substituting for magnesium; fayalite (from Fayal Island in the Azores, where it was believed to occur in a local volcanic rock but probably was obtained from slag brought to the island as ship’s ballast) is restricted to species with no more than 10 percent magnesium substituting for iron. Compositions intermediate to these series end-members are identified by FoxFay, which is an expression of the molar percentage of each compound. For example, Fo70Fa30 denotes a composition of olivine that is 70 percent forsterite. The notation is shortened to Fo70.
The continuity in the forsterite-fayalite series has been verified experimentally. At the magnesium-rich end of the solid-solution series, natural crystals may contain very small amounts of calcium, nickel, and chromium; the iron-rich members near the other end of the series may incorporate small amounts of manganese and calcium. Apart from ferrous iron, the crystalline structure of the olivines is also capable of accommodating relatively small amounts of ferric iron; dendrites (small branching crystals) of magnetite or chromite found oriented with respect to some crystallographic direction within such olivines may be attributed to exsolution. The presence of relatively large amounts of ferric oxide in the analyses of olivines, however, clearly indicates either an advanced state of oxidation or the mechanical inclusion of co-precipitating magnetite upon crystallization from the magma.
In addition to the forsterite-fayalite series, other complete solid-solution series exist among the various olivine minerals. Fayalite is soluble in all proportions with ash-gray tephroite (from Greek tephros, “ashen”), pure manganese silicate (Mn2SiO4); the intermediate in the series is knebelite (FeMnSiO4). Tephroite and knebelite come from manganese and iron ore deposits, from metamorphosed manganese-rich sedimentary rocks, and from slags.
All olivines crystallize in the orthorhombic crystal system. Olivine is classified as a nesosilicate which has isolated SiO4 tetrahedrons bound to each other only by ionic bonds from interstitial cations. The structure of olivine can be viewed as a layered closest-packed oxygen network, with silicon ions occupying some of the tetrahedral voids and the calcium, ferrous iron, and magnesium cations occupying some of the octahedral voids (Figure 2). The layers consist of octahedrons cross-linked by independent SiO4 tetrahedrons. There are two symmetrically nonequivalent octahedral sites, M1 and M2. In magnesium-iron olivines there is no M1 or M2 site preference for magnesium or ferric iron. However, in calcic olivines like monticellite, calcium preferentially enters the M2 site and magnesium occupies the M1 site.
