Oxide mineral,   any naturally occurring inorganic compound with a structure based on close-packed oxygen atoms in which smaller, positively charged metal or other ions occur in interstices. Oxides are distinguished from other oxygen-bearing compounds such as the silicates, borates, and carbonates, which have a readily definable group containing oxygen atoms covalently bonded to an atom of another element.
The oxide minerals can be grouped as simple oxides and multiple oxides. Simple oxides are a combination of one metal or semimetal and oxygen, whereas multiple oxides have two nonequivalent metal sites. The oxide structures are usually based on cubic or hexagonal close-packing of oxygen atoms with the octahedral or tetrahedral sites (or both) occupied by metal ions; symmetry is typically isometric, hexagonal, tetragonal, or orthorhombic.
The simple oxides can be subdivided on the basis of the ratio of the numbers of atoms of metal (or other elements) and oxygen, giving general formulas of the AxOy type. In such formulas A represents a metal atom, and x and y represent integers. Chemical compositions then fall into categories such as those designated AO, A2O, A2O3, AO2. Specific simple oxide minerals include periclase (MgO), cuprite (Cu2O), hematite (Fe2O3), and uraninite (UO2).
Complex oxides show a more varied chemistry, often with extensive solid solution. Most common is the spinel group, with the general formula AB2O4, in which A and B are ions of different metals, the same metal with different oxidation states, or a combination of the two; A (with oxidation state +2), B (with oxidation state +3) is the commonest, as, for example, in spinel itself, MgAl2O4. Frequently occurring doubly charged ions include magnesium, iron, zinc, and manganese, while common triply charged ions are aluminum, iron, manganese, and chromium.
Oxide minerals occur as decomposition products of sulfide minerals, in pegmatites, early crystallizing minerals in ultrabasic rocks, and as accessory minerals in many igneous rocks.
