Soil liquefaction, also called earthquake liquefaction,  ground failure or loss of strength that causes otherwise solid soil to behave temporarily as a viscous liquid. The phenomenon occurs in water-saturated unconsolidated soils affected by seismic S waves (secondary waves), which cause ground vibrations during earthquakes. Although earthquake shock is the best known cause of liquefaction, certain construction practices, including blasting and soil compaction and vibroflotation (which uses a vibrating probe to change the grain structure of the surrounding soil), produce this phenomenon intentionally. Poorly drained fine-grained soils such as sandy, silty, and gravelly soils are the most susceptible to liquefaction.
Granular soils are made up of a mix of soil and pore spaces. When earthquake shock occurs in waterlogged soils, the water-filled pore spaces collapse, which decreases the overall volume of the soil. This process increases the water pressure between individual soil grains, and the grains can then move freely in the watery matrix. This substantially lowers the soil’s resistance to shear stress and causes the mass of soil to take on the characteristics of a liquid. In its liquefied state, soil deforms easily, and heavy objects such as structures can be damaged from the sudden loss of support from below.
Buildings constructed on loose soil pitch and tilt easily when liquefaction occurs, since the soil no longer supports the structures’ foundations. In contrast, structures anchored to bedrock or stiff soils in earthquake-prone areas suffer less damage, because less vibration is transmitted through the foundation to the structure above. In addition, buildings anchored to bedrock have a reduced risk of pitching and tilting.
One of the most severe episodes of liquefaction in modern times occurred in China during the Tangshan earthquake of 1976. Some scientists estimate that an area of more than 2,400 sq km (about 925 sq miles) was subjected to severe liquefaction, which contributed to the extensive damage that took place in the southern part of the city. The liquefaction of the soft lake sediment upon which central Mexico City was built amplified the effects of the 1985 earthquake, the epicentre of which was located hundreds of miles away. In addition, the liquefaction of the ground beneath the Mission and Market districts in San Francisco during the 1906 earthquake caused several structures to pitch and collapse. These districts were built on poorly filled reclaimed wetlands and shallow-water areas.
Liquefaction may also contribute to sand blows, which are also known as sand boils or sand volcanoes. Sand blows often accompany the liquefaction of sandy or silty soil. With the collapse of the soil’s granular structure, the density of the soil increases. This increased pressure squeezes the water out of the pore spaces between the soil grains and expels wet sand from the ground. Sand blows have been observed in the aftermath of several earthquakes, including the New Madrid earthquakes of 1811–12, the Tangshan earthquake of 1976, the San Francisco–Oakland earthquake of 1989, and the Christchurch earthquakes of 2010–11.
In addition, liquefaction may also cause landslides. For example, during the Alaska earthquake of 1964, the liquefaction of a sandy layer of soft clay beneath Turnagain Heights, a suburb of Anchorage, caused a landslide in the mass of ground above that destroyed approximately 75 homes and disrupted utilities.
