Titanosaur,  (clade Titanosauria),  diverse group of sauropod dinosaurs classified in the clade Titanosauria, which lived from the Late Jurassic Epoch (163.5 million to 145 million years ago) to the end of the Cretaceous Period (145 million to 66 million years ago). Titanosaur fossils have been found on all continents except Antarctica and include some 40 species. The group contains the largest terrestrial animals known, some even approaching the size of modern whales.
Like other sauropods, titanosaurs were herbivorous quadrupeds with long tails, long necks, and small heads. They differed from other sauropods, however, in that the titanosaurs’ bodies were stockier and their limbs produced a wider stance than other sauropods. Titanosaurs also possessed vertebrae with a honeycomb-like internal structure and six sacral vertebrae (vertebrae adjacent to the pelvis), but they lacked the hyposphene-hypantrum joints (which connected one vertebra to another) in their dorsal vertebrae (vertebrae that articulate with the ribs). In addition, some titanosaurs, such as Rapetosaurus and Saltasaurus, have been shown to have possessed osteoderms (armoured plates).
Titanosaur size varied greatly. One of the smallest forms, Neuquensaurus, whose size was estimated from only a few bones, grew to a length of 7 metres (about 23 feet) and a weight of approximately 10,000 kg (11 tons). The most complete set of remains, however, belongs to Dreadnoughtus and includes approximately 70 percent of the dinosaur’s skeleton behind its head. The finding of such complete remains allowed paleontologists to make confident estimates of the dinosaur’s length and weight. Although other titanosaurs (such as Patagotitan and Argentinosaurus, whose weights have been estimated at 63.5 metric tons [70 tons] and 70 metric tons [77 tons], respectively) have been conjectured to have been larger than Dreadnoughtus, which was 26 metres (about 85 feet) long and weighed 59 metric tons (65 tons), Dreadnoughtus was the largest titanosaur whose size can be calculated accurately and was also the largest known land animal in Earth’s history.
The clade Titanosauria encompasses several different genera of titanosaurs, but Titanosaurus, which was the first form to be discovered and would later inspire the name of the larger group, is not an officially recognized genus. The first titanosaur fossils, belonging to Titanosaurus indicus, were described in 1877. The species is known from a femur and two caudal vertebrae found in rocks dating to the Cretaceous in central India. Shortly after its discovery, however, the status of Titanosaurus as a true genus was questioned. The fossils, of a fragmentary nature, were superficially similar to remains of other sauropods that were initially classified as titanosaurs, and the genus Titanosaurus became a “wastebin taxon”—a group that serves as a placeholder for fossils too indistinct to be classified in other groups.
