Tropical and subtropical desert climate,  major climate type of the Köppen classification dominated in all months by the subtropical anticyclone (or subtropical high), with its descending air, elevated inversions, and clear skies. Such an atmospheric environment inhibits precipitation. Most of Earth’s tropical, true desert (BW) climates occur between 15° and 30° latitude, at the poleward end of the Hadley cell circulation (see atmosphere). In the Köppen-Geiger-Pohl system, this climate is divided between the tropical desert (BWh) and subtropical desert (part of BWk) subtypes.
The most extreme arid areas also are far removed from sources of moisture-bearing winds in the interiors of continents and are best developed on the western sides of continents, where the subtropical anticyclone shows its most intense development. An exception to the general tendency for aridity to be associated with subsidence is in the so-called Horn of Africa region, where the dryness of Somalia is caused more by the orientation of the landmass in relation to the atmospheric circulation. Both the high- and low-sun monsoonal winds blow parallel to the coast, so that moisture-laden maritime air can penetrate over land only infrequently.
In most low-latitude deserts, cloud cover is uncommon (fewer than 30 days per year have clouds in some areas). Precipitation amounts are mostly in the range 0–25 cm (0–10 inches), although the unreliability of precipitation is more significant than the small totals. Average figures have little meaning; a location with a 10-year mean of 5 cm (2 inches), for example, might have received 50 cm (about 20 inches) in one year as a result of an unusual intrusion of moist air, followed by nine years with no measurable precipitation.
Temperatures are high, with monthly means in the range 21–32 °C (70–90 °F). Daily temperature variations are extreme. Ranges of 35 °C (63 °F) are not unknown when daytime maxima in excess of 40 °C (104 °F) are followed by a rapid nocturnal temperature drop brought about by the limited capacity of the dry, cloudless desert air to emit infrared radiation to the ground to offset radiation loss from the surface at night. The highest air temperatures recorded on Earth have been in the BWh regions; for example, in shaded, well-ventilated locations, Death Valley in the western United States has reached 57 °C (135 °F), while al-ʿAzīzīyah in Libya has had a recorded high of 58 °C (136 °F). Actual surface temperatures may reach 82 °C (180 °F) on dry sand under intense sunshine.
An interesting variant of tropical and subtropical deserts are the so-called West Coast Desert areas found on the western coastal margins of the regions discussed above (such as in the Sonoran Desert of North America, the Peru and Atacama deserts of South America, and the Sahara [Moroccan part] and Namib deserts of Africa). These areas are much cooler than their latitude would suggest (monthly mean temperatures of only 15–21 °C [59–70 °F]), and parts are classified as BWk in Köppen’s scheme. The cooling results from airflow off adjacent coastal waters where upwelling of the ocean gives rise to cold currents. Deserts of this sort are subject to frequent fog and low-level clouds; yet they are extremely arid. Some parts of the Atacama Desert, for example, have recorded no precipitation for 20 years.
