Weather modification,  the deliberate or the inadvertent alternation of atmospheric conditions by human activity, sufficient to modify the weather on local or regional scales.
Humans have long sought to purposefully alter such atmospheric phenomena as clouds, rain, snow, hail, lightning, thunderstorms, tornadoes, hurricanes, and cyclones. The modern era of scientific weather modification began in 1946 with work by Vincent J. Schaefer and Irving Langmuir at the General Electric Research Laboratories in Schenectady, N.Y. Schaefer discovered that when dry ice (frozen carbon dioxide) pellets were dropped into a cloud composed of water droplets in a deep-freeze box, the droplets were rapidly replaced by ice crystals, which increased in size and then fell to the bottom of the box.
The Schaefer-Langmuir experiments in the laboratory and the atmosphere demonstrated that so-called supercooled clouds—namely those composed of water droplets at temperatures below freezing—could be dissipated. When the supercooled clouds were seeded with grains of dry ice, ice crystals formed and grew large enough to fall out of the clouds.
Certain substances other than dry ice can be used to seed clouds. For example, when silver iodide and lead iodide are burned, they create a smoke of tiny particles. These particles produce ice crystals in supercooled clouds below temperatures of about −5° C as the supercooled cloud droplets evaporate. The water vapour is then free to deposit onto the silver iodide or lead iodide crystals. Although many other materials can cause ice crystals to form, the above-mentioned are the most widely used. For the most part, dry ice is dispersed from airplanes, but silver iodide nuclei may be generated on the ground and carried upward by air currents, introduced from airplanes, or produced by pyrotechnic devices such as rockets or exploding artillery shells.
A wide variety of scientific tests and operational weather modification projects have been performed in many countries. The largest programs have been in the United States, the former Soviet Union, Australia, and France.
Most weather modification programs in the United States have dealt with rain or snow. Although there is still considerable debate about the effectiveness of cloud seeding, the evidence indicates that under certain meteorological conditions, ice nuclei seeding may increase precipitation by amounts ranging up to some tens of percent. In other circumstances decreases may occur, and, in still others, seeding has no effect.
In Russia, various other former Soviet republics, and South Africa, the major programs of weather modification were aimed at reducing the fall of damaging hail. Experimentation in this area was apparently successful. Procedures involved introducing ice nuclei into potential hail clouds by means of artillery or rockets. Attempts to modify hailstorms in other countries have had mixed success.
A number of hurricanes were seeded with ice nuclei by American scientists. Although results have been inconclusive, some meteorologists believe it is possible to reduce hurricane intensities in some instances. Before asserting that hurricanes can be beneficially modified, however, more research is needed. Currently, there are no programs anywhere in the world attempting to seed hurricanes. Limited attempts to modify mid-latitude cyclones in the past have not been successful. In the case of tornadoes, knowledge of their dynamic structure remains limited, and no attempts have been made to control them.
There are many misunderstandings about the present status of weather modification. Present techniques are concerned mostly with the influence of existing cloud systems. There is no evidence and no reason for believing, at this stage, that cloud seeding may cause or end droughts. Such dry periods result from peculiarities in the general circulation of the atmosphere that lead to sinking air and cloud-free skies in areas accustomed to precipitation. When there are no clouds present, there can be no cloud seeding.
As meteorologists have developed schemes for changing the weather, the ecological, social, and legal problems have become more serious. Many U.S. states have laws governing weather modification activities. Lawsuits have been filed in which the parties have contested ownership of the clouds and the precipitation therein.
Cloud droplets form when atmospheric water vapour condenses on small particles in the atmosphere called cloud condensation nuclei (CCN). Typically, a cloud is composed of tiny spheres of water that range in diameter from a few micrometres to a few tens of micrometres. The number of cloud droplets per cubic centimetre ranges from less than 100 to more than 1,000; 200 droplets per cubic centimetre is approximately an average value. Clouds over the ocean typically have fewer cloud droplets per cubic centimetre than their counterparts over land, since fewer CCN are present in marine air.
An important characteristic of a cloud is its temperature. When it is everywhere above 0° C, the cloud is said to be warm. Often, clouds develop at altitudes where temperatures are below 0° C, but the droplets do not freeze because of the purity of the water. Such clouds are said to be supercooled. In the atmosphere, supercooling to temperatures of −10° C or even −20° C is not unusual. The lower the temperature, the greater the likelihood that the droplets will intercept so-called ice nuclei, which cause them to freeze. At temperatures below about −40° C, virtually all clouds are composed of ice crystals.
Many all-liquid clouds, whether warm or supercooled, are stable in the sense that the droplets are limited in size to a few tens of micrometres, and the clouds may last for some time without yielding rain or snow.
Sometimes nature is deficient in ice nuclei, and as a result supercooled clouds may persist for many hours. When this is the case, the addition of ice nuclei can upset the cloud stability by causing ice crystals to form; these can then grow and result in precipitation.
The introduction of any substance into clouds for the purpose of changing them is called cloud seeding. Warm clouds (above 0° C) have been seeded with materials such as sodium chloride or calcium chloride particles or by a water spray. The objective of these procedures is to produce giant cloud droplets that will grow by coalescence, fall, and sweep out smaller cloud droplets. Fogs over airports have been seeded in order to reduce the density of the cloud and to improve the visibility and ceiling conditions. Warm convective clouds have been seeded in an effort to increase rainfall.
Aircraft have been used to dispense a water spray or salt particles. In some cases, salt-water sprays have been dispersed. Unfortunately, such solutions tend to be corrosive to aircraft surfaces and have to be handled carefully. In some programs sodium chloride particles in powdered form have been blown up from the ground.
Most cloud-modification activities have been concerned with supercooled clouds and have involved seeding with ice nuclei. The first substance found to be effective as a cloud-seeding agent was dry ice. Its temperature is so low (about −78° C) that it causes ice crystals to form spontaneously from water vapour. It has been estimated that a gram of dry ice will produce at least 3 × 1010 ice crystals. The most common procedure for seeding with dry ice is to fly over a cloud and disperse crushed pellets, less than a millimetre to a few millimetres in diameter, along the path of flight. A typical seeding rate might be several kilograms of dry ice per kilometre of flight.
Dry ice is no longer widely employed as a cloud-seeding agent because it suffers from the disadvantage of having to be delivered to the supercooled regions of the cloud and from the fact that, once a pellet of dry ice has evaporated, it can no longer affect the cloud. Supercooled clouds are now most commonly seeded with tiny particles of silver iodide.
There are many techniques for seeding with silver iodide. All of them produce large numbers of minute particles that range in diameter from about 0.01 to 0.1 micrometre. A common procedure is to dissolve silver iodide in a solution of sodium iodide in acetone. The concentration of silver iodide may range from 1 to 10 percent. When the solution is burned in a well-ventilated chamber at a temperature of about 1,100° C, a very large number of ice nuclei are produced. The concentration increases rapidly as the temperature decreases. A typical quantity at −10° C is 1013 ice nuclei per gram of silver iodide. Exposure to ultraviolet light causes rapid deactivation of the silver iodide nuclei. The concentrations of nuclei may decrease by perhaps a factor of 10 for each hour of exposure.
In the United States, France, Switzerland, and Argentina, a great deal of the silver iodide seeding has been performed by means of ground generators. When this is the case, air currents are expected to transport the nuclei into the supercooled parts of the cloud.
Experimenters in the United States, Australia, Israel, and other countries have also used airplanes for dispersing silver iodide particles. For the most part, silver iodide in acetone has been burned in generators suspended from the wings of one or more airplanes. In some tests pyrotechnical devices have been employed for this purpose. When they are dropped from above into clouds, a solid mixture of silver iodide and an inflammable substance is ignited.
Soviet experimenters relied on rockets fired from the ground. This procedure was first employed in Italy, but the Soviets refined it by employing a superior rocket in which the pyrotechnic mixture could be ignited anywhere along the path of flight. Also in the Soviet experiments a great deal of ice-nuclei seeding was performed by means of 70-millimetre artillery guns that fired projectiles containing 100 to 200 grams of lead iodide or silver iodide. At a predetermined position the projectile exploded and dispersed the ice nuclei.
Most cloud-modification work has been concerned with changing the size of cloud particles or the buoyancy of the cloud air. A number of scientists have been interested in developing procedures for changing the electrical structure of clouds. One practical goal has been the reduction of the number of forest fires caused by lightning. Small clouds have been modified electrically by releasing large quantities of ions from a long piece of wire mounted near the ground.
Attempts to change the electrical nature of large thunderstorms have involved seeding with ice nuclei and, in another set of experiments, with large numbers of short metal strips. The object has been to prevent the electrical charge of clouds from becoming so concentrated that a lightning stroke would occur.
