Álvaro Siza, in full Álvaro Joaquim de Melo Siza Vieira,  (born June 25, 1933, Matosinhos, Portugal), Portuguese architect and designer whose structures, ranging from swimming pools to public housing developments, were characterized by a quiet clarity of form and function, a sensitive integration into their environment, and a purposeful engagement with both cultural and architectural traditions. He was awarded the Pritzker Prize in 1992.
Siza grew up in a large Roman Catholic family in Matosinhos, near Porto. As a youth, he intended to become a sculptor, but his father’s objections and his own admiration for the work of Catalan architect Antoni Gaudí led him in 1949 to enroll in an architecture program at the Porto Fine Arts School (now part of the University of Porto). He soon developed a deep affinity for the discipline, and in 1954, a year before he graduated, he opened a private architecture practice in Porto and designed four houses in his hometown (completed 1957).
In 1955–58 Siza collaborated with Fernando Távora, a former professor of his, who instilled in him an architectural philosophy that maintained a respect for vernacular traditions but sought their continuity within a contemporary context. (Much of Siza’s future work drew from and extended the principles of Modernism.) Through this association, Siza received the opportunity to design the Boa Nova teahouse and restaurant (1963; renovated 2014), a structure on the coast at Leça da Palmeira that won acclaim for its use of diverse materials and its subtle interaction with the rocky landscape onto which it was built. He received further attention for another design in that town, a public swimming pool complex (1966) in an isolated oceanside setting in which the pools’ edges were shaped both by concrete walls and by the beach’s natural rock formations.
For much of his early career, Siza had designed small private houses, but he turned to mass public housing in the early 1970s, especially after Portugal’s 1974 Revolution of the Carnations, which provided him with a sociopolitical context for his work. For the government-supported organization SAAL (Serviço de Apoio Ambulatório Local), which aimed to improve conditions in urban slums, he built the Bouça and São Victor housing projects (both 1977) in Porto. In 1977 he commenced work on the Quinta da Malagueira development in Évora, consisting of 1,200 single-family row houses constructed in phases over more than 20 years. These commissions brought Siza international recognition, and from the late 1970s onward he increasingly worked outside Portugal, primarily in other western European countries. Maintaining an interest in urban development, in the 1980s he began directing a long-term renovation plan in a district of The Hague as well as a rebuilding project in the Chiado neighbourhood of Lisbon.
Other works include the Borges and Irmão Bank (1986) in Vila do Conde, Portugal, a building marked by dynamic curves and distinct spatial fluidity that was honoured with the inaugural Mies van der Rohe Award for European Architecture (1988); and a cylindrical meteorological centre (1992) in Barcelona, created for the 1992 Olympic Games. Some of Siza’s most notable later designs were for art museums, namely the Galician Centre of Contemporary Art (1993) in Santiago de Compostela, Spain; the Museu Serralves (1997) in Porto; and the Iberê Camargo Museum (2008) in Porto Alegre, Brazil. Additionally, he occasionally collaborated on small-scale projects with his compatriot and former student Eduardo Souto de Moura. These projects included the wooden canopy for the 2005 Serpentine Gallery Pavilion, London, and the renovation of the Municipal Museum Abade Pedrosa and an addition to house the International Contemporary Sculpture Museum (2016), both in Santo Tirso, Portugal.
Siza continued to consider materials and form as the 21st century progressed. He added glossy tiles to the exterior of the Paraninfo de la Universidad del País Vasco (2010), an auditorium in Bilbao, Spain, and collaborated with architects Carlos Castanheira and Jun Sung Kim to build a curving concrete structure for the Mimesis Museum (2010), an institution for modern art in Paju Book City, Paju, South Korea. Siza also created a serene office for the Shihlien Chemical Industrial Jiangsu Company (2014), using white concrete to form a hairpin-shaped building that seemingly floats on an artificial lake in Huai’an City, China. He later utilized red brick and horizontal forms to integrate a performing arts centre (2015) into the rolling landscape of Llinars del Vallès, a village outside Barcelona. White concrete again was his choice for such buildings as the Nadir Afonso Foundation (2016), a contemporary art museum in Chaves, Portugal; the church of Saint-Jacques-de-la-Lande (2018), near Rennes, France; and the Capela do Monte (2018; “Hillside Chapel”), Barão de São João, Portugal. Siza also clad buildings in red sandstone (the International Design Museum of China [2018; with Castanheira], Hangzhou), in travertine (two housing blocks [2020] in Gallarate, Italy), and in black corrugated metal (the Huamao Museum of Art and Education [2020; with Castanheira], Ningbo, China).
In 1966–69 Siza taught at the University of Porto, and in 1976 he returned as a full professor. Before his retirement in 2003, he designed several buildings for the Porto School of Architecture. Siza is the recipient of many awards, including the Pritzker Architecture Prize (1992), the Japan Art Association’s Praemium Imperiale prize for architecture (1998), and the Golden Lion for lifetime achievement at the Venice Architecture Bienniale (2012).
