Cesar Pelli,  (born October 12, 1926, San Miguel de Tucumán, Argentina—died July 19, 2019, New Haven, Connecticut), Argentine-born American architect who was widely regarded as one of the 20th century’s preeminent architects.
After earning a bachelor’s degree in architecture at the National University of Tucumán, Pelli moved to the United States to attend the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, where he received a master’s degree in 1954. He began his professional career with the firm of Eero Saarinen and Associates in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, and Hamden, Connecticut, where, among other projects, he worked on the Trans World Airlines Terminal at the John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York City. Pelli was director of design at Daniel, Mann, Johnson, & Mendenhall in Los Angeles from 1964 to 1968 and at Gruen Associates, also in Los Angeles, from 1968 to 1977. During those years he perfected the technology of glass skins, producing buildings of lightweight, translucent quality. He served as dean of the School of Architecture at Yale University from 1977 to 1984 and established (1977) his own practice, Cesar Pelli and Associates (now Pelli Clarke Pelli) in New Haven, Connecticut. During this period the taut style of his early work evolved into stone-clad buildings of greater sculptural quality.
By the mid-1990s Pelli was known for the lightweight, almost tentlike, appearance of his buildings, which were often surfaced in glass or a thin stone veneer. His projects displayed a fascination with abstract, crystalline glass shapes shot through with lines of coloured stone or metal. Among his best-known works are the Pacific Design Center in Los Angeles, the U.S. embassy in Tokyo, the expansion and renovation of the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, the World Financial Center and Winter Garden in New York City, the Canary Wharf Tower in London, and the Carnegie Hall Tower in New York City. The Pacific Design Center, notable for its reflective, opaque blue-glass exterior and geometric design, brought Pelli early recognition. His Museum of Modern Art gallery expansion and residential tower was hailed as an innovative reworking of an important cultural landmark. Pelli also designed the two circular, step-tapered Petronas Twin Towers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Upon completion in 1996 they became, at 452 metres (1,483 feet), the tallest buildings in the world, and in 2004 Pelli received the Aga Khan Award for Architecture for his design. (The award is given every three years “to identify and encourage building concepts that successfully address the needs and aspirations of societies in which Muslims have a significant presence.”) Critics described Pelli’s work as “poetic” and “fresh” and noted his diversity, sensitivity to site, and innovative solutions to architectural problems. At the turn of the 21st century, Pelli continued his decades-long career with a commission to design the Connecticut Science Center in Hartford. It was completed in June 2009.
Throughout his career Pelli lectured and published extensively. He won more than 80 awards for design excellence, including the American Institute of Architects’ 1995 Gold Medal, its highest honour.
