Château,   in France, during the 13th and 14th centuries, a castle, or structure arranged for defense rather than for residence. Later the term came to designate any seignorial residence and so, generally, a country house of any pretensions.
Originally, châteaus functioned as feudal communities; but with the rise of secular prosperity in the 14th century, the restrictive manorial system relaxed, giving rise to the spacious yet still-fortified private residence of the nobility. These compounds, or château-forts, were usually placed on hills in a commanding position above river valleys. Walls were thick, windows were small, and parapets were often crenellated to resist attack. Architectural forms were freely borrowed from medieval bastions. A representative example of this type of fortified château is the Château de Pierrefonds (1390–1400). Eight monumental towers, machicolations (i.e., openings from which missiles could be hurled or shot at attackers below), and battlemented walls surround a courtyard the walls of which are 20 feet (7 metres) thick. The château sits on a rocky cliff overlooking the village and can be approached only by a drawbridge that spans a moat.
The 15th century brought the beginning of a change in the methods of warfare, a decline in the feudal system, and the consequent rise of a social order in which luxuriant country houses rather than fortified castles filled the residence requirements of the nobility. The Château d’Amboise (15th century), Château de Blois (begun in the 13th century), Château de Chambord (1519–47), Château d’Azay-le-Rideau (1518–27), and Château de Chenonceaux (1515–23) may be taken as typical examples of the châteaux de plaisance (country houses) of the transition period, all retaining some of the characteristics of the medieval castle.
At Chambord, for example, the semifortified plan places the main house within a rectangular enclosure protected by a moat. The main inner building, the donjon, is the equivalent of the keep in a medieval English castle. Angle towers with conical roofs, pilasters, supporting classical parapets, and steeply pitched roofs with dormers combine to create a potpourri of architectural motifs. These distinctive and fantastic elements produce, at Chambord, the most famous château in the Loire River district and one that can be placed somewhere between fortified Gothic castle, Renaissance palace, and fairyland.
By the 17th century the need for semifortified châteaus had virtually vanished. In their place were built elegant, refined country villas such as the Château of Maisons (now Maisons-Laffitte) by François Mansart, which was designed, for the most part, by 1642. See also castle.
