Christian de Portzamparc,  (born May 5, 1944, Casablanca, Morocco), French architect and urban planner whose distinctly modern and elegant designs reflected his sensitivity to and understanding of the greater urban environment. He was the first French architect to win the Pritzker Prize (1994).
Portzamparc’s interest in architecture and the built environment was stirred at a young age when he viewed sketches by Swiss architect Le Corbusier. Beginning in 1962 he studied architecture at the École Nationale des Beaux-Arts in Paris. He studied under Eugène Beaudouin and George Candilis. Though Portzamparc graduated with a degree in architecture in 1969, he was unsure that it was the career path for him. Just out of school, he worked alongside a team of sociologists studying neighbourhoods throughout Paris, the buildings and their inhabitants and how their physical living conditions did and did not meet their needs. Through that experience Portzamparc came to view architecture not merely as a professional discipline but as a social responsibility. One of his earliest projects revealed his interest in addressing urban density. For an apartment complex in the centre of Paris, Hautes-Formes (1979), he incorporated open spaces and walkways between a group of seven residential buildings.
In 1980 Portzamparc established his own firm, Atelier Christian de Portzamparc. Portzamparc’s passion for music led him to design many performing arts venues, including the Paris Opéra Ballet School in Nanterre, France (completed 1987), and what was called the Cité de la musique (opened 1995; later part of what is called Philharmonie 2) in Paris, which redefined an industrial and underused part of the city by means of concert halls, an amphitheatre, practice spaces, a music museum, and a library. In addition, he constructed the Philharmonie Luxembourg (completed 2005), praised by leading musicians and conductors for its acoustic capacities; the Cidade das Artes in Rio de Janeiro (completed 2013); and the Shangyin Opera House, Shanghai (2019). Portzamparc also designed the Christian Dior flagship store (2015) in Seoul, whose undulating shell recalls flowing fabric. Other noteworthy projects included the LVMH Tower (1999), the Hearst Tower (2000),  One57 (2014), and Prism Tower (2016), all in New York City. Portzamparc’s later projects comprise the Paris La Defense Arena (2017), built for sporting events and concerts—the Rolling Stones performed during its opening celebrations—and the Suzhou Bay Cultural Center (2020), Shanghai.
Portzamparc was recognized as a Commander of the Order of Arts and Letters by the French Ministry of Culture (1989) and was awarded the Great Prize of Architecture of the City of Paris (1990) and the Pritzker Architecture Prize (1994). In 2018 he received the Japan Art Association’s prestigious Praemium Imperiale prize for architecture. He was the author of Généalogie des formes = Genealogy of Forms (1996), in French and English, and (with Philippe Sollers) Voir, écrire (2003; Eng. trans. Writing and Seeing Architecture).
