Classical architecture,  architecture of ancient Greece and Rome, especially from the 5th century bce in Greece to the 3rd century ce in Rome, that emphasized the column and pediment. Greek architecture was based chiefly on the post-and-beam system, with columns carrying the load. Timber construction was superseded by construction in marble and stone. The column, a unit human in scale, was used as a module for all of a temple’s proportions. The Doric order, probably the earliest, remained the favourite of the Greek mainland and western colonies. The Ionic order developed in eastern Greece; on the mainland, it was used chiefly for smaller temples and interiors. Both Doric and Ionic orders are present in the Athens Acropolis, the greatest Greek architectural achievement. By the late 5th century bce, the orders were applied to such structures as stoas and theatres. The Hellenistic Age produced more elaborate and richly decorated architecture, with often colossal buildings. Many of the great buildings were secular rather than religious, and the Ionic and especially the newer Corinthian orders were widely used. The Romans used the Greek orders and added two new ones, Tuscan and Composite, but the Corinthian was by far the most popular. Roman architects used columns not only as functional bearing elements but also as applied (engaged) decoration. Though rigidly adhering to symmetry, the Romans used a variety of spatial forms. Whereas Greek temples were isolated and almost always faced east-west, Roman temples were oriented with respect to other buildings. Roman columns carried arches as well as entablatures, permitting greater spatial freedom. The discovery of concrete enormously facilitated construction using the arch, vault, and dome, as in the Pantheon. Other public buildings included basilicas, baths (see thermae), amphitheatres, and triumphal arches. Classical architecture may also refer to architecture of later periods that employs Greek or Roman forms. See also Western architecture: The Classical period.
