Crypt,   vault or subterranean chamber, usually under a church floor. In Latin, crypta designated any vaulted building partially or entirely below the ground level, such as sewers, the stalls for horses and chariots in a circus, farm storage cellars, or a long gallery known as a cryptoporticus, like that on the Palatine Hill in Rome. It was natural, therefore, for the early Christians to call their catacombs crypts; and, when churches came to be erected over the tombs of saints and martyrs, subterranean chapels, known as crypts or confessiones, were built around the actual tomb. The most famous of these was St. Peter’s, built over the circus of Nero, the site of St. Peter’s martyrdom.
As early as the reign of the Roman emperor Constantine the Great (306–337), the crypt was considered a normal part of the church building. Further incentive to the building of crypts was provided by growth of ecclesiastical sanction of burials within the church walls. The Council of Mainz (813) officially approved the interment of bishops, abbots, worthy priests, or loyal laymen in a church, and from that time burials within the building, usually in the crypt, multiplied.
Later the size of the crypt was increased to include the entire space under the floor of the church choir or chancel, as in the 10th-century crypt of S. Ambrogio at Milan. With the increased desire for richness in all parts of the church, the general plan became more complex. The choir floor, for example, was raised, thereby opening the front of the crypt to the nave, which then was on an intermediate level between the crypt and the choir. Monumental flights of steps were often designed to lead down to the crypt in the centre and up to the choir on either side. The arcaded fronts of these crypts frequently became an important decorative feature, as in the 12th-century church of S. Zeno Maggiore in Verona, and in S. Miniato at Florence (1013).
Where Byzantine influence was strong, crypts were less common and, when built, were of a totally different type, frequently as cellars under the entire church area, as in Trani cathedral in southern Italy (12th century). St. Mark’s at Venice has a remarkable crypt of Greek-cross plan, which, in fact, functioned as a secondary church.
Outside Italy there was great variation in both commonness and size of crypts. Rhenish churches followed the Lombard Italian precedent of an appreciably raised choir with an important crypt beneath it, but the end beneath the nave was usually closed. Elsewhere in western Europe the choir level was much less raised, and the crypt, where present, tended more and more to become a lower church.
Crypts were highly developed in England throughout the Romanesque and Gothic periods. At Canterbury the crypt (dating from 1100) forms a large and complex church, with apse and chapels, and the extreme east end, under Trinity chapel, is famous as the original burial place of Thomas Becket. The earlier (late 11th century) crypts of Winchester, Worcester, and Gloucester are similarly apsidal but simpler in plan.
Many medieval secular buildings were built over vaulted substructures, and remains of such crypts occur widely throughout Europe. The German Rathäuser (town halls) have many fine and richly decorated crypts, such as the famous cellar of the Bremen Rathaus. Notable English examples of nonecclesiastical crypts are in Gerard’s hall, now destroyed, and the Guildhall (1411), in London. Crypts often occur in traditionally designed cathedrals of the 19th and 20th centuries. The Cathedral of St. John the Divine in New York City, for example, contains an elaborately decorated crypt.
