Dominique Perrault,  (born April 9, 1953, Clermont-Ferrand, France), French architect and designer known for his striking Modernist designs and inventive repurposing of existing or historic buildings. He gained international acclaim for his design of the Bibliothèque Nationale de France.
Perrault earned a bachelor’s degree in architecture from the École Nationale Supérieure des Beaux-Arts in 1978, a degree in urban planning in 1979 from the École Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées (now École des Ponts ParisTech), and a master’s degree in history in 1980 from the École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales. A year later he established his own architectural firm in Paris, and he proceeded to complete a number of projects throughout the 1980s, including the Someloir factory in Châteaudun, France (1981–83); the ESIEE, an engineering school in Marne-la-Vallée, France (1984–87); and the Industrial Hotel Berlier in Paris, a mixed-use commercial building (1986–90).
In 1989 Perrault’s sleek Modernist design won the international competition for the Bibliothèque Nationale de France (1995), also called the François-Mitterrand Library. Perrault designed four buildings that stand like open books at the four angles of a rectangular plaza. The buildings, plaza, and all the interior furnishings were designed by Perrault in steel, glass, and wood. That design launched Perrault into the international architecture arena. His next significant project was the Olympic velodrome (cycling track) and swimming pool (1999) in Berlin. In 1992 he expanded his practice and opened an office in Berlin. Perrault won a competition in 1996 for his design to expand the Court of Justice of the European Union in Luxembourg. While working on the project, Perrault also opened an office in that city. His design for the expansion comprised two dramatic gold towers that, at 328 feet (100 metres) high, rise above all other buildings in the city. The main courtroom is enclosed in a gold steel-mesh canopy that can be seen from the outside of the building and lets natural light into the chamber.
In 2004 Perrault designed the campus centre of the Ewha Womans University in Seoul (2008)—a multipurpose building constructed under a hill that is bisected by a valley. The valley serves as a major thoroughfare while providing the open space necessary for bringing light through the glass curtain windows of the somewhat subterranean student centre. The top of the building serves both as a roof and as an open green space for students. Other notable projects completed in the 2000s include the new modern town hall and a rehabilitation of the original 14th-century building for shops and a hotel in Innsbruck, Austria (2004); the GKD Factory in Maryland (2004), his first design in the United States; the Olympic Tennis Centre in Madrid (2009); and the Fukoku insurance company office building in Ōsaka (2010).
Perrault’s buildings continued to elicit surprise. He dressed his structure for the Albi Grand Theater, Albi, France (2014), in a distinctive copper mesh to protect the facade from sun and rain. He also covered his building for the mechanical engineering department at the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland (2016), though there he used panels of metal screens that fold and unfold to temper sunlight. Meanwhile, he built Vienna’s tallest skyscraper, DC Tower 1 (2014), and refurbished the Longchamp racecourse, Paris (2017). He also repurposed the Poste du Louvre, Paris (2020), a post office originally constructed in 1880–88, into a mixed-use building.
Perrault taught architecture in several universities in Europe and in the United States. In 2013 he became a professor at EPFL, where he also directed the Laboratory of Underground Architecture, which explores the possibilities of building belowground. Throughout his prolific career, Perrault was honoured with numerous awards, including the Grand National Prize for Architecture in France (1993), the Mies Van der Rohe Pavilion Award for European Architecture (1997), and the Praemium Imperiale International Arts Award from the Japan Art Association (2015). 
