Eduardo Souto de Moura, in full Eduardo Elísio Machado Souto de Moura,  (born July 25, 1952, Porto, Portugal), Portuguese architect known for integrating the clean lines of minimalism with such non-minimal elements as colour and the use of local materials. In 2011 he won the Pritzker Architecture Prize, whose jury cited the “intelligence and seriousness” of his work and noted that his architecture “appears effortless, serene, and simple.”
Souto de Moura attended the Porto Higher Institute of Fine Arts (Escola Superior de Belas Artes do Porto [ESBAP]; now part of the University of Porto), where he initially studied sculpture. By his own account, he changed his focus to architecture after meeting the American minimalist artist Donald Judd, who appreciated the communal nature of architecture as opposed to what he considered the solitary work of sculpting. Souto de Moura worked briefly with architect Noé Dinis and then for five years (1975–79) with the firm of Álvaro Siza, a leading influence (as was Ludwig Mies van der Rohe) and himself a Pritzker Prize winner. Although Souto de Moura established his own company in 1980, he and Siza enjoyed their collaboration and continued to work together on several projects. These included the wooden canopy for the 2005 Serpentine Gallery Pavilion, London, as well as the renovation of the Municipal Museum Abade Pedrosa and an addition to house the International Contemporary Sculpture Museum (2016), both in Santo Tirso, Portugal. Beginning in 1980, Souto de Moura also taught architecture at his alma mater.
Souto de Moura’s first major commission was the Municipal Market in Braga, Portugal (1984; remodeled as a cultural centre by the architect in 2001). He then won a competition to design the cultural centre Casa das Artes in Porto (1991). The building uses such diverse materials as copper, stone, concrete, and wood, to pleasing effect. In the following years Souto de Moura steadily engaged in building single-family houses, mostly in northern Portugal, and these notably included House Number Two (1994) in Braga. Constructed of concrete terraces on a hillside, the home offers space for gardens and a pool. He also converted an abandoned Cistercian monastery into an elegant inn, the Pousada de Santa Maria do Bouro in Amares (1997).
In the 21st century Souto de Moura continued to design single-family homes, including the House in Serra Arrábida (2002), Portugal, while completing a variety of large-scale projects. He designed a home and exhibition space for the Portuguese film director Manoel de Oliveira called Cinema House (2003). The building features two large hooded windows that recall camera lenses and a base that suggests a shutter gauge. He also designed the Braga Municipal Stadium (2003), using crushed granite from the site for the concrete of the building; the Metro do Porto, the subway system in Porto (2005); and the Burgo Tower, an office complex also in Porto (2007). The Portuguese artist Paula Rego commissioned a museum to house her work in Cascais (Casa das Histórias Paula Rego, 2008), for which Souto de Moura created two distinct pyramid-shaped towers of red concrete at the entrance. He also designed many other structures, including the Cultural Centre of Viana do Castelo (2013); the restoration of the São Lourenço do Barrocal estate (2017), Monsaraz, Portugal, into a remote retreat; and the Comédie Clermont-Ferrand (2020), a theatre in France. Among Souto de Moura’s many other projects are a bridge, a wine cellar, golf resorts, exposition pavilions, and several more office buildings. Before receiving the Pritzker Prize, Souto de Moura worked chiefly in Portugal, with the occasional excursion into such countries as Italy, Spain, Switzerland, and Belgium.
