François Mansart,  Mansart also spelled Mansard,  (born January 1598, Paris—died  September 1666), architect important for establishing classicism in Baroque architecture in mid-17th-century France. His buildings are notable for their subtlety, elegance, and harmony. His most complete surviving work is the château of Maisons.
Mansart was the grandson of a master mason and the son of a master carpenter. One of his uncles was a sculptor, another an architect. When his father died in 1610, Mansart’s training was taken over by his brother-in-law, an architect and sculptor. Later, Mansart was apprenticed to and heavily influenced by Salomon de Brosse, a distinguished and successful architect during the reign of Henry IV and the regency of Marie de Médicis, mother of Louis XIII.
The 1600s, which saw the end of de Brosse’s career and the beginning of Mansart’s, could not have been more favourable for a young architect. Henry IV’s entrance into Paris in 1594 as king of France signaled the beginning of a period of burgeoning political and social aspiration. Architecture reflected this aspiration, for the kings wanted their capital and their palaces to reflect the power of the crown; and the bourgeoisie commissioned châteaus (country houses) and hotels (town mansions) large enough for their coaches, stables of horses, and retinue of servants and splendid enough to receive the king and his entourage.
Most of Mansart’s patrons were members of the middle class who had become rich in the service of the crown. They would have to have been very rich indeed to be Mansart’s patrons. Not only did he draw up plans without regard to expense but he also refined and improved the plans—tearing down what had been built and rebuilding—as he went along. According to a contemporary, Mansart had cost one of his early patrons “more money than the Great Turk himself possesses.”
Mansart’s career can be traced from 1623, when he designed the facade of the chapel of the church of the Feuillants in the Rue Saint-Honoré in Paris (no longer standing). Of his early works, the only one that survives is the château of Balleroy (begun c. 1626), near Bayeux, in the département of Calvados. Built for Jean de Choisy, chancellor to Gaston, duc d’Orléans, the brother of Louis XIII, the château consists of three blocks—a massive, free-standing main building to which two small pavilions are subordinated. One of the facades of the main building overlooks a court, the other a garden. The materials and treatment of the walls are characteristic of much of the work built during the reign of Henry IV. The walls are mainly of rough, brownish yellow brick with little architectural ornament but emphasized by white stone quoins (corners) and white stone frames around the windows.
In 1635 Gaston commissioned Mansart to reconstruct his château at Blois, which had been built in the 15th and 16th centuries and used as a royal residence by three kings. Mansart proposed rebuilding it entirely, but only the north wing facing the gardens was reconstructed. The main building, flanked by pavilions, is subtly articulated by superimposed classical orders (Doric on the ground floor, Ionic on the first, and Corinthian on the second). The court entrance to the main building is approached on both sides by a curving colonnade. Mansart used the high-pitched, two-sloped roof that bears his name, mansard. (In fact, the roof had been used by earlier French architects.) The details are precise and restrained, the proportions of the masses harmonious.
In the same period, Phélypeaux de La Vrillière, an officer of the crown, commissioned Mansart to build a town house in Paris (rebuilt after Mansart’s death). The building, known from engravings, was a fine example of Mansart’s ability to arrive at subtle, ingenious, and dignified solutions to the problems of building on awkwardly shaped sites.
In 1642 René de Longeuil, an immensely wealthy financier and officer of the royal treasury, commissioned Mansart to build a château on his estate. The château of Maisons (now called Maisons-Laffitte, in the chief town of the département of Yvelines) is unique in that it is the only building by Mansart in which the interior decoration (graced particularly by a magnificent stairway) survives. The symmetrical design of the building (as well as the mansard roof) is similar to that of Mansart’s earlier châteaus, but here there is a greater emphasis on relief. The central building is a free-standing block with a prominent rectangular frontispiece that projects from the main wall in a series of shallow steps. Two short wings, flanking the main building, stand out from it in clean, unbroken rectangular sections. Extending from each of the wings is a low, one-story block. The restrained play of subtly differentiated rectangular motifs lends grace and harmony.
Because it is now surrounded by roads and houses, one can only imagine how noble the château looked, in the setting of terraced gardens designed for it by Mansart, when it opened with a reception for Anne of Austria and her son, the boy-king Louis XIV. At times during the château’s construction, de Longeuil must have been sorely tried by Mansart’s stubborn, independent, generally difficult personality, but on this day he was surely pleased with the architect he had chosen.
Perhaps Mansart’s personality was responsible for the setbacks he began to encounter, the first of which was a royal commission he received in 1645 and lost in 1646. Anne of Austria asked Mansart to draw up plans for the convent and church of the Val-de-Grâce in Paris, which the sovereign had vowed to build if she bore a son. When the costs of laying the foundation exceeded the funds provided, Mansart was replaced by Jacques Lemercier, who more or less followed the original plans.
Along with a large fortune, Mansart had accumulated many enemies who accused him of capriciousness in the building and rebuilding of his projects, of wild extravagance, and of dishonesty. In 1651 a pamphlet entitled “La Mansarade” (possibly written by political enemies of the prime minister, Cardinal Mazarin, for whom Mansart had worked) accused him of having made deals with contractors and charged him with profligacy. The attack did not prevent him from continuing to work for prominent people.
With the accession of Louis XIV to the throne in 1661, private patrons became fewer and fewer. Architects, painters, sculptors, and craftsmen were called upon to build, decorate, and furnish structures commissioned by the king. When, in 1664, Louis decided to complete the palace of the Louvre, his chief minister and surintendant des bâtiments (roughly, “superintendent of buildings”), Jean-Baptiste Colbert, asked Mansart to draw up plans for the east wing (the colonnaded wing). Possibly because he could not produce and keep to any final plan, Mansart lost the commission.
In 1665 Colbert again asked Mansart to produce designs—this time for a chapel for the tombs of the royal family of the Bourbons to be built at the end of the Saint-Denis basilica. Mansart planned his design (which was never executed) around a central, domed space, which later inspired his grandnephew Jules Hardouin-Mansart in his design for the dome of the church of Les Invalides.
When Mansart died the world was quite different from the one in which his career had begun. France had become the centre of Europe and Louis the centre of France—not only politically but also in matters of culture and taste. French architects, artists, and craftsmen were trained and employed by the crown for one end: the glorification of the state in the person of the king, who had declared himself to be the state. But the world was different, too, in that it had been enriched by the work of the independent and individualistic genius of François Mansart.
