Giacomo da Vignola, also called Giacomo Barozzi or Giacomo Barozio,  (born Oct. 1, 1507, Vignola, Bologna [Italy]—died  July 7, 1573, Rome), architect who, with Andrea Palladio and Giulio Romano, dominated Italian Mannerist architectural design and stylistically anticipated the Baroque.
After studying in Bologna, Vignola went to Rome in the 1530s and made drawings of the antiquities for a projected edition of Vitruvius’ treatise on architecture. In 1541–43 he spent 18 months at the court of Francis I at Fontainebleau and in Paris, where he probably met his fellow Bolognese, the architect Sebastiano Serlio and the painter Primaticcio. On his return to Italy he built the Palazzo Bocchi at Bologna and then went to Rome (c. 1550), where he was appointed architect to Pope Julius III, for whom he built the Villa Giulia in collaboration with Giorgio Vasari and Bartolommeo Ammannati, in 1551–55. This was a summer villa, based on ancient villa types as described by Pliny the Younger, with a small house and an elaborate garden.
In 1554 he built the church of S. Andrea in the nearby Via Flaminia, the first church to have an oval dome, although the ground plan is rectangular. In his church of Sta. Anna dei Palafrenieri (begun c. 1572), Vignola extended this idea to include an oval in the ground plan, and this oval theme became a favourite of 17th-century Baroque architects. Vignola’s most important church was, however, Il Gesù in Rome, headquarters of the Society of Jesus, which he began in 1568. Vignola died before the structure was completed, but the basic plan is his: aisles subsumed in side chapels so as to produce an illusion of vast interior space. The broad nave thus created was an effective instrument for dramatizing the Mass, and as such was widely copied throughout Europe in the service of the Counter-Reformation.
After the death of his patron Julius III in 1555, Vignola worked mainly for the Farnese family, for whom he completed the huge Palazzo Farnese at Caprarola, near Viterbo, the plan of which had been established earlier by Antonio da Sangallo and Baldassarre Peruzzi.
The academic tendency of Vignola’s mind is epitomized in his Regola delli cinque ordini d’architettura of 1562, which remained a standard textbook on the architectural orders for three centuries. He also wrote on perspective in Le due regole della prospettiva pratica, which was published posthumously (1583) and had a short life.
