Gottfried Böhm,  (born January 23, 1920, Offenbach-am-Main, Germany—died June 9, 2021, Cologne), German architect who combined traditional architectural styles with modern materials and sculptural forms to create Expressionist sculptures that were gracefully integrated into their landscapes. He was the recipient of the Pritzker Prize in 1986.
After serving in the German army (1938–42), Böhm attended the Technische Hochschule in Munich, graduating with an engineering degree in 1946. He then studied sculpture for a year at Munich’s Academy of Fine Arts. In 1947 he began working in Cologne as an assistant architect alongside his father, Dominikus Böhm, one of the most prominent architects of Roman Catholic churches in Europe. (Gottfried’s paternal grandfather was an architect as well.) After apprenticing at firms in Cologne and New York City in 1950–51, Gottfried became a partner at his father’s office. The two collaborated on church designs, and Gottfried’s early independent work displayed influences from his father as well as from leading exponents of the Bauhaus school, such as Ludwig Mies van der Rohe.
Upon Dominikus Böhm’s death in 1955, Gottfried took over the Cologne studio. At this time his work began to take on a more individualistic cast. His design for the Herz-Jesu church (1957–60) in Schildgen, for instance, is distinct in its incorporation of ornamental coloured glass and geometric forms such as cones and cubes. By the 1960s Böhm’s designs had become increasingly complex and dynamic, with traditional structuralist principles abandoned in favour of asymmetric composition and pronounced plasticity. At the same time, he sought to create structures that existed in close harmony with their immediate environment. In this vein, Böhm built the Pilgrimage Church of Mary, Queen of Peace (1963–72), at Neviges, a striking jewel-like structure of reinforced concrete that engages with its surroundings as the natural destination of a sloping path. He also designed the Bensberg town hall (1962–71), a modern concrete building with an angular sculptural form that was imaginatively integrated with the stone ruins of a medieval fortress. These two works are frequently considered the crowning achievements in Böhm’s career, and the latter is characteristic of his interest in urban restoration.
As the opportunities for new church architecture declined in the 1970s, Böhm took on more commissions for secular structures. In contrast to the molded concrete that typified much of his previous work, his buildings during this period more often relied on glass and steel, the contemporary technological advancements of which he creatively exploited. Böhm’s facility with synthesizing materials is exemplified in the Züblin administrative building (1981–85) in Stuttgart, in which two parallel office wings cast in concrete are connected by an expansive glass hall. Throughout the late 20th century and into the early 21st, Böhm continued to design a versatile array of structures, including arts venues, civic centres, office buildings, and residential dwellings, mainly within Germany.
Böhm was married to architect Elisabeth Böhm, and the couple had four sons, three of whom also took up their parents’ profession. The Böhm architecture dynasty was the subject of the documentary Die Böhms: Architektur einer Familie (2014; Concrete Love). To celebrate Böhm’s 100th birthday in 2020, a number of cultural institutions in Germany organized a series of exhibitions, lectures, and excursions to take place throughout the year. Many of the programs, however, were canceled or rescheduled because of the COVID-19 pandemic.
