Guarino Guarini, also called Camillo Guarini,  (born January 17, 1624, Modena, Duchy of Modena [Italy]—died March 6, 1683, Milan), Italian architect, priest, mathematician, and theologian whose designs and books on architecture made him a major source for later Baroque architects in central Europe and northern Italy.
Guarini was in Rome during 1639–47, when Francesco Borromini was most active. Later he taught in Modena, Messina, and Paris and finally in 1666 went to Turin, where he stayed for the greater part of the remainder of his life. While in Turin in the service of the dukes of Savoy, Guarini built (or furnished designs for) at least six churches and chapels, five palaces, and a city gate; published six books, two on architecture and four on mathematics and astronomy; and sent palace designs to the duke of Bavaria and the margrave of Baden.
In San Lorenzo (1668–87) and Santa Sindone (1667–90; “Holy Shroud”) in Turin, Guarini, working on a centralized plan, converted domes to an open lacework of interwoven masonry arches. (Santa Sindone was extensively damaged by fire in 1997, and the chapel was closed indefinitely for restoration work.) Although its design and symbolism were clearly Christian, Santa Sindone’s structural details echo aspects of Spanish Moorish mosques and French Gothic cathedrals; indeed, Guarini expressed admiration for Gothic architecture. Guarini’s longitudinal churches—of which the most spectacular was Santa Maria della Divina Providenza, in Lisbon, destroyed by earthquake in 1755—with their veiled light sources and interwoven spaces, served as models for much of the church development in central Europe.
The Palazzo Carignano in Turin (1679) is Guarini’s masterpiece of palace design. With its billowing facade, its magnificent curved double stair, and its astonishing double dome in the main salon, it well deserves to be acclaimed the finest urban palace of the second half of the 17th century in Italy. Guarini’s principal architectural treatise, Architettura Civile, was published posthumously in Turin in 1737.
