Gurdwara, (Punjabi: “doorway to the Guru”)  in Sikhism, a place of worship in India and overseas. The gurdwara contains—on a cot under a canopy—a copy of the Adi Granth (“First Volume”), the sacred scripture of Sikhism. It also serves as a meeting place for conducting business of the congregation and wedding and initiation ceremonies. The more historically important gurdwaras serve as centres of pilgrimage during festivals. A communal dining hall (langar), in which meals are prepared and served to the congregation, and frequently a school are attached to the gurdwara. Every Sikh family endeavours to set aside one room of the house for the reading of the Adi Granth, and that room is also called a gurdwara.
The key area of a gurdwara is a spacious room housing the Sri Guru Granth Sahib (“The Granth as the Guru”; also known as the Adi Granth). The community gathers there to participate in devotional activity that typically includes recitation (path) of scripture, singing of scripture to musical accompaniment (kirtan), and its exegesis (katha). Toward the closing of the devotional session, a supplication (ardas) is made in which the Sikhs remember their history, seek divine blessings in dealing with their current problems, and reaffirm their vision of establishing a state in which Sikhs shall rule (Khalsa Raj). The service ends with a hymn read from the Sri Guru Granth Sahib, which is interpreted to be the divine reply (hukam) to the congregation’s supplication. Having paid respects to the Sri Guru Granth Sahib and participated in ritual glorification of God, they then discuss day-to-day problems facing the community.
The gurdwaras associated with the Sikh Gurus’ lives or their activities serve as destinations for Sikh pilgrimage. The leading gurdwaras among those are the Harmandir Sahib, or Golden Temple, in Amritsar in Punjab state; the five takhts (centres of religious authority) located in Amritsar (Akal Takht, the main centre), Talwando Sabo (near Bathinda), and Anandpur (all in Punjab), Patna in Bihar state, and Nanded in Maharashtra state; and the birthplace of Nanak, the first Guru and founder of Sikhism, at Nankana, now in Pakistan.
During the period of persecution of the Sikhs by the Mughal dynasty, the management of some gurdwaras (and the considerable lands and funds attached to them) passed into the hands of Hindu caretakers (mahants). After years of increasing agitation on the part of the Sikhs, the British government passed the Sikh Gurdwara Act in 1925, returning control of the gurdwaras to the Sikhs. The gurdwaras of historic importance are now managed by an elected body known as the Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee (Supreme Committee of Temple Management).
