Harry M. Weese, in full Harry Mohr Weese,  (born June 30, 1915, Evanston, Ill., U.S.—died Oct. 29, 1998, Manteno, Ill.), American architect of the Chicago school who designed the subway system in Washington, D.C.—considered one of the most remarkable public works projects of the 20th century—and who played a prominent role in the planning and architecture of Chicago.
Educated at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (B.A., 1938), Weese also studied city planning under Eliel Saarinen at Cranbrook Academy of Art in Bloomfield Hills, Mich. Though Weese cofounded an architectural firm in 1941, his career was interrupted by World War II service in the U.S. Navy. Two years after being discharged, Weese opened his own Chicago-based firm and soon began shaping the city’s architecture. He was one of the first major architects to foster the preservation of historic buildings, and he renovated a number of Chicago landmarks, including Dankmar Adler and Louis Sullivan’s Auditorium Theatre (reopened 1967) and the Field Museum of Natural History.
Although he was opposed to virtuosity for its own sake, Weese used new or indigenous materials as well as new or structurally inherent designs for dramatic effect; for example, the bronze-coloured glass windows of Chicago’s Time-Life Building (1969), which act as reversible one-way mirrors, allow workers to look out in privacy by day and pedestrians to look in at night. In addition, he created designs for such buildings as the Chicago Metropolitan Corrections Center (1975)—a concrete tower whose irregularly spaced 15-cm (6-inch) slit windows obviated the need for bars and made it resemble a computer punch card—and helped redesign the city’s lakefront. Rather than revealing a trademark style, Weese’s work reflected his attention to setting, historical relations, and functional requirements. His design style is best exhibited in Washington’s 100-mile (160-km) subway system (1976), with its spectacular concrete vaults and rippling lights at each station, which continues to awe and delight riders.
