Henning Larsen, in full Henning Göbel Larsen,  (born August 20, 1925, Videbæk, Denmark—died June 22, 2013, Copenhagen), Danish architect known for his site-specific design philosophy grounded in the Scandinavian Modernist tradition, best exemplified in such buildings as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and the Harpa Reykjavík Concert Hall and Conference Centre in Iceland.
Larsen studied at the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts in Copenhagen (1950), London’s Architectural Association (1951–52), and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1952). His early design work included a collaboration with fellow Danish architect Arne Jacobsen on the iconic Ant chair. In 1959 he founded the firm Henning Larsen Architects. From the beginning the firm took an experimental approach to architecture and focused on entering international architectural competitions. Larsen won first prize for such entries as designs for Stockholm University (unbuilt) and the University of Trondheim in Norway (first stage completed 1978, second stage completed 1994). With the Trondheim project, Larsen established ideas about light and space that he would continue to integrate into his design work throughout his career. The campus was conceived as a small city enclosed in a single structure. It comprised 12 buildings—housing labs, classrooms, and lecture halls—that were connected by large glass-covered “streets.” Larsen focused on allowing abundant natural light to flow throughout the space, taking advantage of Norway’s light-filled summer nights, and incorporated a glass roof that could be partially opened.
Among Larsen’s most important projects was the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Riyadh (1984), which his firm was awarded after winning a design competition. The building’s simple limestone exterior enclosed an interior that comprised a variety of intimate and public spaces, reflecting traditional Middle Eastern Islamic architecture through a Modernist lens. Its three wings centred on a triangular four-story lobby, around which barrel-vaulted walkways led to a central plaza in each wing. The indoor fountains and patterned marble floors likewise echoed the Islamic tradition. Larsen was awarded the Aga Khan Award for Architecture for the ministry in 1989. He continued designing for sites worldwide, including the Danish embassy in Riyadh (1988), the Malmö (Sweden) City Library (1999), the Würth Art Gallery in Schwäbisch Hall, Germany (2000), and the Copenhagen Opera (2004).
In 2012 he received the Japan Art Association’s Praemium Imperiale prize for architecture. In 2013 Henning Larsen Architects, along with Studio Olafur Eliasson and Icelandic firm Batteríið Architects, received the Mies van der Rohe Award for architecture for the Harpa Reykjavík Concert Hall and Conference Centre (2011). With a site on the shores of Faxa Bay, the architects drew their inspiration from the northern lights and the surrounding Icelandic scenery to create a multifaceted glass structure whose mass echoed Iceland’s rocky coast and whose glass panels reflected the light from the bay and from the sky to create a constantly changing light show.
