Humphry Repton,   (born April 21, 1752, Bury St. Edmunds, Suffolk, Eng.—died  March 24, 1818, London), English landscape designer who became the undisputed successor to Lancelot Brown as improver of grounds to the landed gentry of England. Of a well-to-do family, he was intended for a mercantile career but, failing in that, retired to the country, where he learned something of the management of land and had an opportunity to develop his talent as an amateur painter of watercolour landscapes.
In 1788 he set himself up as a landscape designer and wrote to his friends, who included the Duke of Portland and Coke of Norfolk, inviting their support. Contributing largely to his success was his method of making watercolour drawings of the grounds upon which he was asked to advise, with his proposed alterations displayed on an overlay. Like other landscape designers, Repton also tried his hand at architecture but usually worked in association with others who had the necessary professional qualifications. He quarrelled with one of these, John Nash, who, he claimed, stole from him the idea of using a Mughal style of architecture for the Royal Pavilion at Brighton and who in large part used his design. Later he collaborated with his own son, John Adey Repton, a trained architect.
Repton’s landscapes, seldom as large as those designed by Brown, were usually more thickly planted. Repton advocated a gradual transition between house and grounds by means of terraces, balustrades, and steps. He was influenced by the Picturesque movement, which admired wild landscapes.
Many of Repton’s grounds survive at least in part as he laid them out. Uppark in Sussex and Sheringham Hall, Norfolk, are admirable examples of house and grounds designed by both Reptons and of which the authenticity in their present condition is guaranteed by the existence of Repton’s original plans. In addition to several essays and a short play, Repton published three major books on landscape gardening: Sketches and Hints on Landscape Gardening (1795), Observations on the Theory and Practice of Landscape Gardening (1803), and Fragments on the Theory and Practice of Landscape Gardening (1816).
The Red Books of Humphry Repton, 4 vol. (1976) are, in three volumes, facsimiles of manuscripts with illustration for the plans of Sheringham in Norfolk, Antony House in Cornwall, and Attingham in Shropshire; volume 4 has the comment of the editor, Edward Malins.
