James Renwick,  (born Nov. 1, 1818, New York, N.Y., U.S.—died  June 23, 1895, New York City), one of the most successful, prolific, and versatile American architects in the latter half of the 19th century.
Renwick studied engineering at Columbia College (later Columbia University), and upon graduating in 1836 he took a position as structural engineer with the Erie Railroad and subsequently was a supervisor on the Croton Reservoir construction project in Manhattan. He was largely self-taught as an architect.
In 1843 the Gothic design submitted by Renwick won the competition for a new Grace Church to be built in New York City (1843–46). This prominent structure, which was one of the first American designs to show a true understanding of the Gothic style, led to many more ecclesiastical commissions for Renwick, culminating with that for St. Patrick’s Cathedral (begun 1858) in New York City, an immense and eclectic twin-spired structure that mixed German, French, and English Gothic influences.
Because of the stylistic variety evident in his works, Renwick is not considered exclusively a Gothic Revivalist. For example, the main building of the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. (1847–55), was built in a modified Romanesque style, while the Corcoran Gallery, Washington, D.C. (1859), now called the Renwick Gallery, was designed in the Second Empire style Renwick favoured for hospitals, mansions, and other nonecclesiastical structures in the 1850s and ’60s. Many of the churches he designed from the 1850s on, notably Saint Bartholomew’s Church (1871–72) and All Saints’ Roman Catholic Church (1882–93), both in New York City, feature Gothic-Romanesque forms built with stonework of contrasting colours and textures to produce effects of dazzling richness.
Renwick’s extreme eclecticism was his alert response to changes in public taste and architectural fashion. But his buildings were elegant and well planned, and he was progressive in his use of iron as a structural material and in his innovative use of terra-cotta and coloured stone for striking decorative effects. He trained several younger architects who achieved subsequent prominence, most notably John Wellborn Root.
