Jean Nouvel,  (born August 12, 1945, Fumel, Lot-et-Garonne, France), French architect who designed his buildings to “create a visual landscape” that fit their context—sometimes by making them contrast with the surrounding area. For his boldly experimental designs, which defy a general characterization, he was awarded the 2008 Pritzker Architecture Prize, and by the early 21st century Nouvel had earned a place in the pantheon of architectural superstars.
When Nouvel was young, his parents, both teachers, suggested that, instead of following his dream to become an artist, he should do something more practical so that he could earn a living, and architecture provided a perfect compromise. In 1965 Nouvel captured the first of many prizes by winning a national competition to attend the École des Beaux-Arts in Paris. While there, he also worked for an architectural firm formed by the Modernist architect Claude Parent and the “urbanist” and cultural theorist Paul Virilio. Nouvel graduated in 1972 with a degree in architecture.
Nouvel first gained an international audience in 1987 when the Institute of the Arab World (Institut du Monde Arabe [IMA]) was completed. The main, south facade of that building, with its high-tech aperture-like panels, manages to be at once cutting-edge in its creative response to changing levels of light and evocative of traditional Arab moucharaby (latticework grills). The design garnered Nouvel the 1989 Aga Khan Award for architectural excellence. Other awards include a Golden Lion from the Venice Biennale (2000), a Royal Gold Medal from the Royal Institute of British Architects (2001), and the Praemium Imperiale (2001), presented by the Japan Art Association to “artists who have contributed significantly to the development of international arts and culture.”
Nouvel’s list of completed structures includes one of the three buildings that constitute Seoul’s Leeum Museum (2004), Barcelona’s bullet-shaped Agbar Tower (2005), the Guthrie Theater (2006) in Minneapolis, the quirky Quai Branly Museum (2006) in Paris, and Copenhagen’s Concert Hall (2009), with its bright blue exterior that functions at night as a video screen. In 2007 he won commissions to design a 75-story mixed-use tower (later known as 53 West 53, or 53W53) next to the Museum of Modern Art in New York City (construction began in 2014) and a museum for the cultural district of Abu Dhabi, lying just offshore. After years of delays, Nouvel’s Louvre Abu Dhabi opened in 2017, featuring a distinctive latticed dome that filtered the bright desert light; the building contained art leased from 13 French institutions. Nouvel also designed the new National Museum of Qatar (2019) in Doha, which comprised a series of interlocking discs. The building was constructed around the restored Old Amiri Palace, the site of Qatar’s earlier national museum.
Throughout his career Nouvel’s lack of a signature style was his trademark. Architect Frank Gehry summarized Nouvel’s strengths and weaknesses in this way:
