Latin American architecture,  history of architecture in Mesoamerica, Central America, South America, and the Caribbean beginning after contact with the Spanish and Portuguese in 1492 and 1500, respectively, and continuing to the present.
For centuries before about 1500, indigenous American peoples had civilizations with unique architectural traditions; for these traditions, which continue to the present day, see Native American arts. After about 1500, these traditions often became intertwined with those of Europe and North America; for these European and North American histories, see Western architecture. The technical and theoretical aspects of architecture are treated elsewhere; see architecture. For a thorough treatment of the often-related visual art traditions of Latin America after about 1500, see Latin American art.
When Christopher Columbus returned to Spain in 1493 and brought news of his “discovery” of the island of “La Española” (or Hispaniola), the present-day Dominican Republic, the “New World” was born. Over the course of the next 30 years, Spanish explorers encountered several Native American cities as large and as complex as any in Europe.
Before returning, Columbus ordered his men to build a fort—the first European building constructed in the Americas. The Santa Maria, being no longer seaworthy, was turned upside down on the beach, dragged up the coast, and recycled into a fort housing the first Spanish settlers.
Until England’s conquest of Barbados in 1625, Spain, together with Portugal in the south, controlled all of the New World. Though political governance was absolute and centralized in Madrid—via Sevilla—the cultural landscape of the New World remained decentralized and open to influence from Flanders, Germany, and Italy. In some cases Jesuit, Dominican, and Franciscan priests and architects imported knowledge from Europe to the Americas even before it reached Spain. Architectural and artistic production in the New World emerged as a creative product of this new cultural and geographical freedom.
In 1524 the Spanish explorer Hernán Cortés described Tenochtitlán, present-day Mexico City, in a letter to Charles V, the king of Spain:
Spain initially organized its management and governance of the New World according to viceroyalties—geographical regions administered by a viceroy, a direct representative of the Spanish crown vested with executive, legislative, judicial, military, and ecclesiastical power.
The Viceroyalty of New Spain, established in 1535, included what are now Mexico, Central America, Florida, and the southwestern United States. The Viceroyalty of Peru, established in 1543, included territories from present-day Chile, Argentina, Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, Colombia, Venezuela, and Panama.
In New Spain the ancient Aztec city of Tenochtitlán was systematically rebuilt as Mexico City and designated the capital of the viceroyalty. This transformation established Mexico City as a continuing locus of power for the Viceroyalty of New Spain.
Cuzco, the ancient capital of the Inca empire, and Lima, a new city founded by the Spanish in 1535, functioned as the two great cities of colonial Peru, and governance shifted between them. Cuzco’s urban structure featured streets, doors, and walls that utilized existing Inca masonry techniques; the new structures adapted and reused existing earthquake-resistant stone foundations. The original layout of the Inca city was also preserved. In 1553 the conquistador Pedro de Cieza de León stated: “At Cuzco the buildings commence on the sides of a high hill and extend over a wide plain. The city has long wide streets and very large squares. For Cuzco, with regard to the Inca Empire, was another Rome and the one city may be well compared to the other.” The cathedral of Cuzco (mid-16th to mid-17th century), by Francisco Becerra, is one of the few buildings that survived the strong earthquake of 1650. Its rectilinear plan, with three naves of equal height, is Renaissance in its spatial characteristics, but the stone reinforcements in the vaults are similar to those of late Gothic Spanish churches. The austere character of the almost fortresslike walls of the exterior is reinforced by symmetrical bell towers on the corners and an elaborately articulated entrance portal.
In 1532 the founding ceremony of “La Puebla de los Angeles” (now Puebla, Mexico) was held on a desolate spot between the ancient cities of Tlaxcala and Cholula. It was the first new city in Spanish America to apply a regular orthogonal grid system, an urban design model that became the norm for all the Americas. Origins of this grid-based urban plan had previously been found in varied sources dating back to the colonies of the Greek empire and then in Renaissance treaties. Such sources may have been relevant, but it is also important to understand that the orthogonal grid was used in pre-Columbian America long before these sources were known. For example, the ancient city of Cholula is a pre-Columbian grid city that Cortés called “the most beautiful city of all I have seen outside of Spain.” (It remains, along with Cuzco, the oldest city of the Western Hemisphere to be continuously inhabited—perhaps for as long as 8,000 years.)
By the end of the 16th century, many of the major cities now existing in Latin America had been established. Spanish and Portuguese settlers created and developed Amerindian cities according to the preestablished Renaissance grid system. Generally speaking, these cities shared a grid plan featuring large, open squares defined by a cathedral and other institutional buildings. By contrast, architects and planners in European cities were often limited by the existing medieval urban fabric in the application of this model.
The application of this grid system in Latin America was eventually enforced by the Laws of the Indies, a series of guidelines formulated by Spain for the planning and development of all new American cities as well as for the adaptation of the old Amerindian capitals. These laws promoted the ideal of the pure geometry of the Renaissance city. This strategy was reinforced by the architecture of cathedrals that adapted prevailing innovations by European Renaissance and Mannerist architects (see below) to the vernacular and local conditions found in the New World.
The founding of new towns and the construction of large monasteries in Mexico provided an opportunity for enlightened European settlers to realize some of the utopian ideals of Renaissance planning. Antonio de Mendoza, the first viceroy of New Spain, oversaw the creation of mission establishments. Representing different religious orders, these missions were inspired by the theories of Europeans such as Leon Battista Alberti, Erasmus, and Sir Thomas More. The plan usually included a single nave church, a convent around a patio, a large walled atrium or churchyard with an open-air chapel for outdoor masses, and small corner chapels called posas. By 1590 more than 300 churches had been built in Mexico alone.
