Lina Bo Bardi, original name in full Achillina Bo,  (born December 5, 1914, Rome, Italy—died March 29, 1992, São Paulo, Brazil), Italian-born Brazilian Modernist architect, industrial designer, historic preservationist, journalist, and activist whose work defied conventional categorization. She designed daring idiosyncratic structures that merged Modernism with populism.
Bo earned a degree in architecture in 1939 at the University of Rome, where she had studied under architects such as Marcello Piacentini and Gustavo Giovannoni. After she graduated, she moved to Milan and began working with architect Carlo Pagani and launched her career in design journalism. She also worked with architect and designer Gio Ponti and collaborated with him on the magazine Lo Stile while also contributing to several other Italian design publications. In 1944 she became deputy director of Domus—a magazine founded by Ponti in 1928—and held that position until 1945. In 1945 Domus commissioned Bo, Pagani, and photographer Federico Patellani to travel through Italy, documenting the devastation of World War II. Later that year she collaborated with Pagani and art critic Bruno Zevi on the short-lived magazine A—Attualità, Architettura, Abitazione, Arte, which published their findings and discussed ideas for reconstruction in postwar Italy. 
In 1946 Bo married Pietro Maria Bardi, an art gallery director, dealer, and critic. Soon afterward the couple moved to Brazil, where her husband had been invited by journalist and media magnate Assis Chateaubriand to help establish and direct the Art Museum of São Paulo (Museu de Arte de São Paulo; MASP), the first museum in Brazil to collect and exhibit modern art. For the first iteration of the institution, which opened in 1947 in part of the building that housed Chateaubriand’s business, Bo Bardi designed the interior and the museum fittings. She developed an innovative system for suspending paintings away from the wall. (Her design was torn down in the 1990s and replaced with a conventional wall hanging system.) She also designed folding stackable chairs, made from Brazilian jacaranda wood and leather, which were used during lectures and events. She later curated an exhibition at MASP on the history of chair design. 
In 1950 Bo Bardi founded the magazine Habitat with her husband and served as its editor until 1953. During that time it was the most influential architectural magazine in Brazil. She became a citizen of Brazil (1951), established that country’s first industrial design course, at the Institute of Contemporary Art (a part of the expanded MASP), and designed for herself and her husband the Modernist Le Corbusier-like Casa de Vidro (or Glass House), in the Morumbi neighbourhood of São Paulo. The Glass House was built into a hill and, over time, became entirely integrated into the landscape. The front, main room of the house extended out over the slope of the hill, elevated and supported on slender stilts. In 1951 she also designed her most famous piece of furniture, Bardi’s Bowl, a chair in the form of an adjustable hemispherical bowl resting in a steel cradle.
By the mid-1950s it was clear that MASP had outgrown its original building, with not only galleries but also dedicated spaces for teaching art. In 1958 Bo Bardi started work on a new building (completed 1968). Centrally located on São Paulo’s Paulista Avenue, Bo Bardi’s iconic glass-and-concrete building was elevated 8 metres (26.2 feet) above the ground on substantial red pillars. The space at ground level served as an all-purpose gathering place for concerts, protests, socializing, and the like. 
In the late 1950s Bo Bardi began an extended period of living and working in Salvador, an impoverished but culturally rich city in the northeastern state of Bahia. She gave a number of lectures at Bahia University’s School of Fine Arts in 1958, and in 1959 she was invited to establish and run Bahia’s Museum of Modern Art (Museu de Arte Moderna da Bahia). She chose to house the museum in the Solar do Unhão, a former salt mill and part of a network of historic seaside buildings that she restored in 1963. Bo Bardi added a museum of popular art and an art school to the Museum of Modern Art and housed them all in the Unhão.
However, political upheaval caused her to leave Bahia in 1964. Her subsequent return to São Paulo marked the beginning of Brazil’s protracted period of oppression under a military dictatorship that lasted until 1985.  During that period Bo Bardi curated exhibitions and worked in theatre, designing sets and costumes for several productions, notably a 1969 production of Im Dickicht der Städte (In the Jungle of Cities), an early play by Bertolt Brecht. 
Bo Bardi’s experience in Bahia had altered her political and aesthetic philosophies. The region’s examples of vernacular and historic architecture had given rise to a design process increasingly guided by social and ethical responsibilities and inspired by allegiance to her adopted country and its native aesthetic traditions. Bo Bardi became committed to creating uniquely Brazilian architecture, designed more simply and made from local materials, what she called “Arquitetura Povera” (“poor” or “simple” architecture). Much of her work since her initial experience in Salvador involved repurposing existing structures as well as restoring and preserving historic buildings. Throughout the 1980s Bo Bardi led preservation and restoration projects in the historic centre of Salvador, including the House of Benin, which contains an art collection and includes an exhibition space, and Misericórdia Hill, an extremely steep historic street (both in 1987). Her next major architecture project was the SESC Pompéia (built in stages, 1977–1986), a leisure and cultural centre in São Paulo sponsored by the nonprofit Social Service of Commerce (Serviço Social do Comércio). Bo Bardi converted an old steel drum factory into a facility for sports, theatre, and other leisure activities. 
Bo Bardi was recognized, though somewhat belatedly, as one of the most prolific women architects of the 20th century. In the mid-1980s, working with architects André Vainer and Marcelo Carvalho Ferraz, she designed an addition to the Glass House to serve as the Instituto Lina Bo e P.M. Bardi (originally the Instituto Quadrante), a place to house the Bardis’ archive and dedicated to the study and exhibition of Brazilian art and architecture. In 2012, the centennial of her birth, Bo Bardi’s career was celebrated with the launching of a limited-edition line of her bowl chair, a major traveling retrospective organized by the British Council in London, and the publication of a scholarly monograph that spans her life’s work. She posthumously received the Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement at the 2021 Venice Biennale, becoming the first woman to be honoured for her architecture.
