Military bridge,  temporary bridge that must usually be constructed in haste by military engineers, from available materials and frequently under fire. The earliest types historically were pontoon bridges—i.e., floating bridges that rest on stationary boats. Pontoon bridges were constructed in ancient times by Persians, Greeks, Romans, and Mongols, the most famous being Xerxes’ 3-km (2-mile) span over the Hellespont (Dardanelles). The Romans, however, frequently built more durable military bridges, notably Julius Caesar’s timber crossing of the Rhine River and Trajan’s timber-arch span of the Danube (see Trajan’s Bridge). By the 17th century, bridging equipment was part of the train of European and Turkish armies, with pontoons fashioned not only of timber but also of leather, copper, and tin. Pneumatic pontoons with steel roadways made their appearance during World War II.
Military trestles were built in considerable numbers in the wars of the 19th century, notably the American Civil War. Abraham Lincoln, inspecting a 120-metre (400-foot) railroad bridge over Potomac Creek, built in nine days, expressed his astonishment: “Loaded trains are running every hour, and upon my word it consists of nothing but beanpoles and cornstalks.”
Military pontoon bridges are usually built either by successively extending outward from the shore or by constructing whole sections as rafts and floating them into position. Truss bridges, for use where riverbanks are steep or navigation must be kept open, are made up in panels readily bolted together. Military truss bridges were pioneered in World War II by the highly successful British-invented Bailey bridge, which played an especially important role in the Allied campaign in Italy. Also during World War II the scissors assault bridge was introduced; a folding bridge, consisting of a pair of solid-girder-supported deck sections, hinged at their juncture, was carried to the riverbank by a tank; opening out in an inverted V, it flattened into a level crossing. Modern refinements of basic types of military bridges have included increased use of aluminum, more efficient and stronger scissors types, and greatly increased use of mechanical erecting equipment.
