Molding, also spelled moulding,  in architecture and the decorative arts, a defining, transitional, or terminal element that contours or outlines the edges and surfaces on a projection or cavity, such as a cornice, architrave, capital, arch, base, or jamb. The surface of a molding is modeled with recesses and reliefs, which either maintain a constant profile or are set in rhythmically repeated patterns. Of primary importance in the design of a molding is the type of shadow it will cast.
Moldings doubtlessly originated in prehistoric building, where they served specific structural functions, such as supporting, binding, or separating surfaces. As monumental architecture developed, moldings were gradually translated from wood or other ephemeral materials into more permanent ones, most often stone. In this gradual transition, moldings were retained as a matter of conservatism or taste; in stone they were elaborated and refined, contributing order and richness to a decorative system. Although their original structural function was often satisfied by other means, moldings were used in a manner that implied a structural logic. From this usage, best characterized in the orders of architecture of ancient Greece, it was possible later to develop theories for the correct form and employment of moldings, according to which several basic shapes were standardized in the vocabulary of architectural design, as follows:
(1) The fascia, face, or band is a continuous member with a flat surface, parallel to the surface that it ornaments and either projecting from or slightly receding into it. (2) The fillet, listel, or regula is a relatively narrow band, usually projecting, commonly used to separate curved moldings or to finish them at the top or bottom. (3) A bevel, or chamfer, molding is an inclined band, fascia, or fillet. (4) A splay is a large bevel.
(1) The cavetto is a concave molding with a profile approximately a quarter-circle, quarter-ellipse, or similar curve. (2) A scotia molding is similar to the cavetto but has a deeper concavity partially receding beyond the face of the general surface that it ornaments. (3) A flute is a small groove of a semicircular, segmental, or similar section. (4) An ovolo, a convex molding, has a profile approximately a quarter-circle or quarter-ellipse. (5) A torus, a convex molding, approximates a semicircle or semiellipse. (6) A roll, or bowtell, molding is convex, approximating three-quarters of a circle. (7) An astragal is a small torus. (8) An apophyge molding is a small, exaggerated cavetto.
(1) The cyma recta, a projecting molding, consists essentially of a cavetto above an ovolo, forming in profile one continuous double curve, often used as a crowning member, in which case it is sometimes known as a cymatium. When used as a base the convex portion is uppermost. (2) The cyma reversa, or ogee—a projecting molding that is essentially a reversed cyma recta with ovolo above cavetto—is used for a crown or a base. (3) A bird’s beak, or thumb, molding is essentially similar to the cyma reversa, except that the upper convexity is separated from the lower concavity by a sharp edge. (4) A keel molding is a projection, which resembles the keel of a ship, consisting of a pointed arch with a small fillet attached at its outermost surface.
The basic profiles of moldings have traditionally been enhanced by carvings on them inspired by natural forms. These carvings might consist of stylized flower or leaf forms, geometric motifs, spirals, or combinations of rounded and angular forms such as the familiar egg and dart pattern. The combination of basic profiles and decorative carvings created a rich vocabulary for moldings that has been utilized by Western architects from the time of the ancient Greeks onward.
