Mount Vernon,  home and burial place of George Washington, in Fairfax county, Virginia, U.S., overlooking the Potomac River, 15 miles (24 km) south of Washington, D.C. The 18th-century two-story Georgian mansion is built of wood, but the siding is of wide, thick boards paneled so as to give the appearance of cut and dressed stonework. The rooms have been restored as they were when occupied by Washington and his family; most of the furniture pieces on the first floor and all of those in Washington’s bedchamber are originals. Additional Washington relics are in a separate museum building.
From both ends of the house, a curved colonnade leads to a row of outbuildings. A spacious lawn surrounds the mansion, with shaded drives, walks, and gardens. A short distance southwest of the mansion is a plain brick tomb built at Washington’s direction on a site chosen by himself. It contains his remains and those of his wife and of several members of the family (all removed there from the old family vault in 1831).
The estate, originally called Little Hunting Creek Plantation, consisted of about 5,000 acres (2,000 hectares). It descended by inheritance from John Washington, the first of the family in America, to his son Lawrence, who in turn devised it to his daughter Mildred. From Mildred it was purchased in 1726 by her brother Augustine, George Washington’s father; and in 1735, when George was three years old, the family moved there from “Wakefield” (a site now occupied by the George Washington Birthplace National Monument). The central part of the house was probably built during that time. In 1740, Augustine conveyed the plantation to his son Lawrence, elder half brother of George, and Lawrence settled there three years later. He renamed the plantation Mount Vernon in honour of Admiral Edward Vernon, under whom he had served in the Caribbean. Young George, after his father’s death in 1743, spent part of his youth at Mount Vernon with Lawrence.
After Lawrence’s death in 1752, his only surviving child, Sarah, inherited Mount Vernon. However, with her death in 1754, Lawrence’s widow, Anne (who had remarried), received a life interest in Mount Vernon. That year George began leasing the estate, and, following Anne’s passing in 1761, he inherited Mount Vernon. During the next 15 years he enlarged the house, added smaller wings, erected several of the outbuildings, and expanded the gardens. He also tried crop rotation and other agricultural experiments on the plantation. Again called into public service, it was not until December 1783, when he tendered his resignation to Congress as commander in chief of the Continental Army, that he again settled at Mount Vernon. But in 1789 his plantation life was again interrupted when he became the first president of the United States. From 1797 until his death (December 14, 1799) he lived at Mount Vernon. At his death, a life interest in the place went to his widow. The estate then passed to his nephew, Bushrod Washington, and from Bushrod it descended to John Augustine Washington, Jr., who was authorized by will to sell it to the U.S. government, which refused to buy the property.
In 1853 Ann Pamela Cunningham of South Carolina organized the Mount Vernon Ladies’ Association of the Union, which raised about $200,000 and purchased the house and 200 acres (80 hectares) of the original estate in 1858. The association, under its charter, was bound to restore and maintain the estate, which was designated a national registered historic landmark; the state of Virginia agreed to exempt the estate from taxation so long as these terms were fulfilled. Washington’s home, gardens, family cemetery, and outbuildings constitute what is considered America’s first historical tourist attraction.
