Paulo Mendes da Rocha, in full Paulo Archias Mendes da Rocha,  (born October 25, 1928, Vitória, Espírito Santo, Brazil—died May 23, 2021, São Paulo), Brazilian architect known for bringing a Modernist sensibility to the architecture of his native country. He was awarded the Pritzker Prize in 2006, becoming the second Brazilian (after Oscar Niemeyer) to receive the honour.
Mendes da Rocha moved to São Paulo as a child with his mother, the daughter of Italian immigrants, and his father, a Brazilian engineer. After completing a degree in architecture (1954) at Mackenzie University in São Paulo, Mendes da Rocha began a career in that city. From the start he was associated with the architectural cutting edge, and in 1958 his designs for the Club Athletico Paulistano, the first of his many prizewinning structures, gave evidence of his daring and original vision. He won the competition for the Jockey Club in Goiâna in 1963 and in 1969 was selected (with Flavio Motta, Julio Katinsky, and Ruy Ohtake) to build the Brazilian Pavilion for Expo 1970 in Ōsaka. It was his first international building, and many others followed, including in 2004 a project in Spain to enlarge and reorganize the campus of the University of Vigo.
Nevertheless, Mendes da Rocha continued to construct most of his work in São Paulo. One of his most significant designs in the city was the Brazilian Museum of Sculpture (1995), and he counted houses, high-rise apartment buildings, stadiums, schools, social clubs, offices, clinics, bus terminals, libraries, and a reservoir among his structures. He also designed furniture, such as the Paulistano chair (1957); opera sets for Suor Angelica (1990) and The 500-Year Opera (1992); and architectural exhibitions (1997 and 1998). As he expanded his portfolio, Mendes da Rocha developed his own distinctive vocabulary. Employing a style that became known as Paulist Brutalism, he used great expanses of concrete in his buildings, managing to create a sense of monumentality without massiveness, Modernism without alienation.
In addition to the Pritzker Prize, Mendes da Rocha received a number of architecture’s other top honours, including the 2016 Golden Lion for lifetime achievement in architecture at the Venice Biennale, the 2016 Præmium Imperiale for Architecture, and the 2017 Royal Gold Medal from the Royal Institute of British Architects.
