Pierre Charles L’Enfant,  (born August 2, 1754, Paris, France—died June 14, 1825, Prince George’s county, Maryland, U.S.), French-born American engineer, architect, and urban designer who designed the basic plan for Washington, D.C., the capital city of the United States.
L’Enfant studied art under his father at the Royal Academy of Painting and Sculpture from 1771 until he enlisted in 1776 as a volunteer in the American Continental Army. In recognition of his services, Congress made him major of engineers in 1783. The medal and diploma of the Society of the Cincinnati, an association of former Revolutionary officers, were designed by L’Enfant, and upon returning to Paris he helped organize the French branch of the society. L’Enfant went again to America in 1784 and settled in New York City. There, in addition to small architectural jobs, he renovated the old city hall for the U.S. Congress as Federal Hall (1788–89). For this, his first major architectural essay, he added star decorations to the Doric order in honour of his adopted country. He also designed the grandiose Morris House in Philadelphia, a mansard-styled structure that was begun in 1794 but was never completed.
When Congress decided to build a federal capital on the Potomac River, President George Washington hired L’Enfant in 1791 to prepare a plan for it. The plan he created was a gridiron of irregular rectangular blocks upon which broad diagonal avenues were superimposed. It was devised to focus on the Capitol and the presidential mansion and to form many squares, circles, and triangles at street intersections where monuments and fountains could be placed. The plan used to advantage the uneven ground and prepared for future transportation needs as well. Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson had provided L’Enfant with maps of various European cities to use as models, but, instead of copying any one of them, L’Enfant took ideas from several. The influence of Baroque planning at Versailles by André Le Nôtre appears in his plan, and it also bears resemblances to the London plans of Sir Christopher Wren and John Evelyn.
Washington was forced to dismiss L’Enfant in 1792 for his obstinacy in defying the commissioners of the city, and particularly for his high-handed procedure in removing the house of Daniel Carroll, an influential Washington resident, to make way for an avenue. Nevertheless, his plan of the city was generally followed. L’Enfant later attempted to obtain $95,500 as payment for his services. Congress gave him what it thought to be proper, the sum of about $3,800. In his old age L’Enfant lived with friends at Green Hill, a Maryland estate, where he died penniless. In 1909 his body was removed to Arlington National Cemetery, where a suitable monument was erected to him by Congress.
