Potala Palace,  immense religious and administrative complex in Lhasa, southern Tibet Autonomous Region, southwestern China. It is situated atop Mar-po-ri (Red Mountain), 425 feet (130 metres) above the Lhasa River valley, and rises up dramatically from its rocky base. Potrang Karpo (completed 1648; White Palace) once served as the seat of the Tibetan government and the main residence of the Dalai Lama; from the mid-18th century it was used as a winter palace. Potrang Marpo (1694; Red Palace) houses several chapels, sacred statues, and the tombs of eight Dalai Lamas; it remains a major pilgrimage site for Tibetan Buddhists.
King Srong-brtsan-sgam-po commissioned the building of a palace in Lhasa in the 7th century. Significantly smaller and less elaborate than its 5-square-mile (13-square-km) successor, it was named the Potala (“Pure Land” or “High Heavenly Realm”) for reasons that are not historically documented, although Mount Potala in India seems the likely source. Tibetan Buddhists acknowledge the Dalai Lama as the incarnation of Avalokiteshvara (Chinese: Guanyin), a bodhisattva whose home was on Mount Potala.
Srong-brtsan-sgam-po’s palace was later destroyed, and in 1645 the fifth Dalai Lama ordered the construction of a new castle that could accommodate his role as both a religious and a government leader. Lhasa was again chosen as the location because of its importance as a pilgrimage site and its proximity to the three main Buddhist monasteries of Sera, ’Bras-spungs (Drepung), and Dga’-Idan (Ganden). The new Potala was built on Mar-po-ri for the security provided by an elevated position; until its use declined in the mid-18th century, the Potala was a major Tibetan military fortress.
Of more than 1,000 rooms in the Potala, the ones considered most holy are the Chogyal Drubphuk and the Phakpa Lhakhang, remnants from the original palace of Srong-brtsan-sgam-po; the latter houses the sacred Arya Lokeshvara (Avalokiteshvara) statue. More than 200,000 statues and 10,000 altars are located within the sacred complex. Its value was recognized by China’s Cultural Relics Commission, and the palace was spared during the Cultural Revolution. The Potala was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1994. Two other locations—Tsuglagkhang, or Gtsug-lag-khang (Jokhang), Temple, one of the holiest places in Tibetan Buddhism, and the Norbuglingka (Nor-bu-gling-ka; Jewel Palace), the former summer residence of the Dalai Lama—were added to the World Heritage site in 2000 and 2001, respectively.
