Pritzker Prize, in full Pritzker Architecture Prize,  international award given annually to recognize the contributions of a living architect. It has often been called the Nobel Prize of architecture.
The Pritzker Prize was founded in 1979 by Jay and Cindy Pritzker of Chicago, who funded it as a foundation through their family business, the Hyatt Corporation. The original stated goal of the prize was to push architecture and architects into the public’s awareness and to support the notion that buildings have a real influence on people’s lives. The prize was designed to honour architects for their complete body of built work.
Since 1979, every year an independent jury of about eight people—composed of critics, practicing architects, and patrons of the arts—has decided upon the winner. There are no set terms for jurors, who become part of the jury by invitation and step down when they wish. Notable jurors have included J. Carter Brown, former director of the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C.; Italian businessman Giovanni Agnelli; architectural critic Ada Louise Huxtable; art historian Kenneth Clark; and major architects such as Philip Johnson (the first recipient of the prize), Maki Fumihiko, Frank O. Gehry, and Cesar Pelli.
Any licensed architect may nominate a candidate by communicating with the executive director of the jury. The director additionally actively seeks out nominations from critics, academics, professionals in related fields, and the jurors. As part of the deliberation process, which takes place at the beginning of the year, jurors visit many buildings by architects under consideration for the prize. This fieldwork is an especially positive aspect of the prize and distinguishes it from other awards that simply rely on photos.
The Pritzker Prize carries a purse of $100,000 and, until 1987, a limited-edition Henry Moore sculpture; this was replaced in subsequent years by a bronze commemorative medal. The prize is presented in a ceremony, usually in May of each year, at an architecturally significant site. On only three occasions have two winners been chosen: 1988 (to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the prize) and 2001 and 2010 (to recognize both partners of an architectural firm). Past winners are among the most important figures in late 20th- and early 21st-century architecture. For Pritzker Prize winners, see table.
