Richard Upjohn,  (born Jan. 22, 1802, Shaftesbury, Dorset, Eng.—died  Aug. 17, 1878, Garrison, N.Y., U.S.), British-American architect who was the most active exponent in his time of the Gothic Revival style in ecclesiastical architecture.
Although his parents wished him to enter one of the “learned professions,” Upjohn became apprenticed to a British cabinetmaker. In 1829, having amassed debts in England, he went to the United States and settled in New Bedford, Mass. Soon afterward he became an architect, working from 1834 to 1839 in Boston, where he employed a variety of styles. His first Gothic church, St. John’s, was built in Bangor, Maine (1837). In 1839 he moved to New York City, where he began to design in his mature style. His first example is Trinity Church, New York City (1839–46), a building that became renowned for the beauty and purity of its Perpendicular Gothic lines.
Upjohn’s success with Trinity Church led to many other church commissions, as well as houses (Edward King residence, Newport, R.I., 1845) and offices (Trinity Building, New York City, 1852), both in Italian Renaissance style. The Gothic style soon became inseparable from his religious and moral convictions. Although most of his churches were Episcopalian, he accepted commissions for other denominations (Madison Square Presbyterian Church). But so strong was his belief that Gothic was the expression of Christian architecture that he refused to design a church for Unitarians, a sect he considered anti-Christian. He usually contributed designs for at least one mission church a year. For poor parishes he published in Upjohn’s Rural Architecture (1852; reprinted 1975) an unpretentious design in wood, remarkable for its structural honesty and its liturgical character.
In 1853 Upjohn took his son Richard Mitchell into full partnership. The latter became more and more influential in the firm as public tastes changed from pure Gothic to picturesque eclecticism. In 1857 Upjohn helped found the American Institute of Architects and served as its president until he resigned in 1876.
