Richard Boyle, 3rd earl of Burlington,  (born April 25, 1694, London, Eng.—died  Dec. 4, 1753, London), English architect who was one of the originators of the English Palladian (Neo-Palladian) style of the 18th century.
Burlington was born into an enormously wealthy aristocratic family. From a young age he was a patron of the arts, interested in the visual arts, music, and literature; the composer George Frideric Handel and the poet John Gay both stayed in his home, and he was a patron of the poet Alexander Pope. A journey to Italy persuaded him that admirable architecture, grounded in the restraint of Classical models, would be essential to the promotion of good taste and decorum in Britain. He studied the works of Andrea Palladio and Inigo Jones and began practice upon returning to London from Vicenza, Italy, in 1719. He advocated a revival of Palladio’s and Jones’s interpretation of Classical tenets and assembled a collection, the largest to that time, of their drawings (now in the British Architectural Library in London), from which most of his own buildings are derived. He also commissioned numerous illustrations of Palladio’s building.
About 1721 Burlington designed Great (now Old) Burlington Street, No. 29. In 1725 he designed his villa at Chiswick (now in the outer London borough of Hounslow), one of the most influential Palladian buildings in England (completed 1729). The Assembly Rooms at York with the Egyptian Hall (1731–36) are considered the culmination of Burlington’s career.
Burlington’s practice of architecture drew criticism from contemporaries; aristocrats of the time did not themselves work in the arts. Yet his money and position enabled him to influence taste and to ensure through his political connections that architects who pursued the Palladian ideals (with the help of Burlington’s collections) were able to design important buildings throughout Great Britain and to contribute to the orderly development of the expanding cities. Burlington’s work was—in its reliance on earlier models, its rationality, and its restraint—a precursor of later 18th-century Neoclassicism.
