Robert Moses,  (born Dec. 18, 1888, New Haven, Conn., U.S.—died July 29, 1981, West Islip, N.Y.), U.S. state and municipal official whose career in public works planning resulted in a virtual transformation of the New York landscape. Among the works completed under his supervision were a network of 35 highways, 12 bridges, numerous parks, Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, Shea Stadium, many housing projects, two hydroelectric dams, and the 1964 New York World’s Fair. His projects greatly influenced large-scale planning in other cities in the United States. He was also instrumental in bringing the UN complex to Manhattan’s East River waterfront.
Moses studied political science at Yale, Oxford, and Columbia universities. He began a long career of public service for the state and especially for the city of New York in 1913, when he joined the city’s bureau of municipal research. His work there led to his appointment in 1919 by Gov. Alfred E. Smith as chief of staff of the New York state reconstruction commission, which sought administrative reforms in the state government.
In 1924 Smith named Moses head of both the New York and Long Island state park commissions, and for the next 40 years, more or less, through various state administrations at Albany and under various titles, he was virtual tsar of the state’s park system. Moses vastly expanded the existing park system and built a network of roads (parkways) that gave the public easy access to the new parks.
In 1933 Moses was appointed head of the New York City Parks Department and head of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority. He began a massive building program in the city that included hundreds of new playgrounds and city parks, along with several major bridges, tunnels, and highways. In 1934, in his first and only bid for elective office, Moses ran for governor and lost by the rather large margin of 800,000 votes.
During the 1940s and 1950s, Moses replaced tenement slums with huge public housing towers, which became less and less attractive to the public. Further, as writer Neil Sullivan and others have argued, Moses—in his refusal to build the new stadium proposed by Walter O’Malley—was one of the main reasons that Brooklyn’s celebrated baseball team left Brooklyn and became the Los Angeles Dodgers. In 1959, his popularity waning, Moses relinquished his city posts and became president of the World’s Fair. He lost most of his state jobs in 1962 when Nelson Rockefeller unexpectedly accepted his routine resignation. In 1968 Moses was stripped of his last post.
Moses was the prototype of the grandiose public builder concerned with immense but impersonal projects. He was able to achieve rapid funding and construction of his projects through his skillful use of the public authority, an autonomous organization that built public works with money raised by issuing bonds—the revenues of which Moses could control and use free from government interference. Moses’ approach to urban development gradually became unpopular in the 1950s and ’60s as community concern shifted from further expansion of the urban infrastructure to the preservation of existing neighbourhoods by the use of unobtrusive, small-scale development.
