Shikhara, (Sanskrit: “mountain peak”) also spelled shikara, also called shikar,  in North Indian temple architecture, the superstructure, tower, or spire above the sanctuary and also above the pillared mandapas (porches or halls); it is the most dominant and characteristic feature of the Hindu temple in the north. The North Indian shikhara is basically of two types: (1) the latina, curvilinear in outline, the type most usually found above the sanctuary; and (2) the phamsana, rectilinear in outline and capped by a bell-shaped member, the form more usually found above the mandapa.
The latina shikhara is composed of a series of horizontal roof slabs gradually receding toward the top and provided with projections that extend from the base and wall of the temple. The surface of the shikhara is covered with a vinelike tracery composed of diminutive chandrashalas (ogee arches). Above the truncated top (skandha) projects a necking on which rests a large grooved disk (amalasaraka), and above it sits a pot with a crowning finial. Each story is indicated by miniature amalasarakas at the four corners, repeated all the way to the top. The latina shikhara has two further variations: the shekhari and the bhumija. The shekhari consists of the central latina spires with one or more rows of half spires added on either side and miniature shikharas clustered along the base and corners. The shekhari was popular from the 10th century onward and can be observed on most Central Indian temples; the Lakshmana and Kandarya Mahadeva temples at Khajuraho, Madhya Pradesh, have excellent examples.
The bhumija variation has a flat vertical projection in the centre of each of the four sides, the quadrants between being filled with rows of miniature shrines all the way up to the top of the tower. The bhumija temple was particularly popular in Malwa, in the western part of Madhya Pradesh, and in the Deccan; an example is the 11th-century Udayeshvara temple at Udayapur, Madhya Pradesh.
According to South Indian architecture texts, the term shikhara is reserved for the dome-shaped crowning cap, though art historians have generally used the term to designate all temple spires, north and south. The South Indian spire, known as the kutina type, is quite different in shape from the North Indian shikhara, having a pyramidal storied arrangement, with each story (bhumi) stepped and relatively realistically delineated.
