Shotgun house,  narrow house prevalent in African American communities in New Orleans and other areas of the southern United States, although the term has come to be used for such houses regardless of location. Shotgun houses generally consist of a gabled front porch and two or more rooms laid out in a straight line. Rooms are directly connected without hallways. Shotgun houses may have derived their name from that room format, as it was sometimes said that a bullet shot from the front door would pass through the house without hitting anything and exit through the back door. However, the term may also be derived from togun, the Yoruba word meaning “house” or “gathering place.” Although shotgun houses are small, were inexpensively built, and generally lack amenities, they have been praised for their architectural virtues, which include the ingenious use of limited space and decoration such as gingerbread trim and brightly painted exteriors. They represent a unique African American contribution to architecture in the United States.
Shotgun houses first appeared in the early 19th century and peaked in popularity at the beginning of the 20th century. They were built in both rural and urban areas and often became the most common type of dwelling in black neighbourhoods in American cities such as Charlotte, North Carolina, and New Orleans. Most shotgun houses were built on brick piers, were heated by a fireplace, and did not include indoor plumbing. The narrow width of shotgun houses cut costs by allowing many houses to be built on smaller plots of land. Developers often bought 10 to 15 acres and filled them with shotgun houses squeezed tightly in rows along small streets and alleys. They housed low-income and working-class African American families, who often paid rent to absentee landlords.
Shotgun houses are well suited to warm climates. Their narrow, front-to-back design, with doors aligned in a row, aids air circulation during the summer. The houses often do not have windows on side walls, as their close proximity to neighbouring houses does not allow for ventilation or light from the side. Such close proximity does, however, maximize socializing, with residents often sitting on front porches and chatting with neighbours and people passing by on the street. Inhabitants of shotgun houses also live in close contact with each other, since the lack of hallways requires residents to pass through each other’s rooms.
Many shotgun houses built in the 19th and early 20th centuries fell into disrepair over time and were demolished during urban renewal efforts of the 1960s and ’70s. At that time, city planners and politicians viewed the houses as symbols of poverty and substandard housing conditions. In the early 21st century, however, shotgun houses began to receive more attention from scholars and historic preservation groups and were viewed as significant architectural structures, and many of the remaining structures in the South were restored. Some cities, including Charlotte and Houston, created historic districts dedicated to shotgun houses and moved remaining houses to those areas.
Shotgun houses reflect African, Caribbean, and American influences. The origins of those houses were in Haiti, where West Africans built dwellings using traditional West African housing forms—including square rooms, a lack of hallways, and a rectangular exterior—when they were enslaved on sugar and coffee plantations. The West African style soon blended with the housing styles of the Taino people, the original inhabitants of Haiti, to create the caille, a narrow house typically featuring a gabled entrance, stucco walls, shuttered windows, and a thatched roof. After the Haitian rebellion that began in 1791 and culminated in Haiti’s independence in 1804, many Haitians relocated to the southern United States, either freely or as slaves brought by plantation owners fleeing Haiti. In Louisiana and other southern states, the cailles evolved into shotgun houses made from wood, rather than stucco, but retained the narrow structure and gabled entrances.
