stadium,  enclosure that combines broad space for athletic games and other exhibitions with large seating capacity for spectators. The name derives from the Greek unit of measurement, the stade, the distance covered in the original Greek footraces (about 600 feet [180 metres]). The course for the footrace in the ancient Olympic Games at Olympia was exactly a stade in length, and the word for the unit of measurement became transferred first to the footrace and then to the place in which the race was run. As a type of structure, the stadium played a significant role in 20th-century construction technology.
The first Greek stadiums were long and narrow, in the shape of a U or a horseshoe. They were sometimes cut into the side of a hill, as at Thebes, Epidaurus, and at Olympia, the site of the Olympic Games, which began there in the 8th century bce. The Greeks also built hippodrome stadiums similar in layout but broad enough to accommodate four-horse chariot races, a feature of the Olympic Games as early as the 7th century bce.
The design of the Greek stadium was taken over and improved upon by the Romans, who built two types of stadiums: the circus and the amphitheatre. The circus was the Roman version of the hippodrome, a long, narrow, U-shaped structure designed for chariot races. The largest, and doubtless the finest ever built, was the Circus Maximus in Rome. In contrast to the circus, the amphitheatre, one of the most characteristic of all Roman buildings, was oval or round in plan and was completely enclosed on all sides. Intended for gladiatorial contests, in which the precise dimensions of the field were of slight importance, the amphitheatre was designed to afford maximum seating capacity and optimum visual facility for spectators. The giant amphitheatre built in Rome in the 1st century ce is known as the Colosseum. After the fall of Rome, amphitheatres survived for some time until the decline of the cities themselves terminated the spectacles that they had held. Nearly two millennia passed before the form was revived; much smaller, usually temporary stands sufficed for such intervening spectatorial events as the knightly tournaments of the Middle Ages in Europe.
The renewal of large-scale spectator sports came about gradually in the 19th century with the growth of European cities and the revival of interest in athletic contests; symbolically, the great impetus for the design of modern stadiums came from the revival of Olympic competition in 1896.
The stadium for the first modern Olympiad in Athens was a reconstruction of the ancient marble stadium built by Herodes Atticus on the site of an even earlier stadium in Athens. The Olympics since that time have provided a major focal point for the development of the modern stadium concept. In each period since the first modern Olympiad, the host country has usually erected a permanent stadium to mark the event. The first stadium of the modern genre was constructed for the IV Olympiad in 1908 at Shepherd’s Bush in London. The stands were partly roofed, and the stadium seated more than 50,000 people. Other Olympic stadiums of architectural note that were built before World War II include those at Stockholm (1912), Colombes, outside Paris (1924), Amsterdam (1927), and Berlin (1936). The Helsinki stadium built for the XII Olympiad (1940), which was canceled by the outbreak of World War II, served as the site for the XV Olympiad in 1952.
Stadiums rivaling the size of those of ancient Rome were constructed in several cities in the first half of the 20th century, notably the vast Strahov Stadium, in Prague, which was completed in 1934 for the Sokol gymnastics exhibition and had a seating capacity of more than 240,000. Other stadiums built to accommodate in excess of 100,000 people include May Day Stadium, in P’yŏngyang, North Korea; Melbourne Cricket Ground, in Melbourne; Aztec Stadium, in Mexico City; Salt Lake Stadium, in Kolkata (Calcutta); and Michigan Stadium, in Ann Arbor, Michigan, U.S. These figures of course denote how many people can be “accommodated”; the official “seating” capacities may be considerably lower.
American football inspired a new type of stadium design, the elliptical bowl, first employed in the Yale Bowl at New Haven, Connecticut, in 1914, and repeated in several other stadiums, including the Rose Bowl and Michigan Stadium. Because the bowl is entirely unsuited to the other principal American sport, baseball, another type of American stadium has evolved for baseball, in which the aim is to supply maximum roofed-seating capacity to protect spectators from the sunlight. A notable pioneer in this trend was triple-tiered Yankee Stadium, New York, built in 1923 (demolished 2009–10).
