Stanley Tigerman,  (born September 20, 1930, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.—died June 3, 2019, Chicago), prominent American architect and activist best known for his work in Chicago.
Tigerman studied architecture at a variety of schools, including the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1948–49) in Cambridge, the IIT Institute of Design (1949–50) in Chicago, and Yale University (1960–61) in New Haven, Connecticut. Early on he worked with a variety of Chicago architectural firms—including those of George Fred Keck; Skidmore, Owings & Merrill; and Harry M. Weese—before starting his own practice in 1964. In 1982 he partnered with Margaret McCurry to form Tigerman McCurry Architects.
Tigerman quickly developed a reputation for buildings that included as part of their design ironic references to his clients; these buildings were often categorized as postmodern because of their reliance on historical reference and signs and symbols. His buildings from this period range from the garage at 60 East Lake Street (1984–86) in Chicago, which resembles the radiator of a Rolls-Royce automobile, to an apartment building (1984–88) in the Tegeler Hafen district in Berlin, which draws upon the traditions of a Berlin suburban villa but breaks with tradition in its brightly coloured hues (representing the colours of the German flag). Tigerman’s later buildings, such as the Powerhouse (or “Energy Museum”) for Commonwealth Edison (1987–90; now demolished) in Zion, Illinois, though vernacular in overall appearance, are basilican in plan and reflect his lifelong interest in religious architecture. He also built the Illinois Holocaust Museum and Education Center (completed 2009) in Skokie, Illinois, which takes visitors through spaces that are architecturally immersive and representative of a journey through darkness and ultimately ascending into the light (architecturally and spiritually), into the Room of Remembrance and Hall of Reflection.
Perhaps more so than his buildings, Tigerman’s activism had the greatest impact on the American architectural scene. He was a founder of the so-called Chicago Seven movement in architecture, a group of seven Chicago architects who, playfully adopting the name of a group of late-1960s political dissidents, protested against the dominance of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe’s Modernism in postwar Chicago. Tigerman co-organized landmark exhibitions, such as “Chicago Architects” (1976) and “Late Entries: The Chicago Tribune Tower Competition” (1980), and wrote an important book, The Architecture of Exile (1988), about how architects can revitalize architecture by looking to elements from the past. In 1994 he cofounded Archeworks, an influential alternative postgraduate design school in Chicago that specializes in using architecture and design to address social needs. His passion for using architecture in a social cause is demonstrated in his design of Chicago’s Pacific Garden Mission (completed 2007).
