Thom Mayne,  (born January 19, 1944, Waterbury, Connecticut, U.S.), American architect, whose bold and unconventional works were noted for their offset angular forms, layered exterior walls, incorporation of giant letter and number graphics, and emphasis on natural light. He was awarded the Pritzker Prize in 2005.
After earning a bachelor’s degree in architecture from the University of Southern California in 1968, Mayne had a brief career in urban planning, working under noted civic planner Victor Gruen. In 1972 Mayne and fellow architect Michael Rotondi launched the Santa Monica, California-based design firm Morphosis, taking the firm’s name from the Greek word meaning “to be in formation” or “taking shape.” That same year Mayne helped found the Southern California Institute of Architecture (SCI-ARC), which became a leading school in experimental design. In 1978 he completed a one-year master’s degree program in architectural studies at Harvard University. He then returned to California, where he and Rotondi took projects that ranged from private residences to restaurants to a cancer centre in Los Angeles. His original solutions to many architectural questions made him a maverick and earned him a reputation as the “bad boy” of American architecture.
Rotondi left Morphosis in 1991, and in 1992 Mayne became a professor of architecture and urban design at the University of California at Los Angeles. Thereafter Mayne achieved what was considered his breakthrough design—the Diamond Ranch High School (1999–2000), near Pomona, California. Built on a hillside, the school features two rows of unusually angled buildings sheltering a canyonlike interior walkway. The design was widely praised and brought Mayne his first major international recognition. In 2004 Mayne completed his design for the Caltrans District 7 Headquarters building in Los Angeles, which served as a regional headquarters for the California Department of Transportation. Though massive, the Caltrans building is sensitive to the streetscape. Its exterior is an enormous perforated aluminum shell programmed to shift throughout the day, filtering out sunlight or letting it in. His later works include a student centre (2006) at the University of Cincinnati, Ohio, and several government-commissioned projects, including the San Francisco Federal Building (2007). In 2007 Mayne unveiled plans for a tower in Paris that would feature moveable structures to capture sunlight.
