Willis Tower, formerly (1973–2009) Sears Tower,  skyscraper office building in Chicago, Illinois, located at 233 South Wacker Drive, that is one of the world’s tallest buildings. The Sears Tower opened to tenants in 1973, though construction was not actually completed until 1974. Built for Sears, Roebuck and Company, the structure reaches 110 floors and a height of 1,450 feet (442 metres), excluding broadcast antennas and their supports, and provides more than 400,000 square metres (roughly 4.3 million square feet) of floor space for offices and other activities. (See Researcher’s Note: Height of the Willis [Sears] Tower.) The architectural firm of Skidmore, Owings & Merrill (SOM) was responsible for the design and construction of the tower; Bruce Graham served as architect and Fazlur Khan as structural engineer.
In 1969 Sears, Roebuck and Company was the world’s largest retailer, employing approximately 350,000 people. In order to consolidate current staff and accommodate anticipated growth, the company hired SOM to design a three-million-square-foot office tower. The location of the tower was strategically selected for its proximity to expressways and commuter rail lines to benefit Sears employees. But in the end, the tower’s location proved to be advantageous for the city as well. The inhabitants of the bustling office building generated new energy in a formerly stagnant West Loop neighbourhood.
This history explains why many Chicagoans still nostalgically refer to the building as the Sears Tower, although it has not technically been the Sears Tower for years. In 2009 the London-based insurance broker Willis Group Holdings (later called Willis Towers Watson) leased more than 140,000 square feet of office space on three floors of the Sears Tower. The contract included naming rights for 15 years. On July 16, 2009, the name of the building was officially changed to Willis Tower.
Welded steel frames form vertical tubes that support one another to provide the rigidity needed to limit the lateral sway from wind forces. Variations in the height of each individual tube also disrupt air currents, which reduces the stress of the wind on the structure. This system minimizes the amount of structural steel required for a building of its great height. The steel was prefabricated, with nearly all welding done off the erection site and bolt connections made at the site.  The innovative vertical-tube design was inspired by the uneven arrangement cigarettes make when they are pushed out of a pack. (See also building construction.)
The building is modular in plan, with nine 75-foot-square, column-free units. These nine square units compose a 225-foot-square base. At the 50th floor two diagonally opposite units stop, forming the first step back. The second step back is at the 66th floor with the other two diagonal units stopping, and the last at the 90th floor with three units stopping, leaving an upper tower of 20 stories.
The exterior is sheathed in black aluminum and bronze-tinted glass. Black bands appear around the building at the 30th–31st, 48th–49th, 64th–65th, and 106th–108th floors, at which points louvers clad the areas devoted to mechanical operations of the building. In the lobby is a major work by the American sculptor Alexander Calder, an enormous motorized mural named Universe, which he called a “wallmobile.” The tower’s observation deck, the Skydeck, is located on the 103rd floor. In the early 21st century the Skydeck underwent a major renovation that included addition of The Ledge, four glass boxes that extend 4.3 feet (1.3 metres) from the building; The Ledge opened in 2009, offering unobstructed views of Chicago and the outlying area.
The Sears Tower was the world’s tallest building until 1996, when it was surpassed by the Petronas Twin Towers (1,483 feet [451.9 metres]) in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (See Researcher’s Note: Heights of Buildings.)
