Tian Han, Wade-Giles romanization T’ien Han, pseudonym of Tian Shouchang,  (born March 12, 1898, Changsha, Hunan province, China—died December 10, 1968, Beijing), Chinese playwright and poet known for his expressive and powerful one-act plays.
Tian wrote librettos for traditional Chinese opera when he was a teenager. He studied for several years in Japan, where he developed a lasting interest in modern drama. Under the influence of the May Fourth Movement, he joined the Society of Chinese Youth in Japan. Upon his return to China in 1922, he and Guo Moruo and others founded the Creation Society to promote romanticism in creative writing. Tian also founded the South China Society to experiment in and popularize modern vernacular drama, and he initiated the Nanguo Fortnightly as the organ of the society. His earliest works include the sentimental plays Kafeidian zhi yiye (1920; “A Night in a Café”) and Huohu zhi ye (1924; “The Night the Tiger Was Caught”). He also wrote screenplays and founded the Nanguo Movie Society in 1926 and the Nanguo College of Art in 1928. Among his published plays of this period are Hushang de beiju (1928; “Tragedy on the Lakeshore”), Mingyou zhi si (1929; “Death of a Famous Actor”), and Nangui (1929; “Return to the South”), one-act plays that combine melodrama with critical realism.
Tian joined the Left-Wing Dramatists League in 1930 and the Chinese Communist Party in 1932. His plays accordingly became more political. They include Meiyu (1931; “The Rainy Season”), which addresses issues of class struggle through a depiction of factory workers, and Yueguang qu (1932; “The Moonlight Sonata”), about a bus-workers’ strike.
During the Sino-Japanese War (1937–45), while serving in various capacities for wartime mobilization, Tian composed some 12 librettos for traditional Chinese opera in an attempt to energize the populace. Tian personally led troupes on tours to the rear units and agitated for resistance against the Japanese invaders.
After 1949 Tian served as president of the Beijing Experimental School of Traditional Opera, chairman of the Chinese Dramatists’ Association, and vice-chairman of the All-China Federation of Literary and Art Circles. Meanwhile, he continued to write and adapt plays and librettos. The opera Baishezhuan (1958; The White Snake) was an adaptation of a popular legend. His best-known spoken drama of this period is Guan Hanqing (1958; Eng. trans. Guan Hanqing), an eponymous play about a great dramatist of the Yuan dynasty. Xie Yaohuan (1961) is thought by some critics to represent Tian’s highest achievement in drama, but by 1964 it was being attacked as a veiled criticism of Communist Party chairman Mao Zedong. Tian was persecuted by the Gang of Four during the Cultural Revolution and died in jail. In 1979 he was posthumously rehabilitated by the Chinese authorities.
