Al Jarreau, in full Alwyn Lopez Jarreau,  (born March 12, 1940, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, U.S.—died February 12, 2017, Los Angeles, California), American singer and songwriter who sang with almost acrobatic versatility and inventiveness, ranging from tenor crooning to scatting. His music contained influences of jazz, rhythm and blues, soul, and gospel without belonging precisely in any of those genres. Jarreau won seven Grammy Awards across three different musical categories.
As a child, Jarreau sang in church and at other venues in Milwaukee. He earned (1962) a degree in psychology from Ripon College—where he also performed with a group called the Indigos—and received (1964) a master’s degree in vocational rehabilitation from the University of Iowa. He then moved to San Francisco, where he worked as a rehabilitation counselor and sang in local jazz clubs. By the late 1960s he had decided on a career in music and relocated to Los Angeles.
He won favourable notice with his major-label debut, We Got By (1975), a collection of his own jazz songs. He followed that with Glow (1976) and the live double album Look to the Rainbow (1977). The title song on the latter brought him his first Grammy Award, for best jazz vocal performance. He won a second Grammy for All Fly Home (1978). His 1981 release, Breakin’ Away, was his biggest commercial success and yielded the hit single “We’re in This Love Together.” That album’s title song won a Grammy for best pop vocal performance, while another single on the album, Jarreau’s take on the Dave Brubeck classic “Blue Rondo a la Turk,” received a Grammy for best jazz vocal performance. Perhaps his most widely known recording was that of the theme song for the TV series Moonlighting (1985–89), for which he also supplied the lyrics.
Other notable albums include L is for Lover (1986), Heaven and Earth (1992), Tomorrow Today (2000), All I Got (2002), and Accentuate the Positive (2004), a collection of jazz standards. Jarreau garnered a Grammy for best R&B vocal performance for the title song from Heaven and Earth, and he shared the award for best traditional R&B vocal performance with George Benson and Jill Scott for their rendition of Billie Holiday’s “God Bless the Child,” from a duo album featuring Jarreau and Benson, Givin’ It Up (2006).
