Archie Shepp, byname of Archie Vernon Shepp,  (born May 24, 1937, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, U.S.), American tenor saxophonist, composer, dramatist, teacher, and pioneer of the free jazz movement, known not only for his creative improvisation and colourful sound but also for his Afrocentric approach to music.
Shepp grew up in Philadelphia and attended Goddard College (B.A., 1959), Plainfield, Vermont. He began his musical career in New York City, where he played tenor saxophone with pianist Cecil Taylor’s quartet (1960–62), a pioneer free jazz group. Following collaborations with trumpeter Bill Dixon, in 1963 Shepp formed the New York Contemporary Five (with trumpeter Don Cherry, alto saxophonist John Tchicai, and others), which subsequently toured in eastern and western Europe.
Shepp then led his own groups, which included many of the finest young players of the new music. His major work was done in the 1960s, when he formulated a saxophone style featuring a gruff tone, wide vibrato, hearty swing, and eruptions of harsh screams and multiphonics (simultaneously played notes). The traditions of John Coltrane and Ben Webster were important influences on his soloing. Shepp also composed and arranged songs, setting his pieces with provocative dissonances (as in Fire Music, 1965).
Simultaneously, Shepp pursued a literary career, composing essays linking free jazz to Black militancy; reading his own poetry on recordings; and writing plays, including Junebug Graduates Tonight (1967). He taught African American studies at the State University of New York at Buffalo (1968–72). In 1972 he joined the faculty at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, where he remained until his retirement from teaching in 2002. Throughout his years as a university professor and well afterward, Shepp continued to release new material, including Left Alone Revisited (2005), a tribute with pianist Mal Waldron to jazz singer Billie Holiday; Wo!man (2011), an album of duets with German pianist Joachim Kühn; and Ocean Bridges (2020), which incorporated rap and hip-hop. The National Endowment for the Arts named Shepp a Jazz Master in 2016.
