Bill Evans, byname of William John Evans,  (born August 16, 1929, Plainfield, New Jersey, U.S.—died September 15, 1980, New York, New York), American jazz pianist known for lush harmonies and lyrical improvisation, one of the most influential pianists of his time.
Evans’s first piano teacher was his mother; he also studied violin and flute. He graduated with a music teaching degree from Southeastern Louisiana College in 1950 and then went to New York City. After a brief period working as a pianist in the New York area, he was drafted into the army and played flute in the Fifth Army Band. Upon his return to civilian life, and to the piano, he seemed to burst onto the jazz scene: his first recordings, from 1956, reveal a fully formed technique characterized by a fresh harmonic approach and sensitive phrasing.
In 1958 he joined Miles Davis in what proved to be a historic eight-month collaboration. Evans was a key figure on Davis’s Kind of Blue (1959), a milepost of jazz history and perhaps the finest recorded example of modal jazz, a style that eschews complex chords in favour of free melody. Evans’s playing on that album was an influence on jazz pianists for years to come. He contributed “Blue in Green” to the Kind of Blue lineup; that piece joins his later “Waltz for Debby” as his best-known compositions. Because his compositions were tailored to his own style of playing, few Evans pieces entered the jazz repertoire.
Evans next formed a trio (initially with drummer Paul Motian and bassist Scott LaFaro) that was especially noted for its interplay between pianist and bassist. This group released the classic albums Portrait in Jazz (1959) and Explorations (1961), as well as several albums culled from a historic engagement at New York City’s Village Vanguard nightclub in June 1961. Evans often worked in small groups, but he was also an innovative solo player who took full advantage of the recording studio on such albums as Conversations with Myself (1963) and Further Conversations with Myself (1967), which featured multitracking to create the effect of several pianos.
The way Evans built and connected chords and improvised melodies gave his playing a romantic quality that contrasted with much of 1950s bebop. Classical composers such as Claude Debussy, Maurice Ravel, and Aleksandr Scriabin were influences, along with jazz pianists Bud Powell, Lennie Tristano, and Horace Silver. Over the years Evans’s playing became increasingly lyrical. His repertoire was also unusual. Musical theatre pieces such as “Someday My Prince Will Come” and “My Favorite Things” became in his hands bold rhythmic and chromatic experiments. His output in the 1960s was affected by a heroin addiction, but he recovered and began a career resurgence with The Bill Evans Album (1971). He became addicted to cocaine shortly before his death in 1980.
Over the course of his career Evans won multiple Grammy Awards and reached wide audiences with television and festival appearances, as well as recordings and club dates. He was considered the most important jazz pianist of his generation and was an enormous influence on such younger players as Herbie Hancock, Chick Corea, and Keith Jarrett.
