Cecil Taylor, in full Cecil Percival Taylor,  (born March 25, 1929, New York City, New York, U.S.—died April 5, 2018, New York City), American jazz musician and composer, among the leading free-jazz pianists.
Taylor attended the New York College of Music and the New England Conservatory of Music but was influenced more decisively by the music of jazz pianists Duke Ellington, Thelonious Monk, and Horace Silver. By the mid-1950s he was leading his own small groups. From his first recording, Jazz Advance (1956), Taylor was known as an uncompromising musical radical. He received high critical acclaim, but the audience for his complex and demanding music proved small. His career gradually began to gather momentum, however, and from 1973 he toured and recorded regularly, either as a solo pianist or with his own small group.
Like saxophonist Ornette Coleman, who initially overshadowed him, Taylor was one of the first musicians to release jazz improvisation from fixed harmonic structures. Influenced by both classical music and jazz, Taylor became a virtuoso pianist with a unique range of dynamics, attacks, and harmonic resources, including many tone clusters played for percussive, not harmonic, effect. His mastery of improvised form was unprecedented in jazz; he used an extensive repertoire of devices to develop simple material into dense, complex, extended, but structurally unified works. His repertoire consisted of original works, some composed of broken materials in successions of unrelated tempos. In the late 1960s he worked most often with violently fast tempos and long improvisations, and in his later work he steadily expanded his emotional range.
Taylor’s career spanned more than 50 years. He recorded dozens of albums and remained musically productive into his 80s. In 2009 he released Ailanthus/Altissima: Bilateral Dimensions of 2 Root Songs with British drummer and longtime collaborator Tony Oxley. The National Endowment for the Arts named Taylor a Jazz Master in 1990.
