Chet Baker, in full Chesney Henry Baker,  (born December 23, 1929, Yale, Oklahoma, U.S.—died May 13, 1988, Amsterdam, Netherlands), American jazz trumpeter and vocalist noted for the plaintive, fragile tone of both his playing and singing. He was a cult figure whose well-publicized struggles with drug addiction curtailed a promising career.
Born in Oklahoma and reared in California from age 10, Baker began playing trumpet in his school band. He played in U.S. Army bands during two stints as a soldier (1946–48 and 1950–52) and sat in with jazz groups in the San Francisco area during the early ’50s, often playing alongside Charlie Parker. He attracted considerable attention in 1952 as a member of Gerry Mulligan’s renowned pianoless quartet, with songs such as “Walkin’ Shoes,” “Bernie’s Tune,” and “My Funny Valentine” (one of Baker’s signature tunes) featuring Baker’s cool-toned, subdued playing. Baker at this time was heralded as a major new force in jazz, topping Metronome magazine’s poll as the top trumpeter of 1953 and establishing his own quartet in the same year. Several of Baker’s recordings from the 1950s also feature his work as a vocalist; his vibratoless, somewhat feminine-sounding tenor voice was in the “cool school” of singers such as Mel Tormé and June Christy. His 1954 recording of “Let’s Get Lost,” a romantic ballad that took on new connotations when sung by the addict Baker, became the song most associated with him.
Many fans and critics felt that Baker, with his popularity and good looks, could have been a movie star. European tours during 1955 and ’56 furthered his reputation, and recordings made during this time represent the best of Baker’s early career. His life became increasingly unstable during the late 1950s, however, as he became increasingly governed by his heroin addiction. Subsequent tours of Europe during the early 1960s resulted in numerous legal problems for Baker: his drug habit led to arrests, prison sentences, and confinement in a sanatorium. His playing became erratic throughout the decade, and he underwent something of a critical backlash from those who felt that Baker was too often praised for the beauty of his tone and too seldom chastised for his technical limitations.
With the aid of methadone, Baker made a gradual comeback during the 1970s. Years of addiction had taken their toll on his singing voice, which became increasingly uncertain and ragged, but many critics felt that Baker’s trumpet playing was at its finest during his final decade. Despite his history of indulgence and excess, his improvisation became more glib, his attack more forceful, and his tone more intimate. The years 1977–88 were also Baker’s most prolific as a recording artist. He was at something of a musical peak when he died after falling from a hotel room window in Amsterdam on May 13, 1988. Baker’s cult following increased after his death with the release of director Bruce Weber’s biographical documentary Let’s Get Lost (1988) and Baker’s own unfinished memoirs, As Though I Had Wings (1997).
