Cleo Laine, in full Dame Cleo Laine, original name Clementina Dinah Campbell,  (born October 28, 1927, Southall, Middlesex, England), British singer and actress who mastered a variety of styles but was best known as the “Queen of Jazz.”
Laine was born to a Jamaican father and an English mother. She quit school at age 14 and took a variety of jobs while auditioning for singing jobs. Her first break came in 1951, when she was hired as a vocalist for the Johnny Dankworth Seven, a well-known jazz group. At that point she adopted the simpler name “Cleo Laine.” In her seven years dedicated solely to performing with Dankworth’s band, she gained a large following and also began to record. In 1958, the year she married Dankworth (died 2010), she took her first theatrical role, in Flesh to a Tiger, set in Jamaica. Her success in the part led her to take on a number of other acting roles throughout the years, and she was a regular on the weekly BBC television satire That Was the Week That Was.
In the meantime, Laine continued to stretch herself as a singer, presenting lieder, classic blues, contemporary pop music, and even works by Arnold Schoenberg in her concerts; she was the only singer to receive Grammy Award  nominations in jazz, popular, and classical categories. In 1986 she won a Grammy for best female jazz vocal performance (for the album Cleo at Carnegie: The 10th Anniversary Concert; 1985). Laine continued to record and perform into the early 21st century. In addition, she performed in plays by Euripides, William Shakespeare, and Henrik Ibsen and took part in musical theatre, notably (1988–89) in Stephen Sondheim’s Into the Woods. She appeared in several movies, including the comedy The Last of the Blonde Bombshells (2000).
In 1969 Laine and Dankworth founded Wavendon AllMusic Plan, a charity that sought to make music more accessible. She was made Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 1977 and was elevated to Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in the 1997 Queen’s Birthday Honours List.  She wrote the autobiographies Cleo (1994) and You Can Sing If You Want To (1997).
