Free jazz,  an approach to jazz improvisation that emerged during the late 1950s, reached its height in the ’60s, and remained a major development in jazz thereafter.
The main characteristic of free jazz is that there are no rules. Musicians do not adhere to a fixed harmonic structure (predetermined chord progressions) as they improvise; instead, they modulate (i.e., change keys) at will. Free jazz improvisers typically phrase in chromatic intervals and harmonies, and some achieve atonality while playing in microtones, overtones, multiphonics (simultaneous notes played on one horn), and tone clusters. Free jazz performers often improvise without observing fixed metres or tempos. Solo and accompaniment roles tend to be fluid, as does the balance of composition and improvisation in a performance. The ultimate development of free jazz is free improvisation, which combines all these qualities—using no fixed instrumental roles or harmonic, rhythmic, or melodic structures and abandoning composition altogether.
As early as the 1940s, jazz musicians, most notably pianist Lennie Tristano and composer Bob Graettinger, created a handful of works using free jazz elements. Effectively, free jazz began with the small groups led in 1958–59 by alto saxophonist Ornette Coleman, from whose album Free Jazz (1960) the idiom received its name. Shortly afterward, saxophonists John Coltrane and Eric Dolphy and pianist Cecil Taylor began creating individual versions of free jazz. “Energy music,” later called “noise,” became an identifying label for high-energy, collective improvisations in which dense sound textures were created from furiously generated note sequences. In the mid-1960s Coltrane and fellow saxophonist Pharaoh Sanders adopted styles using soaring runs and distorted wails and shrieks, and Albert Ayler played saxophone solos using indeterminate pitches, multiphonic honks, and overtone screams. Such drummers as Sunny Murray and Andrew Cyrille accompanied these improvisations with pure accent and without direct reference to tempo or metre. Sun Ra’s Arkestra, with instrumentalists, singers, and dancers, enriched free jazz with a colourful sense of spectacle, and the Art Ensemble of Chicago and other musicians affiliated with that city’s Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians explored new sound colours and melodic expressions that returned an emphasis on lyricism to free jazz.
There were other innovations as well: saxophonists Anthony Braxton, Steve Lacy, and Evan Parker performed unaccompanied improvisations at their solo concerts, and unprecedented groups began to appear that had no rhythm section instruments whatsoever. Free improvisation also flourished in Europe and Great Britain, where native musical traditions often influenced the players as much as did traditional jazz. The Ganelin Trio from the Soviet Union improvised on Russian folk songs, and exiles from South Africa in the Brotherhood of Breath fused free jazz with kivela (kwela) music. The free-jazz idiom proved to be a stimulus to composers for large and small ensembles, resulting in a remarkable variety of composed music by Coleman, Barry Guy, Leo Smith, Henry Threadgill, Alex Schlippenbach, David Murray, Pierre Dørge, John Zorn, and Roscoe Mitchell, among others.
