Gil Evans, original name Ian Ernest Gilmore Green,  (born May 13, 1912, Toronto, Ont., Can.—died  March 20, 1988, Cuernavaca, Mex.), Canadian-born composer and arranger who was one of the greatest orchestrators in jazz history. Evans had a long and productive career but remains best known for his celebrated collaborations with trumpeter Miles Davis.
A self-taught musician, Evans started his first band in 1933, first leading it and later working as pianist and arranger. From 1941 to 1948, he worked as an arranger with Claude Thornhill’s band, devising the unique instrumentation that was to become a trademark of his early years: a standard big-band lineup, plus French horns and tuba. Evans used similar instrumentation for his two arrangements on Miles Davis’s seminal album Birth of the Cool (recorded 1949–50), their first noted collaboration. Throughout most of the 1950s, Evans worked in radio and television, often composing and arranging for singers such as Tony Bennett, Peggy Lee, Johnny Mathis, and Helen Merrill.
Evans’s importance as a jazz arranger was not widely recognized until he resumed his partnership with Davis in 1957, when Davis was in one of his most fertile and creative periods. In direct contrast to his usual spare approach, Davis released the densely textured Miles Ahead (1957), Porgy and Bess (1958), and Sketches of Spain (1960), all arranged by Evans. The albums “rank with the finest orchestral music of the 20th century,” according to jazz scholar Ian Carr, and Evans’s arrangements were praised as having
After years of obscurity, in his late forties Evans finally emerged as a major force in jazz.
One of Evans’s great skills was his ability to convey the sense of spontaneous improvisation within his carefully notated charts. He created luminous, impressionistic arrangements whose appeal lies in the richness of their textures and harmony and in their musical subtleties. His arrangements were also a challenge to musicians: bassist Bill Crow recalled that bandleader Thornhill would bring out Evans’s arrangements “when he wanted to punish the band.”
The recordings Evans did with his own orchestras during the late 1950s and early ’60s—on such albums as Gil Evans and Ten (1957), New Bottle, Old Wine (1958), and Out of the Cool (1960)—were very well received. He conducted occasional concerts and did some arrangements for other artists during the early 1960s and spent the latter half of the decade focusing on composition. Evans increasingly embraced the rhythms and electronic instrumentation of rock music during this period and planned to record an album in collaboration with the legendary guitarist Jimi Hendrix. Hendrix’s death in 1970 brought such plans to a halt, but arrangements Evans intended for the project were later heard on Gil Evans’ Orchestra Plays the Music of Jimi Hendrix (1974). Gil Evans continued his relationships with rock musicians, notably David Bowie (for the 1986 movie Absolute Beginners), Robbie Robertson (for the 1986 Martin Scorsese movie The Color of Money), and Sting (in live and studio performances in 1987).
