Humphrey Lyttelton, byname Humph,  (born May 23, 1921, Eton, Eng.—died April 25, 2008, London),  British trumpeter, clarinetist, bandleader, and composer who was the leading force in English jazz for more than 50 years. In his later years he was perhaps best known as the host of a BBC (British Broadcasting Corporation) weekly radio comedy titled I’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue. The program, which was a send-up of panel shows, was noted for its word play, ribaldry, and plain silliness.
Lyttelton’s father was a housemaster at Eton College, and both parents were amateur musicians. By age 15 Lyttelton had discovered jazz and, inspired primarily by Louis Armstrong, had begun teaching himself trumpet. After serving in the military during World War II, Lyttelton joined George Webb’s Dixielanders in 1947 and formed his own band the following year. His early group (which recorded with Sidney Bechet in 1949) featured clarinetist Wally Fawkes and was a Dixieland revival group that performed the music of the 1920s. In the mid-1950s the band shifted toward swing music.
An excellent trumpeter who had a deep feeling for early jazz, Lyttelton began doubling on the clarinet in the 1960s. He often performed and toured with visiting Americans, including Jimmy Rushing, Big Joe Turner, and fellow trumpeter Buck Clayton.
In addition to performing, Lyttelton worked as a newspaper cartoonist for The Daily Mail until the mid-1950s. He wrote humour pieces for Punch magazine, served as restaurant critic for Harper’s and Queen magazines, founded the Calligraph record label (1984), and wrote several influential books on jazz history. Into the 21st century, Lyttelton played with his group for sellout crowds throughout England. He also hosted two popular BBC radio programs—The Best of Jazz and I’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue. The latter show endeared him to a new generation of fans for its mixture of erudition and hilarity. Lyttelton, affectionately known as Humph, expressed his philosophy in the following quote:
