Louie Bellson, original name Luigi Paulino Alfredo Francesco Antonio Balassoni, also called Louis Bellson,  (born July 6, 1924, Rock Falls, Illinois, U.S.—died February 14, 2009, Los Angeles, California), American musician who was one of the most heralded jazz drummers, known for his taste and restraint in displaying his considerable technical skills.
Bellson was something of a child prodigy who, while in high school, invented the double-bass drum kit that became his trademark and went on to become a favourite with jazz and rock drummers. At age 17, Bellson won a national drum contest sponsored by Gene Krupa, rising to the top among some 40,000 entrants. He began his professional career with Ted Fio Rito’s band and briefly joined Benny Goodman’s orchestra before departing for army service in 1943. During the late 1940s, Bellson played in numerous small groups and from 1947 to ’49 was the drummer in Tommy Dorsey’s band. After a brief stint with Harry James (1950–51), he achieved celebrity status in the early ’50s as drummer with the Duke Ellington Orchestra; Ellington frequently introduced Bellson as “the greatest drummer in the world.” For Ellington, Bellson also composed three songs that became hits: “The Hawk Talks,” “Ting-a-Ling,” and “Skin Deep.” He left the Ellington band in 1953 to become musical director for singer-actress Pearl Bailey, whom he had married the previous year. Bellson continued to play with or lead several top bands and combos throughout the years, and he continued to work with Bailey until her death in 1990.
Bellson was never regarded as a musical innovator; instead, his facility allowed him to perform expertly in a variety of musical styles and genres. Although he was a virtuoso capable of making lengthy drum solos varied and interesting, Bellson’s playing was characterized more by restraint than flamboyance and rendered him a tasteful accompanist for popular singers such as Tony Bennett and Ella Fitzgerald and for musicians such as Count Basie, Art Tatum, and Oscar Peterson. He was regarded as one of the great ambassadors of jazz and gave freely of his time to several college and high school jazz programs; he was also a frequent guest artist with college bands, such as the renowned jazz band of Northern Illinois University. A prolific recording artist, Bellson released more than 60 albums under his own name throughout the years and appeared on many recordings of other musicians.
