Patricia Barber,  (born November 8, 1955, Lisle, Illinois, U.S.), American jazz musician who achieved international acclaim in the late 1990s and early 2000s.
Barber, the daughter of two musicians, began taking classical piano lessons at age six. She grew up in Illinois and Iowa, majored in classical music and psychology at the University of Iowa, and initially resisted becoming a jazz musician. Jazz, however, proved an irresistible lure, and in 1979, a year after graduation, she moved to Chicago, where she scuffled for work for five years. Her break came with a 1984 booking at the Gold Star Sardine Bar on Chicago’s Gold Coast, where the club owner insisted that Barber sing and play only standards. The intimate quality of her music became evident, as she often chose slow tempos for the familiar songs that she sang quietly, over her lyrical, Bill Evans-influenced piano playing. She continually added new material to her repertoire, and in 1989 she released her first album, Split, which she sold from the bandstand.
In the early 1990s, Barber started performing at the Green Mill, a jazz club in a former Chicago speakeasy, and she began expanding her horizons, adding unusual selections, from 11th-century Gregorian chants to Santana and Joni Mitchell. Barber began writing songs, too, setting poems of E.E. Cummings and Maya Angelou to music and also writing her own lyrics. Songs of hers, including “Touch of Trash” and “Postmodern Blues,” revealed veins of ironic humour, melancholy, and whimsy; she began expressing her own worried visions of society in song. Dissatisfied with the way a major label handled her second album, A Distortion of Love, Barber began producing her own recordings, using her own loyal musicians, for Premonition, a small local label. Barber’s discs Café Blue (1994), Modern Cool (1998), and Companion (1999) spread her reputation beyond Chicago.
In 1998 Blue Note purchased Premonition, and, when the label began distributing Barber’s albums, sales quickly rose. For her sixth album, Night Club (2000), Barber returned to interpreting familiar standard songs in her intimate yet dramatic style. The compact disc became a jazz best seller, spending eight weeks among Billboard’s top five jazz albums in 2001. Barber expanded her fame with months of touring clubs, concerts, and jazz festivals in North America, Europe, and Israel. She followed the success of Night Club with Verse (2002) and the live album A Fortnight in France (2004). In 2003 she received a Guggenheim fellowship to craft a song cycle based on Ovid’s Metamorphoses. The result was Mythologies (2006), jazz and pop melodies that incorporated rock and hip-hop elements. Her next release, The Cole Porter Mix (2008), a collection of Cole Porter standards, reached the top five on the Billboard jazz charts. Later albums included Smash (2013), which features original material, and Higher (2019), a work of classically inspired original jazz.
