Patty Andrews, in full Patricia Marie Andrews,  (born February 16, 1918, Minneapolis, Minnesota, U.S.—died January 30, 2013, Los Angeles, California), American singer and entertainer best known as part of the Andrews Sisters musical trio.
Patty Andrews was born the youngest of three surviving children to immigrant parents—their father, Peter, was from Greece, and their mother, Olga, was from Norway. As a child, she took up singing with her elder sisters, LaVerne and Maxene. Patty, a soprano singer, was given the lead parts, and her sisters sang harmony. The trio performed around Minneapolis before joining Larry Rich’s troupe on the vaudeville circuit in the early 1930s. After their vaudeville run ended in 1932, the sisters continued to perform. While in New York City in 1937, they made their first recordings as part of Leon Belasco’s band. While there, the sisters came to the attention of record executive Jack Kapp. He quickly signed them to Decca Records, and they released their first single, “Why Talk About Love,” in 1937. Though “Why Talk About Love” proved to be a poor seller, the sisters’ second single, an English version of the Yiddish song “Bei mir bist du schoen” (1937; “To Me You’re Beautiful”), was a major hit.
The Andrews Sisters continued to gain popularity in the following years, releasing such hit songs as “Hold Tight, Hold Tight” (1938), “I’ll Be with You in Apple Blossom Time” (1940), and “Boogie Woogie Bugle Boy” (1941). They made regular appearances on the radio and collaborated with stars, including Bing Crosby, and with such popular acts as the Glenn Miller Orchestra. In 1940 the sisters signed with Universal Pictures, appearing in movies with Abbott and Costello, among others. After the United States entered World War II, they began performing for the troops, including traveling overseas with the USO (United Service Organizations) in 1945. Although they had gained much of their popularity before the war, the sisters were best remembered for their upbeat patriotic spirit during this time. Hit songs from the war era included “Don’t Sit Under the Apple Tree (with Anyone Else but Me)”(1942) and “Rum and Coca-Cola” (1944). The sisters were known for the diversity of their songs, which incorporated a wide range of styles—from boogie-woogie and swing to calypso—and cultural backgrounds.
In 1949 Patty began edging toward a solo career, recording “I Can Dream, Can’t I?” and, the following year, “I Wanna Be Loved,” with her sisters performing backup rather than harmony. She went on to release several solo works with Decca. By 1954 Patty had left Decca Records and focused on solo work exclusively. However, she rejoined her sisters in 1956, and the trio made frequent appearances in nightclubs and on television, continuing until LaVerne was forced to retire because of poor health. After LaVerne’s death in 1967, Patty and Maxene joined up with singer Joyce de Young to continue the trio, but they disbanded for good in 1968. By this time, the sisters had released some 600 songs, of which more than 100 had made the charts.
After singer and actress Bette Midler repopularized “Boogie Woogie Bugle Boy” in 1973, Patty and Maxene starred in the well-received Broadway show Over Here! in 1974–75. Patty continued to perform as a solo artist into the 1990s.
