The Roots,  American jazz/hip-hop jam band that was perhaps best known as the house band for Late Night with Jimmy Fallon (2009–14) and The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon (2014– ). The founding members were Black Thought (Tariq Trotter; b. October 3, 1971, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, U.S.) and drummer Questlove (or ?uestlove; Ahmir Khalib Thompson; b. January 20, 1971, Philadelphia).
The group was created in 1987 by Black Thought and Questlove—the only members who remained part of the band throughout its history—when they met as students at the Philadelphia High School for the Creative and Performing Arts. Originally calling themselves the Square Roots, they began performing on Philadelphia street corners. With the addition of rapper Malik B (Malik Abdul Basit) and bassist Hub (Leonard Hubbard), they began making a name for themselves in clubs in Philadelphia and New York City.
The debut album of the Roots, Organix (1993), which included keyboardist Scott Storch in the lineup, was released in conjunction with a concert in Germany. That album, together with the band’s growing reputation, brought offers from major labels, and the group signed with DGC Records. The first release on that label, Do You Want More?!!!??! (1994), included contributions by human beatbox Rahzel (Rahzel Brown) and was notable in that samples of music from other recordings, a mainstay of the art form, were played live by the musicians. The 1999 offering, Things Fall Apart, was regarded as the band’s breakthrough album and won both critical praise and commercial success. A single from the album, “You Got Me,” a collaboration with vocalist Erykah Badu, won the Grammy Award in 2000 for best rap performance by a duo or group.
The Roots, with a fluid lineup, continued touring, recording, and collaborating with other artists, releasing Phrenology (2002), The Tipping Point (2004), Game Theory (2006), and Rising Down (2008). In addition, the Roots backed rap star Jay Z in 2001 on the concert TV show MTV Unplugged (also released as the album Jay-Z Unplugged).
In 2008 comedian Jimmy Fallon approached the Roots to serve as his backing band when he became a late-night talk-show host, maintaining that it was the only group that could provide excellent and appropriate backup music for vocalists in any genre. The choice sent shock waves in several directions. Devotees of the Roots felt that the format was too confining and demeaning for a band generally regarded as extraordinary. Network executives feared that a band known for cogent social commentary and for charting its own course might alienate advertisers and audience members. In the end the Roots proved to be an asset to the talk show, which in turn widened the audience for the band, which was able to showcase talents, including comedic, that had not previously been exhibited. In 2014 Fallon left the Late Night with Jimmy Fallon to host The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon (2014– ), where the Roots continued as the house band.
In addition, the Roots recorded the albums How I Got Over (2010) and Undun (2011) as well as collaborations with soul artist John Legend (Wake Up!, 2010), rhythm and blues singer Betty Wright (Betty Wright: The Movie, 2011), and rock musician Elvis Costello (Wise Up Ghost, 2013). In 2011 Wake Up! was given the Grammy Award for best R&B album, and the single “Hang On in There” took the Grammy for best traditional R&B vocal performance. In 2014 the the Roots released its 11th studio album, … And Then You Shoot Your Cousin, a conceptual collection of densely layered music intended as a meditation on community violence.
