George Town, also spelled Georgetown, also called Penang, or Pinang,  leading port of Malaysia, situated on a triangular promontory in the northeastern sector of the island of Penang (Pinang). Its sheltered harbour is separated from the west coast of Peninsular (West) Malaysia by a 3-mile (5-km) channel through which international shipping approaches from the north to avoid the many shallows of the southern route.
The town was founded as Fort Cornwallis in 1786 by Captain Francis Light of the British East India Company and flourished as a port of call for shipping on the India-China run. It became for a time the capital and commercial centre of the Straits Settlements. A restored Fort Cornwallis, St. George’s Church (1817), and the Esplanade recall the town’s colonial past. As a thriving entrepôt, George Town attracted Chinese (mainly Hokkien and Cantonese) and Indian traders. Although Chinese and European culture predominates, there is a sizable Malay minority in the city.
Industries in the southern suburbs include tin smelting, rice and coconut-oil milling, and the manufacture of soap and of rattan and bamboo articles. Industrial estates at Bayan Lepas are the site of electronics assembly plants. Most of the mainland’s exports are ferried or brought by lighter to George Town from the smaller ports of Butterworth and Perai, which cannot handle oceangoing vessels. The bulk of the Malay Peninsula’s cargo, previously channeled through the east-coast ports, now moves through George Town. Major exports include tin, rubber, and copra. The University of Science of Malaysia (founded 1969) is at Minden Barracks on the outskirts. Also on the outskirts is the city’s most spectacular temple, the Kek Lok Si Temple, or, as it is sometimes called, the Million Buddhas Precious Pagoda, a complex of structures on three levels with thousands of gilded Buddhas. George Town’s cultural and architectural traditions were recognized in 2008 when UNESCO designated the city a World Heritage site. Pop. (2000 prelim.) 180,573.
