Sodom and Gomorrah,  notoriously sinful cities in the biblical book of Genesis, destroyed by “sulfur and fire” because of their wickedness (Genesis 19:24). Sodom and Gomorrah along with the cities of Admah, Zeboiim, and Zoar (Bela) constituted the five “cities of the plain,” and they are referenced throughout both the Old and New Testament and the Qurʾān.
In the Genesis account, God reveals to Abraham that Sodom and Gomorrah are to be destroyed for their grave sins (18:20). Abraham pleads for the lives of any righteous people living there, especially the lives of his nephew, Lot, and his family. Abraham seems to negotiate with God on behalf of the righteous in the two cities. God first agrees to spare the cities if 50 righteous people can be found  and eventually agrees to spare them if 10 righteous people can be found (18:23–32). Two angels, appearing as men, are sent to Lot in Sodom but are met with a wicked mob who ask for the newcomers. Lot offers the mob his daughters instead, but this only further enrages the mob, who are then struck blind by the angelic guests (19:1–11). Finding only Lot and his family as righteous among the inhabitants, the angels warn Lot to quickly evacuate the city and not look back. As they flee the destruction, Lot’s wife looks back upon the city and is turned into a pillar of salt (19:12–29).
The account in the Qurʾān (11:74–83 and 29:28–35) is similar, though the cities are not mentioned by name. Abraham pleads for “Lot’s people” but is told that the chastisement cannot be averted. Lot is grieved when the messengers tell him of the fate of his people and, as in the biblical narrative, offers his daughters in vain to the mob. Righteous Lot is told to escape in the night with his followers and is warned that his wife will suffer the same fate as the rest. The cities are destroyed by stones raining down.
The exact nature of the damning wickedness of the cities has been the subject of debate. Traditionally, Sodom and Gomorrah have been associated with homosexual acts. The mob of men that accosts the angels had demanded of Lot, “Where are the men who came to you tonight? Bring them out to us, so that we may know them” (Genesis 19:5). This has long been interpreted as “carnal knowledge,” and many believe that it is the widespread homosexuality of the inhabitants that earns their obliteration. Other biblical references to Sodom and Gomorrah, including Jude 1:7, which mentions sexual immorality and “unnatural lust,” and the “abominable things” of Ezekiel 16:50, are seen as support for this view.
Modern scholarship, particularly in Judaism and certain branches of Christianity, has proposed that it is the inhabitants’ lack of hospitality, not their homosexuality, that gives offense to God. According to this view, the mob’s demands to rape the angelic guests reveals their deep-seated violence and inhospitality and is meant to stand in striking contrast to the gracious hospitality given by both Abraham and Lot to those same strangers. Indeed, both Abraham and Lot generously welcomed and fed the angelic strangers, Abraham with a choice calf specially prepared (18:7–8) and Lot with a feast and an invitation to rest for the night (19:2–3). To further this claim, some cite the words of Jesus in Matthew 10:14–15:
Here, it is argued, Christ is implying that the grave sin of Sodom and Gomorrah, and of any towns that refuse his disciples, is that of inhospitality. Additionally, Ezekiel 16:49 mentions the inhabitants’ refusal to care for the poor despite their prosperity, which is taken as further evidence that homosexuality is not the cause of their damnation.
In Islam, homosexuality has also traditionally been understood as the sin of Sodom and Gomorrah. In the Qurʾānic account, the mob’s refusal of Lot’s daughters in favour of the messengers is seen as evidence of their sexual depravity. The people of Sodom and Gomorrah were the first on earth to commit a certain “indecency,” and the Qurʾān states that they lusted after men instead of women (7:80–81). This novel indecency merited their destruction, though it is followed with a mention of highway robbery and ambiguous “evil deeds” (29:28–29).
As in Judaism and Christianity, some modern Islamic interpretations have questioned whether homosexuality is what led to the destruction of Lot’s people. It has been suggested that perhaps the mob’s violence, or sexual aggression, against Lot and his guests is the cause of their divine punishment. Supporting this view is the fact that, unlike the Bible, the Qurʾān does not decree earthly punishment for homosexuality. Rather, the historical Islamic basis for punishing homosexuality is Hadith (sayings attributed to the Prophet Muhammad), the authenticity of which has been sometimes called into question.
Sodom and Gomorrah are possibly located under or adjacent to the shallow waters south of Al-Lisān, a former peninsula in the central part of the Dead Sea in Israel that now fully separates the sea’s northern and southern basins. They presumably were devastated about 1900 bce by an earthquake in the Dead Sea area of the East African Rift System, an extensive geologic rift extending southward from the Jordan River valley in Israel to the Zambezi River system in eastern Africa. Archaeological evidence indicates that the area was once fertile, in the Middle Bronze Age (c. 2000–c. 1550 bce), with fresh water flowing into the Dead Sea in sufficient amounts to sustain agriculture. Because of the fertile land, Lot selected the area of the cities of the Valley of Siddim (the Salt Sea, or Dead Sea) to graze his flocks. When the catastrophic destruction occurred, the petroleum and gases existing in the area probably contributed to the imagery of “brimstone and fire” that accompanied the geological upheaval that destroyed the cities. Har Sedom (Arabic: Jabal Usdum), or Mount Sodom, at the southwestern end of the sea, reflects Sodom’s name. The present-day industrial site of Sedom, Israel, on the Dead Sea shore, is located near the presumed site of Sodom and Gomorrah.
An inspiration to writers, artists, and psychologists, Sodom and Gomorrah and their legendary wickedness have been the subject of numerous dramas, including the History of Lot and Abraham, a medieval mystery play; Sodome et Gomorrhe, by the French dramatist Jean Giraudoux, in 1943; and Sodhome kye Ghomorra, by the Greek writer Nikos Kazantzákis, in the 1950s. In art, the subjects involved in the biblical accounts of Sodom and Gomorrah have been portrayed in numerous medieval psalters, Renaissance frescoes, and paintings down to the present day. Sexual acts attributed to the Sodomites gave the city’s name to the contemporary term sodomy. The name is also used in the Marquis de Sade’s infamous and sexually explicit book 120 Days of Sodom (1785).
In July 1943 the Allied bombing of Hamburg, known as “Operation Gomorrah,” created one of the largest firestorms in World War II and killed about 40,000 people.
