Sucre,  judicial capital of Bolivia. (La Paz is the country’s administrative capital.) Sucre lies in a fertile valley crossed by the Cachimayo River, at an elevation of 9,153 feet (2,790 metres) above sea level.
It was founded in 1539 by the conquistador Pedro de Anzúrez on the site of a Charcas Indian village and has been variously called La Plata (the Spanish colonial name), Charcas, and Chuquisaca (the former indigenous name for the site, probably meaning “headquarters of the Charcas”). Many colonial churches survive, including the 17th-century Basílica Metropolitana and the churches of La Recoleta, San Lazaro, La Merced, San Miguel, and Santa Clara.
In 1561 the city became the capital of Charcas audiencia (judicial and military territory of the Viceroyalty of Peru) and in 1609 the seat of an archdiocese. An early (1809) revolutionary centre, the city became the capital of Bolivia in 1839. The following year it was renamed in honour of the liberator Antonio José de Sucre. In 1898 an effort to move the capital to La Paz resulted in a civil war. The outcome was a compromise: Sucre remained the capital in name and law and the seat of the Supreme Court, but the executive and legislature moved to La Paz.
Sucre is home to several museums, including the Casa de la Libertad, which displays Bolivia’s Declaration of Independence; a textile museum; and a children’s museum. One of the oldest universities in South America, Universidad Mayor, Real y Pontificia de San Francisco Xavier (St. Francis Xavier University), was founded in Sucre in 1624. The city contains many examples of Spanish colonial architecture and was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1991.
Roads to Potosí, Cochabamba, and Santa Cruz and secondary roads to nearby valleys have made Sucre a commercial and agricultural centre of growing importance. Industrial establishments include an oil refinery and a cement plant. Extensive dinosaur tracks have been found at the cement quarry and other nearby sites. Pop. (2001) 193,876; (2012) 238,798.
