Valletta, also spelled Valetta,  seaport and capital of Malta, on the northeast coast of the island of Malta. The nucleus of the city is built on the promontory of Mount Sceberras that runs like a tongue into the middle of a bay, which it thus divides into two harbours, Grand Harbour to the east and Marsamxett Harbour to the west.
Built after the Great Siege of Malta in 1565, which checked the advance of Ottoman power in southern Europe, it was named for Jean Parisot de la Valette, grand master of the order of Hospitallers (Knights of St. John of Jerusalem), and became Malta’s capital in 1570. The Hospitallers were driven out by the French in 1798, and a Maltese revolt against the French garrison led to Valletta’s seizure by the British in 1800. After 1814 the city became a strategic British Mediterranean naval and military base of the first order; it was subjected to severe bombing raids in World War II and was the place where the Italian fleet surrendered to the Allies in 1943.
One of the most-notable buildings in Valletta is St. John’s Co-Cathedral. Formerly a conventual church belonging to the Hospitaller order, this church is outwardly austere but inwardly sumptuous and is now almost equal in rank to the archbishop’s cathedral at Mdina. Built between 1573 and 1578, it was designed by the Maltese architect Gerolamo Cassar. Other buildings by Cassar include the Palace of the Grand Masters (1574; now the residence of the president of the Republic of Malta, the seat of the House of Representatives, and the site of the armoury of the Hospitallers), the Auberge d’Aragon (1571; now home to the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs), the Auberge de Provence (1571; now the National Archaeology Museum), and the Castille and León Auberge (1573; now the office of the prime minister). Of the other auberges (lodges built for every langue [nationality] of the Hospitallers), those of France and Auvergne were destroyed in World War II, and that of Italy was heavily damaged. The National Library of Malta was built in the late 18th century, the University of Malta was founded by Pope Clement VIII in 1592, the Manoel Theatre dates from 1731–32, and the National Museum of Fine Arts (opened 1974) is housed in a residence dating from 1571.
Valletta is a city of churches, among them the Church of Our Lady of Victory, which contains the city’s foundation stone; St. Paul’s Shipwreck Church; and an exquisite octagonal church dedicated to St. Catherine of Italy. Valletta is not an industrial city but is an important commercial and administrative centre. The city’s artistic and historical treasures constitute a major tourist attraction. Valletta was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1980. Pop. (2011 prelim.) 5,784.
