Arnold Gesell, in full Arnold Lucius Gesell,  (born June 21, 1880, Alma, Wisconsin, U.S.—died May 29, 1961, New Haven, Connecticut), American psychologist and pediatrician, who pioneered the use of motion-picture cameras to study the physical and mental development of normal infants and children and whose books influenced child rearing in the United States. As director of the Clinic of Child Development at Yale University (1911–48), he collected and published a vast quantity of data and amassed a large collection of films on child development.
Gesell studied psychology at Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts, where he came under the influence of G. Stanley Hall, one of the earliest psychologists to study child development. In 1906 Gesell received a doctorate from Clark, and in 1911 he went to New Haven to head the Yale Psycho-Clinic (later the Clinic of Child Development). Convinced that medical training was essential for his studies in child development, he studied medicine and in 1915 received an M.D. from Yale.
Initially concerned with retarded development, Gesell came to the conclusion that an understanding of normal infant and child development was indispensable to understanding childhood abnormality. He then began his studies of the mental growth of babies, and by 1919 he was addressing himself chiefly to the development of normal infant mentality. He found new methods for observing and measuring behaviour by using controlled environments and precise stimuli. From 1926 the movie camera became his principal tool of investigation. About 12,000 children of various ages and levels of development were filmed candidly through a one-way mirror, and eventually records of children from birth through the late teens were compiled. From these observations Gesell concluded that children must reach specific maturational stages in development before their learning influences their behaviour; there appeared to be a hereditary scheme for development in the four areas of motor skills, adaptive behaviour, language development, and personal and social skills. In Infancy and Human Growth (1928), he presented a developmental schedule based on this theory, using 195 items of behaviour to evaluate infants of ages between 3 and 30 months. In 1938 Gesell and Helen Thompson produced a revised developmental schedule for evaluating infants as early as four weeks after birth. Although his schedules were criticized by some experts, they were widely used. He proposed that a discerning guidance, rather than excessive permissiveness or rigid rules, provided the best approach to bringing up children.
Gesell’s first book appeared in 1912. One of the most comprehensive of his many works is An Atlas of Infant Behavior (1934); other influential works include Child Development: An Introduction to the Study of Human Growth (1949), with Frances L. Ilg; The Child from Five to Ten (1946); and Youth: The Years from Ten to Sixteen (1956). In addition to his studies of normal development, Gesell also considered such questions as the psychological factors in child adoption and the effect of premature birth on mental development. He served as a research consultant for the Gesell Institute of Child Development in New Haven, which continued the work of the Yale clinic, from 1948 until his death.
