Effects of television viewing on child development,  highly contested topic within child development and psychology involving the consequences for children from the content of and the duration of their exposure to television (TV) programming. The effects of television viewing on child development have aroused a range of reactions from researchers, parents, and politicians  that has fueled a debate that extends back to the medium’s inception in the 1940s.
It is difficult to argue that youths are not affected by what is broadcast on television. However, it is equally difficult to pinpoint particular shows or genres of programming as causing specific behaviours in children without considering the innumerable amount of alternate influences that may have an effect on their actions. Some have argued that television clearly has negative effects on youths—such as violent programming resulting in children who are more fearful, more aggressive, or more insensitive to the suffering of others—whereas others believe that such effects are, at best, ambiguous. Although it is uncertain which perspective is right or wrong, it is quite certain that the debate continues to galvanize social scientists, parents, and politicians in the United States and elsewhere.
As commercial television began to flourish in the United States in the 1940s, television’s effects on the first generation of individuals raised alongside the new medium became a topic of interest. In 1949 the Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS) sponsored a study conducted by Rutgers University that found that television increased family unity and cohesion, did not promote viewer passivity, and did not replace other valued diversions, such as outdoor activities and social interactions. That landmark report was one of the first and most widely disseminated of its kind, and several more would follow in the forthcoming decade. Soon, however, questions were raised about whether television viewing decreased dialogue between children and parents and whether children could be expected to maintain academic progress as their average total viewing time increased to more than 20 hours a week. Eventually, broadcasters capitalized upon those youthful watchers by developing targeted programs such as puppet shows and Saturday morning cartoons. Although those were highly popular, many children—especially those from households that provided minimal parental involvement in viewing choices—were also watching wrestling shows, TV westerns, and mystery-crime dramas, all of which incorporated a significant amount of violence into their story lines. That, in turn, raised even more concerns about the impact of television on American youth.
In several studies in the 1960s and ’70s, American psychologist Albert Bandura found that children learn from and imitate the behaviour of individuals they observe, specifically when the individual is rewarded for aggressive acts. That finding corroborated the admonitions of those who suggested that children who constantly witnessed their favorite TV “heroes” being praised for beating up or killing the “bad guy” would, in turn, incorporate aggressive acts into their own repertoire of behaviours for use in situations characterized by conflict. Throughout the following decades, psychologists, sociologists, criminologists, and other social scientists have argued a number of different perspectives with respect to whether television violence facilitates or triggers violent behaviours in children. Some believe that watching violence on television likely causes a significant number of children to behave violently. Others have agreed that this may be true but that it is so only with children already susceptible to exhibiting violence. As a result, some have argued for tighter controls, either voluntary or legislative, concerning what should be allowed on the airwaves. Alternately, some have blamed parents instead of the broadcast industry and contended that parents are ultimately to blame for their children’s viewing habits. A general point of agreement (or compromise) among the research community is that television can have effects on children’s behaviours but that it must be considered as one of many determinants that may cause a child to act in a particular manner.
The debate of whether violence on television begets violence in children may be the most-salient issue, but some social scientists argue that television programming has negative effects on children beyond promoting aggressive behaviour. For example, television shows appear to perpetuate gender and racial stereotypes and offer young viewers a distorted perspective of how the world works and how people behave. Several studies have correlated television with deficits in attention and focus and have revealed negative correlations between test scores and the number of hours of programming watched. In addition, parents have complained about the content of certain shows, contending that even the most “child-friendly” programming may present values (especially those regarding sex, alcohol, tobacco, and illicit drug use) that contradict those they wish to pass on to their offspring.
Health care professionals have also weighed in on the television debate. They believe that children who spend more time watching television are going to spend less time engaging in physical activity. That trend, combined with the ubiquity of fast-food advertisements during such programs, may be largely responsible for America’s obesity epidemic. Additionally, psychologists argue that the large amount of time spent watching TV threatens the cohesiveness of the family. Such negative effects may also include inhibiting children’s social development by diminishing the number of conversations between them and their family members.
Despite all the negative influences attributed to television, some commentators note that the medium can have a positive effect on youths. For instance, television programs are quite commonly used in school classrooms, and teachers may use educational videos or segments recorded from network broadcasts to accentuate their lessons and provide learning avenues for children with different learning styles. Also, television has exposed people to a wider array of cultures and societies and has made more young people aware of political and social issues, which in turn may increase their influence on their respective nation’s government.
Because of the television-viewing habits of youths, some legislators have advocated for stricter regulation of what is shown on TV. In the United States in 1996, Congress mandated that V-chips, devices that parents can use to block programming inappropriate for children, be installed in every television set produced after 1999. In 1997 the entertainment industry, pressured by Congress to enact a ratings system to work in conjunction with the V-chip, developed the TV Parental Guidelines, a ratings system based somewhat on the Motion Picture Association of America’s long-standing system of rating movies, where television shows are marked as “Y” (young children), “Y7” (older children), “G” (general audience), “PG” (parental guidance suggested), “14” (parents strongly cautioned), and “MA” (mature audiences). Studies indicate that most parents do not use the V-chip, which may render the effects of such legislation negligible.
Although members of the television-broadcasting community have been largely compliant in providing ratings and guidelines for their shows, they generally challenge governmental attempts to restrict their product. In essence, they argue that television is part of the free-enterprise system, and any attempt to control its content violates constitutional principles. They argue that their programming reflects events and actions already taking place in the world and is not their cause. Critics of that position argue that most countries have laws that ensure that television programming is regulated in order to make certain that what is aired does not contradict laws guarding against public indecency and obscenity.
