G. Stanley Hall, in full Granville Stanley Hall,  (born February 1, 1844, Ashfield, Massachusetts, U.S.—died April 24, 1924, Worcester, Massachusetts), psychologist who gave early impetus and direction to the development of psychology in the United States. Frequently regarded as the founder of child psychology and educational psychology, he also did much to direct into the psychological currents of his time the ideas of Charles Darwin, Sigmund Freud, and others.
Hall graduated from Williams College in 1867. Although he originally intended to enter the ministry, he left Union Theological Seminary in New York City after one year (1867–68) to study philosophy in Germany (1868–71). He became a lecturer at Antioch College in Ohio in 1872. His decision to adopt psychology as his life’s work was inspired by a partial reading of Physiological Psychology (1873–74), by Wilhelm Wundt, generally considered the founder of experimental psychology. Hall resigned his post at Antioch in 1876 and returned to Germany for further study, becoming acquainted with Wundt and the German physicist and physiologist Hermann von Helmholtz. There Hall discovered the value of the questionnaire for psychological research. Later he and his students devised more than 190 questionnaires, which were instrumental in stimulating the upsurge of interest in the study of child development.
After returning to the United States, Hall in 1878 earned from Harvard University the first Ph.D. degree in psychology granted in America. He then gave special lectures on education at Harvard, and he used questionnaires from a study of Boston schools to write two significant papers: one dealing with children’s lies (1882) and the other with the contents of children’s minds (1883).
A lectureship in philosophy (1883) and a professorship in psychology and pedagogics (1884) at Johns Hopkins University followed. There Hall was given space for one of the first psychological laboratories in the United States. The philosopher-psychologist-educator John Dewey was one of the first to use it. In 1887 Hall founded the American Journal of Psychology, the first such American journal and the second of any significance outside Germany.
Hall was entering the most influential period of his life. The following year (1888), he helped to establish Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts, and, as the university’s president and a professor of psychology, he became a major force in shaping experimental psychology into a science. A great teacher, he inspired research that reached into all areas of psychology. By 1893 he had awarded 11 of the 14 doctorates in psychology granted in the United States. The first journal in the fields of child and educational psychology, the Pedagogical Seminary (later the Journal of Genetic Psychology), was founded by Hall in 1893.
Hall’s theory that mental growth proceeds by evolutionary stages is best expressed in one of his largest and most important works, Adolescence (1904). Despite opposition, Hall, as an early proponent of psychoanalysis, invited Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung to the conferences celebrating Clark University’s 20th anniversary (1909). Hall was a leading spirit in the founding of the American Psychological Association and served as its first president (1892). He published 489 works covering most of the major areas of psychology, including Senescence, the Last Half of Life (1922) and Jesus, the Christ, in the Light of Psychology (1917). Life and Confessions of a Psychologist (1923) was his autobiography.
