Urie Bronfenbrenner,  (born April 29, 1917, Moscow, Russia, U.S.S.R.—died September 25, 2005, Ithaca, New York, U.S.), Russian-born American psychologist best known for having developed human ecology theory (ecological systems theory), in which individuals are seen as maturing not in isolation but within the context of relationships, such as those involving families, friends, schools, neighbourhoods, and society. Bronfenbrenner divided the entire ecological system in which human growth occurs into five subsystems that are organized socially: the microsystem, mesosystem, exosystem, macrosystem, and chronosystem.
Bronfenbrenner’s family moved from Moscow to the United States when he was six. He later studied music and psychology at Cornell University, where he received a bachelor’s degree in 1938. Two years later, at Harvard University, he earned a master’s degree in education, and in 1942 he graduated with a Ph.D. in developmental psychology from the University of Michigan. He served as a military psychologist during World War II and later was an assistant professor at the University of Michigan. In 1948 he moved to Cornell, where he was a professor of human development and a founder of the federal Head Start program, formed in 1965 to provide educational, health, and other support services to impoverished children.
When Bronfenbrenner was a child, his father, who was a neuropathologist, often pointed out the interdependence between living organisms and their surroundings. Those concrete examples were expanded into theories about the ecology of human development, and they were further developed during cross-cultural field research, which Bronfenbrenner conducted in places such as Europe, the U.S.S.R., Israel, and China. His work led him to define human development as a lasting change in the way a person perceives and deals with his or her environment. A child is viewed as a growing dynamic entity that progressively moves into and restructures an environment. The environment in turn exerts an influence on the individual, requiring a process of reciprocity between person and environment. Moreover,
 Bronfenbrenner realized that the developmental process varies by place and time and that public policy affects the development of humans by influencing the conditions of their lives.
With American developmental psychologist Stephen J. Ceci, Bronfenbrenner extended his theory to behaviour genetics. They recommended that explicit measures of the environment in systems terms be incorporated, and they proposed the existence of empirically assessable mechanisms—proximal processes through which genetic potentials for effective psychological functioning are actualized. They hypothesized that when proximal processes are weak, genetically based potentials for effective psychological functioning remain relatively unrealized and, as proximal processes increase in magnitude, potentials become actualized to a progressively greater extent.
Bronfenbrenner received national and international honours and awards for his work, including multiple honorary degrees and invitations to contribute to two U.S. Presidential Task Forces. He also was honoured by the American Psychological Association with its creation of the Urie Bronfenbrenner Award for Lifetime Contribution to Developmental Psychology in the Service of Science and Society.
