Young Women’s Christian Association (YWCA),  nonsectarian Christian organization that aims “to advance the physical, social, intellectual, moral, and spiritual interests of young women.” The recreational, educational, and spiritual aspects of its program are symbolized in its insignia, a blue triangle the three sides of which stand for body, mind, and spirit. The YWCA and the Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) are completely independent organizations.
The first YWCA was established in England in 1855, when two groups met to aid women: one group formed a Prayer Union to pray for women, and the other founded Christian homes for young women. The two groups merged in 1877 and took the name Young Women’s Christian Association. In 1884 the organization adopted a constitution.
In the United States 35 women met in New York City and formed the first Ladies’ Christian Association to provide for the “temporal, moral, and religious welfare of young women who are dependent on their own exertions for support.” In 1866 in Boston another group of women met with similar aims, formed an organization, and wrote the constitution for the Young Women’s Christian Association. By 1900 hundreds of YWCAs were in existence in the United States; the national organization was formed in 1906.
The early YWCA groups were influenced by the profound social effects of the Industrial Revolution on the lives of young women, especially in cities. The organization has continued its efforts to alleviate poverty and to help girls and women move into the mainstream of society. It provides housing for girls seeking inexpensive, safe, and comfortable quarters as they start their lives away from home. Summer camps and programs of education and recreation are offered, all without regard to the economic, racial, or religious background of participants.
Local YWCA organizations are affiliated with their national associations, which in turn are members of the World YWCA, organized in London in 1894, with headquarters in Geneva. The YWCA organization in the United States has locations in all 50 states and offers numerous service and development programs for women, girls, and their families. YWCA programs are concerned with racial equality and harmony, public policy, health care, child care, employment and leadership training, physical education, and recreation.
