Anna Netrebko, in full Anna Yuryevna Netrebko,  (born September 18, 1971, Krasnodar, Russia, U.S.S.R.), Russian Austrian operatic soprano known for her dark, lustrous voice, her compelling dramatic characterizations, and her alluring stage presence.
Netrebko’s father was a geologist and her mother a communications engineer. As a child she briefly studied piano and sang in a chorus, and in high school she sang in a traveling musical troupe. When she was 16 years old, she moved to Leningrad (now St. Petersburg) in the hope of becoming an actress. Discouraged by the intense competition, she decided to pursue an operatic career, studying at a musical college for two years and then entering the St. Petersburg State Conservatory (then the Leningrad Conservatory) in 1990. While a student at the conservatory, she scrubbed floors at St. Petersburg’s famed Mariinsky Theatre, a job that entitled her to watch rehearsals of operas and ballets for free. After winning first prize in Russia’s prestigious Mikhail Glinka vocal competition in 1993, Netrebko auditioned successfully for a supporting role in the Mariinsky Opera’s 1994 production of Mozart’s Le nozze di Figaro (1786; “The Marriage of Figaro”). Despite her relative youth (she was 22 years old) and inexperience, the Mariinsky’s director, Valery Gergiev, soon gave her the opera’s leading role, Susanna. Gergiev thereafter acted as her mentor and was one of her strongest supporters among professional musicians. In 1995 he cast her in the title role (Lyudmila) in a San Francisco Opera production of Glinka’s Russlan and Lyudmila (1842), marking Netrebko’s United States debut. She subsequently sang frequently with the San Francisco Opera, primarily in Russian and Italian roles.
Netrebko sang the role of Natasha in Prokofiev’s War and Peace (1942) in her debut at the Royal Opera House in London’s Covent Garden in 2000 and in her debut at New York City’s Metropolitan Opera two years later. Her performances at the Salzburg Festival (as Donna Anna in Mozart’s Don Giovanni [1787]) and at Munich’s Bavarian State Opera (as Violetta in Verdi’s La traviata [1853]) in 2002–03 were hailed as triumphs, as was her debut with the Los Angeles Opera (in the title role of Donizetti’s Lucia di Lammermoor [1835]) in 2003. Her reprise of Violetta at the 2005 Salzburg Festival was an even greater success. By that time she had become an opera star of the first rank, with large numbers of intensely devoted fans (especially in Europe), including people who did not regularly listen to operatic music.
In 2008 she debuted at the Paris Opéra as Giulietta in Bellini’s I Capuleti e i Montecchi (1830). After withdrawing temporarily from the stage to give birth to a son later that year (the child’s father was the Uruguayan bass-baritone Erwin Schrott), she resumed a busy schedule of mostly European and American appearances, including those at the Zürich Opera (2009), the San Francisco Opera (2009), the Berlin State Opera (2010), La Scala (2011), and Royal Albert Hall (2012), in addition to regular performances at Salzburg and the Metropolitan Opera. She made her long-awaited debut at Lyric Opera of Chicago (as Mimi in Puccini’s La Bohème [1896]) in 2013.
In 2005 Netrebko was awarded the State Prize of the Russian Federation for her contributions to opera, and in 2008 she was named People’s Artist of Russia. From 2007 she was an active supporter of children’s charities, including the Russian Children’s Welfare Society and SOS Children’s Villages International.
