Anthony Braxton,  (born June 4, 1945, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.), American composer and woodwind improviser, one of the most prolific artists in free jazz.
Braxton, who named John Coltrane, Warne Marsh, and Paul Desmond among his inspirations, began playing alto saxophone in his teens and continued to play in a U.S. Army band. In 1966 he joined the groundbreaking free-jazz cooperative Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians (AACM) and quickly became an original player. A tireless experimenter, he was the first to record an entire album of unaccompanied saxophone solos (For Alto, 1968).
He spent 1969 in France and soon gained an international reputation. He toured and recorded as a soloist on flute, saxophones, and clarinets, as well as with his quartets, which included (in the 1970s) bassist David Holland and trombonist George Lewis, and (in the 1980s) pianist Marilyn Crispell and drummer Gerry Hemingway. He also worked with pianists Dave Brubeck, Muhal Richard Abrams, and Chick Corea; the Globe Unity Orchestra; bop musicians; and Europe-based free jazz improvisers.
Braxton also composed, inspired by John Cage, Karlheinz Stockhausen, and others; his pieces were written in coloured graphs and usually titled with diagrams. His works included For Two Pianos (1982); Creative Orchestra Music 1976, a major album of big jazz band scores; For Four Orchestras (1978), involving 160 musicians and four conductors; a series of operas titled Trilium; and works for chamber settings, for 100 tubas, and for four amplified shovels and a coal pile. Throughout his career Braxton developed different musical systems, notably Ghost Trance Music, which he described as “melody that doesn’t end.” In the 1990s Braxton also performed as a pianist. He continued to tour into the 21st century.
Braxton taught at Mills College in Oakland, California (1985–88), and at Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut (1990–2013). In 1994 he founded the Tri-Centric Foundation, which maintained his archives and later released recordings under the Braxton House and the New Braxton House labels. The recipient of numerous honours, he was awarded a John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation fellowship in 1994 and a Doris Duke Performing Artist Award in 2013. In 2014 Braxton was named a Jazz Master by the National Endowment for the Arts.
