Antonio Sacchini, in full Antonio Maria Gasparo Gioacchino Sacchini,  (born June 14, 1730, Florence [Italy]—died Oct. 6, 1786, Paris, France), Italian opera composer who reached the height of his fame in England and France in the second half of the 18th century. Oedipe à Colone (1785), an opera seria (“serious opera”), remains his best-known work.
Although he was of humble background, Sacchini received thorough training at an early age in violin, keyboard instruments, singing, and composition at the Conservatorio di Santa Maria di Loreto in Naples. Following the positive reception of several of his operas, he was hired as secondo maestro to teach at the conservatory upon the retirement of the primo maestro, Gennaro Manna, in 1761. In the same year, Sacchini’s first opera seria,  Andromaca, opened at the premiere opera theatre of Naples, the Teatro San Carlo.
While continuing to provide a steady output of operas for Naples during the early 1760s, Sacchini expanded his activity northward by writing operas for theatres in Rome. He moved to Rome in 1763 and found that his comic works for the Teatro Valle were particularly well received. In 1768 Sacchini moved again, this time to Venice, where he was named director of the famed Conservatorio dell’Ospedaletto. Among his most notable works written for performance in Venice were two in the operia seria genre, the acclaimed Alessandro Severo (1762) and Alessandro nelle Indie (1763; “Alexander in the Indies”)—composed before his actual move to the city—as well as a number of  oratorios, written to be performed by the students of his conservatory, and many sacred works for various Venetian churches. While living in Venice, Sacchini also continued to teach, counting among his students two of the preeminent singers of the period, Adriana Gabrieli and Nancy Storace (both later associated with Mozart in Vienna).
Sacchini’s operatic career abroad, which began with works for the Ducal Theatre in Stuttgart and the Residenz Theater in Munich, culminated in his relocation to London in 1772. He remained in London for nine years, and during that time he experienced some of his greatest triumphs—particularly in opera seria—and secured the favour of the British public. Indeed, the foremost music historian of the period, Charles Burney, described Sacchini’s London operas as equal or superior in quality to any others performed there in the 1770s. In the shadow of his operatic successes, however, Sacchini was noted for his profligate and dissolute style of living, and in 1781 he was constrained to leave London for Paris to avoid debtors’ prison.
The timing of Sacchini’s arrival in Paris was fortuitous, since it coincided with the visit of Austrian emperor Joseph II, who had become familiar with Sacchini’s works through performances in Vienna and warmly recommended Sacchini to his sister, Queen Marie Antoinette, for patronage. At the time, however, the rivalry between advocates of the reform-minded German opera composer Christoph Willibald Gluck and those of his Italian counterpart Niccolò Piccinni was at its height, and Sacchini found himself ill-equipped to negotiate the attendant intrigues. His first two operas performed in France were actually adaptations of earlier Italian operas, but the unsuccessful Dardanus, performed in Versailles in 1784, was an original French opera. Variously claimed and rejected by both the “Gluckists” and the “Piccinnists” in the ongoing controversy, Sacchini suffered a major setback when Marie Antoinette, under heavy pressure from the anti-Piccinni faction, went back on her word to have his new French opera Oedipe à Colone (“Oedipus at Colonus”) performed in 1785; the work was ultimately given a posthumous production in February 1787.
Oedipe à Colone has been generally acknowledged as Sacchini’s masterpiece. It managed to remain within the repertoire of the Paris Opéra through the mid-19th century, and it also received occasional revivals elsewhere, including Naples in 1808 and 1817, Frankfurt in 1862, and Brussels in 1881. More recent revivals, such as the 1992 production at the Festival de Radio France de Montpellier and the 2005 staging by the American opera company Opera Lafayette, have cemented the reputation of Oedipe à Colone as a classic.
Though opera was Sacchini’s principal sphere of activity, he also made important contributions to church music and instrumental genres, particularly chamber music.
