Billy Budd,  opera by Benjamin Britten that premiered in London on December 1, 1951. Based on the novel by Herman Melville, it is set in 1797 on a British naval vessel and is the only opera by a major composer to have an entirely male cast.
The story of Billy Budd concerns a young merchant sailor (the title character) who is forced to serve on a naval vessel, the HMS Indomitable. There he finds a well-meaning captain but an evil-hearted master-at-arms who is determined to destroy the handsome new recruit. Of the three, only the captain survives to the final curtain. Britten’s operas often reveal a fascination with misunderstood innocents; Billy is one such type. That the ship on which he formerly served was called the Rights of Man, to which he must bid farewell, becomes symbolic.
Librettists for the opera were the novelist EM Forster and Eric Crozier, a young man of the theatre who had worked with Britten before and was brought in when Forster expressed doubts about his ability to write for the stage. Of this three-man creative team, Crozier was the only one concerned about the lack of female characters, citing a perceived lack of dramatic variety. However, Britten managed to convince him that it could work. So the librettists reworked Melville’s tale, shifting emphasis, drafting powerful scenes, and creating singable dialog, going so far as to travel to the British harbour of Portsmouth to visit a sailing ship of the correct vintage. They spent most of 1949 on the task. Britten’s time for composing came in 1950, though he admitted that he had been sketching out preliminary ideas while awaiting the text.
Britten himself conducted the premiere at London’s Covent Garden on December 1, 1951. Of the leading roles, Peter Pears, Britten’s partner throughout their adult lives, sang Captain Vere. Billy is the golden boy of the piece, but dramatic emphasis is more upon the Captain and how a good man deals with insoluble moral dilemmas. It is perhaps for this reason that Billy is a lyric baritone and Vere is the tenor of the two, to give the more dramatic role to Pears, and the part’s music was specifically designed for the character of Pears’ voice, not just in pitch but also in colouring. As for Claggart, he is a bass, as villains so frequently are. Their three voice types, and those of the other, less prominent characters, are sufficiently varied as to prove that the lack of female voices need not be a problem.
Setting: the royal naval ship the HMS Indomitable, 1797
Late in life, Captain Vere reflects on the workings of good and evil.
Crewmen tend to morning business while some are occupied with a passing merchant ship, which they have boarded to force men into naval service. One of these new draftees is the young and handsome Billy Budd, whose good looks and stammer attract the suspicions of master-at-arms Claggart. Billy bids farewell to his old ship. Claggart warns his followers to keep an eye on Billy, and Billy soon finds that only the old seaman Dansker befriends him.
In Vere’s cabin, the officers discuss recent mutinies on other ships and mention their suspicions that Billy may have revolutionary leanings. Vere, seeing no wrong in Billy, dismisses their concerns. Meanwhile, Billy finds one of Claggart’s henchmen searching his belongings. The henchman is arrested, but now Claggart hates Billy more than ever. Another sailor is forced into trying to get Billy to lead a mutiny, and Billy is infuriated. Old Dansker tries to persuade him to beware of Claggart, but Billy is unafraid.
Some days later, the Indomitable is pursuing a French ship, which escapes. Claggart again brings to Vere allegations of Billy as a would-be mutineer. Defending Billy, Vere insists that accuser and accused should confront one another. For his own part, Vere is confident that Billy is innocent.
All three men meet in Vere’s cabin. Hearing the charges to his face, Billy strikes out at Claggart and kills him. A drumhead court is called. Vere refuses to speak, and Billy is condemned to hang. Billy is awaiting his execution when old Dansker brings him news that the crew, determined to prevent his death, is close to mutiny. Billy asks that they should not rebel, as he has accepted his fate. Dawn arrives. Billy gives his blessing to Vere and dies quietly.
The aging Vere still wonders what he might have done differently, though the blessing from Billy gives him comfort.
