Carl Ditters von Dittersdorf, original name (until 1773) Carl Ditters,  (born Nov. 2, 1739, Vienna, Austria—died  Oct. 24, 1799, Rothlhotta Castle, Neuhof, Bohemia [now Nové Dvory, Czech Republic]), violinist and composer of instrumental music and of light operas that established the form of the singspiel (a comic opera in the German language).
A brilliant child violinist, Ditters played regularly at the age of 12 in the orchestra of Prince von Sachsen-Hildburghausen and later in the orchestra of the Vienna opera. He became friendly with the composer Christoph Gluck and accompanied him in 1761 to Bologna, Italy. There Ditters gained considerable celebrity with his violin playing. In 1765 he became director of the orchestra of the bishop of Grosswardein and wrote for it his first opera, Amore in musica (“Love in Music”). His first oratorio, Isacco (“Isaac”), was also written during this time.
By 1770 Ditters was in the service of Count Schaffgotsch, prince-bishop of Breslau, at Johannisberg, Silesia, Prussia. There he composed 11 comic operas, among them Il viaggiatore americano (1770; “The American Traveler”), and an oratorio, Davidde penitente (1770; “Penitent David”). In 1773 he was ennobled by Empress Maria Theresa under the name Ditters von Dittersdorf to enable his appointment as Amtshauptmann (district administrator) of Freiwaldau. In about 1779 he formed a close friendship with Joseph Haydn, who directed five of his operas at Eszterháza, and from 1783 he played in string quartets in Vienna with W.A. Mozart (on at least one famous occasion joined by Haydn and Johann Vanhal, then a popular composer of string quartets). From this period onward his output was enormous. He produced the oratorio Giobbe (1786) and several operas, three of which, Doktor und Apotheker (1786; “Doctor and Apothecary”), Hieronymus Knicker (1789), and Das rote Käppchen (1790; “The Little Red Hood”), had great success. Doktor und Apotheker, in particular, became one of the classic examples of the German singspiel. He also wrote a large quantity of instrumental music, including about 120 symphonies and some 40 concerti. In 1795, following the bishop’s death, Ditters was dismissed with a small pension. Poor and broken in health, he accepted a post with Baron Ignaz von Stillfried at Rothlhotta Castle in Bohemia. On his deathbed he dictated his autobiography, which is of great interest to students of 18th-century music.
Ditters was one of the earliest composers of the Viennese Classical school. His symphonies, which are often of great interest, display many elements reminiscent of Haydn, including a pleasing wit, asymmetrical phrases, and folklike material. His violin concerti are worthy of study, and his concerti for harp, for flute, for harpsichord, for double bass, and for other instruments are performed and recorded. As an opera composer Ditters is chiefly remembered for his lighthearted and sometimes sentimental singspiels.
