Concerto for Saxophone Quartet and Orchestra,  concerto for four saxophones—soprano, alto, tenor, and baritone—by American composer Philip Glass that may be performed with or without orchestra. It is remarkable not only for spotlighting saxophones, which are rarely used in classical compositions, but also for exploiting the wide-ranging timbral and emotive capacity of those instruments. The piece premiered for saxophone quartet alone in July 1995 at Germany’s Schleswig-Holstein Music Festival; the version for saxophone quartet with orchestra premiered in September of that year in Stockholm.
Glass composed his Concerto for Saxophone Quartet and Orchestra at the behest of the Rascher Saxophone Quartet (named for Sigurd Rascher, historically one of the world’s most respected classical saxophonists). The group specifically requested a work that could be played either with or without an orchestra, and the composer responded accordingly, with two versions of the piece. Glass believed that the nonorchestrated version would be the more complicated of the pair, as all of the musical layers would need to be carried by just four players, so he wrote the piece first for the quartet only. In the orchestral setting that followed, he distributed notes throughout the orchestral parts while retaining the most intricate lines for the four saxophone soloists. The Rascher Saxophone Quartet premiered both versions of the piece.
Whether performed with or without the orchestra, each of the four movements of the Concerto for Saxophone Quartet and Orchestra highlights one of the members of the quartet. In the gently swaying first movement, the soprano saxophone spins a sinuous melody atop the repeated undulating motifs of the lower-pitched instruments. The jazzy second movement features a lively ascending figure, laid out by the baritone saxophone and later picked up by the other members of the quartet and the orchestra. The tenor instrument carries a relaxed and soulful solo in the graceful third movement, and in the finale, all four saxophones are whipped into a frenzy of continually shifting metres and motifs before charging abruptly into the closing cadence.
