Die Fledermaus, (German: “The Bat”)  operetta by the Austrian composer Johann Strauss the Younger (German libretto by Carl [or Karl] Haffner and Richard Genée) that premiered in Vienna on April 5, 1874. It is the best-known stage work by Strauss, whose fame rested mainly on his ballroom dance pieces.
Die Fledermaus was Strauss’s third operetta for Vienna’s Theatre an der Wien. The piece was based on a popular French vaudeville comedy, its action tidied up for the supposedly more-elevated tastes of Viennese audiences. At its premiere, critics still found it scandalous, in part because its story of a practical joke spinning out of control seemed ill-suited for performance on what happened to be Easter Sunday. Audiences, however, immediately loved it.
Musically, Die Fledermaus is thoroughly high-spirited, with numerous waltz and polka themes. Leading lady Rosalinde is given a faux-Hungarian aria; the maid Adele has her own aria aptly called the “Laughing Song.” The entire work has only one really quiet scene: a chorus in praise of brotherhood and love. Young Prince Orlofsky is played by a mezzo-soprano in masculine garb, as would have been the case in the time of Mozart. In all, Die Fledermaus continued to be an audience pleaser into even into the 21st century.
Die Fledermaus is set in Vienna in the late 19th century.
Gabriel and Rosalinde von Eisenstein’s parlour.
The impetuous tenor, Alfred, is heard serenading his old flame, Rosalinde (“Täubchen, das erflattert ist”). The chambermaid Adele enters reading a letter from her sister Ida, a ballet dancer. The letter urges Adele to make up a story so she can get the night off and come to the ball being held at the villa of Prince Orlofsky, a wealthy, decadent young Russian nobleman. Adele laments her status as a chambermaid but resolves to go. She realizes that Alfred is a secret admirer of her mistress and runs after him to see if she can discover his identity. Rosalinde appears, amazed that Alfred has returned. When Adele returns, she asks Rosalinde if she can get the night off by telling her mistress that her “poor old aunt” is deathly ill. However, Rosalinde refuses to let her go, because tonight Gabriel must start a short jail term for a civil offense (“Ach, ich darf nicht hin zu dir”). Adele exits weeping.
Alfred appears and begins to woo Rosalinde. She manages to get him to leave by promising to see him later that night after her husband has left for jail. Before she can catch her breath, Gabriel arrives, fighting with his lawyer, Doctor Blind (“Nein, mit solchen Advokaten”). Gabriel’s jail term has been extended by three days because of Blind’s alleged incompetence. Blind promises to appeal, but Gabriel throws him out.
Gabriel’s friend, Doctor Falke, comes to visit. He persuades Gabriel to postpone reporting to jail until the next morning and instead go to the ball at Prince Orlofsky’s (“Komm mit mir zum Souper”). After Falke leaves, Rosalinde tells Adele that she has changed her mind and that Adele may have the night off to visit her “poor sick aunt.” Gabriel reenters and bids Rosalinde and Adele a sorrowful goodbye—but each is secretly delighted at the turn of events (“So muss allein ich bleiben”). Gabriel and Adele dance out of the room.
Rosalinde, left alone, doubts the wisdom of receiving Alfred, who soon appears. He is well on the way to removing her doubts (“Trinke, Liebchen, trinke schnell”) when they hear voices in the hallway. Herr Frank, the director of the prison where Gabriel is to spend his jail term, arrives to personally escort “Herr von Eisenstein” to his “cozy little prison.” Alfred starts to tell Frank that he is not Gabriel when Rosalinde takes him aside and begs him to say that he is, to avert a scandal (“Mein Herr, was dächten Sie von mir”). Alfred agrees and leaves with Frank to take Gabriel’s place in prison (“Mein schönes, grosses Vogelhaus”).
The ballroom of Prince Orlofsky.
Everyone is having a wonderful time at the ball. Ida is surprised to see her sister Adele and denies having written the letter telling her to come to the ball. However, since Adele is already there, Ida decides to introduce her as an actress and gives her the stage name “Olga.” Falke enters with the Prince, who is lamenting his terminal boredom. Falke assures him that tonight he will laugh, as Falke has planned a little comedy entitled The Revenge of the Bat, to amuse him. Ida introduces “Olga” to the Prince, who gives the two girls his purse to take to the gaming room, as wagering for himself is too fatiguing. The girls excitedly rush off to gamble.
Gabriel enters, and Falke introduces him to the Prince as the “Marquis de Renard,” a French nobleman. Falke then takes the Prince aside and asks him to distract Gabriel while Falke writes a note to Rosalinde informing her where her husband is and what he is doing. Orlofsky agrees and insists that Gabriel drink with him while Orlofsky expounds his philosophy of life (“Ich lade gern mir Gäste ein [Chacun à son goût!]”). Adele and Ida return from the gaming room, having lost all their money. Gabriel is flabbergasted to see his chambermaid at the ball. Adele is equally horrified to see her master but continues to insist that she is the actress Olga (“Mein Herr Marquis”). A new guest arrives, “the Chevalier Chagrin”—actually, the prison director, Frank. Ida asks when dinner will be served, and Falke replies that they are waiting for another guest, a mysterious Hungarian countess who will have to remain masked to protect her identity. The guests decide to stroll in the garden while awaiting the arrival of the mystery lady, leaving Falke alone in the ballroom.
Rosalinde enters, masked, and asks Falke if what he had written to her is true. He shows her Gabriel in the garden flirting with Adele, and she swears vengeance. The men reenter, and Gabriel is immediately taken with the beauty of the “Hungarian countess.” He tells the “Chevalier Chagrin” and Falke to leave him alone with her and immediately takes out his famous chiming watch. This ploy—promising to give the lady his watch in return for her favours but never delivering, even when she does—has always worked for him. But Rosalinde turns the tables on him and steals the watch (Watch Duet: “Dieser Anstand, so manierlich”). The guests come back in from the garden and insist that the “Hungarian countess” unmask. Orlofsky defends her, telling them that in his house a lady may cover or uncover as much as she wishes. To prove that she is Hungarian, Rosalinde sings a stirring czardas (“Klänge der Heimat”). Ida then asks Dr. Falke to tell them the story of the bat, as he had promised. Gabriel protests that he should tell the story, as it was his joke on Falke. He then tells the guests how three years before, he and Falke had gone to a costume ball dressed, respectively, as a butterfly and a bat. On the way home, Gabriel got Falke drunk and left him asleep in the park in his bat costume. The next day Falke had to walk home in his costume, and ever since, everyone in town has called him the Batty Doctor.
Orlofsky calls for champagne. After a rousing toast, everyone is in the mood for romance and a waltz (Finale: “Im Feuerstrom der Reben”). But the clock is striking six, and Gabriel and Frank are due at jail. They rush off drunkenly as the waltz continues.
The prison.
Frosch, the jailer, enters. His pleasant state of intoxication is interrupted by Alfred singing in his prison cell. Frosch exits just as Frank enters, still inebriated from the evening’s revelries (“Melodrama”). Adele and Ida arrive. They think Frank (or “Chevalier Chagrin,” as they know him) can help Adele break into show business (“Spiel’ ich die Unschuld vom Lande”). The bell rings. Frank goes to the window and, to his horror, sees his friend of last night, the “Marquis de Renard.” Quickly, he tells Frosch to put the girls somewhere, but the only room free is an empty cell, so Frank tells him to take Ida and Adele there.
Gabriel enters and asks the “Chevalier” if he has been arrested too. Frank confesses that he is no chevalier but instead is the director of the prison. Gabriel then confesses that he is no marquis but is Herr von Eisenstein, who has come to serve his short jail term. Frank refuses to believe him, as he himself arrested Herr von Eisenstein the evening before, while he was at home, dining with his wife. This revelation sobers Gabriel completely. Frosch enters to tell Frank that there is another lady at the door. Frank exits to see who this mystery lady is, and the bell rings again. Frosch comes back in with Dr. Blind, whom the imposter “Eisenstein” (Alfred) has sent for. Frosch tells Blind he will bring Gabriel from his cell. Blind is understandably confused, as he can see Gabriel already there. Gabriel robs Blind of his wig, spectacles, and robe and pushes him off.
Frosch brings in Alfred, who is annoyed to see no one there. Rosalinde enters, distraught. Alfred tells her that perhaps the lawyer he has sent for can help them. Gabriel returns disguised as Blind. He questions the pair about their intimate dinner and then reveals himself (“To judge his expression”). Rosalinde counters his insinuation that she has been unfaithful by producing his watch. Falke appears with Prince Orlofsky and all the party guests. The whole situation was a joke: The Revenge of the Bat. Everyone confesses that they were in on the joke, even if they were not! (As Alfred says to Orlofsky, “Why should we start confusion and end his fond illusion?”) All is forgiven, and the opera ends with more champagne and revelry.
