Djuro Zivkovic,  (born December 15, 1975, Belgrade, Yugoslavia [now in Serbia]), Serbian musician and composer whose Grawemeyer Award-winning composition, On the Guarding of the Heart, placed him among the ranks of distinguished 20th- and 21st-century composers.
Zivkovic’s parents, neither of whom had a particular interest in music, early instilled in him an appreciation for the arts. He began taking violin lessons at age 9 while attending music school in Zagreb, Croatia, and made his first effort at composition at age 14, inspired by folklore and Byzantine chant. He continued to specialize in the violin, attending the music academies in Novi Sad, Serbia, and later in Belgrade. He began dedicated composition studies in 1997 and composed what he considered his first mature work, Metaphysical Sonata for violin and piano, in 1998.
On the recommendation of a musician friend, Zivkovic moved to Stockholm in 2000 to attend the Royal College of Music, where he pursued advanced studies in violin and composition. He accepted a position as a teacher at the Royal College in 2011. In addition to teaching and composing, Zivkovic continued to perform new music on violin and viola. His other award-winning compositions include Éclat de larme (2005), Le Cimetière marin (2009), and Ascetic Discourse (2012).
Among his major influences Zivkovic cited the works of J.S. Bach and a written work, the Philokalia, an anthology of Orthodox Christian texts written from the 4th through the 15th century and compiled by two Greek monks in the 18th century. Music scholars characterized Zivkovic’s work as consisting of “harmonic fields,” and the composer was much concerned with harmonic organization after 2002.
The elements in his compositional toolbox included microtonality (use of intervals that are smaller than whole tones or semitones); polyrhythm (the simultaneous combination of contrasting rhythms), a technique much employed by American composer Charles Ives; improvisation; special harmony-based scales; multiphonics, in which two or more pitches are sounded simultaneously on one instrument; and heterophony, texture resulting from simultaneous performances of melodic variants of the same tune. The last technique was common in the guslar folk tradition in Serbia.
In 2014 Zivkovic became the first Serb to win the University of Louisville’s Grawemeyer Award, a $100,000 prize granted annually (since 1984), for his classical composition On the Guarding of the Heart (2011). Intended for a 14-piece chamber orchestra (including piano), the piece was commissioned by an Austrian new-music group, Klangforum Wien. Zivkovic, in winning the Grawemeyer, joined a number of significant 20th- and 21st-century composers, including John Adams, Gyorgy Ligeti, Harrison Birtwistle, John Corigliano, Pierre Boulez, and Esa-Pekka Salonen.
