Ellen Taaffe Zwilich, née Taaffe,  (born April 30, 1939, Miami, Fla., U.S.), American composer, the first woman to be awarded the Pulitzer Prize in composition.
She began composing as a child, and, by the time she finished high school, she had studied piano, violin, and trumpet. After receiving both a bachelor’s (1960) and a master’s (1962) degree in music from Florida State University, she taught in a small South Carolina town for a year. In 1964 she moved to New York, where she studied violin with the revered teacher Ivan Galamian. She played with the American Symphony Orchestra (1965–72) under conductor Leopold Stokowski at a time when there were few women musicians in the major orchestras. Also in New York she married Joseph Zwilich, a violinist with the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra; he died in 1979. In 1975 she became the first woman to receive a doctorate in composition from the Juilliard School, having studied there with the preeminent American composers Elliott Carter and Roger Sessions. As the first person to hold the composer’s chair at Carnegie Hall (1995–99), she organized the “Making Music” concert series, focusing on new music by living composers in an informal setting. She worked solely as a composer until 2000, when she joined the faculty of Florida State University.
From 1975, when Pierre Boulez conducted Zwilich’s Symposium for Orchestra (1973) at the Juilliard School, she was a prolific and widely performed composer. In 1983 her Symphony No. 1 (1982; originally titled Three Movements for Orchestra) was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for music, making her the first woman to be so honoured. The Peanuts® Gallery (1996), for piano and orchestra, consists of sketches of Charles M. Schulz’s comic-strip characters and was first performed by the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra at Carnegie Hall. She had written four symphonies by 1999. Zwilich also composed numerous solo concertos, including works for trombone, horn, bassoon, violin, and piano, as well as group concertos for percussion, two pianos, and multiple soloists; the ballet Tanzspiel (1987), commissioned by the New York City Ballet and choreographed by Peter Martins; several pieces for voice and for chorus; and works for band and for chamber ensembles.
Zwilich’s instrumental compositions were often large-scale works in traditional formats. She wrote with both performer and audience in mind; in an interview in 2000, she said she envisioned “a sort of circle with the audience and the performer and the composer.” Performers and listeners alike could discern in her music the expression of her view that “music is…color and motion and all kinds of kinesthetic features; it’s palpable and it’s physical.” Her music was often described in terms of its vigour, assertiveness, substance, and challenge to the performers, as well as its clarity of structure and accessibility to the audience.
In addition to the honours mentioned above, Zwilich was recognized throughout her career with numerous awards and honorary degrees. She won a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1980, was designated Composer of the Year by the venerable Musical America magazine in 1999, and was elected a member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters in 1992 and of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2004.
