Faust,  opera in five (or sometimes four) acts by French composer Charles Gounod (French libretto by Jules Barbier and Michel Carré) that premiered in Paris on March 19, 1859. The work draws upon Johann Wolfgang von Goethe’s two-part play based on the German legend of a man who sells his soul to the Devil in exchange for knowledge and power. Gounod’s opera does not attempt to match the thematic breadth or the philosophical sophistication of Goethe’s sprawling masterpiece, concentrating instead on Faust’s romantic encounter with Marguerite (Gretchen in Goethe’s drama) and the tragic results of their liaison. Gounod’s Faust was a success and established the composer’s international reputation.
Several versions of the opera exist. The first performances of Faust included spoken dialogue between musical numbers. The following year Gounod reworked it with sung recitative. He later composed music for lengthy ballet scenes at the request of the Paris Opéra, which revived the work in 1869. In modern productions those ballets are usually omitted. The opera is often presented with five acts, sometimes only four. Those who present five acts do not agree on the placement of certain scenes.
The most famous selections in Gounod’s Faust are the leading lady’s two arias the King of Thule (“Il était un roi de Thulé”) and the Jewel Song (“Ah! je ris de me voir si belle en ce miroir”), Faust’s aria (“Salut! demeure chaste et pure”), Méphistophélès’s aria (“Le veau d’or est toujours debout”), the leading lady’s brother’s farewell to her as he heads off to war (“Avant de quitter ces lieux”), and the famed Soldiers’ Chorus. Taken together, they demonstrate Gounod’s command of several moods—from playful to gently lyrical to sardonically mocking to determinedly forthright—making it clear that he understood how to present good theatre.
Faust was Gounod’s first great success, the work that established his international reputation. It also earned him the lasting wrath of the Germans, who were enraged by the way in which Gounod had altered what they saw as their national masterpiece. Even today Germans rarely call the work by its proper name. Instead, they give its title as Margarethe, to emphasize that Gounod’s opera in no way represents Goethe’s Faust. Indeed, the opera focuses far more upon the leading lady and how she eventually overcomes both Faust and the Devil to save herself. It is she, not Faust, who, in the opera’s final scene, is taken in by the angels.
Faust is set in Germany in the 16th century.
Scene 1. Faust’s study.
Doctor Faust, an old philosopher and alchemist, is wearily poring over his books at daybreak. He has sought in vain for the meaning of life and is tired of living. He pours some poison into a goblet, vowing that this dawn will be his last. His musings are interrupted by the sounds of young men and women singing outside of the joys of the new day and praising God. But God has done nothing for Faust; he cannot get his youth back, or love, or faith. He curses human happiness, faith, and science, and angrily calls upon Satan to assist him. To his astonishment and terror, Méphistophélès appears, dressed as a dashing nobleman and ready to grant his every wish. Faust refuses his offers of gold, power, or glory; he wants youth (“À moi les plaisirs”). Méphistophélès is delighted to comply—for a price: Here on earth Méphistophélès will serve Faust, but “down there” the situation will be reversed. Méphistophélès urges Faust to sign the contract. When Faust hesitates, Méphistophélès shows him a vision of the beautiful Marguerite at her spinning wheel. Faust, enraptured, hastily signs, after which Méphistophélès offers Faust the same goblet he was about to drink poison from earlier, only now it contains the elixir of youth. Toasting the vision of Marguerite, Faust drains the goblet and is transformed into a young man. Méphistophélès urges Faust to go with him to see Marguerite in person, and both celebrate the joys of passion.
Scene 2. A fair in the marketplace of a German town. (This is often considered the beginning of Act II.)
A group of students, led by Wagner, indulge in a drinking song. Soldiers, citizens, matrons, and young girls join in the merrymaking. Valentin, a young soldier, enters, sadly contemplating a medallion that his beloved sister, Marguerite, has given him to take into battle. When Wagner and Siébel, a young friend, ask him what is wrong, he replies that he is worried about leaving Marguerite unprotected, for their mother is dead. Siébel eagerly promises to look after her. Valentin is relieved and commends his sister to the Lord’s protection (“Avant de quitter ces lieux”).
Wagner urges everyone to continue their merrymaking and begins to sing a comic song about a rat, but Méphistophélès, appearing suddenly, interrupts him. He politely asks to join in the fun and asks Wagner to continue his song, after which he will sing one. But Wagner gives way to the stranger, and Méphistophélès sings of the golden calf that all people worship as Satan leads the dance (“Le veau d’or est toujours debout”). Everyone joins in the song except Valentin, who finds Méphistophélès rather strange. Wagner offers Méphistophélès some wine. He accepts and meanwhile reads Wagner’s palm, telling him that if he goes to war, he will be killed. Siébel also wants to know his fortune. Méphistophélès tells him that every flower he touches will wither. When he adds, “No more bouquets for Marguerite,” Valentin protests. But Méphistophélès tells Valentin that he will be killed by someone Méphistophélès knows.
Méphistophélès now takes up the cup of wine offered, tastes it, and spits it out in disgust. He offers the company something from his own “cellar,” and, calling upon Bacchus, he strikes a barrel, decorated with a figure of Bacchus, which suddenly pours forth wine. He urges the delighted crowd to drink their fill—to Marguerite. Valentin is enraged. He draws his sword, but, as he is about to attack Méphistophélès, the sword breaks in two. Realizing that they are in the presence of a fiend from hell, Valentin, Wagner, Siébel, and the other soldiers hold the cross-shaped hilts of their swords toward Méphistophélès, warning him to keep off. With this protection, they all exit, leaving the shaken Méphistophélès alone. He swears that they will meet again.
Faust enters and asks Méphistophélès what is wrong. Méphistophélès, recovering, tells him that nothing is wrong and asks what he can do for him. Faust wants to see Marguerite, but Méphistophélès warns that she is pure and protected by heaven. Faust does not care; he wants to see her. Méphistophélès, ever ready to serve, keeps his promise. The strains of a waltz bring in the students and townspeople, who begin to dance. Méphistophélès suggests that Faust ask one of the young girls to dance, but he refuses; he wants only Marguerite. So does Siébel, who is shyly waiting for her to arrive. At last she comes, but when Siébel approaches her, Méphistophélès bars his way so that Faust can reach her first. Marguerite declines Faust’s gallant offer to escort her home and goes on her way. Her manner is so charming that, even though she has rebuffed him, Faust wants her all the more. He tells Méphistophélès of this setback, and Méphistophélès promises his help. The girls of the town are shocked that Marguerite has refused the attentions of such a gentleman but soon forget the incident in their enjoyment of the dance.
