Francis Pilkington,  (born c. 1570, Lancashire?, England—died 1638, Chester, Cheshire, England), English composer of lute songs (ayres) and madrigals.
Pilkington studied music extensively in his youth and received a bachelor of music degree from Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1595. He became a lay clerk at Chester Cathedral in 1602 and a minor canon 10 years later. After taking holy orders in 1614, Pilkington held various curacies in Chester as well as a rectorship in nearby Aldford. He remained involved in the Chester Cathedral choir, however, and in 1623 was named its precentor (song leader), a position he held until his death.
Despite his active career in the church, Pilkington published primarily secular compositions. The First Booke of Songs or Ayres of 4 Parts (1605) contains 21 songs for four voices or for solo voice and lute, as well as a pavane for lute and bass viol. While showing some influence of English composer John Dowland in their attempts at expressiveness, Pilkington’s songs more closely resemble the melodic ayres of Thomas Campion and Philip Rosseter, even as their structure generally has been deemed inferior. Pilkington’s shortest compositions, especially “Rest sweet nimphes,” are considered by some to be his best. The volume was dedicated to William Stanley, 6th earl of Derby, whose father and brother had served as patrons for Pilkington and his family.
Pilkington later published two sets of madrigals. Though the madrigals are not of the first rank, they are pleasing and well constructed. The First Set of Madrigals and Pastorals of 3, 4, and 5 Parts (1613) is rooted in the light and, at the time, somewhat antiquated style of English madrigalist Thomas Morley. The 22-piece collection notably includes a resetting of “When Oriana walkt to take the ayre,” a madrigal by Pilkington’s one-time colleague Thomas Bateson (the former organist of Chester Cathedral) that paid tribute to Queen Elizabeth I. More accomplished, however, is The Second Set of Madrigals and Pastorals of 3, 4, 5, and 6 Parts (1624), which offers a broader range of works, including a fantasia for six viols. Particularly known among its 26 compositions are the madrigals “O softly singing lute,” for six voices, and the five-voice “Care, for thy soule,” which has been noted for its sophisticated use of chromaticism. In addition to the pieces in his three printed collections, Pilkington composed a number of solo works for lute.
