Gian Carlo Menotti,  (born July 7, 1911, Cadegliano, Italy—died Feb. 1, 2007, Monaco), Italian composer, whose operas gained wider popularity than any others of their time. His realistic operas on his own librettos represent a successful combination of 20th-century dramatic situations with the traditional form of Italian opera. Menotti used largely traditional harmonies, resorting at times to dissonance and polytonality to heighten dramatic effect.
Menotti wrote his first opera, The Death of Pierrot, by the age of 11. He studied at the Milan Conservatory and in the late 1920s emigrated to the United States, where he continued his studies at the Curtis Institute of Music, Philadelphia (1928–33), at the suggestion of Arturo Toscanini. There he met Samuel Barber, who became his lifelong companion and frequent collaborator. Although Menotti worked extensively in the United States, he retained his Italian citizenship.
Menotti’s opera Amelia Goes to the Ball, a witty satire on society manners and morals, was produced in Philadelphia in 1937 with great success and was transferred to the Metropolitan Opera in New York City in 1938. It was followed by a radio opera, The Old Maid and the Thief (1939), and The Island God, produced at the Metropolitan in 1942. These works were less successful, and Menotti turned to writing chamber operas—requiring fewer singers and smaller orchestras—on melodramatic subjects. His first opera of this type, The Medium (1946), was a tragedy about a medium who becomes a victim of her own fraudulent voices. It was followed by a one-act comic opera, The Telephone (1946). In 1947 the two operas were paired in an unprecedented Broadway run. In 1951 The Medium was made into a motion picture.
In 1950 Menotti’s opera The Consul, which won a Pulitzer Prize, was produced on Broadway. Like all of his operas, it is a work of great theatrical effectiveness. Set in an unnamed country under totalitarian rule, it deals with the vain efforts of a woman to gain an exit visa to join her husband, an enemy of the state. Amahl and the Night Visitors (1951), the first opera composed for television, is the story of a lame shepherd boy who gives his crutch to the Three Wise Men as a gift for the Christ child. With The Saint of Bleecker Street (1954) Menotti won a second Pulitzer Prize.
In 1958 Menotti wrote the libretto for Barber’s opera Vanessa. His “madrigal fable” The Unicorn, the Gorgon, and the Manticore, for chorus, instruments, and dancers, was produced in 1956. His grand opera Maria Golovin (1958) was less successful than his earlier tragic operas. In 1963 he produced a cantata, The Death of the Bishop of Brindisi; a television opera, Labyrinth; and a comic opera, The Last Savage. His instrumental works include the symphonic poem “Apocalypse” (1951) and concerti for piano and for violin. In 1958 Menotti established the Festival of Two Worlds, for opera, music, and drama, in Spoleto, Italy, and its American branch in Charleston, S.C., in 1977. Help, Help, the Globolinks! (1968) is a satiric opera, and Tamu-Tamu (1973) is an antiwar opera that is sung in English and Indonesian. The opera Goya (1986) dealt with the life of the Spanish painter of that name. A prolific composer, Menotti also wrote ballets and chamber music. In addition, he staged many of his works. In 1984 he received a Kennedy Center Honor.
