Giovanni Paisiello,  Paisiello also spelled Paesiello,  (born May 9, 1740, Roccaforzata, near Taranto, Kingdom of Naples [Italy]—died  June 5, 1816, Naples), Neapolitan composer of operas admired for their robust realism and dramatic power.
Paisiello’s father, who intended him for the legal profession, enrolled him at age five in the Jesuit school in Taranto. When his talent for singing became obvious, he was placed in the Conservatory of San Onofrio at Naples. For the theatre of the conservatory he wrote some intermezzi, one of which attracted so much notice that he was invited to write two operas, La Pupilla (“The Female Pupil”), for Bologna, and Il Marchese Tulissano, for Rome. His reputation established, he settled for some years at Naples, where he produced a series of successful operas. In 1776 Paisiello was invited by the Russian empress Catherine II to St. Petersburg, where he remained for eight years. Among the works he produced for Catherine was Il Barbiere di Siviglia (1782; The Barber of Seville), which some consider his masterpiece, on a libretto by Giuseppe Petrosellini, after Beaumarchais’s comedy Le Barbier de Séville.
In 1784 Paisiello left Russia and, after a brief sojourn in Vienna, where he composed for Joseph II, entered the service of Ferdinand IV of Naples. During his 15 years as music director there, he composed several of his best operas, including La Molinara (1788) and Nina (1789). After many vicissitudes resulting from political and dynastic changes, he was invited to Paris in 1802 by Napoleon. Paisiello conducted the music of the court in the Tuileries; the Parisian public, however, received his opera Proserpine (1803) without enthusiasm. Disappointed at the failure of his only opera with a French libretto, he returned to Naples in 1804. There he was reinstated in his former appointment by Joseph Bonaparte and Joachim Murat, but he was unable to meet the demands for new works, and he left in 1815. The power of the Bonaparte family was tottering, and Paisiello’s fortunes fell with it; he died in political disgrace a year after King Ferdinand was restored to power.
Paisiello’s popularity and influence during his lifetime were considerable. His success with Il Barbiere di Siviglia (produced in Vienna in 1783) led Mozart to set its sequel (Le nozze di Figaro, 1786), and traces of his style may be found in this and Mozart’s second Da Ponte collaboration, Don Giovanni (1787); moreover, the persistent popularity of Il Barbiere was a substantial roadblock for Gioachino Rossini, whose operatic version of the play (early 1816) eventually displaced Paisiello’s. In all, Paisiello is known to have composed more than 80 operas. His church music comprises about 40 masses and many smaller works. His instrumental music includes symphonies, a harp concerto, string quartets, and sonatas for harp and for violin and cello. In the 20th century, Il Barbiere and La Molinara were revived, and several of his operas and piano concerti, string quartets, and keyboard pieces were republished.
