Guillaume Dufay, Dufay also spelled Du Fay or Du Fayt,  (born August 5, 1397?, Beersel, near Brussels, Burgundian Netherlands [now in Belgium]—died November 27, 1474, Cambrai, Bishopric of Cambrai [now in France]), Franco-Flemish composer noted for both his church music and his secular chansons.
Dufay became a chorister at the Cambrai cathedral (1409), entered the service of Carlo Malatesta of Rimini in 1420, and in 1428 went to Rome, where he joined the papal singers. In 1436 he became a canon of Cambrai and worked in the service of the duke of Savoy. A papal letter of 1437 mentions that he had a degree in canon law, which he may have been given by papal fiat. He went to Cambrai about 1440 and supervised the music of the cathedral, then in the service of the duke of Burgundy. In 1446 he became a canon of Sainte-Waudru, Mons. Dufay’s surviving works include 87 motets, 59 French chansons, 7 Italian chansons, 7 complete masses, and 35 mass sections. He often used, and may have originated, the technique of fauxbourdon, a style of composition based on the sonorities of the third and sixth notes of the scale and derived from English descant, an improvisational practice.
During his Italian period Dufay composed a number of ceremonial motets for public celebrations, among them the election of Pope Eugenius IV (1431), the Treaty of Viterbo (1433), and the dedication of Brunelleschi’s dome for Santa Maria del Fiore, Florence (1436). For the brilliant Feast of the Pheasant, held in 1454 by Philip the Good of Burgundy and intended to initiate a Crusade to recapture Jerusalem, Dufay composed a lamentation for the church in Constantinople (now Istanbul).
Dufay’s chansons, normally in three voices, deal with subjects such as springtime, love, and melancholy. Most use the poetic-musical forms of the ballade, rondeau, and virelai; a few are written in freer form.
Dufay’s masses laid the foundation for the rapid musical development of the mass in the second half of the 15th century. His complete mass settings are in four voices and use a cantus firmus placed in the tenor line. His canti firmi include secular songs, such as L’Homme armé (used by many composers up to Palestrina) and his own ballade Se la face ay pale, and sacred melodies such as Ave Regina celorum.
In these and other works of his Cambrai period, Dufay perfected a graceful and expressive style that incorporated into Continental music the sweet harmonies of the contenance angloise, or “English manner,” that according to Martin le Franc’s Le Champion des dames (c. 1440) he had adopted from John Dunstable. In his music he created the characteristic style of the Burgundian composers that links late medieval music with the style of later Franco-Flemish composers of the Renaissance.
