Hänsel and Gretel, German Hänsel und Gretel,  opera by the German composer Engelbert Humperdinck (with a German libretto by his sister, Adelheid Wette) that premiered in Weimar, Germany, on December 23, 1893.
Humperdinck, who began his career as an assistant to Richard Wagner, used Wagner’s harmonic techniques, although with a lighter touch suitable for the fairy-tale subject matter he adapted. The roles of Gretel and Hänsel are sung, respectively, by an adult soprano and an adult mezzo-soprano.
Humperdinck began work on Hänsel and Gretel in 1890 when his sister requested a set of four songs based on the fairy tale by the Brothers Grimm for her children to perform. From that set of songs Humperdinck expanded the piece to a singspiel and then ultimately to a full opera. Humperdinck and Wette presented a softer and lighter version of the story: Hänsel and Gretel’s mother, rather than sending the children off to die as she does in the Grimms’ original, only orders them to go outside and pick strawberries to keep them from causing trouble in the house. Friendly new characters—including the Sandman, the Dew Fairy, and 14 angels who guard the children while they sleep—were added to the story, as were pious pronouncements concerning prayer.
A premiere was arranged for Munich late in 1893. However, a singer’s illness forced the cancellation of that production, so the first performance fell to Richard Strauss, who, as the composer’s friend, had already planned to conduct Hänsel and Gretel in a Christmas-season run in Weimar. The opera was an immediate success. In its first year alone, it was presented in dozens of German theatres.
A poor cottage at the edge of a forest.
Once upon a time, a brother and sister named Hänsel and Gretel lived with their father and mother, Peter and Gertrude, at the edge of a huge forest. When the story opens, they are alone in their poor cottage, hard at work at their chores, and quite hungry. Gretel teases Hänsel for being a grump and promises to tell him a secret if he will cheer up: there is milk in the jug and their mother will make them a nice pudding when she comes home. Hänsel sneaks a taste of the milk, but Gretel warns him that their mother will be angry if they do not get back to work. Hänsel refuses; he prefers to dance. Gretel is infected with her brother’s high spirits, and both begin to dance (“Brüderchen, komm tanz’ mit mir”).
In the middle of all the fun, Gertrude comes home in a very bad mood, angry at them for not having finished their work. She gets a stick to hit them, and, as they escape, she accidentally knocks over the jug, spilling all the milk. She furiously orders them out of the house to pick strawberries. Then she despairs and begs God for help in feeding her children. Exhausted, she falls asleep.
Peter is heard singing in the distance. He reels into the house and gives Gertrude a big kiss. She is not amused and accuses him of being drunk. He ignores her nagging and playfully asks for supper. She tells him that they have nothing to eat. To her surprise, he pulls out a sackful of food. He reports that he had gone to town to sell his brooms, and because he happened upon a festival, he managed to make a huge profit. Gertrude toasts his success, and, as they begin to dig into the food, he realizes that the children are absent. Gertrude reports that Hänsel and Gretel were misbehaving and that she broke the milk jug trying to punish them. Peter laughs heartily at this, and Gertrude cannot help joining in. He asks again where they are, and she replies, “For all  I know, at the Ilsenstein.” Peter is struck with horror, for the Ilsenstein is the mountain abode of a horrible witch who rides on a broomstick, lures children to her gingerbread house, and bakes them into gingerbread. The two rush out of the house in search of the children.
