He Hui, also called Hui He,  (born 1972, Ankang, China), Chinese opera soprano noted for her strong, moving performances, especially in works by composers Giacomo Puccini and Giuseppi Verdi.
He Hui was raised in Ankang, a city in southern Shaanxi province about 110 miles (180 km) south of Xi’an, the ancient capital of China. Her interest in Western music was encouraged while she was in high school, and she attended the Xi’an Conservatory of Music, where, as a young student, she was deeply moved by listening to a recording of Puccini’s La Bohème. She majored in Western operatic vocal performance and remained at the school as a singing instructor after receiving her undergraduate degree in 1994. In 1995 He Hui made her debut as a leading actor in Shanghai as the mezzo-soprano Dorabella in Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart’s Così fan tutte. She soon switched to singing soprano and sang the title role in Verdi’s Aida at the inaugural event of the Shanghai Grand Theater in 1998.
He Hui’s breakthrough on the international stage came in 2000 when she placed second in the Operalia singing competition (founded by renowned tenor Plácido Domingo), held that year in Los Angeles. In early 2001 He Hui and Domingo gave a joint concert in Shanghai, and, later that year at the behest of Domingo, she sang the role of Aida with the Los Angeles Opera and then the character Liù in Puccini’s Turandot with the Washington (D.C.) Opera. In April 2002 she won a Verdi vocal competition in Busseto, Italy (Verdi’s hometown, near Parma), after having performed the title role in Puccini’s Tosca in her European debut (in Parma) two months earlier.
By then, her talent was widely recognized and lauded, and He Hui began appearing at opera houses at first mainly in Italy and France and then throughout Europe. She first performed as Cio-Cio-San in Puccini’s Madama Butterfly in Bordeaux, France (2003), and that role—along with those of Tosca and especially Aida—became one for which she was best known. Notable European operatic debuts included engagements at the Vienna State Opera (2004), La Scala in Milan (2006), and the Royal Opera House (Covent Garden) in London (2010).
Although He Hui performed largely in Europe after launching her international career, she still returned to her native China for concerts and opera productions, and she remained on the faculty at the conservatory in Xi’an. She made her debut at the Metropolitan Opera House in New York City in 2010 as Aida and reprised that role in her inaugural appearances at the Lyric Opera of Chicago in 2012—both times garnering rave reviews. Indeed, by then she had become known for her powerful yet sensitive and moving portrayal of that tragic character. In addition to her hundreds of live performances, He Hui made several recordings, notably of songs by Puccini and Verdi.
