James Levine,  (born June 23, 1943, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.—died March 9, 2021, Palm Springs, California), American conductor and pianist, especially noted for his work with the Metropolitan Opera (Met) of New York City. He was considered the preeminent American conductor of his generation.
As a piano prodigy, Levine made his debut in 1953 with the Cincinnati Orchestra in Ohio. He studied piano with the famed teacher Rosina Lhévinne, and from 1961 to 1964 he was a conducting student of Jean Morel at the Juilliard School in New York City. Levine embarked upon his conducting career in 1965, when George Szell invited him to become the assistant conductor of the Cleveland Orchestra, where he remained until 1970.
Levine made his Met debut in 1971 with Giacomo Puccini’s Tosca. He became that company’s principal conductor in 1973, its musical director in 1975, and its first artistic director in 1986 (a position from which he resigned in 2004). In his position as conductor and director of the Metropolitan Opera, Levine improved the artistic standards of the company and led the orchestra on numerous domestic and international tours. He formed the Met Chamber Ensemble in 1998, performing ambitious programs, including the 2006 premiere of Elliott Carter’s In the Distances of Sleep, commissioned by Carnegie Hall.
In addition to making guest appearances in the United States and Europe, Levine was the musical director of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra at its Ravinia summer festival from 1973 to 1993. Among his critically acclaimed recordings were operas by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Giuseppe Verdi, and Richard Wagner and the symphonies of Johannes Brahms and Gustav Mahler. Levine’s straightforward interpretations were marked by vitality and architectural clarity. He remained active as a recital pianist and recorded chamber music in collaboration with cellist Lynn Harrell.
In 1996 Levine conducted an extensive world tour with “The Three Tenors” (José Carreras, Plácido Domingo, and Luciano Pavarotti), and in 1999 he was named chief conductor of the Munich Philharmonic. In 2004 he left that position to become music director of the Boston Symphony. There he programmed music by Arnold Schoenberg and other major 20th-century composers, and he premiered works the orchestra commissioned from Charles Wuorinen and Gunther Schuller. His work with student orchestras at the Boston Symphony’s summer home, the Tanglewood Music Center, was highly praised. In March 2011, as he struggled with various health issues, Levine stepped down as music director of the Boston Symphony. The following September he withdrew from the year’s remaining engagements with the Metropolitan Opera. He returned to the podium in May 2013, but in May 2016 it was announced that the 2015–16 season would be his last and that he would become music director emeritus beginning in the 2016–17 season. Yannick Nézet-Séguin was appointed as his successor.
In December 2017 Levine was suspended by the Metropolitan Opera following accusations from three men that he had sexually abused them when they were teenagers decades earlier. The Met also indicated that it had opened an investigation into his conduct. Several months later Levine was fired after the investigation found credible evidence of abuse and harassment before and during his tenure there. Alleging breach of contract and defamation, he subsequently sued the Met, which countersued. The cases were settled out of court in 2019. It was later revealed that Levine had been paid $3.5 million.
Levine received many honours from cultural and civic organizations in Europe and the United States, including a Kennedy Center Honor and the National Medal of Arts. His recordings earned eight Grammy Awards in the years 1982 through 1991. In 2010 he was elected an honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters.
