Johann Hermann Schein,  (born Jan. 20, 1586, Grünhain, Saxony [Germany]—died  Nov. 19, 1630, Leipzig), German composer of sacred and secular music, one of the earliest (with Michael Praetorius and Heinrich Schütz) to introduce the Italian Baroque style into German music.
Schein’s father, a teacher and pastor, died when the boy was seven, and the family moved from rural Grünhain back to Dresden, its former home. At 13, he was a soprano in the chapel choir of the court at Dresden and studied under the kapellmeister there. He was an apt scholar. In 1603 he studied briefly at the University of Leipzig and then was accepted into the Schupforta near Naumburg, where he studied music and the humanities for four years. Schein returned to the University of Leipzig for another four years, studying law and the liberal arts. His musical abilities were evident throughout his studies, and by 1615 he was kapellmeister at Weimar. The following year he won the valued position of cantor at the Church of St. Thomas in Leipzig, a post that Johann Sebastian Bach occupied more than a century later. Schein was required to direct choral music at two churches and to teach Latin and music for some 14 hours a week.
Meanwhile, Schein’s reputation as a composer of vocal music, both sacred and secular, was growing. He is considered, along with his acquaintance Samuel Scheidt and his close friend Heinrich Schütz, one of the three finest German composers of his time. His Cantional oder Gesangbuch Augburgischer Konfession (1627) contains about 200 harmonized chorales, in which about 80 of the melodies are his. The Cymbalum Sionium sive Cantiones Sacrae (1615) contains 30 instrumental motets in the rich Venetian style. Italian influence also appears in the Opella nova, geistliche Concerten (1618) and in the secular Diletti pastorali (1624), which contain early examples of chromaticism (use of nonharmonic tones or of harmonies based on them) in German secular music. Schein’s Banchetto musicale (1617), one of his few instrumental compositions, is an outstanding collection of variation suites (i.e., interrelated sets of dances).
