José Carreras, original name in full Josep Maria Carreras i Coll,  (born Dec. 5, 1946, Barcelona, Spain), Spanish operatic lyric tenor known for his rich voice and good looks. As one of the “Three Tenors” (together with the Italian singer Luciano Pavarotti and the Spanish singer Plácido Domingo), Carreras helped find a larger popular audience for opera.
Carreras was raised in Barcelona, the youngest of three children. He displayed an early aptitude for music, often staging mock operas and performing songs from films. When he was seven years old, his parents enrolled him in the Barcelona Conservatory to study music. Carreras entered the University of Barcelona in his late teens to study chemistry, though he continued his musical training.
In January 1970 Carreras sang the minor part of Flavio in Vincenzo Bellini’s opera Norma in Barcelona. There he met the Spanish soprano Montserrat Caballé, who sang the title role. She and her brother served as mentors to Carreras, helping him to embark on an international career. In 1971 Carreras made his Italian debut as Rodolfo in Puccini’s La Bohème in Parma and the next year made his American debut at the New York City Opera as Pinkerton in Puccini’s Madama Butterfly. He made his Metropolitan Opera debut as Cavaradossi in Puccini’s Tosca in 1974. During the next decade Carreras sang a wide variety of roles at opera houses around the world and recorded extensively.
He was diagnosed with leukemia in 1987 after he collapsed during a recording session. Following a bone marrow transplant and chemotherapy treatments, he made a full recovery. In 1988 he founded the José Carreras International Leukemia Foundation in an effort to raise money for research on the disease. In 1990 he first appeared with Pavarotti and Domingo; they were billed as the “Three Tenors.” The performance, held at the World Cup football (soccer) championship in Rome, was televised, and the success of the event led to several recordings and numerous appearances. The recording of their first performance together, Carreras, Domingo, Pavarotti in Concert, won a  Grammy Award in 1991.
Carreras’s operatic career was punctuated by forays into popular music. Having previously sung the role of Tony on a recording of  Leonard Bernstein’s and Stephen Sondheim’s West Side Story (1984), Carreras released Hollywood Golden Classics, an album of popular songs, in 1991. In 1992 Carreras served as music director of the Olympic ceremonies in Barcelona and performed alongside a gathering of fellow Spanish opera stars that included past collaborators Domingo and Caballé. He recorded a number of performances for broadcast on television, including the title role in Verdi’s Stiffelio at Covent Garden in 1993. In addition to his recordings of both full operas and selections of arias, Carreras also released Mediterranean Passion (2008), a selection of Catalan songs.
