Kishori Amonkar,  (born April 10, 1932, Bombay [now Mumbai], Maharashtra, India—died April 3, 2017, Mumbai), Indian classical vocalist, recognized as one of the foremost singers in the Hindustani tradition and as an innovative exponent of the Jaipur gharana (community of musicians sharing a distinctive musical style).
Amonkar’s mother was the well-known vocalist Mogubai Kurdikar, who trained under Alladiya Khan Saheb, the doyen of the Jaipur gharana. While learning the finer points and techniques of the Jaipur gharana from her mother, Amonkar also developed her own personal style, which reflects the influence of other gharanas and has generally been regarded as an individual variant of the Jaipur tradition.
Amonkar cultivated a deep understanding of her art, largely through extensive study of the ancient texts on music, and her repertoire was grand in its sweep. Although she was known primarily for her skillful singing of classical khayal songs set in the traditional ragas (melodic frameworks) of Hindustani music, she also performed the lighter classical thumri repertoire, bhajan devotional songs, and film music. Regardless of musical genre, her performances were marked by vitality and grace.
Throughout her career, however, Amonkar was both criticized and praised for her bending of the Jaipur tradition. As she prioritized the expression of emotion in her music, she frequently departed from the gharana’s conventions of rhythm, ornamentation, and broader musical structure in order to intensify the music’s impact. Ultimately, she aimed to infuse the emotional appeal of the more popular styles into the comparatively rigid classical tradition.
Aside from being a renowned musician, Amonkar was a popular speaker and traveled throughout India giving lectures, most notably on the theory of rasa (feelings, emotions) in music. In recognition of her contribution to the arts, she received many awards, including the Padma Bhushan (1987) and Padma Vibhushan (2002), two of the country’s top civilian honours. In 2010 she became a fellow of the Sangeet Natak Akademi (India’s national academy of music, arts, and dance), a lifetime appointment held by just a few dozen individuals at any given time.
