Lawrence Tibbett,  Tibbett originally spelled Tibbet,  (born Nov. 16, 1896, Bakersfield, Calif., U.S.—died  July 15, 1960, New York City), American baritone renowned for his success in both opera and motion pictures.
Tibbett began his performing career as an actor and church singer in Los Angeles, where he studied voice with Basil Ruysdael. In 1923, after moving to New York City and beginning vocal study with Frank La Forge, he made his operatic debut at the Metropolitan Opera as Lovitsky in Modest Mussorgsky’s Boris Godunov. His first major success came in 1925 at the Metropolitan, when he played Ford in Giuseppe Verdi’s Falstaff. His performance completely overshadowed that of Antonio Scotti, the well-known Italian baritone, who was playing the title role. Over the next several years he sang most of the leading baritone roles at the Metropolitan, continuing with the company for 27 seasons. He was also a popular figure in early talking films and on radio, and he produced the first operas on television.
Tibbett sang in the premiere performances of several native American operas at the Metropolitan, creating the title role in Louis Gruenberg’s The Emperor Jones (the first world premiere to be broadcast live from the Metropolitan) in 1933, Eadgar in Deems Taylor’s The King’s Henchman (1927) and Colonel Ibbetson in Taylor’s Peter Ibbetson (1931), and Wrestling Bradford in Howard Hanson’s Merry Mount (1934). He also played Guido in the first Metropolitan performance of Richard Hageman’s Caponsacchi (1937) and created the title role in Sir Eugene Goossens’ Don Juan de Mañara at Covent Garden, London, in that same year. Films in which he appeared include The Rogue Song, New Moon, The Southerner, and Cuban Love Song. He also did considerable work in radio and recording. He appeared at the Metropolitan for the last time in 1950 in the role of Ivan in Mussorgsky’s Khovanschina, and his last stage appearance was in the musical comedy Fanny on Broadway in 1956. Tibbett’s autobiography, The Glory Road, was published in 1933.
