Louis Couperin,  (born c. 1626, Chaumes-en-Brie, France—died  Aug. 29, 1661, Paris), French composer, organist, and harpsichordist, the first major member of the Couperin dynasty of musicians of the 17th and 18th centuries.
Couperin’s father, a merchant and small landowner in Chaumes-en-Brie, France, was also the organist of the local abbey church, and Louis and his two younger brothers, François (c. 1631–1708/12) and Charles (1638–79), learned to play respectably on the violin, viol, harpsichord, and organ. Still, they might have remained provincial musicians but for Jacques Champion de Chambonnières, the best harpsichordist in France, who heard one of Louis’s compositions in 1650 and insisted that the young man go to Paris.
In 1653 Louis became the first Couperin to occupy the post of organist at the Church of Saint-Gervais, situated across from Notre-Dame Cathedral. He also held a court appointment as a treble viol player, but it was for his performing ability as a harpsichordist that he was best known. Until about 1960, when a collection of 70 organ pieces was discovered, his known compositions had consisted of 123 pieces for harpsichord and a handful of works for viol and organ. This small surviving sample of his life’s work suggests that when he died in 1661, at only 35, the 17th century lost one of its greatest musical talents. He was a brilliant harpsichordist, and contemporary accounts suggest that his vigorous style of playing revealed the same qualities as his harpsichord compositions, which are distinguished by an almost aggressive use of dissonance and of Baroque ornamentation. He had command of a sturdy contrapuntal technique that recalls the French organ school of the 16th century, but at times his tonal architecture, built on Italian models, and his bel canto melodies suggest those of George Frideric Handel.
The two younger brothers followed him to Paris and also became successful musicians. François was described as a “great musician and great drunk”; no compositions are known, but his line of the family carried the name of Couperin into the 19th century. Charles succeeded Louis at Saint-Gervais and, in 1668, produced an only child, François Couperin le Grand, who stands far above all the other Couperins with the exception of Louis.
