Loyset Compère,  (born c. 1445, Hainaut? [now in Belgium]—died August 16, 1518, Saint-Quentin, France), one of the most significant composers of the Franco-Netherlandish school, best known for his motets and chansons. Compère was among the generation of composers who, from roughly 1450 to 1520, succeeded Jean de Ockeghem; among that group (and sometimes considered to surpass Compère in reputation) were Josquin des Prez, Jakob Obrecht, and Pierre de la Rue.
Little is known of Compère’s early life. The French poet and chronicler Jean Molinet, who seems to have known the composer, reported that his family was from Saint-Omer (in France), though it is known that later in life he became a naturalized French citizen. During the mid-1470s Compère was a member of the chapel choir of Galeazzo Maria Sforza, duke of Milan, but, when the duke was murdered in 1477 and the choir was reduced, Compère was among those who were listed to leave the court. By 1486 he was a chantre ordinaire in the service of the French king Charles VIII. Compère became a naturalized French citizen in 1494 and probably traveled with Charles during the French invasion of Italy (1494). Compère was subsequently a dean of Saint Géry in Cambrai (1498–1500) and provost at Saint Pierre in Douai (1500–1503/04). An 18th-century history of this period indicates that the composer had earned bachelor’s degrees in canon and civil law. He was also canon and chancellor at Saint-Quentin, and his remains are buried in the church there. Throughout his tenure at these churches, he seems to have continued to serve the French court.
Once believed to have learned from Josquin des Prez, Compère is now known to have been older than Josquin by perhaps a decade, and scholars believe that Compère may have pioneered some of the techniques and styles that both composers share. Compère’s surviving works include several motets of a variety of types, 2 frottolas, more than 50 chansons, 2 complete masses (Alles regrets and L’Homme armé), 3 cycles of motetti missales (“substitution masses”), and 4 complete Magnificats.
