Luigi Cherubini, in full Maria Luigi Carlo Zenobio Salvatore Cherubini,  (born September 14, 1760, Florence [Italy]—died March 15, 1842, Paris, France), Italian-born French composer during the period of transition from Classicism to Romanticism; he contributed to the development of French opera and was also a master of sacred music. His mature operas are characterized by the way they use some of the new techniques and subject matter of the Romantics but derive their dramatic force from a Classical dignity and restraint.
The son of a musician, Cherubini studied under Giuseppi Sarti, noted composer of opera and religious music. The bulk of Cherubini’s early work consists of sacred music, but he later turned most of his attention to the musical stage, writing 15 Italian and 14 French operas. In 1786 he settled in France, and in 1795 he became an inspector of the newly established Paris Conservatory. He found little favour with Napoleon, but with the restoration of the French monarchy in 1816 he became music director of the royal chapel of Louis XVIII. In 1822 he was made director of the Conservatory, a position that gave him great influence over the younger generation of composers.
Cherubini presents the paradox of an innate conservative compelled to function in an era that was politically and musically revolutionary. He was trained in the traditions of the opera seria, the aristocratic style of 18th-century opera, and his earlier works, including those written as director of the Italian opera house in Paris, the Théâtre de Monsieur, retain that style’s heroic and aristocratic grandeur. His later works, however, especially those in French, follow the operatic reforms of Christoph Gluck (1714–87) in seeking subjects relevant to a changing world. The heroism of aristocrats becomes the nobility of ordinary men and women. Even in operas that dealt with subjects from classical antiquity, such as Médée (1797), he reveals a concern for human traits. The opera that inaugurated his new style was Lodoïska (1791). It moved away from the emphasis on the solo voice found in opera seria to give new scope to ensembles and choruses and a fresh dramatic importance to the orchestra. He thus forged a link between the older style and the grand opera of 19th-century France.
In his harmonies, rhythms, and use of musical form, he remained in the Classical idiom and did not attempt the incipient Romantic style. Those who did, however, were influenced by his operas. Before writing Fidelio, Ludwig van Beethoven (who regarded Cherubini as his greatest contemporary) studied the score of a Cherubini opera with a similar “rescue” theme: Les Deux Journées (1800; The Two Days, also known as The Water Carrier from its German title, Der Wasserträger). This opera is considered by many to be Cherubini’s masterpiece.
In later life he turned to church music. Works such as his Mass in F Major (1809) and his two requiems, especially that in D minor, for male voices (1836), are characterized by a Classical lucidity combined with a sense of religious grandeur. The earlier requiem, in C minor, was singled out for praise by Beethoven, Robert Schumann, and Johannes Brahms.
Cherubini wrote several treatises, including the celebrated Cours de contrepoint et de fugue (1835; “Course in Counterpoint and Fugue”), which is far more conservative musically than Cherubini’s actual music.
Long eclipsed by Beethoven and other less musically conservative composers of his time, Cherubini became the focus of renewed interest with modern revivals of such works as his opera Médée and his Requiem in D Minor.
