Marcella Sembrich, original name Prakseda Marcelina Kochańska,  (born Feb. 15, 1858, Wiśniewczyk, Galicia, Austria-Hungary [now in Ukraine]—died Jan. 11, 1935, New York, N.Y., U.S.), Polish coloratura known for both her operatic and her concert work.
Marcelina Kochańska learned to play the violin and piano from her father and performed on both instruments in recital when she was 12 years old. She also studied piano and voice with Wilhelm Stengel, whom she later married, and studied voice with Victor Rokitansky in Vienna. Franz Liszt, for whom she played and sang in 1874, is said to have encouraged her to develop her voice. She made her operatic debut in 1877 in Athens as Elvira in Vincenzo Bellini’s I puritani. Her next performance, in Dresden, Germany, as Gaetano Donizetti’s Lucia di Lammermoor, was so successful that she remained in Dresden for two years. At that time she adopted her mother’s maiden name, Sembrich, as her professional name.
In 1880 Sembrich signed a five-year contract with the Royal Italian Opera company in London and made her debut at Covent Garden in Lucia di Lammermoor. She also performed in Austria, Russia, Scandinavia, France, and Spain and made her American debut singing Lucia di Lammermoor at the Metropolitan Opera in New York City during its premiere season in October 1883. On the last night of the season, in April 1884, she amazed the audience at a benefit concert by singing a selection from Giovanni Paisiello’s Il barbiere di Siviglia, playing a movement from a concerto by Charles-Auguste de Bériot on the violin, and, as an encore, playing a mazurka by Frédéric Chopin on the piano. She returned to the Metropolitan in 1898 and remained a member of that company until her farewell opera performance in 1909. During that period several highly publicized incidents earned her a reputation as a tempestuous prima donna. At the height of her career, the 1905–06 season, she was paid $1,000 for each of 45 performances. Her voice, a brilliant and flutelike soprano of marked sweetness and remarkable range, was accounted one of the greatest of the time.
Sembrich continued to give concerts until 1917, the year of her husband’s death. Thereafter she devoted herself to teaching, both privately and from 1924 at the Juilliard School in New York City and the Curtis Institute in Philadelphia. Among her pupils was Alma Gluck.
