Marie Van Zandt,  (born October 8, 1858, probably Brooklyn, New York, U.S.—died December 31, 1919, Cannes, France), American opera singer who achieved major European success in a career marked by dramatic heights and depths.
Van Zandt was apparently taken to Europe as a small child by her mother, who pursued a successful career as a concert and operatic singer under the name Madame Vanzini. Marie soon displayed vocal abilities as well, and her mother abandoned her own career in order to promote that of her daughter. Van Zandt received encouragement from Adelina Patti and made her singing debut in a production of Mozart’s Don Giovanni in Turin, Italy, early in 1879. In May of that year she made her London debut in Vincenzo Bellini’s La sonnambula (The Sleepwalker). Her Paris debut followed in March 1880 in an Opéra-Comique production of Ambroise Thomas’s Mignon. Her performance there won her a five-year contract, and she attained popular stardom with dizzying speed. The height of her Paris career came in April 1883, when she created the title role in Lakmé, which Leo Delibes reportedly wrote for her.
In November 1884 Van Zandt’s voice failed during a performance of Il barbiere di Siviglia (The Barber of Seville). Immediately the many cabals that had formed against her—some founded on anti-Americanism, some perhaps inspired by her rival Emma Nevada, and some perhaps arising from entirely irrelevant matters—sprang forth to destroy her reputation. She was accused, falsely, of having attempted to sing while inebriated. Her return to the Opéra-Comique three months later sparked riots, whereupon she secured a release from her contract. She sang successfully in St. Petersburg, Moscow, and London and in November 1891 made her American debut in La sonnambula at the Auditorium Theatre in Chicago.
She spent the rest of the 1891–92 season at the Metropolitan Opera in New York City, where she made her debut in December in La sonnambula. After that single American season she returned permanently to Europe. She made a successful return to the Opéra-Comique in 1896 but retired from the stage following her marriage to Mikhail Petrovitch de Tscherinoff in 1898.
