Marin Alsop,  (born October 16, 1956, New York, New York, U.S.), American conductor who, as the musical director of the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra (2007–21), Maryland, was the first woman to lead a major American orchestra.
Alsop was the daughter of musicians and studied piano and violin as a child. By age nine, when she heard Leonard Bernstein lead the New York Philharmonic, she knew that she wanted to be a conductor. She entered Yale University in 1972 but in 1975 transferred to the Juilliard School in New York City, where she received bachelor’s (1977) and master’s (1978) degrees in violin performance. While working as a freelance violinist in New York City, she began to study conducting in 1979. Alsop formed the jazz group String Fever (1981) and the Concordia Orchestra (1984), which performed everything from jazz to contemporary works.
In 1988 Alsop began conducting studies with Bernstein and with Seiji Ozawa, music director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, and won her first position with an orchestra, as associate conductor of the Richmond Symphony, Virginia. The following year she became music director of the Eugene Symphony, Oregon, and of the Long Island Philharmonic, New York. In 1991 she became music director of the Cabrillo Festival of Contemporary Music in Santa Cruz, California, and in 1993 she assumed that post at the Colorado Symphony in Denver. She also held various positions with other orchestras. She became principal conductor in 2002 of the Bournemouth Symphony, England, with which she earned widespread notice. She was appointed to the post of music director of the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra beginning with the 2007–08 season, making her the first woman to lead an American orchestra of that size and prominence.
Alsop had a particular interest in American and contemporary music. In 2004 she conducted a revival of John Adams’s Nixon in China with the Opera Theater of St. Louis, Missouri, and a semi-staged performance of Bernstein’s Candide with the New York Philharmonic. She recorded the orchestral works of, among others, the American composers Edward Joseph Collins and Samuel Barber. Alsop also garnered praise for her performances of the traditional, particularly the Romantic, repertoire, including her recordings of the works of Johannes Brahms with the London Philharmonic. In 2007 Alsop and the Baltimore Symphony, with Joshua Bell as soloist, released John Corigliano’s Red Violin Concerto.
In 2012 Alsop was named principal conductor of the São Paulo Symphony Orchestra, with whom she recorded Sergey Prokofiev’s seven symphonies (released in 2021). When she stepped down from that role in 2019, she became the chief conductor of the Vienna Radio Symphony Orchestra. Alsop was the first woman in both positions.
Alsop received many honours, among them the Stokowski Conducting Prize in 1988 and, in the same year, a Leonard Bernstein fellowship to the Tanglewood Music Center, Massachusetts, where in 1989 she won the Koussevitsky Conducting Prize. Gramophone magazine named her Artist of the Year in 2003; that year she also won the Royal Philharmonic Society’s Conductor Award. In 2005 Alsop was named a MacArthur fellow, the first conductor to be accorded the honour, and received the Classical BRIT (British Record Industry Trust) Female Artist of the Year Award. She was the subject of the documentary The Conductor, which premiered at the Tribecca Film Festival, New York, in 2021.
