Mariss Jansons, in full Mariss Ivars Georgs Jansons,  (born January 14, 1943, Riga, Latvia—died November 30, 2019, St. Petersburg, Russia), Latvian-born conductor, known for his expressive interpretations of the music of central and eastern Europe.
The son of the respected conductor Arvid Jansons, Mariss was captivated by music as a child. He studied violin, piano, and conducting at the Leningrad (now St. Petersburg) Conservatory in the Soviet Union and graduated with honours. In 1969 he went to Austria, where he studied conducting with Hans Swarowsky at the Academy of Music and Performing Arts in Vienna and with Herbert von Karajan in Salzburg. Those efforts culminated in his winning the International Herbert von Karajan Foundation Competition in Berlin in 1971.
Two years later Jansons was invited to become associate conductor of the Leningrad Philharmonic; he was named its principal conductor in 1985. In 1979 Jansons began a 23-year stint as music director of the Oslo Philharmonic, during which time he elevated the reputation of the Norwegian orchestra through recordings and tours in the United States, Europe, and Japan. Over the course of his career, Jansons conducted many of the world’s major orchestras and appeared on a regular basis at the Salzburg Festival.
Usually specializing in the repertoire of central and eastern Europe, Jansons was admired particularly for his interpretations of the works of Antonín Dvořák, Béla Bartók, Johannes Brahms, Igor Stravinsky, and Dmitry Shostakovich. His recordings with major orchestras, including those of Pittsburgh, St. Petersburg, Oslo, Philadelphia, and Berlin, were well received, winning prestigious honours such as the Dutch Luister Award and the French Grand Prix de Disque, among others. Jansons received an especially significant award in 1995: in recognition of his work with the Oslo Philharmonic, King Harald V of Norway named him Commander with Star of the Royal Norwegian Order of Merit, the country’s highest honour for non-Norwegians and for Norwegians living abroad.
In 1997 Jansons became music director of the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra, and in 2003 he also became chief conductor of the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BRSO) in Munich. Jansons left the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra in 2004 to become principal conductor of Amsterdam’s Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra, a post he held until 2015.
