Orpheus in the Underworld, French Orphée aux enfers,  comic operetta by French composer Jacques Offenbach (French libretto by Hector Crémieux and Ludovic Halévy), a satirical treatment of the ancient Greek myth of Orpheus. It premiered on October 21, 1858, at the Théâtre des Bouffes-Parisiens in Paris. The work’s best-known music is the cancan that appears in the overture and the final scene. The work was originally structured in two acts, though Offenbach later expanded it into four acts.
The classic story of Orpheus concerns a renowned musician who is so distraught over the death of his wife, Eurydice, that he attempts to rescue her from the Underworld, the place of the dead. This tragic tale was adapted for opera by many composers, including Claudio Monteverdi (written and first performed 1607), Christoph Gluck (first performed 1762, later revised), and Joseph Haydn (written 1791, first performed 1951).
Unlike the other composers, Offenbach gave the story a farcical twist. In his version Orpheus and Eurydice, though married to each other, are amicably living separate lives, each blissfully occupied with a new lover. Like Eurydice in the original Greek story, Offenbach’s heroine is fatally bitten by a snake, but, rather than dying tragically, she willingly relocates to the Underworld to be with Pluto—the ruler of the Underworld—who in a mortal form had become her lover while she was alive. In Offenbach’s version Orpheus acts to retrieve Eurydice much against his will. Both he and Eurydice are pleased when his attempt fails. Offenbach was equally irreverent in terms of music, pairing courtly minuets with high-kicking cancans and quoting satirically from Gluck’s earlier opera.
When Offenbach’s opera premiered, critics expressed shock, both because it mocked Gluck’s revered telling of the tale and because it dismissed the idea of the perfection of ancient Greece. Audiences, however, loved it, and within a few years Orpheus in the Underworld became an international success. So marked was the opera’s fame, and so lasting, that in 1886 Camille Saint-Saëns satirized the satire by quoting the finale’s cancan at a much slower tempo and assigning it to tortoises in The Carnival of the Animals (1886).
Of the famed overture, it should be noted that at the time of the operetta’s Parisian premiere, there was no full overture, only a brief prelude. The French preferred their operas that way. Once Offenbach’s work achieved international fame, a more substantial overture was demanded, particularly by German theatres. So an overture was provided, one that made prominent use of the operetta’s best music, most obviously the concluding cancan. The overture rapidly gained popularity on its own account, and it remains a favourite piece for orchestral pops concerts.
Orpheus in the Underworld is set in ancient Greece, on Mount Olympus, and in the Underworld.
The house of Orpheus and Eurydice in the countryside near Thebes.
Public Opinion sets the scene for the ensuing drama: Eurydice is dissatisfied. Her husband, Orpheus, is obsessed with music, and she wishes to have a more attentive admirer. In fact, she has already taken a new lover, the shepherd Aristaeus (the mortal disguise of the god Pluto, ruler of the Underworld). When she is mortally wounded, Pluto reveals himself, and the two go happily off to the Underworld. Orpheus is pleased with the outcome. Unfortunately for him, Public Opinion declares that decency requires the reluctant Orpheus to retrieve his wife.
Mount Olympus at dawn.
Orpheus and Public Opinion go to Mount Olympus to broach the issue with Jupiter, ruler of the gods. Before he can take on Orpheus’s concern, Jupiter must settle his own family problems with his own discontented wife. Pluto is summoned after Mercury suggests that he may have had something to do with the recent death and disappearance of Eurydice. Other gods offer a distraction in the form of a protest against the tedium of daily life on Olympus. Jupiter, knowing that his own liaisons with mortal women have given the gods a low reputation, agrees to investigate the Eurydice situation, and the other gods, seeking diversion, accompany him to the Underworld.
Pluto’s bedroom in the Underworld.
Eurydice is bored by life in the Underworld, where she lives under house arrest, guarded by John Styx. When the gods arrive from Olympus, her jailer hides her away, and it takes the intervention of the playful Cupid to bring Jupiter—in the form of a fly—face-to-face with the lady. Jupiter takes a fancy to Eurydice and suggests that the two of them depart for Olympus. Eurydice agrees to the arrangement, but Pluto objects to Jupiter’s interference.
The Underworld, shortly after events in Act III.
On the banks of the Styx, Pluto is giving a party for the gods, and Jupiter has brought Eurydice in disguise. Pluto soon discovers her identity. Bowing to Public Opinion, Jupiter declares that Orpheus must at least try to take Eurydice home, but he must do so without looking back. Orpheus fails the test when Jupiter throws a lightning bolt and startles him into turning around. Thus is Orpheus freed of Eurydice. Jupiter ultimately hands Eurydice off to Bacchus as another ornament for his wine-tinged revels. Only Public Opinion finds this an unsatisfactory conclusion. All others break into a concluding cancan.
