Plácido Domingo,  (born January 21, 1941, Madrid, Spain), Spanish-born singer, conductor, and opera administrator whose resonant, powerful tenor voice, imposing physical stature, good looks, and dramatic ability made him one of the most popular tenors of his time.
Domingo’s parents were noted performers in zarzuela, a form of Spanish light opera. The family moved to Mexico when he was eight. He studied piano and conducting at the National Conservatory of Music, but he changed the emphasis of his studies when his rich vocal ability was revealed. In 1961 he made his operatic debut in Mexico City and then went to Dallas to perform in its opera company. From 1962 to 1965 he was a resident performer at Tel Aviv’s Hebrew National Opera. He made his debut at the New York City Opera in 1965, at the Metropolitan Opera House in New York City in 1968 (subsequently becoming a regular performer there), and at La Scala in Milan in 1969. Over the course of an opera career that lasted more than five decades, Domingo sang an unprecedented number of different roles—reaching 150 in 2018—and he continued to learn new parts into his 70s. He began adding baritone roles to his repertoire in 2009, many of which received wide acclaim.
A prolific and versatile performer, Domingo made numerous recordings and several film versions of operas, and he ventured into popular music as well, in recordings such as The Domingo Songbook, Perhaps Love, and Pasión Española. His Amore Infinito contains songs inspired by the poetry of Pope John Paul II. With Luciano Pavarotti and José Carreras, he performed around the world as one of the “Three Tenors,” exposing millions of people to the operatic repertoire. In 1993 he founded an international competition—Operalia—to help young opera singers launch their careers. Over the course of his own career, he received a dozen Grammy Awards in several categories as well as a Kennedy Center Honor (2000), the U.S. Presidential Medal of Freedom (2002), and an honorary British knighthood (2002) among many other honours. In 2009 he was awarded the first Birgit Nilsson Prize for outstanding achievement in classical music. (The prize was to be awarded every second or third year in the amount of $1 million.) In 2013 Domingo was named the recipient of the Japan Art Association’s Praemium Imperiale prize for music. In addition to appearing in films of his operatic performances, he occasionally lent his voice to animated characters on-screen, including a Chihuahua in Beverly Hills Chihuahua (2008) and a skeleton in The Book of Life (2014).
Domingo served as the artistic director (1996–2011) and general director (2003–11) of the Washington (D.C.) Opera, and in 2000 he became the general director of the Los Angeles Opera. Domingo also conducted major symphony and opera orchestras in the United States and Europe. His motto, he claimed, was “If I rest, I rust.”
Amid accusations of sexual misconduct from multiple women in 2019, Domingo left the Metropolitan Opera and the Los Angeles Opera. Other cultural institutions, such as the Philadelphia Orchestra and the San Francisco Opera, responded to the allegations by canceling scheduled appearances, and Domingo ultimately withdrew from all of his remaining upcoming performances in the United States. He denied any wrongdoing.
Domingo’s autobiography, My First Forty Years, was published in 1983.
