Roberto Alagna,  (born June 7, 1963, Clichy-sous-Bois, Seine-Saint-Denis, France), French operatic lyric tenor who became known for both his vocal qualities and his flamboyant acting style.
Alagna was born to Sicilian parents in a suburb of Paris and was discovered while he was singing for tips in a Paris pizzeria. Although he was mostly self-taught, his first audition in 1988 resulted in the tenor lead as Alfredo in Glyndebourne’s touring production of La traviata. That same year he entered and won the Luciano Pavarotti International Competition. In 1990 he reprised the role of Alfredo for La Scala in Milan. He overcame personal tragedy to sing a highly acclaimed Romeo in the Royal Opera’s 1994 production of Charles Gounod’s Roméo et Juliette only a few weeks after his wife succumbed to a brain tumour, leaving him and their four-year-old daughter bereft.
Alagna generally was considered a consummate performer, with a strong physical stage presence, though some critics thought  his lack of formal training resulted in an overstrained voice. As the first genuine lyric tenor to appear in many years, however, Alagna was continually hailed as the “fourth tenor.” He dismissed comparisons to the famed trio of Pavarotti, Plácido Domingo, and José Carreras, claiming he wanted to establish his own style.
Alagna married Romanian soprano Angela Gheorghiu, with whom he had engaged in a highly publicized romance, in 1996. The pair had met in 1992 while appearing opposite each other as Rodolfo and Mimi in Giacomo Puccini’s La Bohème with the Royal Opera. They attracted further attention by aggressively marketing their combined talents, banking heavily on the fairy-tale quality of their relationship. The duo was booked jointly with recording studios and opera houses throughout the world, though both continued to pursue solo careers as well.
Alagna also filmed numerous performances for television, including the role of Romeo in Roméo et Juliette (2002) and the title role in Cyrano de Bergerac (2005). He starred as Mario Cavaradossi in the film version of Tosca with Gheorghiu in 2001. Alagna’s recordings included full operas such as La Rondine (1997) and La Bohéme (1999) as well as compilations of arias. In 2006 he walked off the stage during a performance as Radamès in Franco Zeffirelli’s production of Aida at La Scala when members of the audience heckled him. He returned to the role in 2007, replacing the scheduled performer in a production at the Metropolitan Opera in New York City.
