Robert Wilson,  (born Oct. 4, 1941, Waco, Texas, U.S.), American playwright, director, and producer who was known for his avant-garde theatre works.
Wilson studied business administration at the University of Texas at Austin, but he dropped out in 1962 and moved to New York City to pursue his interest in the arts. After earning a degree in interior design from the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn in 1966, he started his own experimental theatre group, the Byrd Hoffman School of Byrds, which operated out of his loft in the Soho neighbourhood of Manhattan. Wilson quickly gained recognition among New York’s art elites. His productions were praised for their innovative use of lighting, space, and sound and for their provocative contradictions of time and place. By the early 1970s he was staging works throughout Europe.
Wilson’s range was vast; he produced Japanese Noh plays, standard operas such as The Magic Flute and Salome, and 12-hour-long theatre pieces. Among his best-known works were The Life and Times of Joseph Stalin (1974); Einstein on the Beach (1976), on which he collaborated with composer Philip Glass; Death, Destruction, and Detroit (1979); and The Civil Wars (1983).
The 1995 premiere of his Hamlet: A Monologue at the Alley Theatre in Houston, Texas, was a major homecoming event for Wilson. Working as writer, director, designer, and solo performer, he presented Hamlet at the moment of his death, flashing backward through 15 of the original’s scenes. He danced awkwardly, threw childish tantrums, growled, and was haunted by props that eerily evoked absent characters. Wilson followed that success with a production of Snow on the Mesa, a dance work that paid tribute to Martha Graham, at the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C., and a staging of Gertrude Stein and Virgil Thomson’s 1934 opera Four Saints in Three Acts for the Houston Grand Opera.
In the 1990s Wilson also earned acclaim for his trilogy performed by the Thalia Theater company of Hamburg, Ger. The series began with The Black Rider (1990) and continued with Alice (1992), a retelling of the Lewis Carroll books, both with music by Tom Waits. The final installment, Time Rocker (1996), had more to do with Wilson’s minimalist decor and lighting and less with music (by Lou Reed) and dialogue (by Darryl Pinckney). Dubbed “art musicals,” the works offered an alternative experience to the typical Broadway production—which Wilson believed was becoming more and more like television, with a programmed audience reaction every few seconds.
Wilson continued to stage productions into the early 21st century. In addition to directing revivals of his works, in 2004 he premiered I La Galigo, which was based on an Indonesian poem that recounts the creation of humankind. Wilson also received critical attention as an installation artist and as a furniture designer.
