Siegfried Jerusalem,  (born April 17, 1940, Oberhausen, Ger.), German tenor who was widely acclaimed in the late 20th and early 21st century for his powerful performances of leading roles in the operas of Richard Wagner.
Jerusalem began his musical career as a bassoonist. He played with orchestras in Germany from 1961 to 1977, his last position being with the Stuttgart Radio Symphony Orchestra. It was in Stuttgart that he began to study voice seriously, and his singing career began there in 1976. In the same year, when the orchestra played for a television production of Johann Strauss’s The Gypsy Baron and the scheduled tenor did not appear, Jerusalem performed the role of Sandor Barinkay. For a year he continued as a bassoonist while taking small parts with the Stuttgart State Opera. When his performances as Lohengrin—the protagonist in Wagner’s opera of the same name—in Stuttgart, Hamburg, and Zürich led to offers from Berlin, Vienna, and Munich, Jerusalem decided to pursue his singing career full-time.
Jerusalem did not begin his singing career in earnest until he was 37 years old. Once having begun, however, he rose rapidly, singing nearly all of Wagner’s heldentenor roles to acclaim and appearing on nearly every major operatic stage. Jerusalem sang Lohengrin at the Metropolitan Opera (1980) and La Scala (1981) and performed the role of Parsifal at the Vienna State Opera (1979) and at the Metropolitan (1992). He appeared for several seasons as Siegmund in Die Walküre at the Wagner festival at Bayreuth, Ger., and he also sang the role at Zürich, Switz. (1988), and at the Lyric Opera of Chicago (1994). He first appeared at Bayreuth, however, in 1977 as Froh in Wagner’s Das Rheingold, and in 1988 and 1989 he appeared there as Siegfried in both Siegfried and Götterdämmerung. In 1990 Jerusalem performed Loge and Siegfried in a complete production of Der Ring des Nibelungen at the Metropolitan that was televised nationally. He also performed the role of Loge in conductor James Levine’s 1991 recording of Das Rheingold, which won a Grammy Award. Other Wagnerian roles included Walther von Stolzing in Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg and Erik in Der fliegende Holländer.
Jerusalem credited his clear diction to his singing of lieder. He gave his first lieder recital at Bayreuth in 1982, and he later recorded Robert Schumann’s Dichterliebe and Liederkreis. He also recorded selections from Mahler’s Des Knaben Wunderhorn and the Rückert, as well as Das Lied von der Erde.
Although Jerusalem was known primarily as a Wagnerian tenor, his repertoire also included operas by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart as well as by various Italian composers. His Mozartean roles included Tamino in The Magic Flute and the title role in Idomeneo. He had a particular talent and fondness for Italian opera, notably for those by Giuseppe Verdi, and he had sung the tenor part in Verdi’s Requiem.
In 1997 Jerusalem was awarded the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany. Two years later he performed at Bayreuth for the last time, before accepting a professorship at the College of Music in Nürnberg, Ger., and thus shifting his professional emphasis; teaching became his top priority. However, Jerusalem continued to perform internationally, albeit intermittently, in the early 21st century.
