Sondra Radvanovsky,  (born April 11, 1969, Berwyn, Illinois, U.S.), American-Canadian bel canto soprano known for being one of the premier interpreters of works by Giuseppe Verdi.
Radvanovsky was raised in Richmond, Indiana. Her interest in opera was piqued during her youth when she watched Plácido Domingo perform in a televised production. At age 13 she had a small role in Georges Bizet’s Carmen, but her first lead role in a professional opera came at age 21. Radvanovsky studied theatre and voice at the University of Southern California and UCLA and focused on music at the University of Cincinnati–College-Conservatory of Music and at the Tanglewood Music Center, Lenox, Massachusetts. In 1995 she won the Metropolitan Opera’s National Council Auditions, a program that discovers young talent. She then completed the Met’s Lindemann Young Artist Development Program and debuted at the opera house in 1996 in the role of Countess Ceprano in Verdi’s Rigoletto, a performance that began to solidify her reputation as a standout interpreter of that composer.
Despite having had surgery on one of her vocal cords in 2002 to remove a polyp, Radvanovsky rose to stardom as she sang bel canto roles in leading opera houses worldwide. Critics praised her unconventional but lustrous voice and her compelling dramatic performances of what were considered some of opera’s most-challenging characters. Some of her other notable Verdi roles included the title role in Aida, Leonora (Il trovatore), Elisabeth de Valois (Don Carlo), Elvira (Ernani), and Amelia (Un ballo in maschera). Her first recording, Verdi Arias (2010), was released to spectacular critical reviews. Radvanovsky was also recognized for such roles as Rusalka (Rusalka, by Antonín Dvorák) and Norma (Norma, by Vincenzo Bellini). In 2008 she proceeded to the big screen to perform Roxane in Franco Alfano’s Cyrano de Bergerac (opposite Domingo) and other major roles in the Met’s Live in HD series, including her reprised role of Leonora in 2011, which was broadcast to movie theatres worldwide. At the Met in 2016 she starred in a trilogy of roles as the Tudor queens in Gaetano Donizetti’s Anna Bolena (Anne Boleyn), Maria Stuarda (Mary Stuart), and Roberto Devereux (Elizabeth I), a series of roles rarely undertaken in a single season by one opera singer. She later earned acclaim for her performance (2018) in Umberto Giordano’s Andrea Chénier at the Liceu Opera Barcelona.
In 2001 Radvanovsky married her business manager, Duncan Lear, of Canada. She obtained Canadian citizenship in 2016.
