Valery Gergiev,  (born May 2, 1953, Moscow, Russia, U.S.S.R.), Russian conductor, known for his charismatic stage presence and passionate performances, who became artistic and general director of the Mariinsky Theatre (previously called Kirov Theatre) in St. Petersburg in 1996.
Gergiev was the son of Ossetian parents and spent much of his youth in the Caucasus. He studied conducting with Ilya Musin at the Leningrad Conservatory and at age 23 won the Herbert von Karajan Conductors’ Competition in Berlin. He made his debut with the Kirov Theatre in Leningrad (now St. Petersburg) in 1978, leading a production of Sergey Prokofiev’s War and Peace  as assistant to Yury Temirkanov, the company’s principal conductor. From 1981 to 1985 he was the principal conductor of the Armenian State Orchestra, and during that period he led performances by many of the major orchestras of the Soviet Union.
Upon being made music director of the Kirov in 1988, Gergiev began to establish a reputation for intensely personal performances. In 1991 he made his European opera debut conducting Modest Mussorgsky’s Boris Godunov with the Bavarian State Opera, and he made his first opera appearance in the United States, leading the San Francisco Opera’s production of War and Peace, in the same year. From there the honours and international acclaim mounted. In 1993 he was named Conductor of the Year at the Classical Music Awards in London. He was also invited to perform as a guest conductor with many of the world’s leading orchestras, including the London Symphony Orchestra, Amsterdam’s Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra, and the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra, among others.
In 1991 the Kirov Theatre, along with its resident opera and ballet companies, reverted to its imperial name, Mariinsky. In 1996 Gergiev became artistic and general director of the Mariinsky Theatre, and during his tenure he strengthened and solidified its position as one of the world’s premiere opera houses.
Gergiev was known for keeping a demanding work schedule. Over the years he founded the St. Petersburg White Nights Festival (1993) and the Mikkeli International Music Festival in Finland (1994), and from 1996 he led the Rotterdam Festival and Israel’s Red Sea International Music Festival. When Gergiev and the Mariinsky Opera appeared at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington, D.C., in February 2002, it marked the opening of a 10-year collaboration that he had engineered between the two institutions.
Gergiev’s activities and honours continued apace in the early 21st century. At Moscow’s Golden Mask Festival in 2002, he was named Best Conductor for his version of Richard Wagner’s Die Walküre, and the Mariinsky won three of five awards in the event’s opera categories. Gergiev also released a number of recordings featuring works by composers from Russia and other states of the former Soviet Union. During this time he also oversaw the construction of new concert halls for the Mariinsky, and in 2009 the theatre launched its own record label.
In addition to his work with the Mariinsky, Gergiev was also involved with other orchestras, notably serving as principal conductor of the Rotterdam Philharmonic Orchestra (1995–2008) and the London Symphony Orchestra (2007–15). In 2015 he became conductor of the Munich Philharmonic Orchestra.
