Zhou Long,  (born July 8, 1953, Beijing, China), Chinese American composer known for his works that brought together the music of the East and the West, thus helping to establish a common ground between different musical traditions and cultures. Among Zhou’s most famous compositions was the music he created for Madame White Snake (2010), a vivid opera based on a Chinese folk tale, for which Zhou earned the 2011 Pulitzer Prize for music.
Zhou spent his early life in Beijing and received instruction on the piano at a young age. During China’s Cultural Revolution (1966–76), however, he was forced to give up his musical studies and was ordered to live in the countryside, where he worked on a farm. In 1977 Zhou returned to Beijing to study composition and music theory at the Central Conservatory of Music. Upon graduating (1983), he became composer in residence (1983–85) with the National Broadcasting Symphony Orchestra of China. He then studied at Columbia University, New York City, where he earned a D.M.A. (1993), and he subsequently served as music director of Music from China, an ensemble based in New York City that performed traditional and contemporary Chinese music. He later presided as distinguished professor of music composition at the University of Missouri–Kansas City.
Zhou composed stage and orchestral works, chamber music, and choral and vocal pieces for ensembles worldwide. He became widely known for his exceptional ability for identifying techniques that enabled Western ensembles to effectively reproduce the sounds unique to Chinese music. Much of his work was influenced by his experience in China’s countryside, though he also drew inspiration from ancient Chinese poetry.
Notable among Zhou’s works were Soul (1992) for pipa (Chinese lute) and string quartet, created for the Pittsburgh New Music Ensemble, and The Ineffable (1994), commissioned by the Koussevitzky Music Foundation and the Library of Congress. Rites of Chimes (2000), commissioned by the Smithsonian Institution, was composed for cellist Yo-Yo Ma and musicians associated with Music from China. Among his later works were the symphonic epic Nine Odes (2013), the chamber composition Tales from the Nine Bells (2014), and the piano concerto Postures (2014).
In 2016 Zhou was enshrined into the New York Foundation for the Arts (NYFA) Hall of Fame. NYFA had previously awarded Zhou a fellowship in music composition (2000), providing him with the opportunity to further his work in blending the sounds and musical traditions of China with those of the West. Also in 2016, Zhou and his wife, Chen Yi, enjoyed growing acclaim for their jointly composed Symphony Humen 1839, which was nominated for a Grammy Award for best orchestral performance, under the baton of Singaporean conductor Darrell Ang and performed by the New Zealand Symphony Orchestra.
In addition to the Pulitzer Prize, Zhou received numerous other honours during his career, including the Herb Alpert Award in the Arts (2001) and the Academy Award in Music (later the Arts and Letters Award) bestowed by the American Academy of Arts and Letters (2003). His translation of “Words of the Sun” (1982, revised 1997) was featured on the male vocal ensemble Chanticleer’s Grammy Award-winning album Colors of Love (1999).
