Gratian, Latin in full Flavius Gratianus Augustus,  (born 359, Sirmium, Pannonia [now Sremska Mitrovica, Serbia]—died August 25, 383, Lugdunum, Lugdunensis [now Lyon, France]), Roman emperor from 367 to 383. During part of his reign he shared this office with his father, Valentinian I (reigned 364–375), and his uncle Valens (reigned 364–378). By proclaiming the eight-year-old Gratian as Augustus (coruler), his father sought to assure a peaceful succession to imperial power. The boy’s education was entrusted to the poet Ausonius, whom he appointed praetorian prefect. Upon the death of Valentinian I (November 17, 375), Gratian was appointed sole ruler of the West. Shortly thereafter he recognized as a colleague his four-year-old half brother, Valentinian, who had been proclaimed Emperor Valentinian II by the troops at Aquincum (near Budapest). Under Ausonius’s influence Gratian sought to make his rule mild and popular. He spent most of his reign in Gaul repelling the tribes that were invading from across the Rhine River. In 378 he arrived too late to take part in the disastrous battle with the Goths at Adrianople. As a replacement for Valens, who was killed in that conflict, Gratian appointed Theodosius emperor of the East in 379.
In 383, upon hearing that Magnus Maximus had been proclaimed emperor in Britain, Gratian rushed into Gaul to intercept the usurper. He was deserted by his troops, however, and sought to escape beyond the Alps, but he was treacherously murdered in Lugdunum by the Goth Andragathius (Maximus’s magister equitum [cavalry commander and lieutenant]).
In the latter part of his reign Gratian was greatly influenced by St. Ambrose. Out of deference to the Christian church, he omitted the words pontifex maximus (“supreme priest”) from his title—the first Roman ruler to do so—and ordered the removal of the pagan statue of Victory from the Senate in Rome. An embassy of the senators, led by Quintus Aurelius Symmachus, failed to persuade him to rescind his instructions on this matter.
