Guangwudi, Wade-Giles romanization Kuang-wu-ti, personal name (xingming) Liu Xiu, temple name (miaohao) (Han) Shizu,  (born c. 6 bc, Nanyang [now in Hubei province], China—died ad 57, Luoyang), posthumous name (shi) of the Chinese emperor (reigned ad 25–57) who restored the Han dynasty after the usurpation of Wang Mang, a former Han minister who established the Xin dynasty (ad 9–25). The restored Han dynasty is sometimes referred to as the Dong (Eastern), or the Hou (Later), Han (ad 25–220).
Liu Xiu—the future Guangwudi (“Shining Martial Emperor”)—was a member of the imperial Liu family and a supposed descendant of Gaozu (reigned 206–195 bc), the founder of the Han dynasty. In ad 22, when the radical reform measures of Wang Mang made his Xin dynasty unpopular, Liu raised an army with support from his powerful clan and other wealthy landowner families. After Wang Mang was killed in 23, Liu defeated some of the other rebelling forces and set up his own power. Two years later he moved the capital, Chang’an (present-day Xi’an), to Luoyang, in eastern China—hence the name Dong Han—and proclaimed himself emperor.
The subsequent 10 years of Guangwudi’s reign were spent in consolidating his rule and subduing the numerous domestic rebellions that had arisen, including the Red Eyebrows revolt. He also suppressed the nomadic tribesmen of China’s northern borders and returned imperial rule to the outlying areas of South China. Having restored peace to the empire, Guangwudi became so weary of fighting that he forbade the mention of the word war in his presence.
The Dong Han was never as powerful as the Xi (Western) Han (also called the Qian [Former] Han). In the wars that led to the founding of the Dong Han dynasty, many of the vast, tax-exempt landed estates had been destroyed, thus eliminating one of the major problems that had plagued the last years of the Xi Han. Nevertheless, Guangwudi had risen to power with the support of a few aristocratic families, and he continued to depend on their military assistance. As a result, those families gradually increased their own holdings at the expense of the central government, and the dynasty grew to resemble a federation of great clans.
