Publius Quinctilius Varus,  (died ad 9), Roman general whose loss of three legions to Germanic tribes in the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest caused great shock in Rome and stemmed Roman expansion beyond the Rhine River.
Varus came of an old patrician family, which had been without political influence for centuries. His father, Sextus Quinctilius Varus, was one of the assassins of Julius Caesar and committed suicide after the Battle of Philippi (42 bc). Varus arranged a good marriage for himself with a daughter of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, the primary adviser to the emperor Augustus. In 13 bc Varus was consul with the future emperor Tiberius, who himself was married to one of Agrippa’s daughters. Varus’s second wife was Claudia Pulchra, Augustus’s grandniece. Varus was given important assignments as proconsul of Africa (7?–6 bc) and legate of Syria. When Judaea rebelled on the death of Herod I the Great (4 bc), Varus marched an army against the insurgents, crushed them, and reestablished direct Roman government.
Augustus eventually sent Varus to the Roman frontiers east of the Rhine, where he functioned as both a civil administrator and a military commander in an attempt to introduce Roman jurisdiction into the recently conquered region.
The Germans, however, found in Arminius, a prince of the Germanic Cherusci tribe, a leader of extraordinary resource. Arminius formed the design of freeing his people from Roman rule and soon came to a secret understanding with influential German chiefs. In September of the year ad 9, Varus, who had been falsely informed that a distant tribe was in revolt, led his legions into the Teutoburg Forest to put down the uprising. Here the Germans were lying in wait for him; and everything was in their favour, the narrow defiles having caused disorder among the troops and the ground having been made muddy by heavy rains. The battle that ensued lasted three days, during which the Romans were altogether destroyed; and Varus killed himself by falling upon his sword.
The aged Augustus was said to have been overcome with grief upon receiving news of the disaster, crying, “Varus, Varus, give me back my legions!” The defeat of Varus was followed by the loss of all Roman possessions east of the Rhine, and Varus was made the scapegoat for the failure of Augustus’s German policy.
