Septimius Severus, in full Lucius Septimius Severus Pertinax,  (born April 11, 145/146, Leptis Magna, Tripolitania [now in Libya]—died Feb. 4, 211, Eboracum, Britain [now York, Eng.]), Roman emperor from 193 to 211. He founded a personal dynasty and converted the government into a military monarchy. His reign marks a critical stage in the development of the absolute despotism that characterized the later Roman Empire.
The son of an equestrian from the Roman colony of Leptis Magna, Severus entered the Senate about 173 and became consul in 190. At the time of the murder of the insane emperor Commodus on Dec. 31, 192, he was governor of Upper Pannonia (now in Austria and Hungary) and commander of the largest army on the Danube River. He remained inactive while the Praetorian Guards murdered Commodus’s successor, Publius Helvius Pertinax (March 193) and auctioned off the imperial title to Marcus Didius Julianus. Then on April 13 Severus was proclaimed emperor by his troops. Declaring himself the avenger of Pertinax, he marched on Rome. Julianus was murdered at Rome on June 1, and Severus entered the city without resistance several days later.
Severus replaced the Praetorian Guard with a new 15,000-man guard from his own Danubian legions. He temporarily pacified his rival in Britain, Decimus Clodius Albinus, by naming him caesar (junior emperor). In 194 he marched east and decisively defeated another rival, Gaius Pescennius Niger, governor of Syria. Severus then headed westward to confront Albinus, who had declared himself emperor. Albinus committed suicide following his crushing defeat near Lugdunum (now Lyon, France) in February 197. Returning to Rome, Severus executed about 30 of Albinus’s senatorial supporters. To justify his usurpation, he declared himself the adoptive son of the emperor Marcus Aurelius (ruled 161–180) and claimed descent from the emperor Nerva (ruled 96–98). He also named Caracalla, his son by his Syrian wife, Julia Domna, as coemperor and thus successor. Late in 197 Severus marched east to turn back an invasion of Mesopotamia (now in Iraq) by the Parthians, and two years later Mesopotamia was annexed to the empire.
By 202 Severus was back in Rome, where he spent the next six years making major changes in the structure of the imperial government. Since his power rested on military might rather than constitutional sanction, he gave the army a dominant role in his state. He won the soldiers’ support by increasing their pay and permitting them to marry. To prevent the rise of a powerful military rival, he reduced the number of legions under each general’s control. At the same time Severus ignored the Senate, which declined rapidly in power, and he recruited his officials from the equestrian rather than the senatorial order. Many provincials and peasants received advancement, and the Italian aristocracy lost much of its former influence.
Severus paid special attention to the administration of justice. The Italian courts outside Rome were removed from senatorial jurisdiction and put under the control of the praetorian prefect. After the fall (205) of the emperor’s favourite, the praetorian prefect Gaius Fulvius Plautianus, the distinguished jurist Papinian became prefect. Severus also drew on the advice of the renowned jurist Ulpian in making extensive reforms of the laws. Despite his donations to the urban poor and his extensive building campaign, Severus succeeded in maintaining a full treasury.
In 208 Severus, accompanied by Caracalla and his younger son, Geta, led an army to Britain to subdue the parts of the island not under Roman rule. Severus succumbed to disease at Eboracum. With the exception of the rule of Marcus Opellius Macrinus (217–218), Severus’s descendants remained in power until 235.
