Thutmose III,  (died 1426 bce), king (reigned 1479–26 bce) of the 18th dynasty, often regarded as the greatest of the rulers of ancient Egypt. Thutmose III was a skilled warrior who brought the Egyptian empire to the zenith of its power by conquering all of Syria, crossing the Euphrates (see Tigris-Euphrates river system) to defeat the Mitannians, and penetrating south along the Nile River to Napata in the Sudan. He also built a great number of temples and monuments to commemorate his deeds.
Thutmose III was the son of Thutmose II; his mother was one of the king’s secondary wives or a lesser harem queen, named Isis. Since there was no prince with a better claim to the throne, the boy was crowned king on the early death of his father; he was very young at the time. Hatshepsut—the daughter of Thutmose I, the wife and sister of Thutmose II, and the mother of Thutmose III’s half-sister Neferure—acted as regent. By the seventh year of his reign this strong-minded and ambitious woman herself assumed the attributes, dress, and insignia of a king and to all intents and purposes reigned in his stead. As one of her courtiers says, “she directed the affairs of the whole land according to her wishes.” Still, Thutmose was given an education befitting his royal station. He was taught all military skills, especially archery, which he demonstrated in public display, and horsemanship, in which he showed considerable prowess. He was later to boast that none among his followers could equal him in physical strength and in marksmanship.
As he grew up, Thutmose may even have been entrusted with command of the army on campaign in Nubia; he may have also fought in Gezer in Palestine. His grandfather Thutmose I had penetrated into northern Syria; Thutmose II, though far from a weakling, had not followed this success, and Hatshepsut may have been unwilling to send an army into the field. Thus, through inaction, Egyptian influence in Syria and Palestine declined. The sons and grandsons of the Syrian princes who had surrendered to Thutmose I no longer sent tribute, and the king of Mitanni, a powerful Mesopotamian kingdom with its capital beyond the Euphrates, was able to extend his control westward to the Mediterranean.
In the 22nd year of Thutmose’s reign, a formidable coalition was formed against Egypt, led by the king of Kadesh in northern Syria and no doubt supported by the Mitanni. At this moment of crisis, Hatshepsut died, and Thutmose as sole ruler began a series of annual military campaigns aimed at Nubia and the Levantine powers.
After a few months’ preparation the king was ready to march at the head of his army. The first campaign is recorded in some detail on the walls of the temple he built at Karnak in Thebes, which describe the march to Gaza and thence to Yahmai south of the Carmel Range, the council of war, and the king’s bold decision to surprise the enemy encamped at Megiddo, northeast of Carmel and about 18 miles (29 km) southeast of the modern city of Haifa. Thutmose’s approach was by the route least expected—a narrow defile over the mountain. It was successful: the enemy was defeated, and Megiddo was taken after a siege of eight months. In subsequent campaigns, which are less fully described in the annals, ports on the Phoenician coast were converted into Egyptian supply bases, and Kadesh and other cities in Al-Biqāʿ (Bekaa) valley were taken.
In the 33rd year of Thutmose’s reign, the time was at last ripe for his most audacious move, an attack on the kingdom of Mitanni itself, which had grown stronger since the day when Thutmose I had taken its army by surprise. Thutmose planned the campaign well; pontoon boats were transported across Syria on oxcarts for the crossing of the Euphrates River. The ensuing encounter, which must have taken place on the eastern bank, is not described by the annalist; it resulted in the precipitate flight of the Mitannian king and the capture of 30 members of his harem and some hundreds of his soldiers. Triumphantly, Thutmose set up his commemorative inscription by the river’s edge, next to that of his grandfather Thutmose I. It was his farthest point of advance. On the homeward journey he hunted elephant in the land of Niy, in the Orontes valley, and on his return he celebrated a great triumph at Thebes and dedicated prisoners and booty to the temple of the state god, Amon.
In later campaigns (there were 17 in all), Thutmose III was content to consolidate what he had won and to lay the foundations of an imperial organization of his Asian possessions. Native rulers, members of local ruling dynasties, were henceforward set to govern their own territories as vassals of Egypt and were bound by solemn oath to keep the peace, render annual tribute, and obey the Egyptian representative in the region, the “overseer of foreign lands.” Their sons were sent as hostages to Egypt and educated at court, so that in due course they might return to rule their inheritance, Egyptianized in outlook and sympathies. Fortresses were built, and Egyptian garrisons were stationed at key points along the coast and in the highlands.
To the south, Thutmose reaffirmed the southern boundary of Egyptian domination over Nubia as far as Kurgus, and at Napata, near Mount Barkal, he built a temple to Amon. He thoroughly subdued the turbulent Nubian tribes and employed many of them in the gold mines, which from his reign on became the basis of Egyptian wealth in foreign exchange with the princes of western Asia. For the last 12 years of his reign, he was content to enjoy the fruits of his victories. The tribute of Syria and Palestine and of the Sudan poured into his treasury; the annals list huge quantities of timber and metal ores, cattle, and grain delivered by the conquered. Minoan Crete and Cyprus, Babylonia, Assyria, and the Hittites sent gifts. The tombs of high officials of the reign are decorated with scenes depicting the reception of foreign envoys coming from places as far away as the Aegean and the Greek mainland to lay their rich and exotic gifts at the feet of the pharaoh. The prestige of Egypt had never been so great.
