Valentinian I, Latin in full Flavius Valentinianus,  (born 321, Cibalae, Pannonia—died November 17, 375, Brigetio, Pannonia Inferior), Roman emperor from 364 to 375 who skillfully and successfully defended the frontiers of the Western Empire against Germanic invasions.
Valentinian, who was the son of an army officer stationed in Pannonia (in central Europe), joined the army and served with his father in Africa. According to some sources, when Valentinian was a tribune in the forces of Julian the Apostate (emperor 361–363), he was disgraced for refusal to renounce Christianity. He did serve, however, in Julian’s Persian expedition of 363, and was promoted by Julian’s successor, Jovian, who died soon afterward (February 17, 364).
Nine days later the commanders of the army proclaimed Valentinian emperor at Nicaea (modern İznik, Turkey). On March 28 he appointed his younger brother, Valens, as coruler and assigned him to govern the East, while Valentinian retained the West. Both agreed to allow religious toleration, which, unlike Valens, Valentinian maintained throughout his reign.
Displaying inexhaustible energy, Valentinian set about fortifying and defending the borders. In January 365 his generals in Gaul were defeated by the Germanic Alemanni; by October Valentinian had set up residence in Paris, from which he directed operations against the invaders. His general Jovinus defeated them three times. At Durocatalaunum (modern Châlons-sur-Marne, France), in the third engagement, Jovinus inflicted heavy casualties on the Alemanni, securing Gaul for years to come. Meanwhile, in 367, the emperor moved to Ambiani (modern Amiens, France) to be in closer communication with his general Theodosius (father of the later emperor Theodosius I), who was defending Britain from Saxon, Pictish, and Scottish invaders.
In order to strengthen the line of succession, Valentinian on August 24, 367, proclaimed his eight-year-old son, Gratian, as coemperor. Two months later Valentinian took up residence at Trier (now in Germany). He remained there for seven years, devoting his attention to the construction of an elaborate system of fortifications on the Rhine. Then, an invasion of Pannonia by the Quadi in 375 brought Valentinian to Sirmium (modern Sremska Mitrovica, Yugoslavia). He died of a stroke suffered during a tirade denouncing the invasions.
Despite his achievements, Valentinian was portrayed by the great pagan historian Ammianus Marcellinus as far beneath Julian in being angry, cowardly, and superstitious. Jerome portrays him as tolerant, brave, and responsible. He was a good administrator and is noteworthy for having persecuted neither pagans nor Arians.
