Zeno,  (born, Isauria, Diocese of the East—died April 9, 491), Eastern Roman emperor whose reign (474–91) was troubled by revolts and religious dissension.
Until he married the Eastern emperor Leo I’s daughter Ariadne (in 466 or 467), Zeno had been known as Tarasicodissa. As such he led an Isaurian army that the emperor relied upon to offset the influence of German troops under the powerful patrician Aspar. In 469 Zeno was appointed consul and master of the soldiers. On the death of Leo I early in 474, Zeno’s seven-year-old son reigned as Leo II; the child died before the end of the year, after having appointed his father coemperor.
Zeno made a lasting peace with the Vandals in Africa but soon encountered difficulties at home when his most trusted adviser, the Isaurian Illus, plotted a coup d’etat with Leo I’s brother-in-law Basiliscus. The emperor, with many of his followers, was forced to flee to Isauria. Basiliscus reigned at Constantinople for 20 months, but his religious beliefs made him highly unpopular.
With the help of Illus, who changed his allegiance, Zeno returned to Constantinople in August 476. Illus, who had gained great influence in the government, raised a rebellion in Asia Minor (484) and, though severely defeated, held out against the emperor until captured and beheaded in 488. During those years Zeno also had to deal with revolts of the Ostrogoths under Theodoric. By appointing Theodoric to replace Odoacer as king of Italy (489), Zeno was able to persuade the Ostrogoths to leave the Eastern Empire.
Although the rest of Zeno’s reign was free from revolts and invasions, there were bitter disputes between the Christians who accepted the Council of Chalcedon (451) affirming Christ had distinct divine and human natures and the miaphysites, an opposing faction that believed the divine and human natures were one in Christ. The emperor sought to reconcile the two groups with his letter, the Henotikon, addressed to the church in Egypt (482). The doctrines expressed in this document were acceptable to the miaphysites and brought a measure of religious peace to the East, but they resulted in a schism with the church at Rome that lasted from 484 to 519.
