Al-Muʿtamid, byname of Muḥammad ibn ʿAbbād al-Muʿtaḍid,  (born 1027, Spain—died 1095, Aghmāt, near Marrakech, Morocco), third and last member of the ʿAbbādid dynasty of Sevilla (Seville) and the epitome of the cultivated Muslim Spaniard of the Middle Ages—liberal, tolerant, and a patron of the arts.
At age 13 al-Muʿtamid commanded a military expedition that had been sent against the city of Silves. The venture was successful, and he was appointed governor of this and another district. In 1069 his father died, and al-Muʿtamid acceded to the throne of Sevilla. He was destined to rule in difficult times: neighbouring princes were resuming the inexorable advance that in time would bring all of Spain once again under Christian rule. Yet his first efforts were successful. In 1071 he conquered and annexed the principality of Córdoba, although his rule was not effectively secured until 1078. During that time he also brought the kingdom of Murcia under his rule.
In 1085 Alfonso VI, king of Leon and Castile, captured the city of Toledo. This was a crippling blow to Spanish Islam. Al-Muʿtamid had already been forced to pay tribute to Alfonso, and, when he dared to refuse a payment, Alfonso invaded his kingdom and sacked various towns. Soon Alfonso also began making demands for territorial concessions. Al-Muʿtamid recognized that he could not stay the Christian advance with his own resources, and, acting as leader of a number of Muslim princes, he reluctantly sought the aid of Yūsuf ibn Tāshufīn. The latter, as the reigning Almoravid sultan, had just conquered all of Morocco and had powerful military forces at his disposal. In 1086 Yūsuf crossed the Strait of Gibraltar and at Al-Zallāqah inflicted a crushing defeat upon the Christian forces. Yet he had to return to Morocco before he could follow up his victory. Al-Muʿtamid now had a respite from Christian military pressure but soon found himself again unable to defend his borders. This time he sought Yūsuf’s aid in person, and in 1090 another Almoravid army invaded Spain. Now, however, Yūsuf decided to carry on the jihad (“holy war”) in his own name and proceeded to dethrone those who had invited him. Sevilla was captured, and al-Muʿtamid was sent as a prisoner to Morocco, where he remained until his death.
