Al-Manṣūr, in full Abū Jaʿfar ʿAbd Allāh al-Manṣūr ibn Muḥammad,  (born 709–714, Al-Ḥumaymah, Syria [Jordan]—died October 7, 775, near Mecca, Arabia [now in Saudi Arabia]), the second caliph of the ʿAbbāsid dynasty (754–775), generally regarded as the real founder of the ʿAbbāsid caliphate. He established the capital city at Baghdad (762–763).
Al-Manṣūr was born at Al-Ḥumaymah, the home of the ʿAbbāsid family after their emigration from the Hejaz in 687–688. His father, Muḥammad, was a great-grandson of ʿAbbās; his mother was a Berber slave.
Shortly before the overthrow of the Umayyads, the first dynasty of caliphs, by an army of rebels from Khorāsān, many of whom were influenced by propaganda spread by the ʿAbbāsids, the last Umayyad caliph, Marwān II, arrested the head of the ʿAbbāsid family, al-Manṣūr’s brother Ibrāhīm. Al-Manṣūr fled with the rest of the family to Kūfah in Iraq, where some of the leaders of the Khorāsānian rebels gave their allegiance to another brother of al-Manṣūr, Abū al-ʿAbbās al-Saffāḥ, Ibrāhīm having died in captivity. Al-Saffāḥ was the first ʿAbbāsid caliph.
Because his brother died in 754, after only five years as caliph, it was upon al-Manṣūr that the main burden of establishing the ʿAbbāsid caliphate fell. Al-Manṣūr had played an important part in wiping out the last remnants of Umayyad resistance. During his brother’s caliphate he led an army to Mesopotamia, where he received the submission of a governor after informing him of the death of the last Umayyad caliph. In Iraq itself, the last Umayyad governor had taken refuge with his army in a garrison town. Promised a safe-conduct by al-Manṣūr and the caliph, he surrendered the town, only to be executed with a number of his followers.
A danger to al-Manṣūr’s caliphate came from a number of revolts by ambitious army commanders. The most serious of these was the revolt in 754 of al-Manṣūr’s uncle, ʿAbd Allāh, who thought he had better claims to the caliphate than his nephew. The danger was only averted with the help of Abū Muslim, one of the chief organizers of the revolt against the Umayyads.
Al-Manṣūr was largely responsible for cutting the ʿAbbāsids free from the movement that had brought them to power. While his brother was still caliph, al-Manṣūr was involved in the murder of several leading persons in that movement. Upon becoming caliph himself, one of his first acts was to bring about the death of the man who had helped him become caliph, Abū Muslim. These acts served both to remove potential rivals and to dissociate the ʿAbbāsids from their “extremist” supporters.
Perhaps in reaction to this policy, a number of revolts broke out, in which some of the pre-Islamic religions of Iran were involved. In 755 in Khorāsān, a certain Sunbadh, described as a magi (here probably meaning a follower of the Mazdakite heresy, not an orthodox Zoroastrian), revolted, demanding vengeance for the murdered Abū Muslim. Another group connected with the name of Abū Muslim, the Rāwandiyyah, was charged with belief in the transmigration of souls and holding al-Manṣūr to be their god. Because of these excesses, al-Manṣūr had to suppress them, probably in 757–758. Finally, in 767 al-Manṣūr had to put down another revolt in Khorāsān, the leader of which was accused of claiming to be a prophet.
Probably the most frustrated of those who had worked against the Umayyads were those who had believed they were fighting for a leader from among the descendants of the Prophet Muhammad’s closest male relative, ʿAlī. When it became clear that the ʿAbbāsids had no intention of handing over power to an ʿAlid, these groups again moved into opposition. Al-Manṣūr’s consequent harsh treatment of the ʿAlids led to a rebellion in 762–763, which was quickly put down.
Al-Manṣūr’s achievement, however, was not based simply upon military power. His most lasting monument is the great city of Baghdad, upon which work began, at his command, in 762. The decision to build Baghdad was probably partly due to the restlessness of the chief towns in Iraq, Basra and, especially, Kūfah, but, in part, too, it was a statement by al-Manṣūr that the ʿAbbāsids had come to stay. It was significant that he considered taking some material for the construction of Baghdad from the ruins of Ctesiphon, the capital of the last native Iranian dynasty.
Another reason for the construction of the new capital was the need to house the rapidly growing bureaucracy, developed by al-Manṣūr under the influence of Iranian ideas in an attempt to provide a more stable basis for ʿAbbāsid rule.
By these political and military measures al-Manṣūr firmly established the ʿAbbāsid caliphate. Furthermore, he arranged the succession in favour of his son, al-Mahdī, and every future ʿAbbāsid caliph could trace his descent directly to al-Manṣūr.
Al-Manṣūr is described as a tall, lean man, with a brown complexion and a sparse beard. There are a number of anecdotes designed to illustrate the simplicity of his life, his tightfistedness, his love of poetry, and his objection to music. He died in 775 on his way to Mecca to perform the pilgrimage and was buried near the holy city.
