Andrea Doria,   (born Nov. 30, 1466, Oneglia, Duchy of Milan [Italy]—died  Nov. 25, 1560, Genoa), Genoese statesman, condottiere (mercenary commander), and admiral who was the foremost naval leader of his time.
A member of an ancient aristocratic Genoese family, Doria was orphaned at an early age and became a soldier of fortune. He first served Pope Innocent VIII (reigned 1484–92) when Genoa had fallen prey to the quarrels of rival families. An extremely able soldier, he was successively hired by King Ferdinand I and his son Alfonso II of Naples and by various Italian princes. From 1503 to 1506 he helped his uncle Domenico quell the Corsican revolt against Genoan rule.
Deciding to try his fortunes on the seas, Doria outfitted eight galleys and patrolled the Mediterranean, fighting the Ottoman Turks and the Barbary pirates, augmenting both his reputation and his fortune. He scored a brilliant victory over the Turks at Pianosa in 1519. After the Holy Roman emperor Charles V’s forces had taken Genoa (1522) and deposed the pro-French faction there, Doria entered the service of Francis I of France, who was fighting Charles V in Italy. As admiral of the French Mediterranean fleet, Doria compelled the emperor’s army to raise the siege of Marseille in 1524. After the French defeat at Pavia (1525), at which Francis was taken prisoner by imperial forces, Doria served Pope Clement VII.
When Francis was freed (1527), Doria rejoined the French forces, which helped him capture Genoa from the imperial forces. But Doria soon became disillusioned both with French policies towards Genoa and with Francis’ intentions towards himself, and so he transferred his services to Charles V. In September 1528 Doria and his forces drove the French out of Genoa and were triumphantly received by the city. Charles V bestowed riches and honours upon him, naming him grand admiral of the imperial fleet and prince of Melfi.
As the new ruler of Genoa, Doria eliminated the factions that had plagued the city and constituted a new oligarchic form of government composed of the city’s principal aristocratic families. (His reformed constitution for Genoa would last until 1797.) From 1528 until his death, Doria exercised a predominant influence in the councils of the Genoese republic. As imperial admiral he commanded several naval expeditions against the Turks, taking Coron (Koróni) and Patras (Pátrai) and aiding in the capture of Tunis (1535). Charles V found Doria an invaluable ally in his wars with Francis and used the former’s services to extend his domination over the whole Italian peninsula.
Although he was 78 when peace was established between Francis and Charles in 1544, Doria still did not retire. He had made many enemies among the pro-French families in Genoa, and in 1547 the Fieschi family undertook a plot against the Doria family that achieved the murder of Doria’s nephew Giannettino. (See Fieschi, Gian Luigi.) The conspirators were defeated, however, and Doria punished them with great vindictiveness. Other plots against him and his family followed, but all failed.
Age did not lessen Doria’s energy, and at age 84 he sailed against the Barbary pirates. When a new war broke out between France and Spain, he fought the French, who had seized Corsica, then administered by the Genoese bank of San Giorgio. He retired to Genoa in 1555, passing command of his fleet to his grandnephew Giovanni Andrea Doria.
One of the last great condottieri, Doria had many of the faults of his profession: he was greedy, conceited, vindictive, unscrupulous, cruel, and authoritarian. Yet he was also a fearless and untiring military commander who was endowed with outstanding tactical and strategic talents. He was genuinely devoted to his native city of Genoa, whose liberty he secured from foreign powers and whose government he reorganized into an effective and stable oligarchy.
