Battle of Tenochtitlán,  (May 22–August 13, 1521), military engagement between the Aztecs and a coalition of Spanish and indigenous combatants. Spanish conquistadores commanded by Hernán Cortés allied with local tribes to conquer the Aztec capital city of Tenochtitlán. Cortés’s army besieged Tenochtitlán for 93 days, and a combination of superior weaponry and a devastating smallpox outbreak enabled the Spanish to conquer the city. Cortés’s victory destroyed the Aztec empire, and the Spanish began to consolidate control over what became the colony of New Spain.
At the beginning of the 16th century, the Aztecs controlled a vast amount of territory containing 400 to 500 subjugated states. They conferred absolute power on a tlatoani, or ruler. The tlatoani Montezuma II presided over the empire at its peak, but the cross-cultural expanse of his empire was also its weakness. The Aztecs demanded regular tributes of their conquered subjects, and often these tributes took the form of human sacrificial offerings. A key pillar of the Aztec religion was the belief that the gods had given their lives to create this world, so humans were bound to repay that debt in blood. Ritual human sacrifice did not always sit well with the vassal tribes.
In 1519 Spanish conquistador (explorer-conqueror) Hernán Cortés landed an expeditionary force of some 500 soldiers and 100 sailors at Potonchan, located on the Yucatán Peninsula of what is now Mexico. The Spanish had previously sent expeditionary forces to explore the region, but they were unaware of the extent of the Aztec empire. Cortés defeated a local Mayan tribe, and as recompense they gifted him several slave girls, one of whom was named Malintzin (Marina). 
One of Cortés’s men spoke the local Mayan dialect, and Malintzin spoke both that dialect and the Nahuatl language of the Aztecs. As a result, she was instrumental as an interpreter for Cortés and stayed by his side throughout his conquests.
Over the next few months, Cortés founded a base at La Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz (now Veracruz, Mexico), and his conquistadores moved west along the coast toward Aztec lands. Although wary of Cortés, Montezuma sent emissaries with lavish gifts to the Spanish in a cautious game of diplomacy. In the meantime, Cortés forged alliances with several disgruntled Aztec subject tribes, chief among them the Totonac and the Tlaxcalans. The Tlaxcalans in particular were critical to Cortés’s future successes, as they were old rivals of the Aztecs and boasted a sizable army that supplemented the modest force of conquistadores. With these warriors in tow, Cortés marched on the important Aztec city of Cholula in October 1519. There Cortés and his army slaughtered thousands of unarmed citizens after learning of their plan to ambush the Spanish. He left for Tenochtitlán a month later with the intent of conquering the city and deposing Montezuma.
When the conquistadores reached the city, Montezuma did not attack them but instead welcomed them with open arms. It was an opportunity for him to try to appease the Spanish while sizing up their army. Cortés was also observing Montezuma’s fighting force, however, and grew concerned. Despite the emperor’s hospitality, Cortés resolved to seize Tenochtitlán. He placed Montezuma under house arrest and forced him into the role of a puppet king.
Cortés’s victory was short-lived. He received word of a Spanish party approaching La Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz with orders to arrest him for going beyond his terms of expedition. He left Tenochtitlán in the hands of his trusted officer Pedro de Alvarado and set out to subdue the arrest party. He defeated them in a surprise attack and successfully convinced the soldiers to join his quest to topple the Aztec empire. In the meantime, Alvarado had butchered several hundred Aztec nobles and warriors during a religious festival. This sparked a revolt throughout the city, and many members of Cortés’s garrison were killed in retaliation. Cortés returned to the devastation at Tenochtitlán in June 1520 and immediately demanded that Montezuma quell the rebellion, but the emperor had lost respect among the people. He was either killed during the fighting or assassinated.
Montezuma’s brother, Cuitláhuac, was named the new tlatoani, and he drove the conquistadores and their allies out of Tenochtitlán in a bloody assault known as La Noche Triste. Cortés retreated east to Tlaxcala, where his army slowly regained its strength over the course of more than five months.
Smallpox had been introduced to the Aztecs through the Spanish, and during those months the disease killed half of Tenochtitlán’s inhabitants, among them the emperor Cuitláhuac. The Aztecs made Cuauhtémoc the next tlatoani. In the meantime, Cortés constructed 13 small ships to launch against the city during his next attack. He left Tlaxcala in December.
Tenochtitlán was situated on an artificial island in the middle of Lake Texcoco. It was connected to the mainland by three large causeways. In May 1521 Cortés and his coalition army reached the outskirts of the Aztec capital and laid siege to the city. His force numbered more than 800 conquistadores and tens of thousands of indigenous warriors. He had portaged his ships from Tlaxcala in segments, and these proved useful because they enabled him to surround the city from the water and through the causeways. He loaded the ships with cannon and mounted several assaults on Tenochtitlán while cutting off the Aztecs’ food and water supply.
Over the course of 93 days, the Spanish and their allies mounted assault after assault on the Aztec defenders, gradually wearing them down. Cortés gained the support of neighbouring Aztec subjects who saw the siege as an opportunity to be rid of Aztec reign for good. When they at last broke through the city’s defenses, the Spanish and their indigenous allies were ruthless. They subdued the Aztecs street by street, slaughtering indiscriminately and looting what they could. Houses were burned and temples destroyed. After the sack of Tenochtitlán, Cortés declared the city his on August 13, 1521. Cuauhtémoc tried to escape with some of his loyal advisors and nobles, but they were discovered and captured, and Cuauhtémoc was later hanged.
Cortés’s victory at Tenochtitlán set in motion the rapid collapse of the Aztec empire. Over the next three years, the conquistadores brought the whole of Mesoamerica under Spanish rule and established the colony of New Spain. Smallpox continued to ravage the indigenous population and cripple their capacity to resist the Spanish. Further disadvantaging them was a serious gap in technological advancement. While the Spanish had access to gunpowder and steel, the indigenous tribes armoured themselves with thick cloth and animal hides and fought with macuahuitl (bladed clubs), bows, and spears. These factors working against them, the tribes soon found themselves the subjects of a people arguably as merciless as the Aztecs had been before them.
