Battle of the Thirty,  French Combat Des Trentes, (March 27, 1351), episode in the struggle for the succession to the duchy of Brittany between Charles of Blois, supported by the King of France, and John of Montfort, supported by the King of England.
Battles are usually fought by many thousands of armed men on either side. One battle, however, was very limited in numbers, with only thirty knights fighting on each side. Although its impact was limited, the Combat of the Thirty has gone down as one of the most chivalrous battles in history.
From 1341 to 1364, the succession to the duchy of Brittany was contested between the rival houses of Blois and Montfort: the French king supporting Blois, the English king favoring Montfort. The contest therefore formed part of the much larger conflict between France and England known as the Hundred Years’ War.
A truce arranged by Jean de Beaumanoir, governor of Brittany and a supporter of Blois, was being ignored by Sir Robert Bramborough, the captain of Ploërmel and a supporter of Montfort. Beaumanoir issued a challenge that thirty knights and squires on each side should decide the matter in battle, midway between their two castles of Josselin and Ploërmel. Beaumanoir commanded an all-Breton army, while Bramborough led a mixed force of twenty Englishmen, six German mercenaries, and four Bretons. The battle, fiercely fought by soldiers either mounted or on foot, was waged with lances, swords, daggers, and maces; it was reminiscent of the last fight of the Burgundians in the Nibelungenlied, especially in the advice of Geoffroy du Bois to his wounded leader, who was asking for water: "Drink your blood, Beaumanoir; that will quench your thirst!"
Victory finally came when Guillaume de Montauban, a squire fighting for Beaumanoir, mounted his horse and overthrew seven English horsemen. Casualties were heavy on both sides but Bramborough’s force suffered a higher loss of life and surrendered. All the prisoners were treated well and were released promptly on the payment of a small ransom.
The impact of the conflict on the succession was limited—the house of Montfort eventually won—but contemporaries considered it to be one of the finest examples of chivalry yet displayed.
Losses: Franco-Breton, 2 of 30 soldiers; Anglo-Breton, 9 of 30.
