Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa, also called Battle of Al-ʿIqāb,  (July 16, 1212), major battle of the Christian reconquest of Spain in which the Almohads (a Muslim dynasty of North Africa and Spain) were severely defeated by the combined armies of Castile, Aragon, Navarre, and Portugal. The battle was fought about 40 miles (64 km) north of Jaén, in Andalusia, southern Spain.
Immobilized for several years by his crushing defeat at Alarcos (1195) at the hands of the Almohads, King Alfonso VIII of Castile gained the sympathy of the archbishop of Toledo, Rodrigo Jiménez de Rada, who proceeded to stir up religious indignation at the Muslim victory over Christians. A proclamation of a Crusade was obtained from Pope Innocent III, which elicited further support from several French bishops, and, in the spring of 1212, contingents of French knights and Knights Templars began to converge on Toledo. After some delay, the Crusade set out southward on June 21, augmented by the armies of Aragon, Castile, and Portugal. Despite their success in taking two Muslim fortresses, the non-Spanish forces were soon discouraged by adverse climatic and living conditions and returned home. The armies of Navarre, however, were then recruited for the expedition.
Meanwhile, on June 22 the Almohad caliph Muḥammad al-Nāṣir had moved to Jaén, then the mountainous area around Baeza, intending to cut off the Christians at the plain of Las Navas de Tolosa. Soon after their arrival on July 12, the Christians took Castroferral with hopes of then reaching the Muslim encampment through the pass of La Llosa. The pass was heavily guarded, however, and it was through a local shepherd who directed the Christians to an alternate opening that they were able to reach the Muslim base. Alfonso himself led the Christians into battle and shattered the Almohad forces on July 16. Al-Nāṣir fled, while Alfonso followed up his victory by immediately taking Baeza and Úbeda. The extensive effects of the Muslim defeat did not become apparent until after 1233, when the Almohad empire disintegrated owing to dynastic squabbles and, lacking a central leader, the Muslim hold on Spain slipped rapidly before the armies of the Christian reconquest.
