Charles V, byname Charles The Wise,  French Charles Le Sage,  (born Jan. 21, 1338, Vincennes, Fr.—died  Sept. 16, 1380, Nogent-sur-Marne), king of France from 1364 who led the country in a miraculous recovery from the devastation of the first phase of the Hundred Years’ War (1337–1453), reversing the disastrous Anglo-French settlement of 1360.
Having purchased the Dauphiné (on France’s southeastern frontier) in 1349, Charles bore the title of dauphin until his coronation. After his father, King John II the Good, was captured by the English at Poitiers in 1356, Charles, in order to raise his father’s ransom money, had to convene a hostile States General, which, led by Étienne Marcel, provost of the Paris merchants, forced him to issue an ordinance of reform on March 3, 1357. To frighten Charles further, Marcel had two of the king’s councillors assassinated in the palace in Charles’s presence in February 1358. Charles, in order to raise an army, left Paris to convoke an assembly of his supporters. On July 31, 1358, Marcel was assassinated.
When Charles reentered Paris on Aug. 2, 1358, his military situation remained precarious because he still had to fight both the English and his archenemy, the King of Navarre. The treaties of Brétigny and of Calais (May and October 1360) granted to Edward III of England most of southwestern France and 3,000,000 gold crowns for John’s ransom.
Charles ascended the French throne on April 8, 1364, on John’s death. He then challenged the King of Navarre over the succession of Burgundy. Bertrand du Guesclin, Charles’s brilliant military leader, defeated the Navarrese at Cocherel in May 1364 but was defeated at Auray the following September by the English-backed side in a renewal of an old dispute over the Breton succession.
When war broke out again with England in 1369 over France’s failure to abide by its treaty obligations, Charles followed du Guesclin’s military advice, winning for the French so many victories that, by 1375, the settlement of 1360 was virtually nullified. In 1378, after learning of plots of the King of Navarre, Charles dispossessed him of all his French lands except Cherbourg. That December Charles made, unsuccessfully, his last attempt to deprive Duke John IV of Brittany. Charles’s last political acts were primarily concerned with the rivalry between the two newly elected popes; his decision to support Clement VII made him chiefly responsible for the great schism of the papacy.
In his court Charles, an intellectual and religious man, surrounded himself with luxury and men of educated tastes. Besides reorganizing the army, creating a new navy, instituting tax changes, and bringing Flanders, Spain, and Portugal into French alliances, he was also concerned with redecorating the Louvre to house a magnificent library and with finishing the castle of Vincennes.
