Charles III, 8th duke de Bourbon,  (born February 17, 1490, Montpensier, France—died May 6, 1527, Rome), constable of France (from 1515) under King Francis I and later a leading general under Francis’ chief adversary, the Holy Roman emperor Charles V.
The second son of Gilbert, comte de Montpensier, head of a junior branch of the House of Bourbon, Charles benefitted by a rapid succession of deaths: his father’s (1496) was followed by his eldest brother’s (1501); and finally, in 1503, his father’s cousin Pierre II, duc de Bourbon, died leaving no male heir. Charles, who then proceeded to marry Pierre’s daughter Suzanne, thus inherited the domains of the ducal line of Bourbon as well as those of Montpensier. At the age of 15, in 1505, he was one of the most powerful men in France.
Charles now started a brilliant military career. He was at the siege of Genoa in 1507 and took part in the Battle of Agnadello in 1509. Appointed constable of France on the accession of Francis I, he contributed greatly to the victory at Marignano, which made his young king master of the Milanese. At 25, laden with honours by the King, Charles was governor of the Milanese in the King’s name. He took effective measures to defend the province against the Holy Roman emperor Maximilian.
Then the Constable began to lose the King’s favour. Various explanations have been advanced for this change, but above all it seems to have been the King’s mother, Louise of Savoy, who worked against Charles. It is certain in any case that Francis, who had neglected to pay his salary to the Constable since his investiture, instituted proceedings in the Parlement of Paris to recover the inheritance of the senior branch of the Bourbon family from him (1522–23). As the King’s case was bad in law, the Parlement suspended judgment but ordered the property to be sequestered, thus constituting the crown a trustee.
Thereupon, Charles turned to negotiate with the emperor Charles V and with Henry VIII of England. At one time they even considered a partition of France, whereby the Emperor would take Languedoc, Burgundy, Champagne, and Picardy; the Constable would add Provence and Dauphiné to his own domains of Bourbonnais and Auvergne; and the King of England would have the rest of France, from Normandy to Guienne. Francis got wind of this simple project but failed to stop Charles from escaping to the Franche-Comté. Passing into the Emperor’s service at the head of an army of German mercenaries, Charles then repelled a French attack on Italy (April 1524), invaded Provence and captured Toulon, but was halted before Marseille (August–September 1524). Falling back on Lombardy, he fought in the Battle of Pavia (Feb. 24, 1525), in which Francis was taken prisoner by Charles’s soldiers. The Treaty of Madrid (1526), whereby Francis recovered his liberty, guaranteed Charles’s free return to France and the restitution of his possessions, but Francis did not keep his word.
To offset this disappointment, Charles V made the Constable governor of the Milanese, the post that he had held 10 years earlier as the representative of the king of France. Left by the Emperor without resources for the upkeep of his army, the Constable, in the spring of 1527, led his pillaging troops across central Italy to Rome. He was killed in the first assault on Rome, just before the capture and sack of the city.
