Charles du Fresne, seigneur du Cange, byname The French Varro,  French Le Varron Français,  (born Dec. 18, 1610, Amiens, France—died  Oct. 23, 1688, Paris), one of the great French universal scholars of the 17th century, who wrote dictionaries of medieval Latin and Greek using a historical approach to language that pointed toward modern linguistic criticism.
Du Cange was educated at the Jesuit college of Amiens and studied law at the University of Orléans before beginning, in 1631, a brief practice as an advocate at the parliamentary bar in Paris. Not long afterward he returned to Amiens, where he succeeded his father-in-law to a sinecure as the town’s titular treasurer (1645–68). Relatively late in life he wrote his first historical works, collected in Histoire de l’empire de Constantinople sous les empereurs français, 2 vol. (1657; “The History of the Empire of Constantinople Under the French Emperors”). Forced to leave Amiens in 1688 because of a severe epidemic, he spent his last months in Paris.
A charming and modest man who was friend to many other scholars of his age, du Cange amassed great amounts of information in many fields; he was well versed in languages, history, law, archaeology, numismatics, and geography. All these interests were combined in his masterworks, the Glossarium ad Scriptores Mediae et Infimae Latinitatis (1678; “A Glossary for Writers of Middle and Low Latin”) and the Glossarium ad Scriptores Mediae et Infimae Graecitatis (1688; “A Glossary for Writers of Middle and Low Greek”). These works were of major significance because in them he attempted to develop a historical perspective on the two languages; i.e., he tried to distinguish the medieval Latin and Greek vocabularies from their classical counterparts. Moreover, because he illustrated from documents and primary sources not only the words but also the matters described by the words, the two books are more like encyclopaedias than dictionaries. The works were of epic scale and virtually unprecedented in their fields; the recent reprints attest to the continuing value of his scholarship as a forerunner of modern historical linguistics.
