Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus, also called Constantine Vii Flavius Porphyrogenitus,  (born September 905, Constantinople [now Istanbul, Tur.]—died  Nov. 9, 959), Byzantine emperor from 913 to 959. His writings are one of the best sources of information on the Byzantine Empire and neighbouring areas. His De administrando imperio treated the Slavic and Turkic peoples, and the De ceremoniis aulae Byzantinae, his longest book, described the elaborate ceremonies that made the Byzantine emperors priestly symbols of the state.
Constantine’s surname, Porphyrogenitus (that is, born in the Purple Chamber of the Imperial Palace in Constantinople, as befitted legitimate children of reigning emperors), pointedly answers the doubts expressed about the legitimacy of his birth in 905, which slowed down his career and contributed to his shyness. His mother was Zoë Carbonopsina, the mistress of his father, Leo VI, who married her shortly after Constantine was born, against the bitter opposition of the patriarch Nicholas Mysticus. It was Leo’s fourth marriage, and the Greek church normally forbade a widower to remarry more than once. As the infant was Leo’s only male offspring, he had to be accepted and, in 911, was proclaimed coemperor. But, on the death of his father in 912, the succession fell to his uncle Alexander, whose death the next year cleared the way for seven-year-old Constantine. The patriarch Nicholas, who became regent, found it expedient to appease the powerful tsar Simeon I of Bulgaria—who had severely defeated the Byzantine armies and coveted the Byzantine imperial crown—by promising that the child emperor would marry Simeon’s daughter. A palace revolt foiled the scheme, which looked like a betrayal of Byzantium to the Bulgarians. It was only after several years that a combination of diplomacy and successful defense of Constantinople succeeded in inducing Simeon to settle for recognition as emperor of the Bulgarians only. The strategist of this success, Admiral Romanus Lecapenus, rewarded himself by having Constantine marry his daughter (919) and crown him coemperor (920). Gradually Constantine lost most of his power to Lecapenus and to his sons.
It is not surprising that the young emperor slipped into a pattern of noninvolvement in government. His mother had been relegated to a convent. His father-in-law relieved him of the burdensome tasks of politics and war and shouldered them masterfully but treated him with deference and left him a full share of the prestige and income belonging to the crown. From his father, Constantine had apparently inherited a passion for learning and writing; he worked full-time at it until he was almost 40, when he became sole emperor. Nor did he change tastes thereafter. De thematibus, probably his earliest book, is mainly a compilation of older sources on the origins and development of the provinces of the empire. An apologetic biography of his grandfather Basil I, which he appended to an anonymous chronicle known as Theophanes Continuatus, stressed the glory of the founder of his dynasty. De administrando imperio, a handbook of foreign politics, is perhaps his most valuable work, a storehouse of information on Slavic and Turkic peoples about whom little else is known except through archaeology.
Yet, the longest book and the one that tells the most about the Byzantine mentality (and most particularly the mind of the writer) is De ceremoniis aulae Byzantinae, basically a minute description of the elaborate ceremonial and processions that made the emperor a hieratic symbol of the state and strove to impress foreigners with his grandeur. There is no doubt that it helped Byzantium in its relations with the northern “barbarians” and even with western Europe. A monument to Byzantine patriotism, the book bears traces of the spoken vernacular that crept into the stilted Greek of more academic writers. The more voluminous, encyclopaedic works compiled under Constantine’s directions are not worth describing, but he exhibited notable zeal in recruiting teachers and students for the “university” of Constantinople, inviting them to court and preferring them for public offices. He signed legislation and is said to have dabbled in various fine and mechanical arts.
Late in 944 the sons of Romanus Lecapenus, impatient to succeed to power, had their father deported; but the populace of the capital, fearing only that the Porphyrogenitus emperor might be included in the purge accompanying the seizure of power, rioted until Constantine appeared at a window of the palace. This show of loyalty emboldened him to banish Romanus’ sons in January 945; he then ruled alone until his death in 959. He appointed to the highest army commands four members of the Phocas family, which had been in disgrace under Romanus Lecapenus, but took no further reprisals, except for an incidental remark, in De ceremoniis, that Romanus Lecapenus was neither an aristocrat nor a cultured man. That he did not depart from the admiral’s basic policy—at home, maintaining a delicate balance among civil and military officers, landed aristocrats, and peasant soldiers; abroad, friendship with the Rus, peace with the Bulgarians, a limited commitment in Italy, and a resolute offensive against the Muslims—may be ascribed to statesmanship as well as to timidity. The policy continued to be effective.
