Declaration of Pillnitz,  joint declaration issued on August 27, 1791, by Holy Roman Emperor Leopold II and King Frederick William II of Prussia, urging European powers to unite to restore the monarchy in France; French King Louis XVI had been reduced to a constitutional monarch during the French Revolution. The French government largely interpreted it as a threat to its sovereignty, and a series of provocations ensued, culminating in France declaring war on Austria (over which Leopold ruled) in April 1792.
The French Revolution was greeted with apprehension by many European leaders, who feared unrest in their own countries. Monarchs grew particularly worried as Louis XVI was forced to accept the authority of the newly proclaimed National Assembly in 1789. Unhappy as a constitutional monarch, he engaged in various duplicities, and in June 1791 he attempted to escape to Varennes but was subsequently captured. Two months later Leopold and Frederick William met in Pillnitz, Saxony (now in Dresden, Germany). Both were concerned about the possible spread of revolution, and they also faced strong pressure from French émigrés to intervene. Furthermore, Leopold was the brother of Louis’s wife, Marie Antoinette, whose safety was in doubt. These concerns led the two men to issue a five-sentence declaration that stated “that they view the situation in which the King of France currently finds himself as a subject of common interest for all of Europe’s sovereigns.” They continued by calling on these powers to “use the most efficient means…to place the King of France in a position to be totally free to consolidate the bases of a monarchical government.”
The declaration was largely symbolic, as Austria and Prussia vowed to commit troops only if all major European leaders intervened, a highly unlikely event. In fact, Leopold had purposely worded the proclamation so as to avoid going to war. Instead, he and Frederick William hoped to both appease the émigrés while intimidating French revolutionaries into pursuing more conciliatory policies. In France, however, it was largely seen as a threat to the revolution, and it led to further radicalization. Although Leopold subsequently retracted the declaration, tensions continued to increase. Notably, in September 1791 the National Assembly annexed the papal territories Avignon and the Comtat-Venaissin. Then in February 1792 Austria and Prussia made a defensive alliance.
On April 20, 1792, France declared war on Austria, launching the first of several French Revolutionary wars that engulfed Europe for nearly a decade. One of the major developments of these conflicts was the rise to power of French General Napoleon Bonaparte, who became emperor of France in 1804.
