Erik the Red, byname of Erik Thorvaldsson, Old Norse Eirik Rauð, Icelandic Eiríkur Rauði,  (flourished 10th century, Norway?), founder of the first European settlement on Greenland (c. 985) and the father of Leif Erikson, one of the first Europeans to reach North America.
According to the Icelanders’ sagas, Erik left his native Norway for western Iceland with his father, Thorvald, who had been exiled for manslaughter. When Erik—who had been nicknamed “Erik the Red” during his youth because of his red hair—was similarly exiled from Iceland about 980, he decided to explore land to the west (Greenland). Leaving in about 982 from Snæfellsjökull, one of the westernmost points of Iceland, Erik and a small group of men reached land on the opposite shore of Greenland, a land that had been skirted by the Norwegian Gunnbjörn Ulfsson earlier in the 10th century. The party rounded the southern tip of Greenland and settled on an island at the mouth of Eriksfjord (now known as Tunulliarfik Fjord) near Qaqortoq (formerly Julianehåb). From there they explored the west and north for two years, bestowing place-names everywhere (a form of establishing personal control). Erik chose the inner area of Eriksfjord for his manor house, which he called Brattahlid (“Steep Slope”). He named the country Greenland in the belief that a good name would attract settlers.
Erik returned to Iceland in 985 or 986. His descriptions of the new territory persuaded many people to follow him to found a new colony in Greenland. Of the 25 ships that sailed from Iceland, only 14 ships are believed to have landed safely at an area later known as Eystribygd (“Eastern Settlement”). Initially there were 400 to 500 settlers in the colony, which never grew to more than 2,000 to 3,000 inhabitants. Erik’s colony, commemorated in Eiríks Saga Rauða (“Erik the Red’s Saga”) and Grænlendinga Saga (“Saga of the Greenlanders”), maintained contacts with Europe until the mid-15th century, by which time it had gradually died out.
