George Pachymeres,  (born 1242, Nicaea [now İznik, Turkey]—died c. 1310, Constantinople [now Istanbul]), outstanding 13th-century Byzantine liberal-arts scholar, whose chronicle of the Palaeologus emperors is the period’s main historical source.
Upon the fall in 1262 of the Latin Eastern Empire and the return of the Byzantine emperor Michael VIII Palaeologus, Pachymeres went to Constantinople and was ordained to the Greek Orthodox ministry. While executing ecclesiastical and political functions, he taught the liberal arts at the patriarchal academy of the Basilica of Hagia Sophia.
Strongly opposed to union of the Eastern church with the Latin, Pachymeres recorded with studied neutrality the tumultuous upheavals marking the reigns of two Palaeologus emperors, the pro-unionist Michael VIII and the anti-unionist Andronicus II. This chronicle, the Hrōmaikē historia (“Roman [i.e., Eastern] History”), a 13-volume continuation of the work of George Acropolites, is Pachymeres’ principal work. A unique eyewitness record, Hrōmaikē historia emphasizes the theological nature of the events that it describes, a characteristic that marked subsequent Byzantine chronicles. Pachymeres depicts the period of the two Palaeologus emperors in the light of the dispute between Eastern patriarchal autonomy and Western papal supremacy. Despite its turgid style, Hrōmaikē historia is particularly valuable for its accounts of Latin military campaigns throughout Byzantium, the construction of frontier defenses against Slavic and Turkish incursions, and the growth of the Byzantine feudal nobility by astute manipulation of land deeds at the expense of centralized imperial authority.
Pachymeres also composed a theological treatise on the doctrine of the Trinity and proposed a compromise between the Greek and Latin speculative interpretations of the Holy Spirit’s relationship to the Father and the Son.
Pachymeres’ lectures at Constantinople’s academy evolved into the Syntagma tōn tessarōn mathēmatōn (“Compendium of Four Mathematics”), a type of classical handbook on mathematics, music, geometry, and astronomy. The Syntagma, with its innovative use of Arabic numbers, became the standard academic text in Greek Byzantine culture.
Other works include a compendium of the philosophy of Aristotle, of which only the book on logic has been published; a paraphrase of texts from Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite; and a series of exercises in rhetoric.
