Henri Pirenne,  (born Dec. 23, 1862, Verviers, Belg.—died  Oct. 24, 1935, Eccle, near Brussels), Belgian educator and scholar, one of the most eminent scholars of the Middle Ages and of Belgian national development.
The son of a prosperous industrialist, Pirenne studied for his doctorate (1883) at the University of Liège under the medievalist Godefroid Kurth and the historian of the Low Countries Paul Frédéricq. After attending the universities of Leipzig and Berlin and the École des Hautes Études in Paris, Pirenne began teaching paleography and diplomatics at the University of Liège in 1885. The following year he moved to the University of Ghent, where he remained until his retirement in 1930, as professor of medieval and Belgian history. He was imprisoned by the Germans (1916–18) for refusing to teach while they occupied Belgium. While in prison he composed from memory a history of Europe that was published after his death.
Pirenne’s first important book was Histoire de la constitution de la ville de Dinant au moyen âge (1889; “History of the Constitution of the City of Dinant in the Middle Ages”), a study of medieval town life that became one of the major themes of his later works. His greatest work, Histoire de Belgique, 7 vol. (1900–32; “History of Belgium”), gained him international respect for his innovative approach to socioeconomic developments in town life and his contention that Belgian unity was not the result of ethnic identification or political centralization but instead emerged from the position of Belgium as a centre of industrial and intellectual commerce between Latin and Germanic cultures.
A series of lectures delivered at Princeton (N.J.) University in 1922 was published as Medieval Cities (1925), the classic exposition of Pirenne’s analysis of the revival of urban centres and commercial activity during the late Middle Ages. In a work published posthumously, Mahomet et Charlemagne (1937), he set forth the thesis that the Roman Empire and civilization declined not as a result of Germanic invaders, but rather because of Arab primacy in the Mediterranean by the 8th century. The decline of international trade and the disintegration of a money economy, he contended, brought about a regression to a less sophisticated, closed agricultural system based on a local subsistence economy and a stratified class system. His radical reinterpretation of the transition between Roman and medieval civilizations stimulated a great deal of criticism and controversy, particularly his almost exclusively economic interpretation of causation in history.
Pirenne’s other works include Origine des constitutions urbaines au moyen âge (1895; “The Origins of the Constitutions of Medieval Cities”), Les anciennes démocraties des Pays-Bas (1910; “The Old Democracies of the Low Countries”), and La Fin du moyen âge (1931; “The End of the Middle Ages”). He also served as director of the Belgian Royal Commission on History and as the first president of the International Historical Congress, beginning at Brussels in 1923.
