J.B. Bury, in full John Bagnell Bury,  (born Oct. 16, 1861, County Monaghan, Ire.—died  June 1, 1927, Rome, Italy), British classical scholar and historian. The range of Bury’s scholarship was remarkable: he wrote about Greek, Roman, and Byzantine history; classical philology and literature; and the theory and philosophy of history. His works are considered to be among the finest illustrations of the revival of Byzantine studies.
The son of a prominent Irish clergyman, Bury was educated by his well-read parents and sent to Foyle College, Londonderry, and in 1878 entered Trinity College, Dublin. Graduating with honours in 1882, he was elected a fellow in 1885; he received a chair in modern history there eight years later and in 1902 was appointed regius professor of modern history at the University of Cambridge, where he remained until his death.
Highly trained in classics and philology, Bury began developing an interest in history in the 1880s. By 1890 he had published The Nemean Odes of Pindar, and two years later he completed another work, The Isthmian Odes of Pindar, simultaneously serving as editor on the scholarly journal Kottabos.
After learning Russian and Hungarian, Bury produced two major volumes on the Roman Empire, A History of the Later Roman Empire, from Arcadius to Irene, 2 vol. (1889), and the History of the Roman Empire from Its Foundation to the Death of Marcus Aurelius (1893). Between 1896 and 1900 he completed a new edition of Edward Gibbon’s Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire with notes and appendixes documenting new research. He also produced A History of Greece to the Death of Alexander the Great (1900) and acted as editor of the Byzantine Texts between 1898 and 1904. A series of lectures that he delivered at Harvard University in 1908 was published a year later as The Ancient Greek Historians, and in 1912 he added another volume to his works on Rome, A History of the Eastern Roman Empire from the Fall of Irene to the Accession of Basil I.
Widening his interests to more generalized studies in intellectual history, Bury later wrote A History of Freedom of Thought (1914) and The Idea of Progress (1920). His last work was yet another volume on Rome, History of the Later Roman Empire from the Death of Theodosius I to the Death of Justinian (1923). Two posthumous publications of his lectures were The Invasion of Europe by the Barbarians (1928) and History of the Papacy in the 19th Century (1864–1878) (1930). In addition to his other publications, he edited the Cambridge Ancient History and planned much of the Cambridge Medieval History.
Bury regarded history as a methodological science, though involving factors sufficiently fortuitous to discourage inference of general laws or of didactic guidance. His skepticism, however, was limited; in general, he represented the Victorian generation and its ultimate faith in the growth of reason and its capacity to elucidate the European past and make intelligible the present. His History of Freedom of Thought probably best expresses his conception of history as the record of man’s rational struggles and progress. In addition to providing high standards of scholarly excellence, he was one of the first English historians to participate in the revival of Byzantine studies, including philosophy, art, culture, and architecture, as valid representations of a civilization’s history.
