Jacob van Artevelde, (English: James Van Artevelde)  (born c. 1295, Ghent, Flanders [now in Belgium]—died  July 17, 1345, Ghent), Flemish leader who played a leading role in the preliminary phase of the Hundred Years’ War (1337–1453). Governing Ghent with other “captains” from 1338, he aligned the Flemings with King Edward III of England and against both France and the Count of Flanders. He maintained his position as chief captain until he was murdered in a riot seven years later.
Van Artevelde’s profession is unknown, but he belonged to the wealthy bourgeoisie and owned land both in Ghent and in the surrounding area. He was twice married, the second time to Kateline de Coster, whose family had considerable influence in Ghent. Van Artevelde had already reached middle age when he began to take part in public affairs. The only mention of him before 1338 is as a supporter of Louis I, Count of Flanders, during a revolt against Louis in Ghent in 1325. But as relations between England and France worsened in the 1330s, tension arose between the count and the Flemish towns. Louis, a vassal of the French king Philip VI, sided with France. The towns, although Philip offered them inducements, needed English wool for their weaving industry and could not afford to alienate Edward III of England.
At that point, van Artevelde emerged as a leader. In 1338, at a great meeting at the Monastery of Biloke, he unfolded his plan for an alliance of the Flemish towns with those of Brabant, Holland, and Hainaut to maintain an armed neutrality in the dynastic struggle between France and England. His efforts were successful. Early in 1338, the people of Ghent, under his leadership, declared their neutrality, and the major towns of Bruges and Ypres followed suit, joining together in a league for that purpose. France was forced to acquiesce, and the vital wool trade with England was safeguarded.
In Ghent itself van Artevelde, with the title of captain general, henceforth exercised almost dictatorial authority until his death. His first step was to bring about the conclusion of a commercial treaty with England. The Count of Flanders tried to overthrow van Artevelde’s power by force of arms but failed completely and was compelled at Bruges to sign a treaty (June 21, 1338) sanctioning the federation of Ghent, Bruges, and Ypres. This was followed during the year 1339–40 by more treaties that gradually brought into the federation many of the towns and provinces of the Netherlands. The policy of neutrality, however, proved impracticable, and the Flemish towns, under van Artevelde, openly took the side of the English, with whom a close alliance was concluded (Jan. 26, 1340). Van Artevelde now reached the height of his power, concluding alliances with kings and publicly associating with them on equal terms. Under his able administration, trade flourished and Ghent rose rapidly in wealth and importance.
Van Artevelde’s virtually despotic rule eventually provoked his compatriots to jealousy and resentment. His proposal to disown the sovereignty of the Count of Flanders and to recognize in its place that of Edward III’s eldest son, Edward the Black Prince, gave rise to violent dissatisfaction. In 1345 a popular insurrection broke out in Ghent, and van Artevelde fell into the hands of the crowd and was murdered. One of his sons, Philip (b. 1340), eventually led an unsuccessful revolt against Count Louis II of Flanders in 1382. Jacob van Artevelde’s memory was resurrected by Belgian-nationalist historians in the 19th century as an early hero in the country’s long struggle for independence.
