Johann Tserclaes, count von Tilly,  (born February 1559, Tilly, Brabant, Spanish Netherlands—died April 30, 1632, Ingolstadt, Bavaria), outstanding general who was the principal commander of the Catholic League in Germany during the Thirty Years’ War.
Educated by Jesuits, Tilly gained military experience in the Spanish Army of Flanders fighting the Dutch. In 1594 he joined the army of Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II in the campaign against the Turks in Hungary.
Appointed by Duke (later Elector) Maximilian I of Bavaria to reorganize the Bavarian army in 1610, Tilly created such an efficient army that it later became the backbone and spearhead of the Catholic League. At the outbreak of the Thirty Years’ War (1618), he became commander in chief of the field forces for the Catholic League. In 1620 he conducted the first campaign of the war and, after a series of successes, marched on Prague to rout the troops fighting for Frederick V of the Upper Palatinate, the “Winter King” of Bohemia, at the Battle of White Mountain (Nov. 8, 1620). Over the next three years Tilly conquered the Upper Palatinate and the Rhenish Palatinate, defeated in battle several other armies raised by Frederick’s supporters, and advanced into northwestern Germany.
In the war against Denmark (1625–29), Tilly, with the army of the Catholic League, crushed the Danes under the personal command of King Christian IV at the Battle of Lutter (Aug. 27, 1626). Together with Albrecht von Wallenstein, commander of Emperor Ferdinand II’s army, he occupied the Jutland peninsula and forced Christian to make an ignominious peace at Lübeck (July 7, 1629). The following year Ferdinand dismissed Wallenstein, and Tilly assumed command of the imperial as well as the league forces.
In July 1630 Gustav II Adolf of Sweden invaded Germany, and Tilly became responsible for defeating him and his allies. Tilly first laid siege to the Protestant city of Magdeburg, which had rashly declared for Gustav, and on May 20, 1631, fearing the arrival of a Swedish relief army, Tilly’s troops stormed the city and conducted a thorough sack. Of more than 30,000 people in Magdeburg, at least three-quarters perished, and most of their houses burned to the ground.
This brutality led several German Protestant princes to side with the Swedes, but John George of Saxony, his territories separating the armies of Tilly and Gustav, remained neutral. After fruitless negotiations, Tilly invaded Saxony, provoking John George to join forces with Gustav. Together they routed Tilly—previously undefeated—at the Battle of Breitenfeld (Sept. 17, 1631), thus laying western Germany open to occupation. Gustav advanced to the Rhine while Tilly retreated to Bavaria.
Early in 1632, Maximilian rashly ordered a preemptive strike, and Tilly moved northward to attack Gustav. The superior strength of Gustav’s forces soon forced Tilly to retire, and on April 15 he tried unsuccessfully to prevent the Swedes from crossing into Bavaria at Rain on the Lech River. Tilly received a wound from which he died two weeks later. He lies buried in a spectacular chapel at Altötting in Bavaria.
