Köprülü Mehmed Paşa,  (born 1575–78?, Rojnik, near Berat, Albania—died  Oct. 31, 1661, Adrianople, Thrace, Ottoman Empire [now Edirne, Turkey]), grand vizier (1656–61) under the Ottoman sultan Mehmed IV. He suppressed insurgents and rivals, reorganized the army, and defeated the Venetian fleet (1657), thereby restoring the central authority of the Ottoman Empire. He became the founder of an illustrious family of grand viziers and other Ottoman administrators prominent in the late 17th and early 18th centuries.
For more than half a century, power in the Ottoman state had been determined as a result of struggles and compromises between rival groups. Grand viziers who were supposed to represent the sultan’s absolute power had virtually become dependent on the palace and the Janissary corps, or provincial forces, with the result that there was a lack of authority and complete disorder in the administration. Faced with crisis, the palace chose Mehmed Paşa, an old vizier in retirement who had been recommended to the sultan’s mother by a clique as the wisest and most experienced man available. A product of the peculiar Ottoman institution of trained palace pages, he came from a village in Albania. After his services and training in the palace, he became a governor-general in the provinces of Trabzon (Trebizond; 1644), Egri (Eger; 1647), Karaman (1648), and Anadolu (1650) and sat as vizier in the imperial council for only a week in 1652, and then, dismissed, he retired to Köprü, his father-in-law’s seat, a small town in northern Anatolia, thence his nickname Köprülü (“of Köprü”).
Well informed in the most complicated Ottoman politics, Mehmed Paşa, once he was grand vizier, began by placing his supporters in key positions and mercilessly repressing opponents and rivals. When challenged by the spahis (the Ottoman cavalry), who wanted to put a former leader of the Anatolian mercenaries in power, he secured the support of Janissaries (the core of the Ottoman standing army) and the sheikh al-Islām, head of the ulema (scholars trained in Muslim religion and law), and thus nipped the rebellion in the bud. His second test came when he organized and led an expedition against the Venetians the next summer. His success in repelling the Venetian navy in the Dardanelles (July 19, 1657) and the subsequent recovery of Tenedos (September 4) and Lemnos (November 15) won him the prestige he needed to establish his authority. During this expedition, he was unusually severe against the Janissaries and others who had neglected their duties. Enjoying the absolute confidence of the palace, Mehmed Paşa tried to reestablish central authority over the vassal princes beyond the Danube and in the provinces of Anadolu, Syria, and Egypt. An expedition against George II (György Rákóczi), prince of Transylvania, resulted in Rákóczi’s replacement by a new prince loyal to the court (1658) and later in the annexation of the provinces of Yanova (Jenö; Aug. 1, 1660) and Várad (Aug. 27, 1660). But the Ottoman expansion in Transylvania opened a period of rivalry and wars between the Ottomans and Habsburgs for the next four decades.
As a protest against Mehmed Paşa’s unusually despotic government the principal governors-general in Anatolia and Syria had not joined the imperial army in Transylvania. In the fall of 1658, while Mehmed Paşa was in the field, they rose up and marched toward the capital. Abaza Hasan, then pasha of Aleppo and chief of the rebels, held his power as the leader of the sekbans, unruly mercenary troops in Anatolia. The skillful tactics of the old vizier eventually made his rivals powerless, and all the rebel pashas were executed (February 1659). In the summer of the same year Mehmed Paşa sent a general inspector to Anatolia with authority to exclude from the state registers all those from among the reaya (non-Muslim taxpayers) who claimed to belong to the military class. This measure, aimed primarily at the suppression of the sekbans, reestablished central authority in the region. By the time of his death, Mehmed Paşa had succeeded in restoring the central authority in the Ottoman Empire in accordance with its age-old principles of government.
