Manuel I Comnenus,  (born November 28, 1118—died September 24, 1180), military leader, statesman, and Byzantine emperor (1143–80) whose policies failed to fulfill his dream of a restored Roman Empire, straining the resources of Byzantium at a time when the Seljuq Turks menaced the empire’s survival.
The son of John II Comnenus (reigned 1118–43) and the Hungarian princess Irene, Manuel transformed the austere, conservative court of his father into a gay setting for tournaments and festivities imported from medieval western Europe. Manuel devoted himself to affairs in the West at the beginning of his reign, practically ignoring the growing Turkish threat on the plains of Anatolia. He renewed his alliances in the West against his Norman rivals in both Sicily and Antioch. At the time of the Second Crusade, he defended his Greek territory from Roger II of Sicily, whose fleet captured Corfu in 1147. With Venetian aid, the island was retaken two years later. In 1148 Manuel consolidated his alliance with Emperor Conrad III of Germany, whose sister-in-law he had earlier married. But Conrad died in 1152, and, despite repeated attempts, Manuel could not reach an agreement with his successor, Frederick I Barbarossa. When Roger II died in 1154, Manuel sent a fleet to attack Ancona (1155), capturing much of the region of Apulia. He was defeated in 1156 at Brindisi by a joint force of Germans, Venetians, and Normans, ending Byzantine influence in Italy.
Manuel next asserted his authority over the Crusader states, established after the First Crusade. He campaigned in Cilicia (in modern Turkey) in 1158, regaining lost territory and forcing Renaud of Châtillon, prince of Antioch, and Baldwin III, king of Jerusalem, to recognize Byzantine suzerainty (1159). Manuel was also successful in his dealings with the Serbs and Hungarians. In 1167 Dalmatia, Croatia, and Bosnia were incorporated into the empire. Interfering in Hungarian dynastic struggles, he was rewarded when his candidate, Béla, was elected king in 1173. Elsewhere in the north his relations were not as successful. Relations between Venice and Constantinople were broken off for 10 years from 1171.
Manuel’s activities elsewhere diverted his attention from the Turkish East. Although he had launched campaigns against the sultan of Iconium in 1145, 1146, and 1160, there were no practical results. By the time he led a large-scale attack against the Turks in 1176, Manuel’s dream of a restored Roman Empire had impaired his ability to measure the growth of Seljuq power. His defeat at Myriocephalon pointed toward the collapse of the Byzantine Empire.
