Mehmed VI, original name Mehmed Vahideddin,  (born Jan. 14, 1861—died  May 16, 1926, San Remo, Italy), the last sultan of the Ottoman Empire, whose forced abdication and exile in 1922 prepared the way for the emergence of the Turkish Republic under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk within a year.
Clever and perceptive, Mehmed VI became sultan July 4, 1918, and attempted to follow the example of his elder brother Abdülhamid II (reigned 1876–1909) by assuming personal control of the government. After the Armistice of Mudros (Oct. 30, 1918) and the establishment of the Allied military administration in Istanbul on Dec. 8, 1918, the nationalist–liberal Committee of Union and Progress had collapsed, and its leaders had fled abroad. The Sultan, opposed to all nationalist ideologies and anxious to perpetuate the Ottoman dynasty, acceded to the demands of the Allies. On December 21 he dissolved Parliament and undertook to crush the nationalists.
The nationalists, however, who were organizing in Anatolia under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal, sought the Sultan’s support in their struggle for territorial integrity and national independence. After negotiations, the Sultan agreed to elections, which were held late in 1919, and the nationalists won a majority in the new parliament. The Allies, alarmed at the prospect of Turkish unity, extended the occupied area in Constantinople and arrested and exiled the nationalists.
The Sultan dissolved the Parliament (April 11, 1920), and the nationalists set up a provisional government in Ankara. Mehmed’s signing of the Treaty of Sèvres (Aug. 10, 1920), however, reduced the empire to little but Turkey itself and served to strengthen the nationalist cause. After their defeat of the Greeks, the nationalists were in solid control of Turkey. The Grand National Assembly on Nov. 1, 1922, abolished the sultanate. Sixteen days later Mehmed VI boarded a British warship and fled to Malta. His later attempts to install himself as caliph in the Hejaz failed.
