Narses,  (born c. 480, Armenia—died  574, probably Rome or Constantinople), Byzantine general under Emperor Justinian I; his greatest achievement was the conquest of the Ostrogothic kingdom in Italy for Byzantium.
A eunuch, Narses became commander of the imperial bodyguard of eunuchs and eventually rose to be grand chamberlain. When rioting broke out in Constantinople in 532, Narses helped save Justinian’s throne both by timely military action and by skillful and lavish political bribes. He was sent to Alexandria (535) to ensure the establishment of the imperial candidate Theodosius as patriarch and to quell disturbances that had arisen from the election. In 538 he became imperial treasurer and was sent to Italy to assist Belisarius, commander of an expedition for the reconquest of Italy, but was also ordered to spy upon him. The rivalry, misunderstanding, and mutual antipathy between the two soon paralyzed all military operations and led to the recapture and devastation of Milan by the Ostrogoths. Consequently, Justinian recalled Narses in 539.
In the summer of 551, Narses was in charge of operations against barbarian raiders, mainly Huns, Gepids, and Lombards, who were devastating the Balkans. Later that year, with the resurgence of Ostrogothic power in Italy under Totila, Narses headed for Italy with 30,000 troops. He defeated the Ostrogothic forces under Totila (who died of his wounds) in June 552, at Taginae in the Apennines. During the next two years, he crushed scattered Ostrogothic resistance and stopped attempts by the Franks and Alemanni to enter northern Italy.
Narses seems to have exercised both military and civil authority in Italy until the death of Justinian I. In 567, however, Justinian’s successor, Justin II, removed him from his command, and he retired to a villa near Naples. When the Lombards invaded Italy and conquered large parts of it the following year, it was rumoured that Narses had retaliated for his dismissal by inviting the Lombards into Italy, but this report has never been confirmed. 
