Normandy, French Normandie,  historic and cultural region of northern France encompassing the départements of Manche, Calvados, Orne, Eure, and Seine-Maritime and coextensive with the former province of Normandy. It was recreated as an administrative entity in 2016 with the union of the régions of Basse-Normandie and Haute-Normandie.
The Seine and Eure valleys were inhabited from Paleolithic times. Their Celtic inhabitants were conquered by Julius Caesar in 56 bce, and the region eventually became the Roman province of Gallia Lugdunensis Secunda. Its inhabitants were Christianized in the 3rd and 4th centuries ce and passed under Merovingian Frankish rule in the late 5th century, becoming part of the Frankish kingdom of Neustria.
The Normandy coast was repeatedly devastated by raids of the Vikings, or Northmen, from the 8th century on, and, as its Carolingian rulers became weaker, the Vikings penetrated farther inland in the course of their depredations. Finally the French king Charles III the Simple ceded the territory around Rouen and the mouth of the Seine River to Rollo, the chief of the largest band of Vikings, in the Treaty of St. Clair-sur-Epte (911). Rollo’s Scandinavian countrymen immigrated in large numbers to settle the country, and they adopted the French language, customs, and religion. These Vikings became known as Normans, and the region they settled became known as Normandy.
Rollo’s Christianized successors to the dukedom of Normandy acquired neighboring territories in a series of wars, becoming so powerful that the control they exercised over their domains was practically independent of the French crown. William, duke of Normandy and a distant successor to Rollo, mounted an invasion of England in 1066, becoming William I of England (William the Conqueror) and thus uniting the rule of England and Normandy in himself. When William died in 1087, the personal union of Normandy and England was broken as his sons disputed the succession. Their fraternal quarrels ended in 1106, when one son, Henry I, king of England, defeated his brother, Robert, duke of Normandy, in the Battle of Tinchebrai, after which the succession in Normandy temporarily passed to the English kings. However, in 1144 Geoffrey Plantagenet, count of Anjou, conquered Normandy. In 1150 he ceded the duchy to his son Henry, who later became king of England as Henry II in 1154.
In this way Normandy became part of the so-called Angevin (from Anjou) empire, which was a series of far-flung territories ruled by Henry II and succeeding English kings. But Normandy thus also became a primary objective for the Capetian kings of France in their struggle against the Plantagenet Angevins of England. The military and diplomatic struggles of the French Capetian monarchs Louis VII and Philip II Augustus to gain control of the region from its English Angevin rulers culminated in the complete conquest and annexation of Normandy by Philip in 1204. However, it was only with the Treaty of Paris (1259) that the English crown in the person of Henry III formally surrendered its claim to Normandy, thus acknowledging the loss of the duchy to France. The English subsequently reconquered Normandy in the early 15th century during the Hundred Years’ War, but the French again recovered it, achieving permanent control in 1450 after their victory in the Battle of Formigny.
Louis XI of France gave the duchy of Normandy to his brother Charles in 1465 but soon took it back and finally persuaded the French Estates-General at Tours in 1468 to declare Normandy inalienable from the French crown. Thereafter Normandy was governed as a province.
Louis XIV’s intendants worked to assimilate Normandy’s institutions to those of France and to promote its commerce and its maritime activity. The revocation of the Edict of Nantes (1685) led to a mass emigration of Huguenots, who had contributed greatly both to the economy and to the navy, but even so Normandy soon recovered its prosperity in the 18th century. In 1791 the French Revolutionary government divided the old province of Normandy into the départements of Manche, Calvados, Orne, Eure, and Seine-Inférieure (now Seine-Maritime). The name Normandy occurs in the history of World War II as the site of the Allied invasion of German-occupied France in June of 1944. In 2016 the Basse-Normandie région was joined with the région of Haute-Normandie to form the new administrative entity of Normandy.
Much of Normandy still retains a rural character, comprising flat grasslands and farmlands interrupted by gentle hills and the hedges that commonly serve to demarcate fields. Agriculture now employs few people but is highly diversified, ranging from the large cereal farms of the Vexin to the dairying and horse-rearing activities of the Pays d’Auge. Population and economic activity are concentrated principally along the lower Seine valley (dominated by Rouen and Le Havre) or in the larger urban centres such as Caen, Cherbourg, and Alençon. The region was once famous for its textile and metallurgical industries, but now the dominant activities include oil refining and petrochemicals (lower Seine valley) and a range of mechanical and electrical engineering industries including automobile manufacture. Rouen and Caen are the principal administrative and commercial centres.
Roman Catholicism predominates, though there were many converts to Protestantism after 1528. Protestant enclaves remain in Rouen, Caen, and the village of Luneray in Seine-Maritime. The influence of the Roman Catholic Church is still highly visible in the traditional life of the region, particularly in the activities of the brotherhoods of charity sponsored by many country churches. Normandy has many historic fairs and festivals, including an international festival of music and folklore in the town of Gisors in early July.
The names of Norman places and families show Nordic, Anglo-Saxon, and Frankish influences. The Norman patois, which incorporates a number of English expressions and words of Nordic derivation, is in decline.
Norman cuisine relies heavily on cream, which is served with eggs, fish, poultry, and vegetables. Calvados produces superlative apple cider, which is aged with nuts in small oaken barrels or distilled into the celebrated apple brandy that bears its name.
