Philippe de Mézières, Mézières also spelled Maizières,  (born c. 1327, Mézières, France—died May 29, 1405, Paris), French nobleman and author who championed Crusades to reconquer the kingdom of Jerusalem.
Born of poor nobility, Mézières was at first a soldier of fortune in Italy, serving Lucchino Visconti, lord of Milan, and then Andrew of Hungary, in Naples. Joining the Crusade led by Humbert II, he was knighted after defending Smyrna (modern İzmir, Turkey) against Turkish assault in 1346. When Humbert’s army disbanded, he made his way to Jerusalem, arriving in 1347. He conceived the idea of a new order of knighthood, Ordre de la Passion (“Order of the Passion”), whose members would be spiritually distant from worldly preoccupations and devoted to conquering the holy places. Although he later drew up a prospectus for this order, it never became a reality.
In 1347 Mézières went to Cyprus, where he found a kindred spirit in the son of the king of Cyprus, the future Peter I. He returned to France, again as a soldier of fortune. When Peter acceded to the throne of Cyprus in 1359, Mézières was made chancellor, and the two set off for Europe to win support for a new Crusade. The Crusade, finally launched against Egypt, culminated in the sack of Alexandria (October 1365). When Peter was assassinated in Cyprus in January 1369, Mézières was in Venice, where he remained until 1372. He then went to Avignon, where he worked to establish in western Europe the feast of the Presentation of the Virgin. He went to Paris and in 1373 was made a member of the royal council by Charles V and preceptor to his son, the future Charles VI. After the death of Charles V, he was compelled, with the other counselors of the late king, to retire. In 1380 he withdrew to the Celestine monastery in Paris, continuing to exert an influence on public affairs. Later he allied himself with Louis d’Orléans, brother of Charles VI.
Mézières’s major writings are the Vita Sancti Petri Thomasii (1659; “Life of St. Peter Thomas”), a biography of the legate; his prospectus on the Order of the Passion, Nova religio passionis (1367–68; revised and enlarged 1386 and 1396; “New Religion of the Passion”); and Le Songe du vieil pèlerin (1389; “The Old Pilgrim’s Dream”), an elaborate allegory containing autobiographical elements and advocating peace with England in the interests of the Crusades.
