Qutaybah ibn Muslim,   (died 715), Arab general under the caliphs ʿAbd al-Malik and ʿAbd al-Walīd I whose conquests in Afghanistan and Central Asia helped bring the Umayyad caliphate to the height of its power.
Qutaybah was granted the governorship of Khorāsān (now part of Iran) in 704 by ʿAbd al-Malik and thus came into the command of a large standing army of about 50,000 Arab troops. From this time on, he used his military expertise in numerous campaigns to expand Umayyad dominion over the territories to the north and east. He began in 705 with the recovery of lower Tukharistan and its capital, Balkh (now part of northern Afghanistan). He then crossed the Oxus River (Amu Darya) and in a series of brilliant campaigns conquered Bukhara and its surrounding territories (706–709) in Sogdiana (now part of Uzbekistan). He then took Samarkand (710–712) and Khwārezm, with its capital, Khiva (all now part of Uzbekistan). Qutaybah then led an expedition in 715 farther north into Central Asia, establishing nominal Arab rule over Farghānal (now part of Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan). He is even traditionally credited with reaching the borders of Chinese Turkistan, but this achievement remains historically undocumented. Qutaybah met his downfall from supporting a plan to prevent Sulaymān from inheriting the caliph’s throne on the death of his brother, ʿAbd al-Walīd. When al-Walīd died, Qutaybah was afraid to return and offer homage to Sulaymān, who did indeed succeed his brother. Qutaybah’s troops thereupon mutinied and killed him.
Many of the territories Qutaybah conquered were incorporated into the province of Transoxiana (“that which lies beyond the Oxus”). Though Qutaybah himself was primarily concerned with the military administration of the conquered territories, his successors ultimately achieved the Islāmization of the heretofore primarily Buddhist peoples of those regions. The conquered cities of Samarkand and Bukhara became major centres for the dissemination of Islāmic culture and learning among the Asian peoples of Central Asia.
