Saint Nicephorus I, Greek Nikephoros,  (born c. 758, Constantinople—died  June 2, 829, near Chalcedon, Bithynia, Asia Minor; feast day March 13), Greek Orthodox theologian, historian, and patriarch of Constantinople (806–815) whose chronicles of Byzantine history and writings in defense of Byzantine veneration of icons provide data otherwise unavailable on early Christian thought and practice.
Although his conservatively Orthodox family had suffered at the hands of iconoclast (image-destroying) regimes during the Isaurian dynasty (717–820), Nicephorus succeeded to the imperial secretariat and represented the emperor Constantine VI as imperial commissioner to the second Council of Nicaea (787), which approved the use of liturgical icons. After having retired for a number of years into monastic seclusion, he was called to be director of Constantinople’s refuge centre for the poor soon after the accession of the empress Irene (ruled 797–802).
Though still a layman, he was nominated patriarch of Constantinople in 806. That move stirred the opposition of zealous monks of the Stoudion monastery who attacked his unconventional succession to the patriarchate, his compromising stand on an adulterous marriage at court, and his generally conciliatory position on theology. Later, however, his repudiation of the iconoclastic policies of the Isaurian emperor Leo V the Armenian won the monks’ respect.
Subsequently, in 815, an iconoclastic synod at Constantinople deposed and exiled Nicephorus to a monastic retreat near Chalcedon; thenceforth, he produced a series of influential anti-iconoclastic tracts and Byzantine chronicles. His theological arguments achieved a measure of toleration from the emperor Michael II (ruled 820–829). Chief among his theological works was his Apologeticus major (817, “Major Apology”), an exhaustive treatise on the legitimacy of icon veneration. Nicephorus succeeded in neutralizing his theological adversaries and contributed to the eventual vindication of the use of icons by the mid-9th century.
Two of his historical works became universally popular: Breviarium Nicephori (“Nicephorus’ Short History”), which narrated events during Byzantine reigns from 602 to 769 and is significant for material on the founding of Bulgarian settlements; and chronological tables, which listed civil and ecclesiastical offices from the time of Adam to the year 829. Both works circulated in the West through the Roman Anastasius the Librarian’s late 9th-century Latin compilation of the Chronologia tripartita (“Tripartite Chronicle”).
