Thorkell the Tall,  (born late 950s, southern Sweden—died after 1023), Viking warrior and chieftain who gained renown during his lifetime for his fighting prowess and who played a notable role in English history in the 11th century.
Little is known of Thorkell’s early life. He was born into a prominent family and was said to be a member of the legendary Jomsviking warrior order. He reputedly took part in the Battle of Hjörungavágr, a naval engagement in 986 in which the Jomsvikings attacked and were defeated by the forces of Haakon Sigurdsson of Norway. Thorkell was later said to have become the leader of the Jomsvikings.
In 1009 Thorkell the Tall led a Viking invasion of England, landing in Kent and ravaging the south. The following year he attacked Ipswich, East Anglia, defeated defending forces, and continued on until being paid a large sum of Danegeld, after which he withdrew. However, he later led an attack on Canterbury, where in September 1011 the invaders seized Aelfheah, archbishop of Canturbury, hoping to gain a large ransom for him. Aelfheah refused to allow the poor of England to be further burdened by paying for his release, and eventually the Vikings killed him. Thorkell was said to have attempted to prevent Aelfheah’s murder, and he and his loyalists subsequently entered the service of the English king Ethelred the Unready.
Thorkell and his men helped resist the invasion led by Sweyn Forkbeard of Denmark in 1013, but Sweyn eventually overcame the resistance and became king of England. Ethelred, meanwhile, fled to Normandy. After Sweyn died in 1014, Ethelred returned to power, and Thorkell renewed his service to the English king. However, at some point (sources differ as to when), Thorkell allied himself with Sweyn’s son Canute, who led a new invasion of England in 1015. After Canute became king of England in 1017, he rewarded Thorkell with the earldom of East Anglia. In 1021, under unclear circumstances, Thorkell was obliged to flee to Denmark, where Canute later made him earl. Thorkell the Tall disappeared from the historical record after 1023.
