Micronesia,  country in the western Pacific Ocean. It is composed of more than 600 islands and islets in the Caroline Islands archipelago and is divided roughly along cultural and linguistic lines into the states of—from west to east—Yap, Chuuk, Pohnpei, and Kosrae. The capital is Palikir, on the island of Pohnpei.
To the west of the Federated States of Micronesia lies the Republic of Palau, also in the Caroline archipelago, and to the east is the Republic of the Marshall Islands. Those two countries, together with the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia, were administered by the United States as the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands from 1947 to 1986.
The islands are of two general types: high volcanic islands that support a large variety of plant forms and low-lying coral atolls with poorer soil. Yap Island is distinctive in that it was formed by folds in the Earth’s crust and is continental in geologic composition. Each of the four states has as its population centre an elevated landmass of fairly large extent—ranging from Pohnpei Island, with an area of 129 square miles (334.1 square km), to Yap Island (38.7 square miles [100.2 square km]). The volcanic islands of Chuuk are an anomaly in the Pacific because they are encircled by a reef but have not yet subsided beneath sea level to become a classic atoll. Yap Island and six islands in the Chuuk group rise to more than 500 feet (150 metres), and Kosrae and Pohnpei islands have peaks of 2,064 feet (629 metres) and 2,595 feet (791 metres), respectively. The coral atolls consist of groups of small islands, formed atop a coral reef enclosing a lagoon.
The climate is tropical, with high humidity and a mean annual temperature in the low 80s F (about 27 °C). There is little seasonal variation in temperature. Rainfall averages about 120 inches (3,000 mm) per year throughout the area, although Pohnpei receives more than 200 inches (5,000 mm) yearly. There are distinct rainy and dry seasons, the latter occurring during the height of the northeasterly trade-wind season between December and April. Yap, which alone is situated in the monsoon area, has westerly winds for part of the year. Numerous typhoons (tropical cyclones) originate in the east each year, usually spinning off to the northwest toward Yap and the Mariana Islands and seldom striking any of the other islands.
On the high islands, mangrove swamps grow along the shore, and grassland or scrub ascends to tropical rainforests in the interior mountain areas. Settlements are almost without exception located near the coast. Volcanic islands, with their richer soil, support many different species of plant life. On coral atolls the predominant forms of vegetation are the coconut palm along with pandanus and breadfruit trees. Atoll dwellers typically locate their houses on the lagoon side of the island.
The people of the Federated States, while generally classified as Micronesian, are very diverse culturally and linguistically. The people of Yap Island speak Yapese, a language only distantly related to the other languages of the area (which are known as Nuclear Micronesian languages). Inhabitants of the coral atolls in Yap state are similar in language and culture to the people of Chuuk, although the Chuukese and Yapese languages are not mutually intelligible. Both Chuuk and Pohnpei contain several dialects, and the inhabitants of Kapingamarangi and Nukuoro, two atolls in the southwestern portion of Pohnpei state, are Polynesians and speak languages unrelated to Pohnpeian. Only Kosrae has complete ethnic and linguistic unity. Altogether, eight local languages are recognized as distinct, and dialectal differences in the outlying atolls add further variety.
About half the total population lives in Chuuk state. Pohnpei has about one-third of the population, and Yap and Kosrae have about one-tenth each. In the late 20th century there began a trend toward migration to the towns for employment and education; more than one-fifth of the population was considered urban by the 2010s. The population growth rate is one of the highest in the region. Nearly three-fifths of the population is under the age of 30. Almost the entire population is Christian; more than half the people are Roman Catholic, and another two-fifths are Protestant. The country has no official language, but English is spoken widely in government and commerce.
Subsistence farming and fishing are the principal economic activities. The main staples are breadfruit, taros, coconuts, and bananas, but yams, cassava, and sweet potatoes also are grown on some of the high islands. Poultry, pigs, and dogs are sometimes also raised for food.
The main source of revenue is U.S. government grant aid, which continues under the Compact of Free Association signed in 1982. External grants account for almost two-thirds of revenue. The terms of the original compact, which expired in 2001, were renewed with slight amendment in 2003. Because of the nature of the aid arrangement, servicing the debt consumed only a small portion of government outlays in the late 1990s.
The major source of income is the service sector, including government employment. The government also derives income from the sale of fishing rights. Tourism is slowly expanding; as with the economy in general, the growth of tourism is restrained by the islands’ remote location and an underdeveloped infrastructure. Local commercial fishing is developed only on a small scale, and large-scale agriculture has repeatedly proved a failure. The only mineral resources to speak of are unexploited offshore deposits of high-grade phosphate.
Much of the Federated States’ food, including rice, fruits, vegetables, meat, and fish, and almost all manufactured goods and fuel oil must be imported. Indeed, over the course of the late 20th century, the islanders’ traditional diet was largely displaced by imported processed foods. Imports, whose sources include the United States, Guam, Singapore, Taiwan, and Thailand, also include machinery and transport equipment. Marine products are the primary export; other significant exports are garments, betel nuts, and copra. The major export destinations are Thailand, Taiwan, and Guam.
Interisland and international transportation are by air or ocean freighter. The major commercial ports are at Dekehtik (Takatik Island), near Pohnpei; Kosrae; Colonia on Yap; and Weno (Moen). International airports are located on the main islands of each state, and there are airstrips on several outlying islands in Chuuk. Small ships operated by the government service the outlying atolls in each state. Some of the atolls are also linked by weekly flights on smaller airplanes. All villages on the major islands are connected by a road system, and the primary roads in the commercial centres are paved.
