Genomic imprinting,  process wherein a gene is differentially expressed depending on whether it has been inherited from the mother or from the father. Such “parent-of-origin” effects are known to occur only in sexually reproducing placental mammals. Imprinting is one of a number of patterns of inheritance that do not obey the traditional Mendelian rules of inheritance, which assume indifference about the parental origin of an allele (an allele is any one of two or more genes that may occur alternatively at a given site on a chromosome). Traits are therefore able to be passed down maternal or paternal lines.
Imprinting can occur when one of the gene’s parental alleles is silenced throughout the embryonic development of the individual by an alteration in parental DNA made during parental gametogenesis (the formation of gametes, or sperm in males and eggs in females). The other parental allele is therefore allowed expression during embryonic development. A mechanism by which this occurs is DNA methylation (the addition of a CH3, or methyl, group to specific regions of DNA) at imprinting control regions (ICRs). Intracellular DNA-reading mechanisms exist after fertilization to check that the correct parental allele has been allowed differential expression.
Imprinting has been able to explain certain predicaments of life in utero. A number of imprinted genes are related to embryonic and fetal growth and thus the extraction of resources from the uterine environment for growth. Mother and father, however, have different interests in how resources are extracted, because of asymmetrical parental investment in each given child. This arises from the fact that mothers can only have one child every nine months for approximately 20 years, whereas a father could conceivably impregnate many different women from puberty until death.
Systematic knockout (inactivation) studies of key imprinted genes, especially as performed on mice, have provided support for the hypothesis that imprinted genes that allow expression of paternally inherited alleles tend to drive more extraction of nutrients from the mother during gestation and after birth to produce a larger child. In contrast, imprinted genes that allow expression of maternally inherited alleles will tend to drive mechanisms to prevent the disproportionate utilization of resources by the fetus. A commonly cited example of this differential resource transfer in mice is the paternally expressed gene Igf2 (insulin-like growth factor 2), which enhances fetal growth and placental nutrient transport capacity, and the maternally expressed Igf2 receptor (Igf2r), which degrades excessive Igf2 protein.
Many of the effects of imprinted genes occur in the placenta, a crucial site for resource and nutrient transfer. For example, an overgrown placenta (hydatidiform mole) results when maternal imprints are missing. Additionally, in Silver-Russell syndrome (or Russell-Silver syndrome), a maternal uniparental disomy (both copies of a chromosome or partial chromosome are inherited from one parent), growth restriction is present. Similar effects are found in other cases of disordered imprinting. Preeclampsia, for example, in which disordered imprinting has been implicated, also demonstrates growth restriction in utero. Many of these diseases can be understood only within the context of imprinting as a common mechanism of parental conflict and manipulation of the phenotypic outcome of children.
Although only approximately 100 human genes are known to be subject to parent-of-origin effects, these prove to have tremendous implications for the development and eventual adult attributes of people, including cognitive and behavioral attributes. Imprinting effects, similar to other genetic expression patterns, may manifest as earlier age of onset effects or changes in severity.
In Turner syndrome, which affects females and is characterized by the deletion of one X chromosome (females normally carry two X chromosomes), a parent-of-origin effect may influence social and intellectual functioning. The affected female could have received her only X chromosome from her father (Xp) or her mother (Xm). Studies have suggested that neurodevelopment in Xp Turner syndrome patients is similar to that of healthy females, whereas neurodevelopment in Xm patients is altered. Other studies, however, have yielded conflicting results.
