mutation,  an alteration in the genetic material (the genome) of a cell of a living organism or of a virus that is more or less permanent and that can be transmitted to the cell’s or the virus’s descendants. (The genomes of organisms are all composed of DNA, whereas viral genomes can be of DNA or RNA; see heredity: The physical basis of heredity.) Mutation in the DNA of a body cell of a multicellular organism (somatic mutation) may be transmitted to descendant cells by DNA replication and hence result in a sector or patch of cells having abnormal function, an example being cancer. Mutations in egg or sperm cells (germinal mutations) may result in an individual offspring all of whose cells carry the mutation, which often confers some serious malfunction, as in the case of a human genetic disease such as cystic fibrosis. Mutations result either from accidents during the normal chemical transactions of DNA, often during replication, or from exposure to high-energy electromagnetic radiation (e.g., ultraviolet light or X-rays) or particle radiation or to highly reactive chemicals in the environment. Because mutations are random changes, they are expected to be mostly deleterious, but some may be beneficial in certain environments. In general, mutation is the main source of genetic variation, which is the raw material for evolution by natural selection.
The genome is composed of one to several long molecules of DNA, and mutation can occur potentially anywhere on these molecules at any time. The most serious changes take place in the functional units of DNA, the genes. A mutated form of a gene is called a mutantallele. A gene is typically composed of a regulatory region, which is responsible for turning the gene’s transcription on and off at the appropriate times during development, and a coding region, which carries the genetic code for the structure of a functional molecule, generally a protein. A protein is a chain of usually several hundred amino acids. Cells make 20 common amino acids, and it is the unique number and sequence of these that give a protein its specific function. Each amino acid is encoded by a unique sequence, or codon, of three of the four possible base pairs in the DNA (A–T, T–A, G–C, and C–G, the individual letters referring to the four nitrogenous bases adenine, thymine, guanine, and cytosine). Hence, a mutation that changes DNA sequence can change amino acid sequence and in this way potentially reduce or inactivate a protein’s function. A change in the DNA sequence of a gene’s regulatory region can adversely affect the timing and availability of the gene’s protein and also lead to serious cellular malfunction. On the other hand, many mutations are silent, showing no obvious effect at the functional level. Some silent mutations are in the DNA between genes, or they are of a type that results in no significant amino acid changes.
Mutations are of several types. Changes within genes are called point mutations. The simplest kinds are changes to single base pairs, called base-pair substitutions. Many of these substitute an incorrect amino acid in the corresponding position in the encoded protein, and of these a large proportion result in altered protein function. Some base-pair substitutions produce a stop codon. Normally, when a stop codon occurs at the end of a gene, it stops protein synthesis, but, when it occurs in an abnormal position, it can result in a truncated and nonfunctional protein. Another type of simple change, the deletion or insertion of single base pairs, generally has a profound effect on the protein because the protein’s synthesis, which is carried out by the reading of triplet codons in a linear fashion from one end of the gene to the other, is thrown off. This change leads to a frameshift in reading the gene such that all amino acids are incorrect from the mutation onward. More-complex combinations of base substitutions, insertions, and deletions can also be observed in some mutant genes.
Mutations that span more than one gene are called chromosomal mutations because they affect the structure, function, and inheritance of whole DNA molecules (microscopically visible in a coiled state as chromosomes). Often these chromosome mutations result from one or more coincident breaks in the DNA molecules of the genome (possibly from exposure to energetic radiation), followed in some cases by faulty rejoining. Some outcomes are large-scale deletions, duplications, inversions, and translocations. In a diploid species (a species, such as human beings, that has a double set of chromosomes in the nucleus of each cell), deletions and duplications alter gene balance and often result in abnormality. Inversions and translocations involve no loss or gain and are functionally normal unless a break occurs within a gene. However, at meiosis (the specialized nuclear divisions that take place during the production of gametes—i.e., eggs and sperm), faulty pairing of an inverted or translocated chromosome set with a normal set can result in gametes and hence progeny with duplications and deletions.
Loss or gain of whole chromosomes results in a condition called aneuploidy. One familiar result of aneuploidy is Down syndrome, a chromosomal disorder in which humans are born with an extra chromosome 21 (and hence bear three copies of that chromosome instead of the usual two). Another type of chromosome mutation is the gain or loss of whole chromosome sets. Gain of sets results in polyploidy—that is, the presence of three, four, or more chromosome sets instead of the usual two. Polyploidy has been a significant force in the evolution of new species of plants and animals. (See also evolution: Polyploidy.)
Most genomes contain mobile DNA elements that move from one location to another. The movement of these elements can cause mutation, either because the element arrives in some crucial location, such as within a gene, or because it promotes large-scale chromosome mutations via recombination between pairs of mobile elements in different locations.
At the level of whole populations of organisms, mutation can be viewed as a constantly dripping faucet introducing mutant alleles into the population, a concept described as mutational pressure. The rate of mutation differs for different genes and organisms. In RNA viruses, such as the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV; see AIDS), replication of the genome takes place within the host cell using a mechanism that is prone to error. Hence, mutation rates in such viruses are high. In general, however, the fate of individual mutant alleles is never certain. Most are eliminated by chance. In some cases a mutant allele can increase in frequency by chance, and then individuals expressing the allele can be subject to selection, either positive or negative. Hence, for any one gene the frequency of a mutant allele in a population is determined by a combination of mutational pressure, selection, and chance.
