Tim D. White,  (born Aug. 24, 1950, Los Angeles, Calif., U.S.), American paleoanthropologist whose findings of ancient hominin remains in Africa helped clarify the early stages of human evolution.
The passion for hunting ancient remains came to White at a young age. He spent much time in his early years around Lake Arrowhead, California, scouring Native American campsites for artifacts. After studying anthropology and biology at the University of California, Riverside, he earned a Ph.D. in biological anthropology in 1977 from the University of Michigan and went on to become a professor at the University of California, Berkeley.
White developed his interest in Africa during his years as a graduate student, when he took part in an expedition to Tanzania headed by anthropologist Richard Leakey. He later worked with Leakey’s mother, Mary Douglas Leakey, studying fossilized hominin footprints. White continued his engagement with Africa, returning to the continent many times over the following decades. Some of his most significant finds were made in the early 1990s in the middle Awash River valley of northern Ethiopia; in Maka, a town to the west of the archaeological site of Aramis, he uncovered the 3.4-million-year-old remains of Australopithecus afarensis, a hominin species of which specimens (including the famous partial skeleton Lucy) had been discovered earlier in Ethiopia and Tanzania. White’s find helped quell the controversy over whether the specimens from the two countries were indeed of one species.
In 1994 White and his research team discovered—again near Aramis—what they initially believed to be the oldest, most apelike hominin fossils yet found. White named the 4.4-million-year-old bones Australopithecus ramidus, which classified the new primate among the australopithecine hominins and gave it the status of a potential root species for the human family. In May 1995, however, after finding more bones and hearing his colleagues’ criticisms, White appeared less sure and changed its name to Ardipithecus ramidus, thus creating a new genus for it. Although “Ardi” proved not to be a direct human ancestor, it presented a significant piece of the puzzle of human evolution. Working again in the middle Awash River valley in the early 21st century, White’s team unearthed the oldest known fossils of Homo sapiens.
