Alexander Lukashenko, Lukashenko also spelled Lukashenka,  (born August 30, 1954, Kopys, Vitebsk oblast, Belorussia, U.S.S.R. [now in Belarus]), Belarusian politician who espoused communist principles and who became president of the country in 1994.
Lukashenko graduated from the Mogilyov Teaching Institute and the Belarusian Agricultural Academy. In the mid-1970s he was an instructor in political affairs, and he spent five years in the army. He subsequently held minor posts in the Komsomol (communist youth organization) and in local party organizations. From 1982 through 1990 he held management and party posts at collective and state farms and at a construction materials combine. He was elected to the parliament of the Belorussian S.S.R. in 1990.
In parliament Lukashenko created a faction called Communists for Democracy. He was the only deputy to oppose the December 1991 agreement that led to the dissolution of the Soviet Union. He maintained a close association with conservative communist factions in independent Belarus and had links with similar groups in Russia. In 1994 he addressed the Russian State Duma in Moscow with an appeal for the formation of a new union of Slavic states.
Lukashenko was elected president of Belarus in 1994. Among other things he promoted closer ties with Russia and in the succeeding years signed a number of agreements with Russian President Boris Yeltsin that called for various forms of union between the two countries. In 1996 he persuaded voters to approve a new constitution that gave him sweeping additional powers, including the right to prolong his term in office, to rule by decree, and to appoint one-third of the upper house of parliament. An authoritarian and unpredictable leader, he resisted economic and political reforms, suppressed dissent in the media and among the people, and led Belarus into isolation from its European neighbours and the international community.
In 1999 Lukashenko and Yeltsin succeeded in signing a Treaty on the Creation of a Union State, which proposed broad cooperation but stipulated independence for both states. Although Lukashenko’s term of office had been scheduled to expire in 1999, he continued in office under the new terms he had negotiated. Reelected in 2001, he oversaw the passage in 2004 of a controversial amendment that allowed him to seek a third term. Lukashenko won the 2006 election amid allegations of tampering. Many countries and organizations condemned the election, and the European Union (EU) subsequently barred Lukashenko and a number of his officials from entering any of its member countries. In 2008, in an attempt to improve relations with Belarus, the EU temporarily removed its travel ban against the president. Lukashenko easily won another term as president in elections held in late 2010, and, as in 2006, there were allegations of voting irregularities.
In 2014 Lukashenko inserted himself into the conflict in eastern Ukraine when he offered to broker a deal that would, it was hoped, end the Russian-backed insurgency there. A pair of meetings were held in Minsk with Russian Pres. Vladimir Putin and Ukrainian Pres. Petro Poroshenko, and the result was a 13-point protocol that laid the foundation for a cease-fire. Although the actual implementation of that agreement was slow to come and fighting continued in the Donets Basin, some observers believed that Lukashenko’s emergence as a would-be regional peacemaker might signal an intention to abandon the autocratic tendencies that had characterized his rule. Indeed, ahead of the 2015 presidential election, Lukashenko freed a number of political prisoners and welcomed international observers. In that contest Lukashenko once again claimed an overwhelming victory against token opposition, but “significant problems” with the electoral process were noted by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe.
Lukashenko appeared to be on track for another heavily managed victory in the 2020 presidential election, but his poor handling of the COVID-19 epidemic and the overt nature of his electoral interference—which included the jailing of opposition candidates—sparked the largest wave of popular demonstrations in Belarus since the collapse of the Soviet Union. Nearly 7,000 people were arrested, and scores were injured in clashes with police, while workers in state-owned factories walked off the job in protest. Lukashenko rejected calls for a new election, characterizing the demonstrators as foreign-controlled “rats.” He was sworn in for a sixth term in an unpublicized ceremony in September 2020, while opposition leaders such as Svetlana Tikhanovskaya were forced into exile. Protests against his rule continued unabated, and in November 2020 Lukashenko implied that he would be open to stepping down after constitutional changes were enacted to weaken the power of the presidency. He gave no timeline for these reforms, however. In May 2021 Lukashenko’s campaign against the opposition took an unprecedented turn when a Belarusian fighter jet forced a commercial airliner to divert from its Athens-to-Vilnius, Lithuania, route and land in Minsk. Upon landing in the Belarusian capital, security officials arrested opposition journalist Roman Protasevich before allowing the plane to continue its journey. Western leaders immediately called for the release of Protasevich and characterized the incident as a “state-sponsored hijacking.”
