Autarky,  an economic system of self-sufficiency and limited trade. A country is said to be in a complete state of autarky if it has a closed economy, which means that it does not engage in international trade with any other country.
Historically, societies have utilized different levels of autarky. The mercantilist policies followed by western European countries from the 16th to the 18th century, which tried to augment state power in part by limiting international trade, were autarkic. A more extensive form of autarky was pursued by Nazi Germany (1933–45), which tried to maximize trade within its own economic bloc and to eliminate it with outsiders. A contemporary example of extreme autarky is North Korea’s system of juche (Korean: “self-reliance”).
Autarkic systems are the opposite of liberal economic systems, which encourage the free flow of goods and services. Adam Smith, the 18th-century Scottish philosopher who is also considered to be the father of modern economics, was one of the first modern thinkers to question the benefits of autarkic policies. In his major work, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776), he argued that mercantilist policies followed by the British Empire were detrimental to economic growth and that a free-trade system in which countries specialized in producing the goods in which they held an absolute advantage (because of superior productive capacity) would generate more wealth. The 19th-century British economist David Ricardo, considered the founder of modern international trade theory, took Smith’s study a step further by showing that, if countries engaged in international trade by specializing in the goods in which they held a comparative advantage (because of lower opportunity costs), then there would be guaranteed gains from trade for all parties, regardless of the size of the economies involved.
A wide range of theoretical studies published in the centuries following the pioneering works of Smith and Ricardo, as well as the rapid globalization of the world economy following the end of the Cold War (1991), further established the economic superiority of free trade and caused autarky to loose its appeal as a viable economic system among most countries.
