Bookkeeping,  the recording of the money values of the transactions of a business. Bookkeeping provides the information from which accounts are prepared but is a distinct process, preliminary to accounting.
Essentially, bookkeeping provides two kinds of information: (1) the current value, or equity, of an enterprise and (2) the change in value—profit or loss—taking place in the enterprise over a given period of time. Management officials, investors, and credit grantors all require such information: management in order to interpret the results of operations, to control costs, to budget for the future, and to make financial policy decisions; investors in order to interpret the results of business operations and make decisions about buying, holding, and selling securities; and credit grantors in order to analyze the financial statements of an enterprise in deciding whether to grant a loan.
Traces of financial and numerical records can be found for nearly every civilization with a commercial background. Records of commercial contracts have been found in the ruins of Babylon, and accounts for both farms and estates were kept in ancient Greece and Rome. The double-entry method of bookkeeping began with the development of the commercial republics of Italy, and instruction manuals for bookkeeping were developed during the 15th century in various Italian cities.
In the late 18th and early 19th centuries, the Industrial Revolution provided an important stimulus to accounting and bookkeeping. The rise of manufacturing, trading, shipping, and subsidiary services made accurate financial records a necessity. The history of bookkeeping, in fact, closely reflects the history of commerce, industry, and government and, in part, helped to shape it. The global expansion of industrial and commercial activity required more sophisticated decision-making processes, which in turn required more sophistication in the selection, classification, and presentation of information, increasingly with the aid of computers. Taxation and government regulation became more important and resulted in increased demand for information; business firms had to have available information to support their income tax, payroll tax, sales tax, and other tax reports. Governmental agencies and educational and other nonprofit institutions also grew in size, and the demand for bookkeeping for their own operations increased.
Although bookkeeping procedures can be extremely complex, all are based on two types of books used in the bookkeeping process—journals and ledgers. A journal contains the daily transactions (sales, purchases, and so on), and the ledger contains the record of individual accounts. The daily records from the journals are entered in the ledgers. Each month, as a general rule, an income statement and a balance sheet are prepared from the trial balance posted in the ledger. The purpose of the income statement or profit-and-loss statement is to present an analysis of the changes that have taken place in the ownership equity as a result of the operations of the period. The balance sheet shows the financial condition of a company at a particular date in terms of assets, liabilities, and the ownership equity.
