Carlos the Jackal, byname of Ilich Ramírez Sánchez,  (born October 12, 1949, Caracas, Venezuela), Venezuelan militant who orchestrated some of the highest-profile terrorist attacks of the 1970s and ’80s.
Ramírez was born into an upper-class Venezuelan family; his father operated a lucrative law practice. Ramírez’s father was a committed Marxist, and Ramírez received an education that emphasized communist political theory and revolutionary thought. Ramírez also traveled extensively, in the company of his socialite mother, and acquired a taste for a lavish playboy lifestyle that seemed to be at odds with his professed communist beliefs. After a stint in a British preparatory school, Ramírez enrolled at Patrice Lumumba People’s Friendship University in Moscow, but his lacklustre academic performance and troubles with university authorities led to his expulsion in 1970.
His academic career over, Ramírez sought to continue his revolutionary training with the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP). He was given the nom de guerre “Carlos,” and he traveled to Jordan to undertake weapons training. After the PFLP was ejected from Jordan in 1970–71, Carlos was sent to London, where he collected a list of names as potential targets for kidnapping or assassination. This endeavour culminated in Carlos’s first mission, the murder of Joseph Sieff, president of the retailer Marks & Spencer and one of Britain’s most prominent Jewish businessmen. On December 30, 1973, Carlos forced his way into Sieff’s home at gunpoint and seriously wounded him with a shot to the head. However, Carlos’s gun jammed before he could fire again, and he was forced to flee the scene.
Carlos then aided in the planning of the September 13, 1974, occupation of the French embassy in The Hague, Netherlands, by members of the Japanese Red Army. As the French were negotiating for the release of the 11 hostages held at the embassy, Carlos lobbed a grenade into a Paris café and shopping arcade. The attack killed two and wounded dozens, and within days the French had agreed to the Japanese Red Army’s demands.
In January 1975 Carlos led a failed rocket attack on an El Al airliner at Orly Airport in Paris. A second rocket attack a week later resulted in a shootout with French police, but Carlos slipped away in the ensuing chaos.
Carlos’s PFLP handler and coplanner of the El Al attacks, Michel Moukharbal, was arrested by French police in June 1975, and he led them to the Paris flat where Carlos was staying. Carlos welcomed the police into the apartment, entertaining them and offering them drinks, before drawing a machine pistol and opening fire. Moukharbal and two detectives were killed, while another was seriously wounded. Carlos, previously unknown to French investigators, suddenly became the focus of a manhunt that would last almost two decades. During a search of one of Carlos’s London safe houses, a journalist uncovered a copy of Frederick Forsyth’s The Day of the Jackal, and Carlos was soon dubbed “Carlos the Jackal” by the media.
Carlos escaped to Beirut and began planning his next mission—one that would make his name known to the world. On December 21, 1975, Carlos and five others stormed a meeting of OPEC ministers in Vienna, killing two security guards and a Libyan economist and taking more than 60 people hostage. After securing an aircraft and releasing some of the hostages, Carlos and his squad flew the remaining 42 captives on a roundabout journey that ended in Algiers. There Carlos was welcomed by the Algerian leadership, and it was later revealed that he had received a ransom of tens of millions of dollars for the safe release of the hostages. This act angered his PFLP superiors, who had demanded the execution of two of the OPEC ministers, and Carlos was expelled from the PFLP in 1976.
Carlos subsequently drew support from various individuals and groups, including Libyan leader Muammar al-Qaddafi and the East German Stasi, who furnished Carlos with an East Berlin headquarters and a support staff of more than 70 people. Carlos set about building his own terrorist network, which he dubbed the Organization of the Armed Arab Struggle (OAAS) in 1978. Carlos married Magdalena Kopp, a West German member of the OAAS, in 1979, and her arrest by French police in 1982 triggered a series of reprisals. Throughout the spring and summer of that year, France was rocked by a wave of deadly bombings, one of which targeted Jacques Chirac, who was then mayor of Paris. The attacks continued into 1983, but pressure from Western governments caused many of Carlos’s connections behind the Iron Curtain to disavow him.
On the run and lacking resources, Carlos spent the rest of the 1980s in retirement in Syria, where his hosts demanded that he remain inactive. No longer regarded as a serious threat, he was virtually ignored by international law enforcement. In 1990, however, when rumours began to surface that Iraqi leader Ṣaddām Ḥussein was trying to recruit Carlos to lead a terror campaign against U.S. and European targets, Western intelligence agencies resumed their hunt for Carlos in earnest. He was tracked to Sudan, and in 1994 French agents captured Carlos and returned him to France for trial. In December 1997 Carlos was found guilty of the 1975 murders of Moukharbal and the two investigators and was sentenced to life in prison. In November 2011 he went on trial for his alleged involvement in four bombings in the early 1980s that killed more than 10 people in France. Carlos was convicted the following month and given another life sentence. French authorities brought additional charges against Carlos in October 2014, in connection with the 1974 grenade attack in Paris. That trial concluded in March 2017, and Carlos received a third life sentence.
