Cheddi Jagan, in full Cheddi Berret Jagan,  (born March 22, 1918, Plantation Port Mourant, British Guiana [now Guyana]—died  March 6, 1997, Washington, D.C., U.S.), politician and union activist who in 1953 became the first popularly elected prime minister of British Guiana (now Guyana). He headed the country’s government again from 1957 to 1964 and from 1992 to 1997.
The son of a foreman on a sugarcane plantation, Jagan studied dentistry in the United States. When he returned to practice dentistry in British Guiana in 1943, he became active in union and political affairs and was elected to the British Guianan legislature in 1947.
In 1950 Jagan and his American-born wife established Guiana’s first modern political party, the People’s Progressive Party (PPP), with himself as its leader. In elections held under the new British-granted constitution of 1953, the PPP won a majority of the seats in the House of Assembly and Jagan became the country’s prime minister. His subsequent program of radical socioeconomic reforms, however, along with the strikes and demonstrations encouraged by his party, prompted the British authorities in late 1953 to dismiss him from office, suspend the new constitution, and send in troops to prevent the consolidation of a government that they viewed as procommunist. Jagan practiced dentistry for the next four years, and in the meantime the PPP in 1955 split along racial lines, with most of its black members seceding under Forbes Burnham to form the People’s National Congress (PNC) and its members of East Indian descent remaining in the ranks.
The PPP won the elections of 1957, and Jagan pursued moderate policies of socioeconomic reform as the new government’s minister of trade and industry (there was no prime ministerial position). In the elections of 1961 the PPP emerged with a slim majority, and Jagan became British Guiana’s prime minister in that year. He remained committed to establishing a socialist economy within a framework of parliamentary democracy and neutralism in foreign affairs, but his second term was marred by a long general strike and by serious rioting that once again compelled the stationing of British troops in Guiana (1961–64). Under a new system of proportional representation instituted by the British in 1964 to accurately reflect the relative voting strengths of blacks and East Indians, the PPP lost the general elections of 1964 to the PNC. Jagan served as leader of the parliamentary opposition from then on and was the PPP’s general secretary from 1970. He became president of Guyana after the PPP won general elections in 1992 and stayed in power until his death. Jagan wrote several books analyzing Guyana’s history and contemporary economic and political problems.
