Clive W.J. Granger,  (born Sept. 4, 1934, Swansea, Wales—died May 27, 2009, San Diego, Calif., U.S.), Welsh economist, corecipient of the Nobel Prize for Economics in 2003 for his development of techniques for analyzing time series data with common trends. He shared the award with the American economist Robert F. Engle.
Granger attended the University of Nottingham (B.A., 1955; Ph.D., 1959), where he became a lecturer in statistics in the mathematics department. In 1974 he became a professor at the University of California at San Diego. He wrote numerous books, covering such subjects as time series analysis and forecasting, statistical theory, and applied statistics. He retired and became professor emeritus in 2003.
In his seminal work, conducted in the 1970s and ’80s, Granger developed concepts and analytic methods to establish meaningful relationships between nonstationary variables, such as exchange rates and inflation rates. His adoption of long- and short-run perspectives increased understanding of the long-term changes in macroeconomic indicators where, for example, a country’s annual gross domestic product might grow long term but in the short term might suffer because of a sharp rise in commodity prices or a global economic downturn. Granger demonstrated that estimated relationships between variables that changed over time could be nonsensical and misleading because the variables were wrongly perceived as having a relationship. Even where a relationship did exist, it could be a purely temporary one. Fundamental to his methods was his discovery that a specific combination of two or more nonstationary time series could be stationary, a combination for which he invented the term cointegration. Through his cointegration analysis, Granger showed that the dynamics in exchange rates and prices, for example, are driven by a tendency to smooth out deviations from the long-run equilibrium exchange rate and short-run fluctuations around the adjustment path.
In addition to his Nobel Prize, Granger received many other honours and awards. He was also a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
