Communist Party of India (CPI),  national political party in India whose headquarters are in New Delhi. Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy became head of the CPI in 2012, following his election as general secretary.
According to the CPI’s official history, the party was founded in late 1925 in Kanpur (now in Uttar Pradesh state). Earlier in the decade, however, a number of people, both within and outside India, attempted to establish a communist presence on the subcontinent. Notable was a manifesto issued in 1920 in Tashkent (now in Uzbekistan) by Manabendra Nath Roy (who would become the party’s first leader), Abani Mukherji, and Roy’s wife Evelyn that called for the creation of a communist party in India.
The CPI’s initial objectives combined militant anti-imperialist patriotism with internationalism to create a movement parallel to the nonviolent civil disobedience (satyagraha) campaigns led by Mohandas K. Gandhi and the Indian National Congress (Congress Party). At that time, however, the British colonial administration had imposed a general ban on communist activities and took a number of measures against the party, including imprisoning its leaders in 1929. The CPI thus remained organizationally weak and constrained to operate clandestinely until the party was legalized in 1942.
The CPI gained momentum after India became independent in 1947. It demanded social equality for women, suffrage for all adults, the nationalization of privately owned enterprises, land reforms, social justice for the lower castes (including those formerly called untouchables), and the right to protest through demonstrations and strikes—all of which increased the party’s popularity. In 1951 the party substituted its core demand of the formation of a “people’s democracy” with one it called a “national democracy.”
The party did well politically in the 1950s. Nationally, it gained relatively small numbers of seats in the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament) elections of 1951, 1957, and 1962 compared with the ruling and then-dominant Congress Party, but each time it was enough for the CPI to be the principal opposition party. In 1957 the CPI defeated Congress in legislative assembly elections in the southern state of Kerala and, under Chief Minister E.M.S. Namboodiripad, formed the first non-Congress government in independent India. That government introduced several reforms (including land distribution and education), but, following violent protests against those actions, its members were dismissed by the central authorities in New Delhi.
The CPI’s fortunes began to decline in the 1960s. It was defeated in the 1960 Kerala assembly elections by a Congress-led coalition. The 29 seats the party garnered in the 1962 Lok Sabha polls marked their electoral high point in that chamber. Most significantly, however, in 1964 ideological differences that had built up over a split between the Soviets and the Chinese communists in the 1950s and over the response to the 1962 border clashes between India and China prompted a large faction of party members (including Namboodiripad) to break with the CPI and form the Communist Party of India (Marxist), or CPI(M). The split weakened the CPI considerably at the national level. The CPI(M) surpassed the CPI’s seat total in the Lok Sabha in 1971 and consistently won two or more times as many seats as the CPI in subsequent elections. In Kerala the CPI was forced to become part of a Congress-led coalition that governed the state between 1970 and 1977.
In the late 1970s the CPI started aligning itself with the CPI(M) and other leftist parties to create the Left Front coalition, which formed governments in the states of West Bengal, Tripura, and, intermittently, Kerala. In Tamil Nadu the CPI was part of the ruling Democratic Progressive Alliance formed there in 2004. The party was also politically influential in the states of Andhra Pradesh and Bihar.
The 2004 Lok Sabha elections gave the country’s Left Front parties a chance for some national political leverage. The CPI won 10 seats (compared with only four in the 1999 elections) and the CPI(M) 43 seats, and the front was able to provide important external support that allowed the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance (UPA) coalition to form a government. By 2008, however, the Left Front had withdrawn its backing, citing its opposition to the UPA’s civil nuclear cooperation agreement with the United States. The front’s decision initiated a series of political setbacks for the country’s leftist parties. In the 2009 Lok Sabha elections, the CPI was again able to win only four seats, and the CPI(M) total was reduced to 16, its lowest since it first fielded candidates in 1967. The Left Front also suffered defeat in the 2011 West Bengal state assembly elections, the first time that the left had been out of power there since 1977. The slide in leftist support continued in the 2014 Lok Sabha polls, where the CPI could win only one seat, and the CPI(M) total dropped to nine.
