Contingent valuation,  a survey-based method of determining the economic value of a nonmarket resource. It is used to estimate the value of resources and goods not typically traded in economic markets. It is most commonly related to natural and environmental resources.
Contingent valuation is employed to assess environmental resources, goods, and services. Government agencies apply the technique to estimate use and nonuse values of environmental resources that they oversee and manage and to make decisions regarding environmental policy, lawsuits, and damage assessments (see also environmental law). For example, the U.S. government employed the methodology to estimate the environmental damage of the Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska in 1989. Businesses also use the technique to estimate cost-benefit values on environmental projects.
A variety of methods are used to select respondents and to develop survey questionnaires. Respondent selection is at the discretion of the survey administrator. Respondents are always individuals, and the survey samplings may range in size. In addition, respondents may be chosen randomly or selected using other approaches such as geographic specifications or database segmentation.
Survey questions are based on hypothetical scenarios. Respondents are asked to estimate what they would be willing to pay to sustain, improve, maintain, protect, or repair natural and environmental resources. For example, if the U.S. government wished to ascertain the cost-benefit value of a future project of the Interior Department’s Bureau of Reclamation to repair water-storage facilities, it might use contingent valuation to answer the question, What would be the environmental cost of this project if it ensured the water supply of nearby cities and farms but also disrupted the ecosystem of an endangered species? Survey recipients might be asked to comment on their willingness to pay $10, $20, or $30 more in utilities per year to improve water storage and pay environmental conservation costs.
Contingent valuation is a disputed method of estimating natural and environmental impact. Opponents argue that the technique is not empirical enough to accurately estimate financial data and to encompass the complexities of natural resources management. Unlike other methods of economical valuation, survey responses are not based on an individual’s behavioral choice or actual conduct. Therefore, according to critics, survey responses are subjective and uninformed, creating a high likelihood of “hypothetical bias.” There have been many attempts to improve survey controls, but opponents argue that the improvements are not sufficient to minimize inaccuracies. Contingent valuation is also criticized for being expensive and time-consuming.
Proponents of the methodology claim that it is the most-flexible option and is, therefore, suitable to environmental concerns. The technique accounts for costs that more traditional methods do not, and it adds a critical consumer perspective. Proponents also state that the technique is reliable, as it has been refined and improved over a long period of time—it was first proposed as a theory in 1947.
