Credit bureau,  organization that provides information to merchants or other businesses relating to the creditworthiness of current and prospective customers. Credit bureaus may be private enterprises or cooperatives operated by the merchants in a particular locality. Users, such as credit card issuers or mortgage lenders, pay a membership charge or a fee based on the amount of service.
Cooperative credit bureaus, organized for the exchange of credit information between merchants, were known in some countries as early as 1860; most of their growth, however, occurred after World War I. Until then, the small amount of credit granted was usually based on the merchant’s personal knowledge of the customer. The primary function of many of the very early credit bureaus was to maintain a list of customers who were considered poor risks. As the use of consumer credit grew and populations became more mobile, businesses turned to credit bureaus for information regarding decisions on whether to grant credit.
At the turn of the 21st century, the leading credit bureaus in the United States (and in many European, Latin American, and Asian countries) were Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion. Their sources of information included the merchants or other businesses that had granted a customer credit in the past, employment records, landlords, public records, newspapers, and direct investigation. Any individual who has applied for a credit or charge account, a personal loan, insurance, or a job most likely has a credit record on file at one or more of these credit bureaus. The credit record, which is built and amended over time, contains information about one’s income, debts, and credit payment history, as well as whether one has been sued or arrested or has filed for bankruptcy. This information leads to the establishment of a credit score, a numerical representation of an individual’s creditworthiness.
The development of e-commerce facilitated the accumulation and distribution of information on a nationwide and worldwide basis. The threat to privacy resulting from these practices was only recently recognized. Independent agencies evaluate and compare the major credit bureaus, sometimes revealing errors and problems that have included mistaken identities, misapplied charges or debts, uncorrected errors, misleading information, and credit inconsistencies. To remedy some of these problems, the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACTA) was passed in the United States in 2003 to allow individuals to obtain a free copy of their credit report once a year from each of the three leading credit bureaus.
