Dani Rodrik,  (born August 14, 1957, Istanbul, Turkey), Turkish American economist whose work on economic globalization and international trade has had a significant impact on the fields of international trade policy and development economics.
Rodrik received a bachelor’s degree in government and economics from Harvard University in 1979 and a master’s degree in public affairs from Princeton University’s Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs in 1981. He continued his studies in Princeton’s economics department, receiving a Ph.D. in economics in 1985.
Rodrik earned his reputation as an economist through his extensive contributions to the fields of international trade and development economics. The primary focus of his work was the effects of trade policies on the macroeconomic performance of national economies. He argued that successful export economies are the result of a mix of protectionist and liberal policies. He therefore encouraged developing countries to adopt policies to protect some of their critical industries in their initial stages, until they were mature enough to produce quality goods that could compete on the world market. Rodrik’s view was often misunderstood and criticized by his colleagues as a general advocacy of protectionism over free trade.
In addition to his controversial stance on trade policy, Rodrik also advocated social-insurance policies that would mitigate the adverse effects of free trade on workers in the United States and elsewhere. He believed that barriers to trade were already low enough in the United States and argued that, instead of further reducing tariffs, the United States should consider casting a larger social safety net for those workers whose jobs had been eliminated by offshoring and other corporate practices in the era of economic globalization.
In his book The Globalization Paradox: Democracy and the Future of the World Economy (2011), Rodrik argued that national priorities should take precedence over the international demands of globalization—which often included the rapid opening of a country’s markets to international companies at the expense of domestic producers—and presented a recipe for economic development that involved customizing globalization to a particular country’s needs while at the same time establishing institutions to counter some of its possible negative consequences. His other books included Economics Rules: The Rights and Wrongs of the Dismal Science (2015) and Straight Talk on Trade: Ideas for a Sane World Economy (2017). In 2020 Rodrik was made a member of the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences.
