Dolores Huerta, née Dolores Fernández,  (born April 10, 1930, Dawson, New Mexico, U.S.), American labour leader and activist whose work on behalf of migrant farmworkers led to the establishment of the United Farm Workers of America.
When Huerta was a child she moved to Stockton, California, with her mother and siblings after her parents’ divorce. She remained in touch with her father, Juan Fernández, and took pride in his personal and professional development from coal miner to migrant labourer to union activist to an elected representative in the New Mexico state legislature to college graduate. Unlike many women of her era, she went on to college, after graduating from Stockton High School. Although a brief marriage, motherhood, and divorce interrupted her studies, she eventually received an A.A. degree from Stockton College. A series of unsatisfying jobs led her to seek a teaching credential, but her teaching career lasted only a few months. Huerta decided that she could do more for the hungry and barefoot farmworkers’ children in her class by helping their parents win more equitable working conditions. As an employee of a Mexican-American self-help association called the Community Service Organization (CSO), Huerta lobbied California state legislators to enact such progressive legislation as old-age pensions for noncitizens.
In the late 1950s Huerta became interested in the conditions of farmworkers and met Cesar Chavez, a CSO official who shared that interest. Their attempts to focus the CSO’s attention on the inequities plaguing rural workers failed, and both eventually left that organization. By 1962 they had cofounded the National Farm Workers Association, forerunner of the United Farm Workers (UFW), an influential union whose grape boycott in the late 1960s forced grape producers to improve working conditions for migrant farmworkers. As coordinator of nationwide lettuce, grape, and Gallo wine boycotts in the 1970s, Huerta helped create the national climate that led to the passage in 1975 of the Agricultural Labor Relations Act, the first law recognizing the rights of California farmworkers to bargain collectively.
In the 1980s Huerta cofounded the UFW’s radio station and continued to speak and raise funds on behalf of a variety of causes, including immigration policy and farm labourers’ health. From 1988 to 1993, Huerta served on the U.S. Commission on Agricultural Workers, established by Congress to evaluate special worker provisions and labour markets in the agriculture industry. In 2002 she founded the Dolores Huerta Foundation, which was involved in community organizing. Her numerous honours include induction (1993) into the National Women’s Hall of Fame. She also was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2012. Huerta was the subject of the documentary Dolores (2017).
