Economic stabilizer,  any of the institutions and practices in an economy that serve to reduce fluctuations in the business cycle through offsetting effects on the amounts of income available for spending (disposable income). The most important automatic stabilizers include unemployment compensation and other transfer payment programs, farm price supports, and family and corporate savings.
The ultimate objective of research into the problems of economic instability (including fluctuations in output, employment, and prices) is to provide the foundation for stabilization policy—that is, for the systematic use of fiscal and monetary policies to improve an economy’s performance. The main tasks, therefore, are to explain how levels of prices, output, and employment are determined and, on a more applied level, to furnish predictions of changes in these variables—predictions on which stabilization policy can be based.
The problems of economic stability and instability have, naturally, been of concern to economists for a very long time. But, as a special field of investigation, it emerged most strongly from the confluence of two developments of the depression decade of the 1930s. One was the development of national income statistics; the other was the reorientation of theoretical thinking often referred to as the “Keynesian revolution.”
To understand why the theoretical contributions of John Maynard Keynes were regarded as so important through much of the 20th century, one must examine the workings of a modern economy. Such an economy comprises millions of people engaged in millions of distinct activities; these activities include the production, distribution, and consumption of all of the different goods and services that a modern economy provides. Some of the economic units are large, with hierarchies of executives and other managerial specialists who coordinate the productive activities of thousands or tens of thousands of people. Aside from these relatively small islands of preplanned and coordinated activity, most of the population pursues its myriad economic tasks without any overall supervised direction. It resembles an immensely complicated, continuously changing puzzle that is continually being solved and solved again through the market system. A breakdown in the coordination of activities, such as occurred in the depression decade of the 1930s, is very rare—in fact, it happened on that scale only once—or this system of organization would not survive. The way in which the economic puzzle is solved without anyone thinking about it has been the broad main theme of economic theory since the time of the English economist Adam Smith (1723–90).
If one singles out a particular household from the millions of economic units and studies it over a period of time, one can draw up a budget of that household’s transactions. The budget will come out as a long list of amounts sold and amounts bought. If at any time this economic unit had tried to do something different from what it actually did (cutting down, say, on meat purchases to buy another pair of shoes), the solution of the economic puzzle would have been correspondingly different. At the prevailing prices the supply of meat would have exceeded the demand, and the demand for shoes would have exceeded the supply.
The point Keynes made, right or wrong, was that, if the economy were to function as a coordinated system, the activities of each economic unit must be somehow controlled—and controlled quite precisely. This is done through price incentives. By raising the price of a good (relative to the prices of everything else), any economic unit can, generally speaking, be made to demand less of it or to supply more of it; by lowering the price, it can be made to demand more or to supply less. Through the conflux of prices, an individual unit is thus led to fit its activities into the overall puzzle of market demands and supplies. If economic units could not be controlled in this fashion, the market-organized system could not possibly function.
Keynesians therefore believe that in any given situation there exists, theoretically, one and only one list of prices that will make the puzzle come out exactly right. But the amounts that economic units choose to supply or demand of various goods at any given price list depend on numerous factors, all of which change over time: the size of the population and labour force; the stock of material resources, technology, and labour skills; “tastes” for particular consumer goods; and attitudes toward consumption as against saving, toward leisure as against work, and so on. Government policies—tax rates, expenditures, welfare policies, money supply, the debt—also belong among the determinants of demand and supply. A change in any of these determinants will mean that the list of prices that previously would have equilibrated all of the different markets must be changed accordingly. If prices are “rigid,” the system cannot adjust and coordination will break down.
