Environmental economics,  subdiscipline of economics that applies the values and tools of mainstream macroeconomics and microeconomics to allocate environmental resources more efficiently.
On the political stage, environmental issues are usually placed at odds with economic issues; environmental goods, such as clean air and clean water, are commonly viewed as priceless and not subject to economic consideration. There is, however, substantial overlap between economics and the environment. In its purest form, economics is the study of human choice. Because of that, economics sheds light on the choices that individual consumers and producers make with respect to numerous goods, services, and activities, including those made with respect to environmental quality. Economics can not only identify the reasons why individuals choose to degrade the environment beyond what is most beneficial to society, but it can also assist policy makers in providing an efficient level of environmental quality.
Environmental economics is interdisciplinary in nature, and, thus, its scope is far-reaching. The field, however, remains rooted in sound economic principles. Environmental economists research a wide array of topics, including those related to energy, biodiversity, invasive species, and climate change.
Environmental goods are aspects of the natural environment that hold value for individuals in society. Just as consumers value a jar of peanut butter or a can of soup, consumers of environmental goods value clean air, clean water, healthy ecosystems, and even peace and quiet. Such goods are valuable to most people, but there is not usually a market through which one can acquire more of an environmental good. That absence makes it difficult to determine the value that environmental goods hold for society. For example, the market price of a jar of peanut butter or a can of soup signals the value each item holds for consumers, but there are no prices attached to environmental goods that can provide similar signals.
To some it may seem unethical to try to place a dollar value on the natural environment. However, there are plenty of cases in which ethics demands such a valuation. Indeed, in cases of extreme environmental damage, as resulted from the Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska in 1989, an unwillingness to apply a value to that environmental loss could be considered equivalent to stating that clean Alaskan waters have no value to anyone. The assessment of appropriate damages, fines, or both in such cases often depends on the careful valuation of aspects of the environment. In the case of environmental policy development, uncertainty about the benefit that environmental goods provide to society could easily skew the results of a cost-benefit analysis (a comparison made between the social benefits of a proposed project in monetary terms and the project’s costs) against environmental protection. That would, in effect, undervalue environmental goods and could possibly lead policy makers to believe that certain environmental regulations are not worth the costs they impose on society when, in fact, they are.
Economists have long tried to accurately determine the value of environmental goods to society. That effort has led to several valuation techniques.
Contingent valuation, or stated preferences, is a seemingly simple method that involves asking people directly about their values for a particular environmental good. This method is particularly useful in determining the value of environmental goods that individuals have yet to experience or may never actually experience themselves.
Contingent valuation was useful in the Exxon Valdez oil spill. This method was used to determine, among other things, the value placed on simply knowing that a pristine Alaskan wilderness exists (the existence value), even though many respondents might never actually experience that wilderness. More generally, the contingent-valuation method is often used in policy development to determine how much respondents would be willing to pay for a higher-quality environment.
However, despite its simple concept, the contingent-valuation method carries with it a host of complex problems that must be taken into account for the results of a survey to be considered credible. The problems usually stem from one or more of the following: information bias (where the respondent has no information), hypothetical bias (where the respondent will neither pay nor give a reasonable answer), starting-point bias (where the respondent is influenced by the initial numbers given as examples or as part of a range in survey), and strategic bias (where the respondent wants a specific outcome). Because any bias can hinder the usefulness of a contingent valuation survey, special care must be taken to ensure that bias is minimized.
With information bias, hypothetical bias, and starting-point bias, respondents unintentionally misrepresent the value that they hold for an environmental good. With information bias, respondents lack enough information to form an accurate response. To avoid that type of bias, surveyors will usually provide a great deal of information to respondents about the survey topic.
Hypothetical bias occurs because individuals tend to respond differently to hypothetical scenarios than they do to the same scenarios in the real world. One solution to that problem is to conduct the contingent-valuation surveys in a laboratory setting. The surveyor can then remind respondents to consider the financial ramifications that their responses would produce in a real-world setting. The surveyor can also use experimental techniques that mimic real-world conditions.
Starting-point bias results when respondents are influenced by the set of available responses to the survey. Solving that problem requires significant pretesting of a survey’s design.
Unlike the other types of response bias mentioned above, strategic bias occurs when respondents intentionally try to manipulate the outcome of a survey. It is not always possible to eliminate intentionally biased responses. However, it is generally best to randomly survey a large number of individuals, because that will decrease the likelihood that strategic bias will undermine the results.
Contingent-valuation methods have been used to determine the amount respondents would be willing to pay for many environmental goods. For example, respondents have been asked the value they would place on increased air visibility in the White Mountains and the Grand Canyon in the United States. Contingent-valuation methods also have been used to determine the value of old-growth forest preservation in the face of industrial expansion.
