Eurocommunism,  trend among European communist parties toward independence from Soviet Communist Party doctrine during the 1970s and ’80s. With Mikhail Gorbachev’s encouragement, all communist parties took independent courses in the late 1980s, and by 1990 the term Eurocommunism had become moot.
The term Eurocommunism was coined in the mid-1970s and received wide publicity after the publication of Eurocommunism and the State (1977) by the Spanish communist leader Santiago Carrillo. A spirit of independence among nonruling communist parties had already appeared, however, shortly before World War II with the growth of Popular Fronts in socialist politics and was afforded dramatic encouragement by the example of Josip Broz Tito’s Yugoslavia from 1948 on. The excesses of Joseph Stalin’s regime and such Soviet repressions as the crackdown in Hungary in 1956 and the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 alienated many communists in the Western countries and tended to accelerate the movement toward independent policies and autonomy.
The Eurocommunist movement avowedly rejected the subordination of all communist parties to the once-prevalent Soviet doctrine of one monolithic world communist movement. Instead, every party was expected to base its policies on the traditions and needs within its own country. The promotion of Eurocommunism seemed to coincide with the stagnation or decline of many European communist parties. Notably, in France the once-powerful French Communist Party, which in the early postwar era was able to command about a third of the French popular vote, experienced a severe decline in later years. Its leader Georges Marchais and his comrades briefly flirted with Eurocommunism in the late 1970s—without any popular success. On the other hand, the Italian Communist Party remained Italy’s second largest party, partly by stressing its independence of Moscow. Its foreign contacts and sympathies seemed to lie more with the European social democrats and labour parties, and in 1991 it changed its name to Democratic Party of the Left (shortened to Democrats of the Left in 1998). After the democratic revolutions of 1989, almost all the communist parties of eastern Europe became social democratic parties in spirit or name. Eurocommunism, in effect, had become the norm.
