General Confederation of Labour, French Confédération Générale du Travail (CGT),  French labour union federation. Formed in 1895, the CGT united in 1902 with the syndicalist-oriented Federation of Labour Exchanges (Fédération des Bourses du Travail).
In its early years the CGT was racked by ideological divisions between socialist, syndicalist (promoting an overthrow of capitalism by the working class), and other factions. The confederation advocated the use of collective bargaining and the general strike to reach economic goals, but it was also concerned with achieving more revolutionary social changes through class warfare. The CGT declined after syndicalists took control in 1906, but the organization began to grow again under the leadership of the socialist Léon Jouhaux, who served as its secretary-general from 1909 to 1947. By 1914 the CGT’s leadership was sufficiently moderate to support the French government in World War I.
In 1921 the CGT expelled its more radical unions, which were led by anarchists and communists as well as syndicalists. The expelled unions responded by forming the Unitary General Confederation of Labour (Confédération Générale du Travail Unitaire; CGTU), whose politics came to be dominated by Moscow. The CGTU rejoined the CGT in 1936 when communist parties and unions formed popular fronts with socialist organizations in joint opposition of fascism. By supporting the Popular Front government of the mid-1930s, the CGT won a number of victories, including a 40-hour workweek and an all-around wage increase ranging from 7 to 15 percent.
The CGT was banned by the Vichy government during World War II, and, by the time the confederation reemerged in 1944–45, the French communists had gained enormous popularity through their wartime resistance activities. In 1945 Benôit Frachon, a communist, became co-secretary-general of the CGT with Jouhaux, and in 1946–47 the communists won control of the CGT’s administration. By this time the confederation represented more than five million members. That number dropped somewhat when the CGT alienated its more moderate socialist members by sponsoring strikes in 1947 to protest the French government’s dismissal of communist ministers. Under the leadership of Jouhaux, the socialists left the CGT in 1947 and formed a new federation, the General Confederation of Labour–Workers’ Force (Confédération Générale du Travail–Force Ouvrière), in 1948.
Even after the defection by the socialists, the CGT remained France’s largest and most powerful labour union federation for many years. The CGT maintained close ties with the French Communist Party and was a member of the World Federation of Trade Unions.
