Helen Marot,  (born June 9, 1865, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.—died June 3, 1940, New York, N.Y.), American writer, librarian, and labour organizer, best remembered for her efforts to address child labour and improve the working conditions of women.
Marot grew up in an affluent and cultured family and was educated in Quaker schools. In 1896 she worked as a librarian in Wilmington, Delaware, and the next year she returned to Philadelphia and with a friend opened a private library specializing in works on social and economic topics. In 1899 she published a Handbook of Labor Literature and also conducted for the U.S. Industrial Commission an investigation of working conditions in the custom tailoring trades in Philadelphia, an experience that added force to her natural sympathy for the exploited. In 1902 Marot investigated child labour in New York City for the Association of Neighborhood Workers and helped form the New York Child Labor Committee. With Florence Kelley and Josephine Goldmark she drew up a report on child labour in the city that was the principal impetus to the passage of the Compulsory Education Act by the state legislature in 1903.
In mid-1906 Marot became executive secretary of the two-year-old New York branch of the national Women’s Trade Union League. Her organizing talent and sheer drive built the group into a formidable force in labour organization. She was largely responsible for creating the Bookkeepers, Stenographers and Accountants Union of New York, a pioneering effort in organizing white-collar women. During that time she also assisted Goldmark and Kelley in assembling the data for Louis Brandeis’s famous brief in the case of Muller v. Oregon, concerning the regulation of women’s working hours. She was later the principal leader and organizer of the first great strike of shirtwaist makers and dressmakers (1909–10) under the banner of the new International Ladies’ Garment Workers’ Union.
Marot resigned from her work with the trade union league in 1913 and turned to writing. After publishing American Labor Unions (1914), a tract on the syndicalist Industrial Workers of the World written from her standpoint as a Fabian socialist, she served on the editorial board of the radical journal Masses (1916–17) and on the staff of The Dial (1918–20). She was also a member of the U.S. Industrial Relations Commission (1914–16). Her Creative Impulse in Industry appeared in 1918. From 1920 she lived in quiet retirement.
