Hemispheric integration,  the process by which countries in the Americas liberalized their trade regimes in the 1990s and 2000s in order to establish a hemispherewide free-trade area. However, formal negotiations concerning a proposed Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA), which lasted from 1998 to 2005, concluded without an agreement because of the failure to reconcile the economic and ideological differences between the countries of North and South America.
The initial step toward hemispheric integration was taken in June 1990 when U.S. Pres. George H.W. Bush launched the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative (EAI), an ambitious project to establish a free-trade area stretching from Alaska to Tierra del Fuego. In addition to promoting extensive trade liberalization with the goal of establishing free trade throughout the Western Hemisphere, the EAI also envisaged the negotiation of agreements with selected Latin American countries that were to encourage market-led reforms, to stimulate private investment, and to relieve indebtedness to the United States, thereby releasing revenues for environmental programs. The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)—negotiated by the governments of Canada, the United States, and Mexico and launched in 1994—was to form the hub around which enlargement of the free-trade zone would proceed. Since April 1998, the formal negotiations envisaged under the EAI  proceeded under a general agreement among 34 countries, which created a timetable for a series of multilateral summits that aimed at introducing the FTAA by 2005.
Although the FTAA was also concerned with establishing a continental free-trade zone, like the European Union (EU), it differed in that it proceeded through the incorporation of already existing bilateral free-trade agreements (FTAs) and regional trade associations, such as the Andean Community, the Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM), the Central American Common Market (CACM), Mercosur, and, of course, NAFTA. Other FTAs and multilateral initiatives, such as the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA)—signed by the governments of the United States, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, and the Dominican Republic in May 2004—were negotiated with the view to future incorporation within the FTAA.
Although the FTAA was intended to come into effect by December 2005, negotiations failed to result in a consensus by the January 1, 2005, deadline. Several Latin American countries elected leftist governments opposed to various aspects of the hemispheric integration agenda, such as the U.S. government’s continued subsidizing of domestic agriculture, and some leftist Latin American governments—notably that of Venezuela under Hugo Chávez—opposed to the entire principle of free trade.
