Imperial preference,  historically, a commercial arrangement in which preferential rates (i.e., rates below the general level of an established tariff) were granted to one another by constituent units of an empire. Imperial preference could also include other sorts of preference, such as favourable consideration in the allocation of public contracts, indirect subsidies to shipping, and preferential access to the capital market. Such arrangements were enforced in the first half of the 20th century by most countries with dependent colonies; of these, the British imperial preference introduced in 1932 was perhaps the most important.
With a radical change in tariff policy in 1931 and 1932, the United Kingdom removed the ban on the taxation of food imports, opening the way for a systematic policy of imperial preference. Such a policy—based on the principle of “home producers first, empire producers second, and foreign producers last”—was negotiated at the Imperial Economic Conference in Ottawa in 1932 and took the form of a series of bilateral agreements intended to extend for five years (lacking a formal renewal, they expired after 1937).
The agreements pledged the United Kingdom to allow the continued free entry of most imperial goods and to impose new tariffs on certain food and metal imports from foreign countries. The dominions were to use their tariffs against U.K. produce only in order to protect efficient producers, and both sides were to maintain certain margins of preference. Although the political reasons for the agreements were strong, the effect of the Great Depression, the search for “sheltered markets,” and the spread of the protectionist spirit (evidenced by the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of the United States in 1930) were probably more important. Trade within the empire increased after the Ottawa conference, but other factors also contributed to the upswing, including the recovery of prices of primary products and the existence of the sterling bloc, a group of countries that held the bulk of their exchange reserves with the Bank of London. (See sterling area.)
During and after World War II, exchange problems, commodity agreements, and other factors had more effect on trade than did preferential tariffs. The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1947—to which the partners of the Ottawa agreements subscribed—prohibited the extension of existing preferences, and in subsequent negotiations the United Kingdom and its partners agreed to some reductions of preferential margins. Inflation and trade liberalization, meanwhile, reduced the value of remaining preferences. At the same time, many newly independent members of the Commonwealth also canceled preferences formerly given to British goods.
