Inheritance tax,  levy on the property accruing to each beneficiary of the estate of a deceased person. It is usually calculated by reference to the amount received and the relationship (if any) of the beneficiary to the deceased. In some systems the value of the property already owned by the beneficiary also enters into the calculation.
Inheritance taxes are one of the oldest forms of taxation, dating back to the Roman Empire, which levied a one-twentieth-portion tax on inherited property in order to pay the pensions of veteran soldiers. The basis of the modern inheritance tax, however, was established during the Middle Ages in the feudal arrangement whereby all land and property was ultimately owned by the sovereign, whose permission was required to transfer any property upon death of the owner. If there were no direct descendants, relatives of the deceased could obtain the property through payment of a “relief.” In many European countries, including Great Britain, the Netherlands, Spain, and Portugal, modern inheritance taxes can be traced back directly to these “reliefs.”
Demands for inheritance tax reform grew more insistent in the early 21st century, especially in European countries. Italy repealed the tax in 2001, but calls for its reinstatement soon followed. In France and the United Kingdom, rising property values caused an increasing number of middle-class families to be liable for inheritance taxes. Recognizing this, some politicians called for an increase in the exemption levels for inheritance taxes.
Opponents of inheritance taxes claim that they hurt businesses, reduce savings, and are an attachment against the country’s capital. Proponents argue that the tax is small and occurs only once, reduces savings much less than income taxes of equal yield, and is a useful tool for redistributing wealth. In many countries, however, inheritance taxes tend to yield insignificant amounts of revenue, largely because the tax liability can be eliminated or postponed for long periods through tax planning.
In the United States, inheritance taxes are controlled by individual states, some of which have chosen not to levy an inheritance tax. (The federal government collects an estate tax on qualifying estates.) The first state inheritance tax was imposed by Pennsylvania in 1826. Since 1926 the federal government has allowed a credit for a portion of state taxes in order to reduce competition between states wishing to attract wealthy individuals as residents.
