Ishibashi Tanzan,   (born Sept. 25, 1884, Tokyo—died  April 25, 1973, Tokyo), politician, economist, and journalist who was prime minister of Japan from December 1956 to February 1957.
The son of a Nichiren-sect Buddhist priest, Ishibashi studied philosophy and graduated from Waseda University and then entered the field of journalism. He joined the Tōyō keizai shimpō, a weekly magazine on economics, and became known for his outspoken commentaries on economic affairs. In 1934 Ishibashi began publishing an English-language magazine, the Oriental Economist, and by 1939 had become president of the company. He served as an adviser to various government economic organs and in 1946 became minister of finance in the Cabinet of Prime Minister Yoshida Shigeru. From 1947 to 1951 he was ineligible for public office because of an Allied Occupation directive based on his journalistic activities during World War II.
Ishibashi became international trade and industry minister in the Cabinet of Hatoyama Ichirō in 1956 and won a narrow party election victory to become president of the majority Liberal-Democratic Party and prime minister in December of that year. He advocated “independent diplomacy” for Japan and sought trade relations with the People’s Republic of China. At home he tried to stimulate production to achieve full employment in a welfare-state structure. But his Cabinet proved unstable amid intraparty factional dissensions, and serious illness caused him to resign in favour of his former rival Kishi Nobusuke in February 1957.
Despite ill health, he became president of the Japan–Soviet Friendship Association (1960) and the International Trade Promotion Association of Japan. He toured Russia and Europe (1964) to promote trade. In 1959 he visited China and returned there in 1963 as chairman of a Japanese trade fair. He advocated a multilateral peace treaty among Japan, the United States, China, and the Soviet Union, but his increasingly progressive policies had made him unpopular with the Liberal-Democratic Party, and he was defeated in an election bid for the House of Representatives (1963).
