Jeane Kirkpatrick, née Jeane Duane Jordan,  (born Nov. 19, 1926, Duncan, Okla., U.S.—died Dec. 7, 2006, Bethesda, Md.), American political scientist and diplomat, who was foreign policy adviser under U.S. President Ronald Reagan and the first American woman to serve as ambassador to the United Nations (1981–85).
Kirkpatrick took an associate’s degree from Stephens College, Columbia, Mo. (1946), a bachelor’s from Barnard College, New York City (1948), and a master’s and doctorate from Columbia University, New York City (1950 and 1968, respectively). After working as a research analyst with the Office of Intelligence Research at the U.S. State Department, she studied at the Institute of Political Science in Paris. She served on several Democratic Party committees and worked intermittently for the United States Department of Defense before joining the Communism in Government project of the Fund for the Republic Organization (1956–62). In 1967 she joined the faculty of Georgetown University, Washington, D.C., where she became a full professor of political science in 1973; she retired as professor emeritus in 2002.
During the 1970s Kirkpatrick increasingly criticized the Democratic Party. Republican presidential candidate Ronald Reagan hired her as his foreign policy adviser during his successful 1980 campaign and then nominated her for the U.S. ambassadorship to the United Nations, a position she held for four years. She was given cabinet rank and was also a member of Reagan’s national security team. At the 1984 Republican National Convention, she made headlines after giving a speech in which she called Democrats the “blame America first” party. A forceful advocate of U.S. policies and a noted neoconservative, Kirkpatrick was known for her anticommunist stance and for her tolerance of authoritarian regimes. In the mid-1980s she was involved in the Iran-Contra Affair—a political scandal in which weapons were secretly sold to Iran and the funds diverted to Contra rebels in Nicaragua.
In 1985 Kirkpatrick resigned from her position and officially joined the Republican Party. She returned to teaching at Georgetown University while also serving as chief foreign policy adviser to Senate Republicans. She became a fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative think tank, and wrote a syndicated column and several articles and books, including The Withering Away of the Totalitarian State (1990) and Good Intentions (1996). In 1993 she cofounded Empower America, a conservative public-policy organization.
