Jean Tirole,  (born August 9, 1953, Troyes, France), French economist who was awarded the 2014 Nobel Prize for Economics in recognition of his innovative contributions to the study of monopolistic industries, or industries that consist of only a few powerful firms. Tirole’s work had a significant impact across a wide range of fields within economics, including microeconomics, game theory, and industrial organization.
Tirole earned bachelor’s degrees in engineering and decision mathematics at the École Polytechnique in France and the Université Paris Dauphine, respectively, in 1976. In 1978 he received a specialized doctorate in decision mathematics from Dauphine, and in 1981 he earned a Ph.D. in economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). He then worked as a researcher at the École Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées in Paris until 1984, when he began teaching at MIT, where he remained until 1992. He later taught at a number of other universities. In 2011 he cofounded the École d’Économie de Toulouse (Toulouse School of Economics).
From the start, Tirole’s research was highly theoretical in nature. He carefully analyzed how markets work and used mathematical models to study the ways in which markets fail in the absence of sufficient competition. Tirole’s research showed that the “one-size-fits-all” approach of previous models, which recommended price caps for monopolies to prevent them from charging too much for their products, did not always have favourable social outcomes. Although such policies would encourage greater production efficiency by those firms, which is a good thing for society, they may also permit excessive profits if those firms are allowed to continue to operate as monopolies. He adapted his models to study a number of specific industries, ranging from telecommunications to banking, that are highly regulated owing to their tendency to form monopolies. From the mid-1980s, his research became the basis of a general theory of the market power of firms, which helped economists to devise policy recommendations on issues such as monopoly regulation and ways to best design antitrust laws to ensure desirable social outcomes without harming competition.
Tirole’s many publications include more than 200 articles and several books, including the influential graduate-level textbook Game Theory (1991), cowritten with Drew Fudenberg, The Theory of Corporate Finance (2006), and Inside and Outside Liquidity (2011), cowritten with Bengt Holmström.
