Jiangxi Soviet, Wade-Giles romanization Chiang-hsi Soviet, also called Kiangsi Soviet or Chinese Soviet Republic,  (1931–34), independent government established by the communist leader Mao Zedong and his comrade Zhu De in Jiangxi province in southeastern China. It was from this small state within a state that Mao gained the experience in guerrilla warfare and peasant organization that he later used to accomplish the communist conquest of China in the late 1940s.
The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) was originally an urban-oriented group of intellectuals allied with the Nationalist Party, or Kuomintang (KMT), until 1927, when Chiang Kai-shek (Jiang Jieshi) purged the communists from the KMT. At this time Mao and Zhu De, at the head of a small band of communist soldiers, retreated into the mountainous countryside along the border of Jiangxi and Hunan provinces. There, independent from the Moscow-oriented leaders of the party, they began to build their own peasant-based government.
In June 1930 they received a temporary setback when they attempted to use their small forces to capture urban centres. They were forced to retreat into the countryside, but they continued their efforts to organize the peasants by developing a land redistribution policy that appealed to the people. In this way they were able to rebuild their base. This soviet, of which Mao was elected chairman, expanded so rapidly that it soon had an area containing several million people under its control. Its success, however, alarmed the Nationalists, and between 1930 and 1933 Chiang Kai-shek launched four massive military campaigns to encircle and annihilate the Jiangxi Soviet, all of which were repulsed by the communists by means of guerrilla warfare.
In 1933 the CCP’s Russian-oriented Central Committee moved its headquarters from its precarious urban base in Shanghai to the Jiangxi Soviet. With support from Moscow, the members of the Central Committee gradually took over the leadership of the soviet from Mao, radicalizing Mao’s land reform policy so that not only large landlords but also rich peasants and small landlords had their possessions confiscated and redistributed. When Chiang Kai-shek launched his fifth military campaign against the Jiangxi Soviet in 1933, the new leadership resorted to a strategy of fixed positional warfare, and the soviet was overwhelmed. In October 1934 the Red Army abandoned its Jiangxi base and began its famous Long March.
