Khalid Bakdash, Arabic Khālid Bakdāsh, Bakdash also spelled Bekdache,  (born 1912, Damascus, Syria—died July 15, 1995, Damascus), Syrian politician who acquired control of the Syrian Communist Party in 1932 and remained its most prominent spokesman until 1958, when he went into exile.
As a young man Bakdash went to law school in Damascus but was expelled for illegal political activity. In 1930 he joined the Communist Party and began to acquire a reputation for skillful public debate, dedication to his political vision, and personal magnetism. Jailed in 1931 and 1932 by the French, he nevertheless succeeded in 1932 in ousting Fuad al-Shamali from leadership of the Syrian Communist Party. He was soon forced to go underground and then left Syria. In 1935 he led the Syrian delegation to the Seventh Congress of the Communist International, which was meeting in Moscow, and remained there for a period of training.
In 1954 Bakdash was elected to a seat in the Syrian parliament, becoming the first Communist deputy in the Arab world. He adopted alliances with the Socialist and the increasingly powerful Baʿth Party. He became Syria’s apologist for the policies of the Soviet Union, and, when in August 1957 the Soviet Union signed a wide-ranging economic and technical agreement with Syria, his influence rose considerably.
Yet his position was threatened by widespread Syrian sentiment for some kind of union with Egypt, the president of which, Gamal Abdel Nasser, would not tolerate a Communist opposition. By 1957 he found himself increasingly at odds with the Baʿth, and, hoping to take the initiative, he demanded a total merger with Egypt. He expected Nasser to refuse such a prospect, leaving Bakdash a leading exponent of Arab nationalism but free to continue his activities as Communist leader. On Feb. 1, 1958, however, union with Egypt was proclaimed; three days later Bakdash fled to eastern Europe. He returned to Syria in April 1966, where he again became leader of the Syrian Communist Party. Following Ḥafiz al-Assad’s rise to the presidency in 1971, the Syrian Communist Party was included in the National Progressive Front, a left-leaning coalition led by the Baʿth. Upon Bakdash’s death in 1995, his wife assumed control of the Syrian Communist Party.
