Köhler effect,  phenomenon that occurs when a person works harder as a member of a group than when working alone.
There are many tasks in which a bad performance by a single member can ensure a bad group performance; social psychologists refer to them as conjunctive group tasks. For example, a mountain-climbing team that is tethered together cannot climb any faster than the slowest climber in the group. In the Köhler effect, less-capable members, the “weak links,” tend to exert extra effort, especially at such conjunctive tasks. For example, a slow climber should climb harder and faster when tethered to faster climbers than when climbing alone.
The Köhler effect was first described by the German industrial psychologist Otto Köhler in the 1920s. He asked members of a Berlin rowing club to perform a difficult task: to do standing curls with a heavy weight—97 pounds (44 kg)—until they were so exhausted that they could not go on. Sometimes they did this alone, and sometimes they did it in two- or three-person groups. When they worked in groups, they held a single weighted bar. The bar was twice as heavy for two-person groups and three times as heavy for three-person groups. Thus, the group task was conjunctive—as soon as any group member quit, the rest of the group could not continue very long. Köhler found that the groups persisted longer than their weakest members had persisted as individuals. That surprising motivation gain was biggest when the members of the groups were moderately different in ability. If the difference in ability was very small, or it if was very big, the motivation gain was not as large.
Those provocative findings were largely forgotten for more than 60 years until a 1989 article by the German psychologist Erich Witte rekindled research interest. Köhler’s motivation-gain effect was then replicated repeatedly, not only for physical-persistence tasks but also for simple computations and tasks involving visual attention.
Much research suggests that the Köhler effect may have at least two causes, one rooted in the process of social comparison and the other in the effects of individual members being indispensable to the group. First, simply learning that others are performing better than oneself can be enough to boost an individual’s efforts. Such upward social comparisons can lead a person to set a higher performance goal in order to compare better with others, or it may serve as a reminder of some of the stigmas that attach to those who are less capable. Second, knowledge that a work group is depending on one’s performance can motivate one’s efforts. Both processes seem to contribute independently to the overall Köhler effect, and certain characteristics of the group-performance situation and of the group members themselves can affect their relative importance.
As Köhler showed in his original work, the motivation gain is largest when members’ abilities are only moderately different (versus about the same or very different). That fact seems to be due mostly to the social-comparison mechanism. For example, a person will stop comparing himself or herself to others if the others are much more capable than the comparer, because the task of matching or competing will seem unachievable.
The indispensability mechanism seems to be relatively more important to women, whereas the social-comparison mechanism appears to be relatively more important to men. It has been suggested that those gender differences reflect more-general gender differences in levels of concern for others and for relationships (stronger in women) versus for social status and dominance (stronger in men).
Certain aspects of the work-group setting seem to facilitate both causal mechanisms. For example, the Köhler effect is stronger when group members are able to monitor each other’s performance constantly, as compared with a situation in which monitoring is difficult or impossible. Such monitoring makes it easier for group members to make upward social comparisons and for less-able group members to be reminded that they are indeed weak links in the group’s chain. Likewise, the effect is stronger when group members are physically in each other’s presence than when they are not. Such physical presence seems to increase concern with how one is likely to be evaluated by others, either because one is not as capable as they are (upward social comparison) or because one may be holding the group back (indispensability).
In research since the 1980s, additional aspects of group composition have been shown to influence the Köhler effect. For example, a less-able man working at a physical-strength task produces a much larger Köhler effect when his more-capable partner is a woman than when that partner is another man. Apparently, it is more embarrassing to men to be outperformed by a woman than by a man, at least on a task that requires physical strength.
Furthermore, when social comparison is possible, the Köhler effect is larger when one’s more-capable partner (in a two-person group) is a member of an out-group (a group to which one does not belong) than when one’s partner is a member of one’s in-group. Apparently, it is more embarrassing to be bested by someone in a “competing” group than by someone in one’s own group. Both of those aspects of group composition appear to alter the social-comparison mechanism, but some aspects of group composition also alter the indispensability mechanism. For example, if a person is rejected or ostracized by a more-capable partner, he tends to become less concerned about the indispensability of his efforts to the group.
