Leonid Hurwicz,  (born Aug. 21, 1917, Moscow, Russia—died June 24, 2008, Minneapolis, Minn., U.S.), Russian-born American economist who, with Eric S. Maskin and Roger B. Myerson, received a share of the 2007 Nobel Prize for Economics for his formulation of mechanism design theory, a microeconomic model of resource allocation that attempts to produce the best outcome for market participants under nonideal conditions.
Hurwicz’s parents fled their native Poland for Moscow, where Leonid was born, to escape the ravages of World War I. Fearing persecution from the newly installed Soviet government, the family returned to Poland in 1919. Hurwicz earned a law degree at the University of Warsaw in 1938. He continued his education at the London School of Economics and the Graduate Institute of International Studies in Geneva, Switz., but the outbreak of World War II forced him to emigrate to the United States by way of Portugal. After serving as a research assistant for Paul Samuelson at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and for Oskar Lange at the University of Chicago, Hurwicz took a number of teaching positions before settling at the University of Minnesota in 1951. He remained there for the rest of his career, retiring from full-time teaching in 1988 but continuing as professor emeritus.
As described by Hurwicz, mechanism design theory addresses the gap in knowledge that exists between buyers and sellers. In ideal conditions, all parties have equal information about the pricing of goods within markets. In real world conditions, however, information asymmetry prevents buyers from knowing how much a seller should charge and limits the ability of sellers to determine how much a buyer will pay. The “mechanism” of mechanism design is a specialized game in which participants submit messages to a central point and a rule determines the allocation of resources based on those messages. As a result of his study of mechanism design, Hurwicz concluded that the most efficient market system for both buyers and sellers is the double auction.
