luxury,  word that implies a relatively large consumption of wealth for nonessential pleasures. There is, however, no absolute definition of luxury, for the conception is relative to both time and person. It is a commonplace of history that the luxuries of one generation may become the necessities of a later period; thus, no hard and fast line can be drawn between luxuries, comforts, and necessities. The private bath was one of the greatest luxuries of the Roman Empire; in the 19th century its use was largely confined to the wealthy; today it may be ranked among the necessities of the developed world. Examined from one important standpoint, luxury might be defined as any expenditure in excess of the normal and customary standard of living of the class to which an individual belongs. The problem of luxury involves economic, social, and ethical considerations.
Luxury has undoubtedly played a great role in the history of economic development. Werner Sombart in his Luxus und Kapitalismus proposed that the luxurious expenditure of the papacy and of the courts in the Middle Ages stimulated the growth of modern capitalism. The rentals of distant estates were concentrated at some central spot, and wealth was accumulated there. This created a relatively large market for the products of certain industries, and the necessary conditions for the development of capitalist enterprise were fulfilled.
In France the continual drain of wealth from the countryside to Paris and Versailles was combined with a vicious system of taxation and the burdensome restrictions of feudal tenure. These conditions produced, on the one hand, a considerable amount of industrial activity carefully fostered by the mercantilist policy of the statesman Jean-Baptiste Colbert and his successors. On the other hand, they led eventually to the disruption of the old social order and the turmoil of the French Revolution. It is one of the paradoxes of history that a precisely opposite view and method of life—that of the Puritans, with their strong moral condemnation of luxury and their emphasis on the value of hard work and abstinence from all unnecessary consumption—should have contributed even more notably to the growth of capital and to the expansion of industry and commerce in other countries.
Luxury has made its influence felt in other directions as well. Thus, in Italy the rise of the merchant princes gave a new direction to the whole course of art. The medieval church ceased to be the chief patron of the artist, who now had to conform in his work to the standards and tastes of those who provided the market for his products. Simple piety gave way to the sumptuous paganism of the Renaissance period, and that in turn to the elaborate ornamentation and decorative inventiveness which was perhaps at its best in the metal work of Benvenuto Cellini.
Luxury is the inevitable concomitant of the growth of wealth, which brings with it the increase and the differentiation of wants. The fact that the fundamental needs of mankind for a minimum of food, clothing, and protection from the weather are relatively soon satisfied gives rise to a demand for greater variety and finer qualities as soon as income rises above the bare subsistence level. This demand has, in the past, been a great stimulus to economic progress, for it has provided an enormously strong incentive to work and effort.
The attitude of many people toward the luxurious expenditure of the rich is a mixture of envy—sometimes accompanied by, but often devoid of, a feeling of resentment—and of approval based on popular economic reasoning. It is a very widespread belief that such expenditure is good for trade because it makes money circulate and therefore increases employment. Classical economists, down to and including Alfred Marshall, had no hesitation in declaring that this reasoning was based on a fallacy. They agreed that the maintenance of racing stables or private yachts or the purchase of magnificent furs or jewelry does give employment to those engaged in the trades concerned and that the localities in which these trades are situated benefit from such expenditure. They argued that the fallacy of such reasoning lay in ignoring the fact that the aggregate real resources of producing power in a country are limited at any one time. A large amount of capital and labour is required to make and equip yachts and racing stables, and this capital and labour is withdrawn from other uses to which it would be put. If the wealth consumed extravagantly were saved and invested, the volume of capital would be increased, the rate of interest would tend to fall and there would be a larger demand for labour to produce goods consumed by other sections of the community.
If, in a capitalist society, there was a sudden change in the standards of expenditure of the wealthy classes such that all expenditure commonly recognized as luxurious was regarded with strong social disapprobation, these persons would find themselves impelled to save on a much larger scale than formerly, and a great deal more capital would be available for production. As the ultimate aim of production is consumption, the net effect of the change of policy in regard to expenditure would be to transfer additional spending power to all the less wealthy members of the community. The latter would benefit by higher money wages, because of the greater demand for their services, and from the still higher real wages, because of the fall in the rate of interest and the larger production of the types of commodities that they consume. Some proportion of this increased wealth would be consumed by the poorer classes in the form of luxuries, or in an increased enjoyment of leisure. The ultimate consequences of such a change would depend upon the economic and social effects of this transfer of real income to the poorer classes and upon the willingness of the wealthier classes to continue to work as hard and efficiently as formerly to produce incomes which they do not themselves enjoy by consumption and the spending power of which they in fact transfer to other people. The classical view of the economic effects of luxurious expenditure was accepted thus far. Later, however, particularly under the influence of the ideas put forward by the economist John Maynard Keynes, a fresh turn was given to the discussion.
When closely examined, the classical view is found to depend for its validity upon the assumption of full employment of the community’s available resources. If there are idle resources and if the saving portion of the community prefers to hold its savings in the form of money rather than in the form of investment in some income-yielding use (other than the purchase of securities), then any additional expenditure on the part of any section of the community will increase the volume of employment and make the total national income larger than it would otherwise have been.
While it is true, on the one hand, that the country as a whole cannot save what it cannot invest, any given level of investment and saving may fall short of occupying fully all the resources of the economy. Under these conditions a decision by an individual to save rather than to spend a portion of income may merely have the effect of inflicting an equivalent loss on other individuals. The saver will hold a larger command over the community’s wealth than before, whether in the form of money or in the form of securities which have had to be sold by other members of the community in order to finance their losses, but the total savings of the community will not have been increased. It still remains true that the community will normally benefit more by an expansion of investment than by an increase of luxurious expenditure. If the savings would otherwise run to waste in an increase of hoarding, however, then a rise in what is called the “propensity to consume” will increase the total volume of employment and output and will not, as in the classical case, be at the expense of an equivalent amount of investment which would otherwise have been made. In this way, the popular argument has partially come into its own again in relation to short-period analysis and to certain phases of the business cycle when there is a shortage of effective demand.
