Morgan Tsvangirai,  (born March 10, 1952, Gutu, Southern Rhodesia [now Zimbabwe]—died February 14, 2018, Johannesburg, South Africa), Zimbabwean opposition leader and trade union activist known for his dissent against the policies of Zimbabwe’s longtime president Robert Mugabe. He formed a power-sharing government with Mugabe and served as prime minister (2009–13). Tsvangirai failed in his attempt to unseat Mugabe in the 2013 presidential election.
The eldest of nine children, Tsvangirai left school at a young age to seek employment to assist his family. He began working at Trojan Nickel Mine in 1974 and was an active member of the Associated Mineworkers Union. In 1988, after working his way through the ranks of the labour organization, he became secretary-general of the Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions (ZCTU), the national federation of trade unions. In 1997–98 Tsvangirai successfully led a series of strikes against President Mugabe’s taxation policy. He also served as a chairman of the National Constitutional Assembly, a nongovernmental organization formed in 1997 to support the creation of a new constitution for Zimbabwe.
Tsvangirai resigned from this position in 1999 to form an opposition party, the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), to challenge President Mugabe and his ruling party, the Zimbabwe African National Union–Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF); this was done with the support of the ZCTU—formerly an ally of ZANU-PF. The nascent MDC soon demonstrated its influence: in a February 2000 nationwide referendum, the party helped garner the necessary support to defeat the government’s constitutional reform bill, which included clauses to extend President Mugabe’s rule and expropriate farms from white landowners. In the June 2000 parliamentary elections, Tsvangirai’s MDC provided one of the most serious opposition challenges in the country’s history, winning almost as many seats as ZANU-PF.
Shortly before the presidential election of 2002, in which Tsvangirai was a candidate, he was charged with treason for allegedly plotting to assassinate Mugabe. Tsvangirai was acquitted after enduring a long trial but was again charged with treason in 2003 after calling for mass protests to overthrow the president. Soon after, he was acquitted once more. On October 12, 2005, differences in opinion regarding the participation of the MDC in the national Senate elections led to a split in the party, one faction being led by Tsvangirai and the other by Arthur Mutambara, a former student protest leader, professor, and consultant. Subsequent attempts to solve the conflicts within the party met with only limited success.
On March 11, 2007, Tsvangirai was the centre of international attention after he was the victim of a brutal attack by the Zimbabwean police. While on his way to attend a prayer meeting arranged by local churches, Tsvangirai was seized, arrested, and beaten by the police; other MDC officials were also beaten and imprisoned. Police officials claimed that the confrontation was instigated by MDC activists, but their version of events was not widely accepted, and the Mugabe administration was subject to much international criticism after images of the injured parties circulated throughout the world. After recovering from the attack, Tsvangirai tried to maintain popularity with his supporters while sorting out rivaling interests among MDC party members, with limited success. He also defended himself against state-controlled media propaganda and an increase in intimidation tactics while preparing for the 2008 elections, in which he was again a candidate for president.
Zimbabwe’s presidential, parliamentary, and local elections were held on March 29, 2008. Unofficial preliminary results indicated a favourable outcome for Tsvangirai and his faction of the MDC, but, as days passed with only a slow, partial release of parliamentary results (and the complete absence of presidential results), many feared that Mugabe and ZANU-PF were manipulating the outcome of the elections in their favour. Tsvangirai’s MDC released its own accounting of the presidential election results on April 2, which indicated that Tsvangirai had captured slightly more than half the votes; the MDC’s claims were dismissed by ZANU-PF. Later that day, official results indicated that Tsvangirai’s MDC had won the most seats in the House of Assembly. Senate results announced several days later revealed a split between the MDC and ZANU-PF, with the latter receiving an only slightly larger share of the votes. When the presidential election results were officially released on May 2, they showed that Tsvangirai had won 47.9 percent of the vote compared with Mugabe’s 43.2 percent. However, since he had not secured a majority of the votes, a runoff election would be necessary, which was later scheduled for June 27.
In the weeks leading up to the runoff election, MDC supporters were harassed and attacked; some were murdered. Tsvangirai was repeatedly detained by the police, as were several other MDC officials and supporters, and the party’s secretary-general, Tendai Biti, was arrested and charged with treason. Wary of the increasing levels of violence and intimidation, on June 22 Tsvangirai announced that he would withdraw from the election, citing the impossibility of it being free and fair in the county’s current political climate. Nevertheless, the election was still held, and Mugabe was declared the winner despite assertions from independent observers that the election was neither free nor fair.
The fact that the election was even held—as well as the outcome—prompted widespread international condemnation, most notably from the governments of African countries that had previously supported Mugabe, and there were calls for the MDC and ZANU-PF to form a power-sharing government. To that end, the Southern African Development Community (SADC) sponsored negotiations, led by South African President Thabo Mbeki, between Tsvangirai, Mugabe, and Mutambara. After several weeks of negotiations, the three Zimbabwean leaders signed a comprehensive power-sharing agreement—referred to as the Global Political Agreement (GPA)—on September 15, 2008. As part of the agreement, Mugabe would remain president but would cede some power to Tsvangirai, who would serve as prime minister; Mutambara would serve as a deputy prime minister.
