Myron S. Scholes, in full Myron Samuel Scholes,  (born Jan. 7, 1941, Timmins, Ont., Can.), Canadian-born American economist best known for his work with colleague Fischer Black on the Black-Scholes option valuation formula, which made options trading more accessible by giving investors a benchmark for valuing. Scholes shared the 1997 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences with Robert C. Merton, who generalized the Black-Scholes formula to make it apply to other areas of finance. (Black, who died in 1995, was ineligible for the Nobel Prize, which is not awarded posthumously.)
After attending McMaster University in Hamilton, Ont. (B.A., 1961), Scholes studied under Nobel laureate Merton H. Miller at the University of Chicago (M.B.A., 1964; Ph.D., 1970). Scholes taught at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1968–73) and the University of Chicago (1973–83) before joining Stanford University in 1983 as a professor of both law and finance, becoming emeritus in 1996. He also worked with many economic and financial institutions, including the National Bureau of Economic Research; Salomon Brothers; Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM), which Merton cofounded in 1994; Platinum Grove Asset Management, L.P., which he cofounded in 1999; the Chicago Mercantile Exchange; and Dimensional Fund Advisors. Because of its highly leveraged positions, LTCM lost more than $4 billion in 1998. (After an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) audit found that LTCM had taken $106 million in improper deductions, the firm was liquidated in 2000.)
Before the Black-Scholes formula appeared in 1973, investors had lacked realistic means for determining the future value of an option. Though it was complex and involved many assumptions and restrictions, the formula showed that shares and call options could be combined to form a riskless portfolio. This approach was adopted by traders worldwide as the main method for valuing stock options. Merton expanded the formula to other areas of finance, such as home mortgages, and to risk management in general.
