New Deal,  domestic program of the administration of U.S. Pres. Franklin D. Roosevelt (FDR) between 1933 and 1939, which took action to bring about immediate economic relief as well as reforms in industry, agriculture, finance, waterpower, labour, and housing, vastly increasing the scope of the federal government’s activities. The term was taken from Roosevelt’s speech accepting the Democratic nomination for the presidency on July 2, 1932. Reacting to the ineffectiveness of the administration of Pres. Herbert Hoover in meeting the ravages of the Great Depression, American voters the following November overwhelmingly voted in favour of the Democratic promise of a “new deal” for the “forgotten man.” Opposed to the traditional American political philosophy of laissez-faire, the New Deal generally embraced the concept of a government-regulated economy aimed at achieving a balance between conflicting economic interests.
Much of the New Deal legislation was enacted within the first three months of Roosevelt’s presidency (March 9–June 16, 1933), which became known as the Hundred Days. The new administration’s first objective was to alleviate the suffering of the nation’s huge number of unemployed workers. Such agencies as the Works Progress Administration (WPA) and the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) were established to dispense emergency and short-term governmental aid and to provide temporary jobs, employment on construction projects, and youth work in the national forests. The WPA gave some 8.5 million people jobs. Its construction projects produced more than 650,000 miles of roads, 125,000 public buildings, 75,000 bridges, and 8,000 parks. Also under its aegis were the Federal Art Project, Federal Writers’ Project, and Federal Theatre Project. The CCC provided national conservation work primarily for young unmarried men. Projects included planting trees, building flood barriers, fighting forest fires, and maintaining forest roads and trails.
Before 1935 the New Deal focused on revitalizing the country’s stricken business and agricultural communities. To revive industrial activity, the National Recovery Administration (NRA) was granted authority to help shape industrial codes governing trade practices, wages, hours, child labour, and collective bargaining. The New Deal also tried to regulate the nation’s financial hierarchy in order to avoid a repetition of the stock market crash of 1929 and the massive bank failures that followed. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) granted government insurance for bank deposits in member banks of the Federal Reserve System, and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) was established in 1934 to restore investor confidence in the stock market by ending the misleading sales practices and stock manipulations that had led to the stock market crash. The farm program was centred in the Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA), which attempted to raise prices by controlling the production of staple crops through cash subsidies to farmers. In addition, the arm of the federal government reached into the area of electric power, establishing in 1933 the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), which was to cover a seven-state area and supply cheap electricity, prevent floods, improve navigation, and produce nitrates.
From 1933 to 1944 Roosevelt provided a source of hope and security through his “Fireside Chats,” a series of radio broadcasts that were initially meant to gain support for his New Deal policies. In those “chats” Roosevelt, who understood the importance of radio as a medium, used common language to construct the radio addresses as an informal conversation between himself and an American public greatly in need of reassurance. In his efforts to implement the New Deal, Roosevelt was ably assisted by the popular first lady, Eleanor Roosevelt, who served as her husband’s eyes and ears throughout the nation, embarking on extensive tours and reporting to him on conditions, programs, and public opinion. FDR also had the support of a cabinet full of skillful committed New Dealers, including Harry L. Hopkins, who initially served as the administrator of the Federal Emergency Relief Administration and later as the secretary of commerce. Hopkins personified the ideology of vast federal work programs to relieve unemployment, and by 1938 he had directed the spending of more than $8.5 billion for unemployment relief, aiding some 15 million people. Among the other key members of Roosevelt’s cabinet and New Deal brain trust were Cordell Hull, Harold L. Ickes, Henry Morgenthau, Jr., Frances Perkins, Henry Stimson, and Henry Wallace.
In 1935 the New Deal emphasis shifted to measures designed to assist labour and other urban groups. This additional legislation is sometimes called the “Second New Deal.” The programs of the New Deal, then, fell into three principal categories—relief, recovery, and reform—though several programs provided both relief and recovery. New Deal recovery programs were intended to help stabilize and rebuild the economy, especially its nonbanking sectors. Among other objectives, they sought to increase agricultural prices by holding down supply, to help people remain in their homes, and to foster long-term employment. New Deal reform programs involved legislation that was intended to guard against an economic disaster like the Great Depression ever recurring. In particular, they targeted banking, the stock market, labour, and labour unions.
The Wagner Act of 1935 greatly increased the authority of the federal government in industrial relations and strengthened the organizing power of labour unions, establishing the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) to execute this program. The Fair Labor Standards Act, also called Wages and Hours Act, was the first U.S. legislation to prescribe nationwide compulsory federal regulation of wages and hours. To aid the “forgotten” homeowner, legislation was passed to refinance shaky mortgages and guarantee bank loans for both modernization and mortgage payments. Perhaps the most far-reaching programs of the entire New Deal were the Social Security measures enacted in 1935 and 1939, which used employer and employee contributions to fund the provision of old-age and widows’ benefits, unemployment compensation, and disability insurance.
Certain New Deal laws were declared unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court on the grounds that neither the commerce nor the taxing provisions of the Constitution granted the federal government authority to regulate industry or to undertake social and economic reform. Roosevelt, confident of the legality of all the measures, proposed early in 1937 a reorganization of the Court. This proposal met with vehement opposition and ultimate defeat, but the Court meanwhile ruled in favour of the remaining contested legislation.
Although the programs initiated by the New Deal had little direct expansionary effect on the economy, it remains an open question whether they may nevertheless have had positive effects on consumer and business sentiment. By 1941 real GDP in the United States had recovered to within about 10 percent of its long-run trend path. Therefore, the United States had largely recovered from the Great Depression even before World War II-related military spending accelerated. Despite resistance from business and other segments of the community to “socialistic” tendencies of the New Deal, many of its reforms gradually achieved national acceptance. Roosevelt’s domestic programs were largely followed in the Fair Deal of Pres. Harry S. Truman (1945–53), and both major U.S. parties came to accept most New Deal reforms as a permanent part of the national life.
