Norman Thomas,   (born Nov. 20, 1884, Marion, Ohio, U.S.—died  Dec. 19, 1968, Huntington, N.Y.), American socialist, social reformer, and frequent candidate for political office.
Following his graduation from Union Theological Seminary, New York City, about 1911, Thomas accepted the pastorate of the East Harlem Church and the chairmanship of the American Parish, a settlement house in one of the poorest sections of New York City. He became a pacifist and opposed U.S. participation in World War I. Then, in 1918 Thomas joined the Socialist Party, and, leaving his East Harlem posts the same year, was appointed secretary of the newly formed Fellowship of Reconciliation, an international pacifist organization. In 1921 he became associate editor of the influential liberal weekly The Nation, and the following year he was made executive codirector of the League for Industrial Democracy—a position he held for more than 10 years. He was also one of the founders of the American Civil Liberties Union.
Thomas ran for governor of New York on the Socialist Party ticket in 1924; he ran for mayor of New York City twice (1925, 1929) and for president of the United States in six successive elections beginning in 1928. He was generally critical of the Democratic New Deal administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt, holding that it stressed solution of economic emergencies to the neglect of moral issues.
In 1935 Thomas severed his connection with the New Leader, a magazine then dominated by the Marxist “Old Guard” of the Socialist Party, and supported the newly founded Socialist Call. This internal factionalism, added to Thomas’ pacifist resistance to intervention in World War II, weakened his public influence, though he remained the party’s unofficial popular spokesman in years to come. Following World War II, as chairman of the Postwar World Council, he devoted much of his energy to the problems of international peace and pressed for a cessation of fighting in Indochina.
Thomas’ many books include The Test of Freedom (1954), Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen (1955), The Prerequisites for Peace (1959), and Socialism Re-examined (1963).
