Partnership,  voluntary association of two or more persons for the purpose of managing a business enterprise and sharing its profits or losses. In the usual partnership each general partner has full power to act for the firm in carrying on its business; thus, partners are at once proprietors and also agents of their copartners. Each partner not only is individually liable to third persons for the obligations incurred for the firm but also is equally liable for obligations incurred by copartners when they are acting within the scope of the firm’s business.
If a partner has paid or been required to pay creditors of the firm from personal assets, other partners may be expected to contribute on an equal or some other agreed-upon basis. If copartners have become insolvent, however, this remedy for unlimited personal liability may be inadequate. Unlimited personal liability has been one factor restricting the partnership form of business to small enterprises.
Unlike the corporation, the partnership is regarded merely as an aggregation of persons doing business under a common name and not as a legal entity separate and apart from its shareholders. The implication of this is that the earnings of the partnership will be taxed only as personal earnings of the partners. Although corporations are usually organized to have perpetual existence, partnerships may be dissolved at any time upon the withdrawal or death of a partner. Dissolution may be avoided by issuing transferable shares, but this device is usually not feasible except by a large organization in which, as in the case of a corporation, operating control can be centralized in a board of managers. In the United States the demand for a hybrid of corporate and partnership structure led to the creation of the limited-liability company (LLC), a form of business organization that restricts the liabilities of individuals (as in a corporation) while also simplifying the taxation of income by passing profits or losses onto individuals (as in a partnership). First instituted in Wyoming in 1977, LLCs had been adopted in all 50 states by 1996. (See also limited liability.)
