Peter A. Diamond, in full Peter Arthur Diamond,  (born April 29, 1940, New York City, N.Y., U.S.), American economist who was a corecipient, with Dale T. Mortensen and Christopher A. Pissarides, of the 2010 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences “for their analysis of markets with search frictions.” The theoretical framework collectively developed by the three men—which describes the search activity of the unemployed, the methods by which firms recruit and formulate wages, and the effects of economic policies and regulation—became widely used in labour market analysis.
Diamond received a bachelor’s degree in mathematics from Yale University in 1960 and a Ph.D. in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1963. He was assistant professor of economics at the University of California, Berkeley, until 1966, when he returned to MIT as an associate professor. He became a full professor in 1970 and then acceded to a series of chaired positions. Diamond also acted as research associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research from 1991 and held several other academic and editorial posts.
Diamond first gained attention in the 1960s for his work on the economic ramifications of national debt. He was honoured by the Nobel committee, however, for his later analysis of frictions in markets—that is, external factors that prevent buyers or searchers from finding a suitable match. Diamond’s theories challenged the classical market view in which buyers and sellers are well informed and find each other simultaneously, without costs, ensuring that supply and demand are in balance. In a groundbreaking article in 1971, he demonstrated that when buyers sought the best possible price and sellers set their price after having taken into account the costs associated with the buyer’s search, the resulting price would be the same as that set by a monopolist in a corresponding market. His finding that the only equilibrium price was the monopoly price became known as the Diamond paradox. Along with Mortensen and Pissarides, Diamond then applied these concepts to the labour market to identify and explain situations in which high unemployment rates coexist with many job vacancies. In 2010–11 he was nominated three times by U.S. Pres. Barack Obama to serve on the Federal Reserve Board; in each case, however, Senate Republicans prevented a vote on his confirmation, and he eventually withdrew his name from consideration.
