Prachanda, byname of Pushpa Kamal Dahal,  (born December 11, 1954, Lewadi, Nepal), Nepali rebel leader and politician who headed the Maoist insurgency that ended Nepal’s monarchy and established the country as a democratic republic, which he served as its first prime minister (2008–09); he later was returned to that office (2016–17).
Pushpa Kamal Dahal was born into a poor farming family in the mountainous Kaski district of central Nepal. At age 11 he moved with his family to Chitwan district, where a schoolteacher indoctrinated him in communism. In 1975 he graduated from the Institute of Agriculture and Animal Science in Rampur, Chitwan district.
In 1980 Prachanda (a nom de guerre meaning “fierce”) was tasked with leading the All Nepal National Free Students’ Union (Revolutionary), which was affiliated with the radical Communist Party of Nepal (Masal), or CPN (Masal [meaning “flame” in Nepalese]). In 1983 he was elected to the central committee of the CPN (Masal), which soon split into the CPN (Masal) and the CPN (Fourth Convention). In 1985 the CPN (Masal) divided again, into the CPN (Masal) and the CPN (Mashal [“flame” in Sanskrit]). Prachanda joined the latter, becoming a member of the politburo and rising to the position of general secretary in 1989. Several leftist parties merged in 1990 to form the CPN (Unity Centre), with Prachanda as a general secretary, but in 1994 it also split in two. In March 1995 Prachanda renamed his branch to reflect its Maoist leanings—the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist).
The CPN (Maoist) launched its insurgent campaign to abolish the monarchy with an attack on several police stations on February 13, 1996. During 10 years of insurgency, Prachanda remained underground, spending 8 of those years in India. Though the campaign led by Prachanda did not enjoy consistent good fortune, it was ultimately successful in its goal of ending Nepal’s 237-year-old monarchy.
Because Prachanda had spent nearly his entire career underground, he at first held little political appeal for the Nepalese public, which tended to view him with suspicion. After his June 2006 public appearance in a meeting with Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala and opposition leaders to negotiate the creation of the country’s new government, however, his popularity began to increase. From the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in November 2006, the CPN (Maoist) worked to have Prachanda installed as the head of the new government.
Under Prachanda’s leadership, the CPN (Maoist) won 220 seats in the April 10, 2008, elections, becoming the single largest party in the 601-member Constituent Assembly. The following month the new assembly voted to declare Nepal a democratic republic, thereby ending the monarchy, and on August 15 it elected Prachanda prime minister.
Sworn into office on August 18, 2008, Prachanda, who had no previous experience with parliamentary politics, was faced with the task of rebuilding his country. In May 2009 he fired the army chief, who had refused to free some 20,000 Maoist rebels and enlist them in the country’s military, a condition of the 2006 peace agreement. Pres. Ram Baran Yadav, however, overturned Prachanda’s order. Faced with a power struggle, Prachanda resigned on May 4, 2009.
In August 2016 Prachanda was again elected prime minister by the Constituent Assembly; the previous prime minister, Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli, had resigned ahead of a confidence vote that he was expected to lose. Prachanda, the only official candidate, was elected after obtaining the backing of the Madhesi Front, a coalition of political parties representing the interests of the Madhes people of the Tarai region. His party also entered a power-sharing deal with the Nepali Congress party. In accordance with the terms of that agreement, Prachanda stepped down in May 2017, and Sher Bahadur Deuba, leader of the Nepali Congress, succeeded him.
As parliamentary elections approached, Prachanda broke with the Nepali Congress and formed an alliance with Oli and his Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist-Leninist). Together, the two parties swept the elections. In May 2018 the two parties merged into the Nepal Communist Party and formally dissolved their respective factions.
Under a power-sharing deal, Oli and Prachanda were expected to rotate the office of prime minister. Prachanda sought greater influence during Oli’s stint, however, and in November 2019 he agreed to allow Oli to serve as prime minister for the government’s full five-year term in exchange for Prachanda taking executive leadership of the party. Although Prachanda intended for Oli to consult the party on major decisions thereafter, Oli made many important decisions unilaterally. Prachanda then insisted that Oli observe the original agreement to rotate the prime minister’s office, but in December 2020 Oli opted instead to recommend that the president dissolve parliament and call early elections. Prachanda condemned the move as unconstitutional and appealed to supporters to take to the streets in protest.
