Red Army Faction (RAF),  also called Red Army Fraction, byname Baader-Meinhof Gang, German Rote Armee Fraktion and Baader-Meinhof Gruppe,  West German radical leftist group formed in 1968 and popularly named after two of its early leaders, Andreas Baader (1943–77) and Ulrike Meinhof (1934–76).
The group had its origins among the radical elements of the German university protest movement of the 1960s, which decried the United States as an imperialist power and characterized the West German government as a fascist holdover of the Nazi era. From its early years, members supported themselves through bank robberies and engaged in terrorist bombings and arson, especially of West German corporations and businesses and of West German and U.S. military installations in West Germany. They also kidnapped and assassinated prominent political and business figures. The goal of their terrorist campaign was to trigger an aggressive response from the government, which group members believed would spark a broader revolutionary movement. As its tactics became more violent, however, it lost much of the support it had enjoyed among the West German political left. By the mid-1970s the group had expanded its scope outside West Germany and occasionally allied itself with militant Palestinian groups. For example, in 1976 two Baader-Meinhof guerrillas took part in a Palestinian hijacking of an Air France jetliner, which eventually ended after the successful Entebbe raid in Uganda by Israeli commandos.
The Red Army Faction included at least 22 core members in the early 1970s, most of whom, including Meinhof, had been jailed by the summer of 1972. Baader, escaping one imprisonment in 1970, was arrested again in 1972. Meinhof hanged herself in her cell in 1976. Three others, including Baader, were found shot dead in their cells on October 18, 1977. Ostensibly suicides, their deaths came one day after West German commandos stormed a hijacked Lufthansa plane in Mogadishu, Somalia, blocking the hijackers’ attempt to win the release of their jailed comrades as ransom for their hostages. Thereafter, the Red Army Faction continued its terrorist activities and splintered into a number of groups.
After the collapse of the communist government in East Germany in 1989–90, it was discovered that the Red Army Faction had been given training, shelter, and supplies by the Stasi, the secret police of the former communist regime. Greatly weakened by the demise of communism throughout eastern Europe, the group announced an end to its terrorist campaign in 1992, and several of its surviving militants were arrested and tried. However, it retained a following among some European radicals, and in 1996 several thousand sympathizers attended a meeting to commemorate the anniversary of Meinhof’s death. The group formally disbanded in 1998, though arrests and trials continued.
