Regional development program,  any government program designed to encourage the industrial and economic development of regions that are stagnant or in which a large portion of the population is experiencing prolonged unemployment. The measures taken may include loans, grants, and tax incentives to private industries relocating in such areas; assistance in developing power, light, transportation, and sanitation facilities; and various degrees of central control over the location of plant construction and expansion. Most of the more industrialized countries have adopted some type of regional development program since World War II. An alternative approach to the problem, also widely practiced, is to retrain and relocate workers. Regional development may be favoured if the inhabitants have a strong attachment to the area or if the population density in cities where they might relocate is already unmanageably great.
The most common method of encouraging industry to enter such areas is to offer grants, loans, and loan guarantees to companies relocating or expanding in such areas. France, for example, has given subsidies related to the amount of investment and the number of new jobs created, as well as loans, interest subsidies, and free land sites. Japan has made state-owned land available for private industrial development. Loan and interest assistance have been elements in area development plans in Germany, the Netherlands, the United States, Great Britain, and Japan.
Great Britain, Sweden, and France have maintained some central control over the selection of sites for industrial construction and expansion. British Board of Trade approval, for example, is necessary for new large industrial project sites. The Economic and Social Development Fund of France has exercised negative sanctions by withholding building permits for unapproved sites. Sweden’s Labour Market Board, by refusing to approve loans, can direct new business investment out of labour-shortage areas.
France and Japan are among countries that have extended various tax incentives to companies investing in depressed or rural areas. In Great Britain the Board of Trade can offer assistance in developing the regional organization necessary to economic expansion; this help is also an element in some American programs. Another measure to facilitate economic development is the provision of low-cost housing. See also development bank.
