Retailing,  the selling of merchandise and certain services to consumers. It ordinarily involves the selling of individual units or small lots to large numbers of customers by a business set up for that specific purpose. In the broadest sense, retailing can be said to have begun the first time one item of value was bartered for another. In the more restricted sense of a specialized full-time commercial activity, retailing began several thousand years ago when peddlers first began hawking their wares and when the first marketplaces were formed.
As with most other business activities, retailing is extremely competitive, and the mortality rate of retail establishments is relatively high. The basic competition is based on price, but, for brick-and-mortar retailers (those that operate within a physical building), this is moderated somewhat by non-price forms of competition such as convenience of location, selection and display of merchandise, attractiveness of the retail establishment itself, and intangible factors such as reputation in the community. Competition for sales has led to a blurring of traditional product lines in retailing, and many establishments offer a much wider variety of merchandise than their basic classification would indicate (e.g., drugstores may carry food, clothing, office supplies, hardware, etc.). Some retailers specialize in merchandise sold in bulk, while others, notably Walmart, created extremely large superstores offering groceries as well as an enormous variety of other goods at discounted prices.
The advent of the Internet and its increasing use for e-commerce in the 1990s resulted in a revolutionary shift in retailing away from brick-and-mortar stores and toward online retailing, in which customers shop for and purchase merchandise through personal computers, mobile phones, or other Internet-connected devices. Many established retailers began selling merchandise online to customers who appreciated the convenience of shopping from their homes, while new wholly online retailers and “e-malls,” led by eBay (an online auction site) and Amazon.com, enjoyed spectacular growth. By the 2010s those trends had led to significant declines in sales at many brick-and-mortar retailers, though a large majority of retail purchases in the United States and elsewhere continued to take place in physical stores. See also marketing.
