Southern Student Organizing Committee (SSOC),  organization of students from predominantly white colleges and universities in the American South that promoted racial equality and other progressive causes during the American civil rights movement. Founded in Nashville, Tennessee, in 1964, the Southern Student Organizing Committee (SSOC) dedicated itself to encouraging progressive activism on mostly Southern campuses and ultimately to creating a more just, peaceful, and democratic society in the South. Maintaining close ties to the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) and to Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), the SSOC was variously described as the “white students’ SNCC” and the “Southern New Left.” By the time it disbanded itself in 1969, the SSOC comprised more than 500 members and nearly 50 chapters.
SSOC members initially joined sit-ins and other protests by African American students, and they often spearheaded efforts to desegregate their campuses and the surrounding towns. The organization soon became heavily involved in broader civil rights efforts, including campaigns in 1964 to increase voter registration among African Americans in the Deep South (the Freedom Summer) and to raise awareness of racism among Southern whites (the White Folks Project). The SSOC was subsequently a leader among Southern organizations in efforts to end the Vietnam War, sponsoring campus speaking engagements (“peace tours”) in six Southern states. Many of those events violated in loco parentis (“in the place of a parent”) regulations, which limited the free speech of students on campuses throughout the country. SSOC members also helped to organize the Vietnam Summer education campaign across the South during the summer of 1967.
SSOC members assisted labour organizing drives among textile workers, migrant workers, tobacco pickers, and campus employees throughout the South. The organization also helped to stage a Southern grape boycott in support of the United Farm Workers and to garner student support for the United Mine Workers.
The SSOC was disbanded amid disagreement about the future of the organization at a June 1969 conference attended by about 100 people, including members of the SDS. Although it was short-lived, the SSOC left its mark on a changing South and broke significantly and visibly with the notion of a “solid South” of whites desperate to defend the old patterns of racism.
