Special economic zone (SEZ),  Chinese (Pinyin) jingji tequ or (Wade-Giles romanization) ching-chi t’e-chü,  any of several localities in which foreign and domestic trade and investment are conducted without the authorization of the Chinese central government in Beijing. Special economic zones are intended to function as zones of rapid economic growth by using tax and business incentives to attract foreign investment and technology.
The first four special economic zones were created in 1980 in southeastern coastal China and consisted of what were then the small cities of Shenzhen, Zhuhai, and Shantou in Guangdong province and Xiamen (Amoy) in Fujian province. In these areas, local governments have been allowed to offer tax incentives to foreign investors and to develop their own infrastructure without the approval of the central government. Business enterprises have made most of their own investment, production, and marketing decisions, and foreign ownership of such ventures has been legalized. Though some of them began as little more than small towns, the new SEZs soon attracted foreign investment and became boomtowns, with rapidly expanding light and consumer-goods industries and growing populations—notably, Shenzhen’s population grew from some 30,000 in 1979 to more than 1,000,000 by the beginning of the 21st century.
Encouraged by the zones’ success, the Chinese government in 1984 opened 14 larger and older cities along the coast to foreign trade and investment. These “open” cities offered foreign investors much the same incentives as in the special economic zones, but their corporate income taxes were higher. In 1988 Hainan Island was made a separate province and a special economic zone, and in 1990 the Pudong area within the Shanghai municipality became a special economic zone with policies even more flexible than those already in force in the original four SEZs. In 1992 the Chinese government decided to adopt some of the same policies in some two dozen major cities in inland China, including many provincial capitals, as a means of encouraging foreign investment in them.
