Steven D. Levitt, in full Steven David Levitt,  (born May 29, 1967, Boston, Massachusetts), American economist whose work has been influential in many social science disciplines, including political economy, sociology, political science, the economics of crime, and the study of law. In 2003 he received the John Bates Clark Medal, which is awarded annually by the American Economic Association to an American economist under the age of 40 whose work has contributed substantially to the field.
Levitt grew up in Minneapolis, Minnesota. He received a bachelor’s degree in economics from Harvard University in 1989 and a Ph.D. in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1994. After working as a junior fellow at the Harvard Society of Fellows for three years, he joined the department of economics at the University of Chicago.
Levitt earned his reputation as a researcher by applying innovative empirical strategies to analyze data in new ways. In so doing he was able to clear up long-standing puzzles by establishing solutions that had previously been difficult to prove. In his paper “The Effect of Prison Population Size on Crime Rates: Evidence from Prison Overcrowding Litigation” (1996), for example, he isolated the causal relationship between incarceration rates and crime rates, showing that policies that increase incarceration have a greater impact in reducing crime than had previously been thought. In other work on street gangs, Levitt and his colleague Sudhir A. Venkatesh refuted the popular view that most youth crimes are the work of a few “super predators.” Among his most controversial findings (published in a joint paper with John J. Donohue III) was that legalized abortion indirectly decreases crime by reducing the number of “unwanted” and thus less-cared-for children.
Levitt’s work reached a broader audience with the publication of his first book (coauthored with Stephen J. Dubner), Freakonomics: A Rogue Economist Explores the Hidden Side of Everything (2005). A collection of Levitt’s research findings addressed to a lay audience, it became a best seller.  Follow-up Freakonomics books by Levitt and Dubner were also well received.
