Svetozar Marković,  (born Sept. 21 [Sept. 9, Old Style], 1846, Jagodina, Serbia, Ottoman Empire—died March 10, 1875, Trieste, Austro-Hungarian Empire [now in Italy]), political writer who was largely responsible for introducing socialism into Serbia and whom the Yugoslav Communists claim as their precursor. He was a skilled popularizer of political ideas, an inveterate controversialist, a courageous fighter, and a strong influence on the realist trend in Serbian literature.
Marković studied in Belgrade, in St. Petersburg, and in Zürich, where he first was influenced by Marxism. A member of the Socialist International, he edited the first Serbian socialist newspaper, Radnik (“The Worker”; founded 1871), which was more concerned with economics than with politics. When the Serbian government took repressive measures, Marković went into exile briefly. He returned to edit the newspaper Javnost (“Public Opinion”; 1873), which placed greater emphasis on politics than on economics, and then Glas Javnosti (“The Voice of Public Opinion”; 1874). After a nine-month term of imprisonment for his writings, he edited the newspaper Oslobodjenje (“Liberation”) until poor health forced his retirement.
Marković hoped to avoid a capitalist phase in Serbia and to progress directly from a primitive agrarian stage to a sophisticated agrarian socialism. In Serbia during his lifetime there was virtually no capitalism or a working class. With no one else in sight, he attacked civil servants, though they were not capitalists, and favoured small landholders, though they were not proletarians. He denounced bureaucracy, professional judges, and written laws; promoted the study of economics; urged the masses to be concerned with politics; and taught the elements of Socialism to many young Serbian intellectuals. His ideas influenced the development of the cooperative movement among the South Slavs.
In addition to playing a role in the political evolution of Serbia, Marković had a marked effect on the country’s literary development. His realistic writings (eight volumes), published between 1891 and 1912, were reissued by the Tito government of Yugoslavia.
