Todor Zhivkov, in full Todor Khristov Zhivkov,  (born Sept. 7, 1911, Pravets, near Botevgrad, Bulg.—died Aug. 5, 1998, Sofia, Bulg.), first secretary of the ruling Bulgarian Communist Party’s Central Committee (1954–89) and president of Bulgaria (1971–89). His 35 years as Bulgaria’s ruler made him the longest-serving leader in any of the Soviet-bloc nations of eastern Europe.
The son of poor peasants, Zhivkov rose in the Communist Party and during World War II helped organize the resistance movement known as the People’s Liberation Insurgent Army. After the war and the institution of a Soviet-sponsored communist government in Bulgaria, Zhivkov held increasingly important posts, including the command of the People’s Militia, which arrested thousands of political opponents. In March 1954 he was made first secretary of the Central Committee—the youngest leader of any nation in the Soviet bloc—and, as a protégé of the Soviet leader Nikita S. Khrushchev, emerged as the strongman in the internal party struggles that followed.
From 1962 to 1971 Zhivkov served as premier of Bulgaria and in the latter year was elected president of the State Council formed by Bulgaria’s new constitution. In 1965 he survived an attempted coup d’état by dissident party members and military officers—the first ever within a communist regime. Zhivkov hewed closely to the Soviet line in both domestic and foreign affairs. He collectivized his country’s agriculture, firmly repressed internal dissent, and cultivated close ties with Khrushchev’s successor, Leonid Brezhnev.
In 1989 when communist governments across eastern Europe began to collapse, a coup arose within his own party, and Zhivkov resigned all his posts in November of that year. He was subsequently expelled from the Bulgarian Communist Party in December and was placed under arrest in January 1990. Zhivkov was convicted of embezzlement in 1992 and sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment. He was allowed to serve his sentence under house arrest on account of his failing health, and in 1998 he was reinstated as a member of the Communist Party’s successor organization, the Socialist Party.
