Walter Reuther, in full Walter Philip Reuther,  (born September 1, 1907, Wheeling, West Virginia, U.S.—died May 9, 1970, Pellston, Michigan), American labour leader who was president of the United Automobile Workers (UAW) and of the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) and was active in national and international affairs.
Reuther’s negotiating skills helped win numerous bargaining gains for the UAW. These included annual raises based on productivity advances, cost-of-living increases, supplementary unemployment benefits, early-retirement options, and health and welfare benefits.
As the son of a trade-union and socialist activist, Reuther became an apprentice tool and die maker in Wheeling at the age of 16 and, upon moving to Detroit, Michigan, at 19, became a tool and die craftsman. He was soon promoted to a foreman’s post and went on to complete high school and three years of college. In the 1930s Reuther and his brother Victor spent three years traveling around the world, working for almost two years in an automobile factory in the Soviet Union. The experience led him to condemn the lack of freedom in communist societies. He would go on to fight the communist elements in the UAW and the CIO.
While president of his local union on the west side of Detroit, Reuther helped lead the sit-down strikes that established the UAW as a force in the automobile industry. He became director of the General Motors Department of the UAW in 1939 and was president of the union from 1946 until his death. In 1952 Reuther succeeded Philip Murray as president of the CIO; in that position he became an architect of the AFL-CIO merger in 1955. Reuther, elected a vice president of the merged labour federation and president of its Industrial Union Department, held positions that made him second only to George Meany, president of the combined AFL-CIO. At the same time, Reuther served as vice president of the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions, a counterforce to the communist-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions.
Reuther’s relationship with Meany—whom he criticized for dictatorial control, conservatism, and inaction—had deteriorated by 1968, which prompted Reuther to withdraw the UAW from the federation he had helped create. The following year he launched the Alliance for Labor Action in cooperation with the Teamsters, a union that had been expelled from the AFL-CIO in 1957 on charges of corruption.
In 1970 Reuther and his wife were killed in a plane crash near Pellston, Michigan.
