Yakov Mikhaylovich Sverdlov,  (born May 22 [June 3, New Style], 1885, Nizhny Novgorod, Russia—died  March 16, 1919, Moscow), Soviet Communist Party leader and government official. His organizational skills and mastery of personnel made him a key figure in the Bolshevik Party in 1917–18.
The son of a Jewish engraver, Sverdlov became involved in politics while a teenager and joined the Russian Social-Democratic Workers’ Party in 1902. When that party split in 1903, he joined the Bolshevik faction and remained thereafter a faithful adherent of the policies of Vladimir Lenin. Sverdlov became a party organizer and agitator, working primarily in the Urals, where he headed the Bolshevik underground. He was arrested a number of times and consequently served prison terms and periods of internal exile. While in exile he was co-opted in 1912 into the Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party.
After the Russian monarchy was overthrown in early 1917, Sverdlov returned to Petrograd (St. Petersburg) from internal exile. He was soon reelected to the party’s Central Committee and was appointed to head the party Secretariat. The remarkable talents he displayed in the latter post made him in effect the party’s chief organizer and its director of personnel. Sverdlov figured importantly in the planning and execution of the Revolution of October 1917, which brought the Bolsheviks to power.
Sverdlov was subsequently elected chairman of the Central Executive Committee (CEC) of the All-Russian Congress of Soviets, thereby becoming titular head of the Bolshevik state (Nov. 8, 1917). He used his power to bring the CEC and other organs of the new Soviet government firmly under Bolshevik Party control. Like Lenin, Sverdlov believed in a highly centralized party hierarchy, and he worked to place all decision-making power in the party’s Central Committee. His working relations with Lenin were extremely close, with the two men dominating decision making in the Central Committee by late 1918. It was Sverdlov who in July 1918 authorized the Urals Soviet to execute the Romanov imperial family in Yekaterinburg that month.
Sverdlov died of an infectious illness in 1919 and was buried on Moscow’s Red Square. In 1924 the city of Yekaterinburg in the Urals, where he had performed much of his early party work, was renamed Sverdlovsk in his honour. (The city reverted to its original name in 1991.) Sverdlov’s untimely death created a void in the Communist Party’s organizational machinery that was never satisfactorily filled; Joseph Stalin took over the party’s Secretariat in 1922.
