Zhou Enlai, Wade-Giles romanization Chou En-lai,  (born March 5, 1898, Huai’an, Jiangsu province, China—died Jan. 8, 1976, Beijing), leading figure in the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and premier (1949–76) and foreign minister (1949–58) of the People’s Republic of China, who played a major role in the Chinese Revolution and later in the conduct of China’s foreign relations. He was an important member of the CCP from its beginnings in 1921 and became one of the great negotiators of the 20th century and a master of policy implementation, with infinite capacity for details. He survived internecine purges, always managing to retain his position in the party leadership. Renowned for his charm and subtlety, Zhou was described as affable, pragmatic, and persuasive.
Zhou was born to a gentry family, but the family’s fortune declined during his early youth. In 1910 he was taken by one of his uncles to Fengtian (present-day Shenyang) in northeastern China, where he received his elementary education. He graduated from a well-known middle school in Tianjin and went to Japan in 1917 for further studies. He returned to Tianjin in the wake of the student demonstrations in Beijing that became known as the May Fourth Movement (1917–21). He was active in student publications and agitation until being arrested in 1920. After his release from jail that fall, he left for France under a work-and-study program. It was in France that Zhou made a lifelong commitment to the communist cause. He became an organizer for the CCP in Europe after its founding in Shanghai in July 1921.
In the summer of 1924 Zhou returned to China and took part in the national revolution, led by Sun Yat-sen’s Nationalist Party (Kuomintang) in Guangzhou (Canton) with CCP collaboration and Russian assistance. It was at this time, in 1925, that he married Deng Yingchao, a student activist who later became a prominent member of the CCP. Zhou was appointed deputy director of the political department of the Whampoa (Huangpu) Military Academy, where future Nationalist leader Chiang Kai-shek (Jiang Jieshi) was the commandant. Early in 1927 Zhou became director of the military department of the CCP Central Committee.
When Chiang’s troops were on the outskirts of Shanghai in March 1927, Zhou organized the workers’ seizure of that city for the Nationalists. But Chiang soon afterward purged his former communist allies, and Zhou barely escaped with his life to Wuhan, the new centre of communist power, where the CCP was still working closely with the left-wing branch of the Nationalist Party. There, in April 1927, during the party’s Fifth National Congress, Zhou was elected to the CCP Central Committee and to its Politburo.
Following the left-Nationalist split with the communists, Zhou took a major role in organizing the communist insurrection known as the Nanchang Uprising (August 1927). Upon the Nationalists’ recapture of the city of Nanchang, Zhou retreated to eastern Guangdong province and then escaped to Shanghai via Hong Kong.
Zhou was confirmed in his party leadership posts during a visit to Moscow in 1928 for the Sixth National Congress of the CCP, after which he returned to China to help rebuild the battered CCP organization. In the late 1920s the CCP centre, operating underground in Shanghai, continued to stress urban uprisings, but communist attempts to seize major cities failed repeatedly, with great losses. Zhou left Shanghai in 1931 for Jiangxi province, where Zhu De and Mao Zedong had been developing communist rural bases (soviets) since 1928. In late 1931 the party centre, under increasingly heavy police pressure in Shanghai, also moved to Jiangxi, and Zhou succeeded Mao as the political commissar of the Red Army, which was commanded by Zhu De.
Although Zhou initially allied himself with the CCP leaders who wrested control of policy making in the Jiangxi soviet from Mao’s hands, the two men eventually entered into a close association that would last unbroken until Zhou’s death. Chiang Kai-shek’s campaigns finally forced the communists to retreat from Jiangxi and other soviet areas in south-central China in October 1934 and begin the Long March to a new base in northern China. Mao gained control of the party apparatus during the Long March; he also took over Zhou’s directorship of the Central Committee’s military department. Zhou thenceforth faithfully supported Mao’s leadership in the party.
The Long March ended in October 1935 at Yan’an in northern Shaanxi province, and, with the securing of the communists’ base there, Zhou became the party’s chief negotiator and was set to the difficult task of forming a tactical alliance with the Nationalists. Exploiting the growing national sentiment against Japanese aggression and carrying out Moscow’s new so-called popular-front strategy against fascism, the CCP in late 1935 proposed to unite with the Nationalists and all patriotic Chinese in order to resist Japan. When in December 1936 Chiang Kai-shek was arrested in Xi’an (in Shaanxi; the Xi’an Incident) by his generals, who wanted to stop the CCP-Nationalist civil war, Zhou immediately flew to that city. He persuaded the dissident commanders not to kill Chiang and helped obtain the Nationalist leader’s release on condition that he cease military attacks against the communists and cooperate with them in the United Front against Japan.
Zhou helped negotiate the formation of the United Front after the outbreak of the Sino-Japanese War in July 1937, and from then until 1943 he was the CCP’s chief representative to the Nationalist government. Two weeks after the Japanese surrender in August 1945, Zhou accompanied Mao Zedong to Chongqing for peace talks with Chiang Kai-shek. When Mao returned to Yan’an six weeks later, Zhou remained in Chongqing to continue the negotiations. Zhou was also a leading participant in the unsuccessful peace negotiations with the Nationalists in 1946 that were sponsored by the United States and held under Gen. George C. Marshall. Zhou’s skillful cultivation of the communists’ image among liberal politicians and intellectuals who had become disenchanted with the Nationalists at that time became an important factor in Chiang’s eventual downfall after the resumption of full-scale civil war in 1947.
As premier of the People’s Republic of China from its inception in October 1949, Zhou became the chief administrator of China’s huge civil bureaucracy. Serving concurrently as foreign minister, he also bore heavy responsibilities in foreign affairs and continued to play a key role in diplomacy after relinquishing the post of foreign minister. On Feb. 14, 1950, Zhou signed in Moscow a 30-year Chinese-Soviet treaty of alliance, and, at the 1955 Afro-Asian conference that convened at Bandung, Indon. (the Bandung Conference), he offered China’s support to Asian nonaligned nations. Between 1956 and 1964 Zhou traveled widely throughout Europe, Asia, and Africa, proclaiming the latter continent “ripe for revolution.” Zhou visited Moscow in 1964, but he was unable to resolve the fundamental differences that had arisen between China and the Soviet Union. After the U.S. envoy Henry A. Kissinger visited him in Beijing in July 1971, Zhou’s reputation as a diplomat and negotiator was widely noted by the American press. The historic meeting between Mao Zedong and U.S. Pres. Richard M. Nixon that took place in Beijing in February 1972 was, to a great extent, arranged and implemented by Zhou.
Zhou meanwhile maintained his leading position in the CCP. In 1956 he was elected one of the party’s four vice chairmen. Although Lin Biao emerged after the Cultural Revolution (1966–76) as the only vice chairman of the party, Zhou remained the third-ranking member of the Standing Committee of the Politburo. During the Cultural Revolution he played a key role in exercising restraints on the extremists and was probably the single most important stabilizing factor during that chaotic period. During the waning of the Cultural Revolution in the early 1970s, Zhou sought to restore Deng Xiaoping and other former moderate leaders to positions of power.
