Zhu De, Wade-Giles romanization Chu Teh,  (born Dec. 1, 1886, Yilong, Sichuan province, China—died  July 6, 1976, Beijing), one of China’s greatest military leaders and the founder of the Chinese communist army.
Born into a peasant family, Zhu was initially a physical education instructor. In 1911 he graduated from the Yunnan Military Academy and took part in the revolution that overthrew the Qing dynasty. For the next 10 years Zhu served as a middle-ranking officer and then a brigade commander in the armies of warlords in Sichuan and Yunnan provinces in southwestern China. In 1922, disillusioned with warlordism and the chaotic politics of republican China in general, he went to Europe and studied in Berlin and at the University of Göttingen. While in Germany he joined the Chinese Communist Party.
Expelled from Germany for his political activities, Zhu went to the Soviet Union for a while then returned in 1926 to China, where, concealing his communist affiliation, he became an officer in the Nationalist (Kuomintang) Army. In August 1927 he took part in the communist-led Nanchang Uprising against the Nationalists, an event that is regarded by communists as marking the birth of the Chinese Red Army. When the Nanchang Uprising was crushed by the Nationalists, Zhu led his remaining troops south to Fujian, Guangdong, and eventually Hunan province, where they linked up with the small guerrilla forces of Mao Zedong. The two formed the 4th Red Army, with Zhu De as commander and Mao Zedong as political commissar. They established a base, or soviet, in Jiangxi province, and Zhu built up the Red Army from 5,000 troops in 1929 to 200,000 in 1933. He commanded the Red Army’s successful defense of the Jiangxi soviet against the Nationalists’ first four campaigns (1931–33) to annihilate it. Zhu then served as commander in chief of the Red Army throughout the communists’ 6,000-mile- (10,000- km- ) long retreat (1934–35) to Shaanxi province, a journey known as the Long March.
After the communists had formed an alliance with the Nationalists to resist the Japanese invasion of China in 1937, Zhu directly commanded the Red Army’s northern forces, renamed the Eighth Route Army. He retained overall command of all communist military operations against the Japanese from 1937 to 1945. Upon the Japanese surrender in 1945 and the resumption of the civil war between the Nationalists and the communists, Zhu commanded the renamed People’s Liberation Army (PLA), which defeated the Nationalists and drove them from the mainland. He retained command of the PLA of the new People’s Republic of China until 1954. Although a Political Bureau member from 1934, Zhu was never regarded as a contender for political power. When ranks were initiated in the army he was made a marshal, and from 1959 he served as chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress, the nominal legislature.
Zhu De, along with Mao Zedong, was primarily responsible for the Chinese Red Army’s major contribution to modern warfare—the elevation of guerrilla warfare from a minor supplement of conventional forces to a major strategic concept, particularly for revolutionary armies. Under Zhu, the Red Army developed as a highly mobile, flexible, and self-sufficient force that operated throughout the countryside and won the support of the rural population through its discipline, courage, and responsiveness. Zhu’s strategy was customarily to destroy the enemy’s forces piecemeal and by attrition rather than by fighting pitched battles with massed troops. Control of the countryside was regarded as more important in the long run than costly attempts to overrun and hold large cities. Zhu’s perfection of virtually all aspects of large-scale guerrilla warfare was a major factor in the Red Army’s crushing defeat of the Nationalist forces in the period from 1946 to 1949.
