Acyclovir, also called acycloguanosine,  antiviral drug used to control the symptoms of infections involving herpes simplex virus (HSV), which causes herpes simplex, or varicella-zoster virus (VZV; a type of herpesvirus), which causes shingles and chickenpox. Acyclovir was first discovered in the mid-1970s and is effective against active, replicating HSV or VZV.
Acyclovir belongs to a group of synthetic drugs called nucleoside analogs, which are characterized by their similarity to naturally occurring nucleosides—the structural subunits of DNA and RNA—that are found in cells and viruses. However, synthetic nucleoside analogs lack specific components of their natural counterparts and therefore—once incorporated into the genetic material of a cell or virus during replication—are unable to bind subsequent nucleosides, thereby terminating the synthesis of new strands of DNA or RNA.
Acyclovir, similar to all other nucleoside analogs, must be activated by addition of a phosphate group (phosphorylation) before it can inhibit the synthesis of viral DNA (HSV and VZV are DNA viruses). Acyclovir is phosphorylated by a viral enzyme called thymidine kinase (TK), to which the drug has a high affinity (attraction). Phosphorylation by either HSV-TK or VZV-TK converts acyclovir into acyclovir triphosphate, which is then incorporated into viral DNA, thereby blocking further DNA synthesis. Because acyclovir is attracted to a specific type of viral kinase, the drug enters and acts on only those cells infected with HSV or VZV. Thus, it is highly effective in disrupting the formation of herpesvirus DNA and has very little activity in uninfected cells, even at high concentrations. However, mutation of HSV-TK or VZV-TK can cause resistance to acyclovir.
Acyclovir may be taken orally, applied topically, or injected intravenously. The drug has few side effects. The most common reactions include nausea, headache, diarrhea, malaise, and vomiting. In rare cases, toxicity to the nervous system, causing symptoms of confusion and dizziness, or toxicity to the renal system, resulting in kidney failure or hematuria (blood in the urine), may occur. Acyclovir is sometimes given in combination with other agents; for example, it may be used in combination with zidovudine (AZT) in the treatment of AIDS or with the immunosuppressant agent mycophenolate mofetil in transplant recipients affected by opportunistic herpesvirus infection.
