Aids for activities of daily living (AADLs), also known as daily living aids, self-care equipment, or basic assistive technology,  products, devices, and equipment used in everyday functional activities by the disabled or the elderly. A form of assistive technology, aids for activities of daily living (AADLs) include a wide range of devices. Potential categories of equipment may span, but are not limited to, eating and meal preparation, grooming, bathing and showering, dressing, transferring to and from beds, vehicles, or wheelchairs, mobility, writing and basic communication, environmental control, home management, time management, organization and scheduling, money management, shopping, leisure/recreation/play, community living, and school and work activities. Common examples include tub benches, reachers, large-print or talking devices, and adapted utensils or utensil or tool holders that can be used across many activities. Such technologies adapt the environment, rather than the person, to support identified needs, choice, and control. AADLs may compensate for impairments and functional limitations and enable a quicker, safer, or more-efficient performance of everyday activities. Products may address vision, hearing, fine and gross motor, sensory, cognitive, communication, safety, and learning needs.
AADLs are often distinguished from other assistive technologies as low, simple, or basic technology. However, that conceptualization can be misleading in that there is an increasing, rapidly changing pool of products and features from which to choose. Many AADLs involve electronic components (e.g., telephone and computer systems), and some involve custom fabrication or fitting to meet specific demands (e.g., fabrication of a custom orthotic to hold a variety of everyday utensils). In addition, most AADLs need to be considered as part of an accommodation package involving complex integration and environmental fit issues. For instance, AADLs are often combined with physical and social environment adaptations and strategies. An example is that commonly used AADL equipment in the bathroom includes long-handled reachers, raised toilet seats, and extended shower controls. Those products are often used in combination with environmental modifications such as grab bars, roll-in or seated shower-stall modifications, and nonslip flooring, which are then coupled with individually customized plans to manage and troubleshoot routine bathroom activities, such as strategies for transferring safely and efficiently.
Previously, AADLs were available only through medical or rehabilitation professionals, such as occupational and physical therapists, and required a physician’s prescription to obtain and fund them through third-party reimbursement sources such as private insurance or Medicare and Medicaid in the United States. Although rehabilitation professionals remain a primary source for AADLs in many countries, particularly if third-party reimbursement is sought, the equipment is more easily available. Given the functionality of such devices, many are now built into new homes and community environments and are widely available in department stores, in consumer product catalogs, and on Internet sites. With the universal design movement, which seeks to design products that work well for people across the spectrum of ability, AADLs are being constantly redesigned and updated to increase their ease of use, efficiency, and ergonomics in response to the growing disability and aging consumer markets. Thus, many types of AADLs are no longer considered “assistive” but rather are perceived as common tools and are available to the general public.
Research examining the effectiveness of assistive technologies, much of which would be categorized as AADLs, has shown the supportive role such equipment can play in maintaining, increasing, or delaying declines in everyday function for people with disabilities and older adults. AADLs may also support the function and safety of family, personal attendants, and others who may work during everyday activities with people with disabilities. However, research has shown that AADLs are often abandoned at rates from 20 to 50 percent. Reasons for abandonment include the fact that the technology did not do what it was intended to do or did not match the person’s needs, that the consumer was not included in the decision-making process, that the technology was not accepted because of aesthetics and issues surrounding being labeled as “disabled,” or that a change in needs occurred that was not considered. Those findings point to the critical need for consumer involvement in AADL decisions and to the complexity of factors influencing the fit between the person, the task, the AADL, and the physical and social environment in which it will be used.
Despite the growing need, one of the primary barriers to obtaining needed or wanted AADLs is cost; that is, a large number of people with disabilities cannot afford AADLs and are not able to get reimbursed for them through existing funding systems. As an example, although tub benches have been found to support function and safety, they are typically not funded through third-party reimbursement systems, as they are considered “optional” and do not qualify as durable medical equipment. In response, a number of initiatives have occurred to increase access to AADLs. In the United States, a national network of alternative financing programs offers a consumer-directed program and range of alternative financing strategies to increase access to funding for AADLs and other technologies. Several countries, such as Canada and Sweden, have implemented delivery systems that offer more-extensive access to AADLs as part of integrated community living plans.
