anesthetic, also spelled anaesthetic,  any agent that produces a local or general loss of sensation, including pain. Anesthetics achieve this effect by acting on the brain or peripheral nervous system to suppress responses to sensory stimulation. The unresponsive state thus induced is known as anesthesia. General anesthesia involves loss of consciousness, usually for the purpose of relieving the pain of surgery. Local anesthesia involves loss of sensation in one area of the body by the blockage of conduction in nerves.
General anesthetics induce anesthesia throughout the body and can be administered either by inhalation or by direct injection into the bloodstream. The relationship between the amount of general anesthetic administered and the depression of the brain’s sensory responsiveness is arbitrarily, but usefully, divided into four stages. Stage I is the loss of consciousness, with modest muscular relaxation, and is suitable for short, minor procedures. Additional anesthetic induces stage II, in which increased excitability and involuntary activity make surgery impossible; rapid passage through stage II is generally sought by physicians. Full surgical anesthesia is achieved in stage III, which is further subdivided on the basis of the depth and rhythm of spontaneous respiration, pupil reflexes, and spontaneous eye movements. Stage IV anesthesia is indicated by the loss of spontaneous respiration and the imminent collapse of cardiovascular control.
Not infrequently, general anesthetics are combined with drugs that block neuromuscular impulse transmission. These additional drugs are given to relax muscles in order to make surgical manipulations easier. Under these conditions, artificial respiration may be required to maintain proper levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood. The ideal anesthetic agent allows rapid and pleasant induction (the process that brings about anesthesia), close control of the level of anesthesia and rapid reversibility, good muscle relaxation, and few toxic or adverse effects. Some anesthetics have been rejected for therapeutic use because they form explosive mixtures with air, because of their excessive irritant action on the cells that line the major bronchioles of the lung, or because of their adverse effects on the liver or other organ systems.
Inhalational anesthetics are administered in combination with oxygen, and most are excreted by the lungs with little or no metabolism by the body. Except for the naturally occurring gas nitrous oxide (laughing gas), all the major inhalational anesthetics are hydrocarbons, compounds formed of carbon and hydrogen atoms. Each carbon has the potential to bind four hydrogen atoms. The potency of a given series of hydrocarbons depends on the nature of the bonds between the carbons and the degree to which the hydrogen atoms have been replaced with halogens. In the ethers, the carbon atoms are connected through a single oxygen, as in diethyl ether, and halogen substitution increases potency, as is seen in enflurane and methoxyflurane. A peculiar, unpredictable, and serious adverse property of halogen anesthetics and muscle relaxants is their ability to trigger a hypermetabolic reaction in the skeletal muscles of certain susceptible individuals. This potentially fatal response, called malignant hyperthermia, produces a very rapid rise in body temperature, oxygen utilization, and carbon dioxide production.
Rapid, safe, and well-controlled anesthesia can be obtained by the intravenous administration of depressants of the central nervous system, such as the barbiturates (e.g., thiopental), the benzodiazepines (e.g., midazolam), or other drugs such as propofol, ketamine, and etomidate. These systemic anesthetics result in a rapid onset of anesthesia after a single dose, because of their high solubility in lipids and their relatively high perfusion rate in the brain. The intravenous anesthetics are frequently used for induction of anesthesia and are followed by an inhalational agent for maintenance of the anesthetic state. Unconsciousness occurs smoothly within 10 or 15 seconds of starting the injection.
Certain drugs that are used to induce general anesthesia can also be used to produce a state known as conscious sedation (also called procedural sedation). This semiconscious or drowsy state can be induced when the drugs are administered in relatively small doses. Conscious sedation typically is used for outpatient diagnostic or minor surgical procedures, such as dental procedures, laceration repair, or endoscopy. Examples of drugs used for procedural sedation include fast, short-acting agents, such as ketamine, propofol, and midazolam. These agents may be combined with an opioid analgesic (pain reliever), such as fentanyl.
Local anesthetics provide restricted anesthesia because they are administered to the peripheral sensory nerves innervating a region, usually by injection. Thus, local anesthetics are useful in minor surgical procedures, such as the extraction of teeth. The first known and generally used local anesthetic was cocaine, an alkaloid (a naturally occurring organic nitrogen-containing compound) extracted from coca leaves obtained from various species of Erythroxylum.
The feeling of pain depends upon the transmission of information from a traumatized region to higher centres in the brain. The information is passed along fine nerve (sensory) fibres from the peripheral areas of the body to the spinal cord and then to the brain. Local anesthetics cause a temporary blocking of conduction along these nerve fibres, producing a temporary loss of pain sensation.
Local anesthetics can block conduction of nerve impulses along all types of nerve fibres, including motor nerve fibres that carry impulses from the brain to the periphery. It is a common experience with normal dosages of an anesthetic, however, that, while pain sensation may be lost, motor function is not impaired. For example, use of a local anesthetic in a dental procedure does not prevent movement of the jaw. The selective ability of local anesthetics to block conduction depends on the diameter of the nerve fibres and the length of the fibre that must be affected to block conduction. In general, thinner fibres are blocked first, and conduction can be blocked when only a short length of fibre is inactivated. Fortunately, the fibres conveying the sensation of dull aching pain are among the thinnest and the most susceptible to local anesthetics. If large amounts of local anesthetic are used, pain is the first sensation to disappear, followed by sensations of cold, warmth, touch, and deep pressure.
Many synthetic local anesthetics are available, such as procaine (trade name Novocain), lidocaine, and tetracaine. It is the convention to end the names of local anesthetics with -caine, after cocaine. In general, they are secondary or tertiary amines linked to aromatic groups by an ester or amide linkage. The hydrophobic nature of the molecules makes it possible for them to penetrate the fatty membrane of the nerve fibres and exert their effects from the inside. When an impulse passes along a nerve, there are transient changes in the properties of the membrane that allow small electrical currents to flow. These currents are carried by sodium ions. The influx of these sodium ions through small channels (ion channels) that open briefly in the surface of the nerve membrane during excitation transports the impulse. Local anesthetics block these channels from the inside, preventing the movement of the sodium ions and small electrical currents. The action of a local anesthetic is terminated as the agent is dispersed, metabolized, and excreted by the body. Its dispersal from the injection site depends, in part, on the blood flow through the region. In some cases epinephrine is added to the local anesthetic solution to cause local vasoconstriction (narrowing of blood vessels) and to prolong the action of the local anesthetic.
Local anesthetics are used to induce limited areas of anesthesia. The limited area is achieved largely by the site and method of administration and partly by the physiochemical properties of the drug molecules. The drug may be injected subcutaneously around sensory nerve endings, enabling minor procedures such as repair of skin laceration. This is called infiltration anesthesia. Some local anesthetics are applied directly to mucous membranes, such as those of the nose, throat, larynx, and urethra or those of the conjunctiva of the eye. This is called surface or topical anesthesia. A familiar example of topical anesthesia is the use of certain local anesthetics in throat lozenges to relieve the pain of a sore throat. Local anesthetics may be injected near a main nerve trunk in a limb to produce what is called regional nerve block anesthesia. In this situation, conduction in both motor and sensory fibres is blocked, enabling procedures to be carried out on a limb while the patient remains conscious. A special form of regional nerve block may be achieved by injecting a local anesthetic into the spinal canal, either into the space between the two membranes (the durae) that surround the cord (epidural anesthesia) or into the cerebrospinal fluid (spinal or intrathecal anesthesia). In spinal anesthesia, the specific gravity of the local anesthetic solution is appropriately adjusted, and the patient is positioned in such a way that the anesthesia is confined to a particular region of the spinal cord. In both epidural and spinal anesthesias, the anesthetic blocks conduction in nerves entering and leaving the cord at the desired level.
