Angiography, also called arteriography,   diagnostic imaging procedure in which arteries and veins are examined by using a contrast agent and X-ray technology. Blood vessels cannot be differentiated from the surrounding organs in conventional radiography. It is therefore necessary to inject into the lumen of the vessels a substance that will distinguish them from the surrounding tissues. The contrast medium used is a water-soluble substance containing iodine. On the radiograph, iodine-containing structures cast a denser shadow than do other body tissues. The technique in use today was developed in the early 1950s by Swedish cardiologist Sven-Ivar Seldinger.
In a typical angiography procedure, a needle is used to puncture the main artery in the groin, armpit, or crook of the arm and to place a coiled wire in the artery. The needle is withdrawn, and a small flexible hollow tube (catheter) is passed over the wire and into the artery. The wire is removed, and contrast medium is injected through the catheter. Both the arteries and the structures they supply with blood can then be visualized.
A technique called digital subtraction angiography (DSA) is particularly useful in diagnosing arterial occlusion (blockage). For example, it can be used to identify constriction (stenosis) of the carotid artery or clot formation (thrombosis) in a pulmonary artery. It also can be used to detect renal vascular disease. After contrast material is injected into an artery or vein, a physician produces fluoroscopic images. Using these digitized images, a computer subtracts the image made with contrast material from a postinjection image made without contrast material, producing an image that allows the dye in the arteries to be seen more clearly. In this manner, the images arising from soft tissues, bones, and gas are the same in both the initial and the subsequent image and are thereby eliminated by the subtraction process. The remaining images of blood vessels containing the contrast material are thus more prominent.
All organs of the body can be examined by using various angiography techniques. Radiographic evaluations of diseased arteries supplying the legs, the brain, and the heart are necessary before corrective surgical procedures are undertaken. See also angiocardiography.
