Antacid, also spelled antiacid,  any substance, such as sodium bicarbonate, magnesium hydroxide, calcium carbonate, or aluminum hydroxide, used to counteract or neutralize gastric acids and relieve the discomfort caused by gastric acidity. Indigestion, gastritis, and several forms of ulcers are alleviated by the use of antacids.
Numerous nonprescription liquid antacids reduce the gastric acidity of indigestion or gastritis for up to three hours after a single dose. Of the many liquid antacids available, those consisting of either magnesium or aluminum alkalinizing agents are preferable to antacids containing calcium salts, which have been shown to lead to a secondary increase in gastric acidity. Antacids should be taken when gastric acidity is most likely to be increasing—namely, between one and three hours after each meal and at bedtime. Although they are more convenient, antacid tablets are not nearly so effective as liquid forms. Because magnesium-containing antacids tend to have a laxative effect if used regularly and aluminum-containing antacids tend to constipate, many patients prefer to alternate doses of the two types.
In the treatment of ulcers, acid secretion can be reduced by several agents that block the action of hormones on the acid-secreting parietal cells of the stomach. Histamine receptor antagonists such as famotidine, ranitidine (Zantac), and cimetidine (Tagamet) block histamine receptors on the parietal cells and are effective for about 12 hours. The most potent acid-inhibitory drugs are the proton pump inhibitors such as omeprazole, lansoprazole, and rabeprazole that block the final pathway of acid secretion and are effective for 15 to 17 hours. Histamine receptor antagonists and proton pump inhibitors, when given in conjunction with medication to eradicate Helicobacter pylori, are highly successful in healing duodenal ulcers.
In addition to mild laxative or constipating effects, some antacids, such as those that are positively charged, may cause the blood to become alkaline, leading to metabolic alkalosis in severe cases. Some antacids may affect the absorption of other drugs by binding with them in the gastrointestinal tract.
