Antifungal drug,  any substance that acts selectively against a fungal pathogen (disease-causing organism) in the treatment of fungal infection (mycosis). The major groups of antifungals are the polyenes, the azoles, and the allyamines; these groups are distinguished primarily by chemical structure and mechanism of action. Important drugs that do not fall within these groups but that are used in the treatment of fungal infections include griseofulvin and flucytosine.
Polyenes, such as amphotericin B and nystatin, are macrolide antibiotics made up of alternating conjugated double bonds. The polyene drugs work by interacting with ergosterol, a type of steroid that is found in fungal membranes; this binding causes channels to form in the fungal membrane, resulting in the loss of membrane-selective permeability and of cytoplasmic components. Because cholesterol found in human cell membranes is similar in structure to ergosterol, there is some toxicity associated with the use of these drugs. Amphotericin B is used primarily in the treatment of serious fungal diseases, such as cryptococcal meningitis, histoplasmosis, and blastomycosis. During administration an individual may experience fever, chills, hypotension (low blood pressure), nausea, and shortness of breath. Most patients who receive amphotericin B experience some degree of toxicity to the kidney, but renal function usually improves after completion of therapy. Lipid-based formulations of amphotericin B are thought to have reduced toxicity while retaining antifungal action. Nystatin is more toxic and is not used systemically. It is not absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and is only used orally or topically for the treatment of infections of the skin and mucous membranes caused by Candida albicans.
The azole antifungal agents, which are further divided into the imidazoles and triazoles, according to the number of nitrogen molecules in their organic ring structure, exert their effects by binding to fungal membranes and blocking the synthesis of fungal lipids, especially ergosterol. The azoles have broad antifungal activity and are active against fungi that infect the skin and mucous membranes and those that cause deep tissue infections. Clotrimazole, econazole, miconazole, and tioconazole are given topically and are used for treating oral, skin, and vaginal infections. Introduction of the triazoles (fluconazole and itraconazole) provided an alternative to amphotericin B in the treatment of endemic mycoses. The triazoles are active against most of the organisms that cause systemic or deep-seated fungal infections, such as cryptococcosis, candidiasis, histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, and paracoccidiosis.
The allylamines (terbinafine and naftifine) are synthetic antifungal agents that are effective in the topical and oral treatment of dermatophytes (fungi that infect the skin and other integumentary structures). Like the azoles, the allylamines act through inhibition of fungal ergosterol biosynthesis. Oral terbinafine is used in the oral treatment of nail infections by dermatophytes.
Griseofulvin is given orally for the treatment of several superficial fungal infections of the skin (e.g., ringworm, athlete’s foot) and diseases of the hair and nails. Griseofulvin binds to keratin, thus depositing high levels in the skin. Griseofulvin affects the fungus by binding to microtubules, structures responsible for forming mitotic spindles during cell division and for processing cell wall components needed for growth.
Flucytosine (5-FC) is unique in that it becomes active only when converted to 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) by an enzyme, cytosine deaminase, found in fungi but not present in human cells. Flucytosine inhibits RNA and DNA synthesis. 5-FC is used primarily in the treatment of systemic cryptococcal and Candida infections and chronomycosis. Because drug resistance may emerge against 5-FC, the agent often is used in combination with other antifungals, particularly amphotericin B.
