Antiplatelet drug,  any drug that interferes with the aggregation of platelets and formation of a clot (thrombus) in a blood vessel. Clot formation in coronary arteries may cut off the blood supply to a region of the heart and cause a myocardial infarction (heart attack). When administered during a heart attack, antiplatelet drugs can reduce the extent of damage to the heart muscle and the incidence of immediate reinfarction and death.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) inhibit an enzyme (cyclooxygenase) involved in the production of thromboxane A2 in platelets and of prostacyclin in the endothelial cells that line the heart cavities and walls of the blood vessels. Cyclooxygenase is synthesized by endothelial cells but not by platelets. The goal of NSAID therapy is to neutralize cyclooxygenase only in platelets, which inhibits thromboxane A2 synthesis and therefore platelet aggregation, but to continue the production of cyclooxygenase and prostacyclin in endothelial cells. The occurrence of coronary embolization (when a clot detaches from a blood vessel and becomes lodged in a coronary artery) and the incidence of acute myocardial infarction and death also are reduced with the administration of low-dose aspirin therapy.
Dipyridamole, which widens (dilates) the coronary arteries, decreases platelet adhesiveness to damaged endothelium. The drug prevents platelet aggregation and release by increasing the concentration of platelet cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) in two ways: by inhibiting an enzyme (phosphodiesterase) that degrades cAMP and by increasing the stimulating effect of prostacyclin on an enzyme (adenylate cyclase) that synthesizes cAMP. Dipyridamole alone does not reduce the incidence of death following myocardial infarction, but it works effectively in combination with other inhibitors of platelet function or with anticoagulants.
Other antiplatelet drugs, including ticlopidine, abciximab, eptifibatide, and tirofiban, bind to various receptors found on the surface of platelets that must be stimulated to activate platelets, thus inhibiting platelet aggregation.
