Antiepileptic drug,  any drug that is effective in the treatment of epilepsy, a chronic disorder of the central nervous system that is characterized by sudden and recurrent seizures. The treatment of epilepsy generally is directed toward reducing the frequency of seizures. An accurate diagnosis of the form of epilepsy is critical to selection of the drug most likely to be effective.
Many antiepileptic drugs were discovered by testing their ability to prevent seizures in experimental animals after electrical stimulation of the brain or after the administration of convulsant drugs such as strychnine or pentylenetetrazol. Others, such as phenytoin, were discovered as a result of persistent testing of a series of drugs. Phenytoin is effective in the long-term treatment of many varieties of epilepsy and is thought to work through an interaction with sodium channels—a type of ion channel in the cell membrane, characterized by its selectivity for sodium. The barbiturates and the benzodiazepines act as antiepileptics by enhancing the effectiveness of the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA).
The tricyclic antidepressant drug carbamazepine, used in the treatment of trigeminal neuralgia, was later found to have value in the treatment of epileptic disorders. The effectiveness of the drug has been attributed to a combination of effects, including the blockage of repetitive neuron firing through an interaction with sodium channels.
Because many epileptic conditions are long-lasting and of unknown origin, their treatment is largely confined to drugs. As might be expected, side effects after prolonged use are common. Phenytoin, for example, may be directly toxic to neurons of the cerebellum. In addition, this drug can cause gingival hyperplasia (enlargement of the gums) and hirsutism (excessive facial and body hair), side effects that may lead patients to abandon it. The barbiturates and benzodiazepines are effective antiepileptics but are generally avoided because of their sedative properties.
