anticoagulant,  any drug that, when added to blood, prevents it from clotting. Anticoagulants achieve their effect by suppressing the synthesis or function of various clotting factors that are normally present in the blood. Such drugs are often used to prevent the formation of blood clots (thrombi) in the veins or arteries or the enlargement of a clot that is circulating in the bloodstream. Conditions commonly treated with anticoagulants include deep-vein thrombosis, in which clots form in so-called deep veins, such as those of the legs; pulmonary embolism, in which a clot obstructs the pulmonary artery or one of its branches; coronary thrombosis, in which a clot obstructs a coronary artery in the heart; and disseminated intravascular coagulation, a systemic activation of the coagulation system that leads to the consumption of coagulation factors and hemorrhage. Anticoagulants are also used in drawing and storing blood.
Anticoagulants generally are of two types: heparin, which is given by injection, and derivatives of coumarin or indandione, which are administered orally.
Heparin, used primarily in hospitalized patients, is a mixture of mucopolysaccharides that promote the activity of antithrombin III, a blood plasma protein that inactivates thrombin (an enzyme that promotes clotting). Because it is not well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, heparin is given intravenously to inhibit coagulation immediately, or it is given subcutaneously. Heparin is not bound to plasma proteins, it is not secreted into breast milk, and it does not cross the placenta. The drug’s action is terminated by metabolism in the liver and excretion by the kidneys. The major side effect associated with heparin is hemorrhage; thrombocytopenia (reduced number of circulating platelets) and hypersensitivity reactions also may occur. When oral anticoagulants are given with heparin, additional anticoagulant effects occur. Heparin-induced hemorrhage may be reversed with the antagonist protamine, a positively charged protein that has a high affinity for heparin’s negatively charged molecules, thus neutralizing the drug’s anticoagulant effect.
Structurally, the coumarin derivatives resemble vitamin K, an important element in the synthesis of a number of clotting factors. Interference in the metabolism of vitamin K in the liver by coumarin derivatives gives rise to clotting factors that are defective and incapable of binding calcium ions (another important element in the activation of coagulation factors at several steps in the coagulation cascade). The other group of oral anticoagulants, the synthetic indandione derivatives (e.g., anisindione), are thought to work by a similar mechanism of action.
When anticoagulants are taken orally, several hours are required for the onset of the anticoagulant effect because time is required both for their absorption from the gastrointestinal tract and for the clearance of biologically active clotting factors from the blood. Warfarin, a coumarin derivative and the most commonly used oral anticoagulant, is rapidly and almost completely absorbed.
Oral anticoagulants differ from heparin primarily in their longer duration of action, which is the result of extensive binding to plasma proteins, giving these agents relatively long plasma half-lives. Oral anticoagulants are metabolized by the liver and excreted in the urine and feces. They may cross the placenta to cause fetal abnormalities or hemorrhages in newborns; however, their appearance in breast milk apparently has no adverse effect on nursing infants.
Hemorrhage is the principal toxic effect during oral anticoagulant therapy. Vitamin K, when given intravenously to promote the synthesis of functional clotting factors, stops bleeding after several hours. Plasma that contains normal clotting factors is given to control serious bleeding. Oral anticoagulants may interact adversely with other drugs that bind to plasma proteins or are metabolized by the liver.
