antihistamine,  any of a group of synthetic drugs that selectively counteract the pharmacological effects of histamine, following its release from certain large cells (mast cells) within the body. Antihistamines replace histamine at one or the other of the two receptor sites at which it becomes bound in various susceptible tissues, thereby preventing histamine-triggered reactions under conditions such as stress, inflammation, and allergy. Antihistamines with powerful antiemetic properties are used in the treatment of motion sickness and vomiting.
Histamine is a chemical messenger involved in a number of complex biological actions. It occurs mainly in an inactive bound form in most body tissues. When released, it interacts with specific histamine receptors on the cell surface or within a target cell to elicit changes in many different bodily functions. Four types of pharmacological histamine receptor have been described: H1, H2, H3, and H4. All four are structurally similar and are classified as so-called G protein-coupled receptors (receptors that transmit signals to an intracellular molecule called a guanine nucleotide-binding, or G, protein). They differ, however, with respect to their tissue distribution and biological effects.
Histamine stimulates many smooth muscles to contract, such as those in the gastrointestinal tract, the uterus, and the bronchi. In some smooth muscle, however, it causes relaxation, notably that of fine blood vessels, whose dilation may produce a pronounced fall in blood pressure. Histamine also increases the permeability of the walls of the capillaries so that more of the constituents of plasma can escape into tissue spaces, leading to an increase in the flow of lymph and its protein content and to the formation of edema. These effects are manifested in the redness and rash associated with histamine release, as may occur after a scratch from a blunt instrument or a bee sting.
Histamine appears to have a physiological role in the body’s defenses against a hostile environment, since it is found in the body’s surfaces—in the skin, in the respiratory membrane and adjacent tissue, and in the lining of the digestive tract. Histamine may be released from tissue mast cells and blood basophils when the body is subjected to trauma, infection, or some drugs. It assists the body in removing the products of cell damage from inflammation. The most common circumstance in which histamine is liberated is as a result of the antibodies produced by foreign proteins. Under extreme circumstances, the effects of histamine become pathological, leading to exaggerated responses with distressing results, as may occur in some allergic conditions.
The antihistamines that were the first to be introduced are ones that bind at H1 receptor sites. They are therefore designated H1 receptor antagonists (or H1-blocking agents) and oppose selectively all the pharmacological effects of histamine except those on gastric secretion. The development of these antihistamines dates from about 1937, when French researchers discovered compounds that protected animals against both the lethal effects of histamine and those of anaphylactic shock. The first antihistamines were derivatives of ethylamine; aniline-type compounds, tested later and found to be more potent, were too toxic for clinical use. In 1942 the forerunner of most modern antihistamines (an aniline derivative called Antergan) was discovered. Subsequently, compounds that were more potent, more specific, and less toxic were prepared, including the H1 receptor antagonists diphenhydramine, chlorpheniramine, promethazine, and loratidine.
The H1 antihistamines are used to suppress or alleviate the symptoms in various allergic conditions; they do so by competing with the released histamine for occupation of its H1 receptors. They may be effective in the treatment of seasonal hay fever (seasonal rhinitis and conjunctivitis) to relieve sneezing, rhinorrhea (runny nose), and itching of eyes, nose, and throat. In general, the H1 antihistamines tend to be more successful in controlling acute than chronic conditions; thus, they are most useful at the beginning of the hay-fever season, when the allergens are present in low concentration, but in perennial vasomotor rhinitis (nonseasonal, nonallergic inflammation of the mucous membranes of the nose brought on by environmental or emotional stimuli) they are only of limited value. They are not usually effective in treating asthma, indicating that in this condition histamine is not the main agent producing the symptoms. Certain allergic skin reactions respond favourably to H1 antihistamines, which are particularly effective for treatment of acute urticarial rashes of the skin and the itch and swelling of insect bites.
The H1 antihistamines are relatively free from serious side effects. Less-serious side effects are common, the most notable being drowsiness. Because they do not cross the blood-brain barrier, newer H1 antihistamines, however, are relatively free of this side effect. The action of some H1 antihistamines (e.g., diphenhydramine and promethazine) on the central nervous system has been put to advantage in the prevention and treatment of motion sickness. Because they also possess sedative action (especially dimenhydrinate and promethazine), they may impair a person’s performance while driving and enhance the effects of alcohol and other depressant drugs that act on the central nervous system. The older antihistamines bind strongly to H1 receptors in the brain but also bind to muscarinic receptors in the brain, and this action may contribute to their beneficial effect.
Histamine has a physiological role in regulating the secretion of acid in the stomach, where it stimulates the parietal cells to produce hydrochloric acid. This is probably protective, since the acid controls the local bacterial population. In the 1970s a new class of synthetic drugs was invented that blocked the action of histamine at its H2 receptors; the first of these agents was cimetidine (Tagamet). These drugs were shown to be extremely effective in antagonizing the action of histamine in stimulating acid secretion and in blocking other stimulants of acid secretion, including the hormone gastrin and food. The H2-receptor antagonist drugs, such as cimetidine and ranitidine, rapidly established a place in the treatment of conditions involving the hypersecretion of gastric acid, such as peptic ulcers.
