Art therapy,  the use of creative processes as a means of aiding one’s well-being. Art therapies allow individuals to express themselves through creative means. Often the process of making art is the core of the process of art therapy: through the work, individuals can experience themselves as empowered, valued, able to achieve, and able to deal with a task. Art can articulate deep feelings and can bring unconscious issues to the fore. Group art therapy approaches can also foster social interaction.
Most art practices—including dance, music, theatre, drawing, photography, sculpture, and creative writing—have specialized art therapy approaches associated with them. One significant difference between “mainstream” art practices and art therapy is the status of the final product: concepts such as mastery, control, and commercial value are either not important or much less important than self-expression. Also, public consumption is not necessarily an aim of art therapy. Public display can have therapeutic effects on individuals, particularly people who have seen themselves as being devalued or invalid, but the processes and products of art therapy are also private and often remain so.
Against both mainstream practice and art therapy approaches stands community or participatory art practice. There training is also unimportant, and process often is stressed over product as a value in its own right. Different from art therapy, though, community and participatory practices often stress the community as the focus of the work practices. Doing something together and finding ways of expressing a shared vision become important concepts in that art practice, and public display is often seen as effective in community transformations.
Art therapy approaches can be useful in allowing people to work through social stigmas or personal problems associated with physical or mental impairment. Art therapy also tends to be the first place where institutionalized people encounter the alternative expressive means of art, enabling them to find new perspectives on their life experiences.
