Artemisinin, also called qinghaosu,  antimalarial drug derived from the sweet wormwood plant, Artemisia annua. Artemisinin is a sesquiterpene lactone (a compound made up of three isoprene units bound to cyclic organic esters) and is distilled from the dried leaves or flower clusters of A. annua. The antipyretic (fever-reducing) properties of the plant were first recognized in the 4th century ce by Chinese physicians, who called the plant qinghao and recommended a natural remedy in the form of qinghao tea. In the following centuries, this remedy was commonly prescribed for hemorrhoids and malaria. The active agent, called qinghaosu, was isolated from the plant in the 1970s; this compound became widely known as artemisinin. Today, there are several derivatives of artemisinin, including artesunate and artemether, that are used in the treatment of malaria.
Artemisinin is effective against all the malaria-causing protozoal organisms in the genus Plasmodium. The drug is particularly useful in the treatment of infections involving chloroquine-resistant parasites and infections involving multidrug-resistant P. falciparum, which is the deadliest of the malaria protozoans. Artemisinin targets Plasmodium organisms in the schizont stage of development. Schizonts, which mature from sporozoites—the form of parasite transmitted to humans in the saliva of Anopheles mosquitoes—contain insoluble iron called hemozoin. Hemozoin is formed within schizonts as they feed on hemoglobin in the cytoplasm of human red blood cells. Artemisinin contains a peroxide group that reacts with hemozoin, and this reaction is suspected to result in the production of radicals that attack parasite proteins, thereby killing the organisms.
Artemisinin may be administered orally, intramuscularly, or as a suppository. The drug reaches peak plasma levels within hours after administration and acts rapidly, significantly reducing malaria parasite burden in the first few days of treatment. Artesunate is unique among the artemisinin-derived agents because it can be administered intravenously, enabling the drug to take immediate effect. As a result, artesunate is used in the treatment of cerebral malaria, which is an acute form of the disease characterized by the rapid spread of parasites to the brain and by death within 72 hours if left untreated. Artemisinin appears to have few side effects in humans. However, animal studies have shown that high doses can elicit symptoms of neurotoxicity, including respiratory depression and unsteady gait. These symptoms are associated with degeneration of the brainstem, though it remains unclear whether similar neurodegenerative effects occur at high doses in humans.
Because artemisinin and its derivatives have a short duration of action and target malaria parasites in a specific stage of their life cycle, there is a high rate of disease relapse associated with the drugs when they are used alone in single-agent therapy. As a result, they are usually used in combination with other, longer-acting antimalarial drugs. Examples of first-line artemisinin-based combination therapies used in the treatment of malaria include artesunate-mefloquine, artemether-lumefantrine, and artesunate-amodiaquine. Although these combination therapies also have proved valuable in preventing the emergence of artemisinin-resistant parasites, the persistent use of single-agent artemisinin therapy in some parts of the world has led to the development of resistant parasites and to high rates of treatment failure in these areas.
In addition to activity against Plasmodium, artemisinin appears to have some lethal effect on other protozoal organisms. Studies have demonstrated that artemisinin is effective against Toxoplasma gondii, which causes toxoplasmosis; Leishmania major, which causes leishmaniasis; and species of Babesia, which cause diseases resembling anemia in humans and animals. Artemisinin and one of its metabolites, dihydroartemisinin, also may be useful as anticancer agents, since they have been shown to disrupt the growth of various types of cancer cells in laboratory research.
