Aspirin, also called acetylsalicylic acid,  derivative of salicylic acid that is a mild nonnarcotic analgesic (pain reliever) useful in the relief of headache and muscle and joint aches. Aspirin is effective in reducing fever, inflammation, and swelling and thus has been used for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, rheumatic fever, and mild infection. In these instances, aspirin generally acts on the symptoms of disease and does not modify or shorten the duration of a disease. However, because of its ability to inhibit the production of blood platelet aggregates (which may cut off the blood supply to regions of the heart or brain), aspirin has also been used as an anticoagulant in the treatment of conditions such as unstable angina or following a minor stroke or heart attack.
Aspirin is sometimes used in the prevention of certain diseases, though its role as a preventive agent is controversial because of the risk of adverse effects. For example, daily intake of low-dose aspirin (75–300 mg) was associated with a reduced risk of heart attack or stroke in high-risk individuals. In addition, studies found that long-term use of low-dose aspirin potentially lowers the risk of colon cancer in some persons and is associated with a reduced risk of death from several types of cancer, including certain forms of colon cancer as well as lung cancer and esophageal cancer. Later studies, however, indicated that long-term low-dose aspirin use was more likely to lead to complications, such as increased bleeding, than to significantly lower disease risk, particularly in the case of cardiovascular disease. Many patients were also found to be taking aspirin regularly without a physician’s recommendation, increasing the chance of harm in high-risk individuals.
Aspirin acts by inhibiting the production of prostaglandins, body chemicals that are necessary for blood clotting and are noted for sensitizing nerve endings to pain. The use of aspirin has been known to cause allergic reaction and gastrointestinal problems in some people. It has also been linked to the development in children (primarily those 2 to 16 years old) of Reye syndrome, an acute disorder of the liver and central nervous system that may follow viral infections such as influenza and chickenpox, and to the development of age-related macular degeneration (a blinding disorder) in some persons who use the drug regularly over many years. Like almost all drugs, aspirin is to be avoided during pregnancy. Compare acetaminophen; ibuprofen.
