Barbiturate,  any of a class of organic compounds used in medicine as sedatives (to produce a calming effect), as hypnotics (to produce sleep), or as an adjunct in anesthesia. Barbiturates are derivatives of barbituric acid (malonyl urea), which is formed from malonic acid and urea. Barbital was first synthesized in 1903, and phenobarbital became available in 1912. Barbiturates act by depressing the central nervous system, particularly on certain portions of the brain, though they tend to depress the functioning of all the body’s tissues. Most of them exert a sedative effect in small doses and a hypnotic effect in larger doses. The barbiturates have largely been replaced as sedatives by the benzodiazepines and other minor tranquilizers, which have fewer unfavourable side effects and less abuse potential.
Barbiturates are classified according to their duration of action. The effects of long-acting barbiturates, such as barbital and phenobarbital, may last for as long as 24 hours; these drugs are used in conjunction with other drugs for the treatment of epilepsy, in which their prolonged depressant action helps prevent convulsions. Barbiturates of intermediate duration of action, such as amobarbital and butabarbital sodium, act for 6 to 12 hours and are used to relieve insomnia. Short-acting barbiturates, such as pentobarbital and secobarbital, are used to overcome difficulty in falling asleep. Ultrashort-acting barbiturates, such as thiopental sodium and thiamylal, are used intravenously to induce unconsciousness smoothly and rapidly in patients about to undergo surgery, after which gaseous anesthetics are used to maintain the unconscious state.

The prolonged use of barbiturates—especially secobarbital and pentobarbital—may cause the development of a tolerance to them and require amounts much larger than the original therapeutic dose. Denial of a barbiturate to the habitual user may precipitate a withdrawal syndrome that is indicative of physiological dependence on the drug. An overdose of barbiturates can result in coma and even death due to severe depression of the central nervous and respiratory systems.

Barbiturates became known as “goofballs” about the time of World War II, when they were used to help soldiers cope with combat conditions. Between the 1940s and ’70s, however, the abuse of barbiturate drugs became highly prevalent in Western societies. In North America barbiturates were widely used by youth gangs and deviant subcultures as depressants and attracted notoriety because they were often taken in combination with other substances (e.g., stimulants such as amphetamines). Alcohol greatly intensifies the depressant effect of barbiturates, and in the 1950s and ’60s, barbiturates taken with alcohol became a common agent in suicide cases. The drugs became a frequent target of anti-drug campaigns. The use and availability of barbiturates in the United States declined steeply following the federal Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. As a street drug, barbiturates were largely replaced by other substances during the 1970s, especially by PCP.
