Benzodiazepine,  any of a class of therapeutic agents capable of producing a calming, sedative effect and used in the treatment of fear, anxiety, tension, agitation, and related states of mental disturbance. The benzodiazepines are among the most widely prescribed drugs in the world. The first benzodiazepine to be developed was chlordiazepoxide (Librium), followed by a large variety of agents, including diazepam (Valium) and alprazolam (Xanax), each of which has slightly different properties. Benzodiazepines work by enhancing the action of the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), which inhibits anxiety by reducing certain nerve-impulse transmissions within the brain.
Before the development of the benzodiazepines, the only available antianxiety drugs were the barbiturates and meprobamate. Relative to these drugs, the benzodiazepines have fewer unfavourable side effects and less abuse potential; thus, they have replaced barbiturates and meprobamate in the treatment of anxiety. In addition, some benzodiazepines are used primarily as sleeping pills (hypnotics) to treat insomnia or to relieve the strain and worry arising from stressful circumstances in daily life. They also are useful in treating alcohol withdrawal, calming muscle spasm, and preparing a patient for anesthesia.
Side effects of benzodiazepines include sleepiness, drowsiness, reduced alertness, and unsteadiness of gait. Benzodiazepines are not lethal even in very large overdoses, but they increase the sedative effects of alcohol and other drugs. The benzodiazepines are basically intended for short- or medium-term use, since the body develops a tolerance to them that reduces their effectiveness and necessitates the use of progressively larger doses. Dependence on them may also occur, even in moderate dosages, and withdrawal symptoms have been observed in those who have used the drugs for only four to six weeks. In patients who have taken a benzodiazepine for many months or longer, withdrawal symptoms occur in 15 to 40 percent of the cases and may take weeks or months to subside. Withdrawal symptoms from benzodiazepines are of three kinds. Such severe symptoms as delirium or convulsions are rare. Frequently the symptoms involve a renewal or increase of the anxiety itself. Many patients also experience other symptoms such as hypersensitivity to noise and light as well as muscle twitching. As a result, many long-term users continue to take the drug not because of persistent anxiety but because the withdrawal symptoms are too unpleasant.
