Christopher & Dana Reeve Foundation,  nonprofit organization focused on advancing scientific knowledge of spinal cord injuries, in search of a cure for such injuries and to improve the quality of life of individuals who are paralyzed.
The organization had its origin in the American Paralysis Association, which was established in 1982. After actor Christopher Reeve was paralyzed in a horse-riding accident in 1995, he and his wife, Dana, began working with the association. In 1999 the association merged with the Christopher Reeve Foundation, which had previously been established by the Reeves. The organization’s later name (Christopher & Dana Reeve Foundation) was adopted in 2007. The foundation helped thousands of paralyzed individuals around the world improve their quality of life and supported hundreds of scientists in their research efforts regarding spinal cord injuries.
The foundation’s International Research Consortium on Spinal Cord Injuries facilitates collaboration between many international research labs. Through those relationships, contributions have been made to treatments for Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, multiple sclerosis, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Clinical trials and provisions for implementing activity-based therapy are also included in the foundation’s work, under the umbrellas of the foundation’s North American Clinical Trials Network and NeuroRecovery Network.
In addition to monies going toward scientific research for a cure, there is funding put aside for Quality of Life Grants. Those grants can be awarded in amounts as much as $25,000 and are available to nonprofit organizations. The grants serve to encourage and support programs that help improve the daily standard of living for those with paralysis caused by any type of injury, disease, or condition.
Quality-of-life issues are also addressed through the foundation’s Paralysis Resource Center, which compiles information regarding paralysis, treatment options, and resources to improve the lives of individuals living with paralysis. It also offers referral services to individuals in need of assistance because of paralysis.
The foundation uses its voice to advocate for legislation that fosters research in the study of spinal cord injuries and aids those living with such injuries. One notable example of legislation that has been supported by the foundation is the Christopher and Dana Reeve Paralysis Act, which was signed into law in 2009. Some of the objectives of this legislation are to reduce redundancies in research, expand research done at the National Institutes of Health, and encourage open communication between scientists working on similar projects.
