Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT), also called cognitive behavioral therapy,  form of psychotherapy that blends strategies from traditional behavioral treatments with various cognitively oriented strategies. It is different from other forms of psychotherapy (e.g., traditional psychodynamic psychotherapies) in that the focus of treatment is on changing the maladaptive thought patterns, feelings, and behaviours that are believed to be maintaining a problem, rather than on helping a client to gain insight into early developmental factors that may have set the stage for the problem. There are structured treatment protocols based on cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) principles for a wide variety of psychological conditions including mood disorders, anxiety disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder, insomnia, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and substance use disorders.
Modern CBT has its roots in the 1950s and ’60s, when psychologists and psychiatrists working in South Africa, England, and the United States began to study the use of psychotherapeutic interventions based on principles of learning theory. Before long, behaviour therapy became an established form of treatment that included exposure-based strategies, techniques based on classical and operant conditioning, and other strategies aimed at directly changing problem behaviours.
By the early 1960s the term behaviour therapy had appeared in several important publications. Related terms, such as behaviour modification, began to be used more frequently during the 1960s. In 1963 the first scientific journal devoted to behaviour therapy (Behaviour Research and Therapy) began publication, and in 1966 the Association for Advancement of Behavior Therapy (AABT) was formed.
In the 1960s and ’70s several psychologists began to combine behaviour therapy with cognitive treatments meant to change clients’ negative patterns of thinking and information processing. Although a number of individuals played important roles in the early advancement of cognitive treatments, Aaron Beck and Albert Ellis are most often credited with the development of these treatments. Both were originally trained as psychoanalysts, and both described their dissatisfaction with traditional psychoanalysis as the reason they sought to develop new approaches to treating depression, anxiety, and related problems. Ellis referred to his form of treatment as rational emotive therapy and, later, rational emotive behavior therapy, and Beck used the term cognitive therapy. Both treatments were focused on helping clients to shift their beliefs, assumptions, and predictions from being negative, depressive, anxious, and dysfunctional to being more realistic, positive, and adaptive. With effective behavioral and cognitive treatments becoming more established, researchers in the 1970s and ’80s began to develop protocols that included strategies from both forms of treatment.
Duration, frequency, and format of CBT sessions vary greatly, depending on the type of problem being treated, the therapist’s availability, and the client’s preferences. Typically, treatment consists of 10 to 20 sessions, usually occurring weekly. However, individuals with complex presentations (e.g., significant comorbidity, personality disorders) may take longer than 20 sessions to treat, and individuals with very-focused problems (e.g., specific phobias) can often be treated in a much smaller number of sessions. Treatment may occur individually or in groups. Although CBT is often administered on an outpatient basis, there are also inpatient and day-treatment programs based on a CBT approach.
CBT sessions usually begin with the therapist and client collaborating to set an agenda for the meeting. The bulk of each session is spent teaching, reviewing, or applying specific CBT strategies to the client’s problems. Early sessions are often more didactic, with the therapist describing how to use particular techniques, while in later sessions more time is spent using the new strategies. Homework is often assigned to encourage clients to review and practice the CBT strategies on a daily basis.
A variety of assessment procedures are used to understand the client’s therapeutic needs, to determine which CBT techniques to use in treatment, and to measure progress. As with almost all forms of psychotherapy, the clinical interview is an important tool for therapists who use CBT. In addition to the usual topics covered during the interview (e.g., history of the presenting problem, personal and family history, etc.), CBT therapists inquire about the types of behavioral excesses and deficits that are associated with the client’s difficulties, the triggers and consequences of problem behaviours, and the types of cognitions that are associated with negative mood states such as anxiety, depression, and anger. Often, semistructured interviews are used to ensure a standardized approach to assessment that is unlikely to accidentally miss important features of the problem.
Direct behavioral observation involves observing a client in a relevant situation and noting behaviours and responses of interest. For example, when treating social anxiety disorder using CBT, therapists may first administer a behavioral approach test (BAT), in which the client confronts a feared situation (e.g., a casual conversation with a stranger, or a brief presentation). During the BAT, the therapist has the opportunity to observe the client in order to note any skill deficits and to observe any avoidance or safety behaviours that are used during the test. After the BAT, clients typically report on the severity of their anxiety and on any anxious thoughts that occurred during the exercise. Behavioral observation has the advantage, over other forms of assessment, of being able to identify behaviours or other features of a problem of which a client may be unaware.
Monitoring diaries are forms that clients complete on a regular basis to measure relevant symptoms or to monitor their use of particular CBT strategies. For example, in the treatment of depression, it is common to have clients monitor their depressive thoughts and to use cognitive diaries to challenge their patterns of negative thinking. An advantage of monitoring diaries is that they avoid problems of retrospective recall bias. By having clients report on their symptoms as they occur, they are more likely to provide an accurate account of the frequency and severity of their symptoms than they might be if they were simply trying to re-create the memory of the symptoms while sitting in the therapist’s office several days or weeks later.
Numerous standardized scales exist for measuring the most important features of almost every diagnostic category. For anxiety disorders alone, more than 200 empirically supported scales were in use in the early 21st century. For example, in the case of panic disorder and agoraphobia, scales measure the frequency of panic attack symptoms, the severity of agoraphobic avoidance, and the extent to which the client is fearful of panic-related sensations (a hallmark feature of panic disorder). Information obtained on self-report scales can be used to help select targets or goals for treatment, as well as to select the most appropriate strategies for dealing with the problem.
