Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM),  any of various approaches intended to improve or maintain human health that are not part of standard medical care, also known as conventional, or Western, medicine. The various approaches of CAM typically are used in a manner that is complementary to standard medical practices or are used in place of standard medicine. Such approaches are sometimes referred to as holistic or traditional medicine, although those areas of medicine do not cover all forms of CAM. Indeed, CAM includes not only classical systems, such as Ayurvedic medicine and traditional Chinese medicine, which are centred on bringing together the mind, body, and spirit, but also a wide range of other forms of therapy, including chiropractic medicine, biofeedback, art therapy, hypnosis, prayer, specialty diets, and therapeutic touch. Many of those practices are considered to be marginal when compared with conventional practices—that is, they usually are not a central part of the medical curriculum, nor are they typically prescribed by physicians who practice conventional medicine. However, partly because of the growing evidence base that supports the safety and efficacy of certain CAM approaches, some practitioners of conventional medicine have also become practitioners of CAM.
Prior to the rise of scientific medicine in the 19th century, medical practice was a relatively undifferentiated field. Herbal remedies were prescribed regularly, and the range of practitioners on offer included not only the precursors of contemporary doctors but also groups such as bonesetters and healers. In some cultures those suffering from illness and disease were able to make use of what was a relatively strong cradle of neighbourliness and community support, where the human condition was viewed holistically. In other cultures, however, the sick and disabled were shunned, alienated, or neglected, largely because of a lack of knowledge of disease. With the rise of scientifically based medicine and the development of the modern medical profession, however, the understanding of human disease increased dramatically. Health care became increasingly centred on biomedicine, and a division of labour proliferated. Some doctors, for example, specialized in surgery, whereas others focused on areas such as infectious disease, human development, or mental health. In addition, beginning in the 19th century, scientists discovered ways to isolate and synthesize the active ingredients of plant-based medicines, which gave rise to the modern pharmaceutical industry. By the mid-20th century the advances in medicine had marginalized CAM in Western countries.
In the 1960s and ’70s, however, a sort of medical counterculture arose in the West, born from the more general countercultural trend that involved, among other things, a rising interest in Eastern practices of meditation, mysticism, and other philosophies. There was a growing awareness of the limits of conventional medicine, and some believed that modern biomedicine was becoming increasingly counterproductive. Such perspectives were fueled in part by highly publicized medical tragedies, such as those involving thalidomide, which was withdrawn from the market in the early 1960s, and diethylstilbestrol, which was withdrawn in the 1970s; both agents were found to increase the risk of prenatal toxicity. Some people also associated conventional medicine with depersonalization and disempowerment of the patient. Consumers demanded increasing control over their own health, which led to the development of self-help and to the emergence of campaign groups that lobbied on behalf of health consumers and specific groups, such as the disabled and those afflicted by cancer and HIV/AIDS. In the wake of the counterculture, public interest in CAM gained new impetus.
The number of people in Europe and North America who use CAM is considerable. In the United States, for example, a 2007 survey revealed that about 38 percent of adults had used some form of CAM in the past year. A study published in 2010 indicated that about 26 percent of people in England had used CAM at some point in the year prior to filling out the study’s survey.
The therapies employed and the extent of their use vary considerably by country. Although the majority of use involves self-help (e.g., use of over-the-counter herbs), a rise in the number of CAM practitioners enabled increasing numbers of people to seek the assistance of CAM providers. Growing numbers of conventional practitioners also employed CAM. In such cases, CAM therapies tend to be prescribed or administered for very specific and evidence-supported purposes, such as the use of acupuncture to relieve pain. As a result, in some cases, the use of CAM by conventional practitioners is not wholly in agreement with traditional principles. Acupuncture, for example, is viewed in traditional Chinese medicine as a panacea, being used to restore balance between the polar forces of yin and yang along meridians.
Reluctance among doctors to employ CAM often is related to the protection of their patients. Despite the ideology of a safe, “natural” approach to health care frequently espoused by CAM therapists, the approaches used in CAM pose certain hazards to users, ranging from punctured lungs in the case of acupuncture to potentially fatal overdosing from herbal remedies. There are also major gaps in the evidence that has been provided for such therapies. By the late 20th century many complementary and alternative therapies still had not been explored in clinical trials in human patients, unlike most drugs and devices employed in conventional medicine. That was largely because manufactured pharmaceuticals and other medical products were thought to be superior to complementary and alternative therapies, and so the latter did not attract significant investment from governments and biomedical companies. In the early 21st century, however, an increased need for medicines generally resulted in renewed interest in natural-products drug discovery and in unorthodox medical practices, which in turn led to a rise in the clinical exploration of various CAM therapies.
Much debate remains about how to assess the efficacy of CAM. The need for large-scale randomized controlled trials is highly controversial, particularly because many complementary and alternative therapies have been used by humans for centuries and because certain conventional medicines that have been scrutinized by such means have later been discovered to cause severe side effects, resulting in their removal from the market. There are also significant methodological questions about whether the randomized controlled trial is the best way to evaluate complementary and alternative therapies, especially when they are employed holistically. Many treatments associated with CAM are targeted toward individuals, rather than toward conditions (e.g., diabetes or heart failure) as in conventional medicine, suggesting that alternative methods of assessment may be more appropriate. For example, randomized controlled trial methodology attempts to eliminate the placebo effect, but some researchers have claimed that the placebo effect should be more fully employed in studies of complementary and alternative therapies. Other methods, such as case studies and consumer-satisfaction surveys, are attractive evaluative tools for CAM.
Many small-scale controlled trials of CAM have been conducted, with comparisons to placebos and to conventional approaches. Some of those trials have produced encouraging results—for example, the use of acupuncture in the relief of chronic pain. However, from the standpoint of conventional research methodologies, the numbers of participants usually has been too restricted to make firm judgments about the likely efficacy of particular complementary and alternative therapies. In such cases, systematic reviews of trial data can be helpful, provided that clear criteria to assess the quality of the studies are employed and that there is a sufficient number of credible trials on which to build the meta-analysis. In the field of herbal medicine, such systematic reviews have suggested that extracts of St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum) can provide symptomatic relief in cases of mild to moderate depression and that peppermint oil is more effective than a placebo for the treatment of irritable bowel disease.
Beyond evidence from randomized controlled trials, the data set on CAM is enriched by a plethora of individual case studies, many of which indicate the positive qualitative outcomes that can be obtained from such therapies. The use of CAM also tends to produce high levels of consumer satisfaction. The subjective views elicited in such research, however, must be weighed against a variety of methodological pitfalls in interpreting such results. Nonetheless, data from case studies and consumer surveys have indicated that unorthodox therapies could help to fill the vacuum created in areas where conventional medicine has little to offer. Case studies and surveys have also emphasized the fact that the many diverse approaches of CAM vary in their effectiveness and use. In the United Kingdom, for example, research has suggested that therapies such as herbalism, homeopathy, and osteopathy tend to be relatively more effective for users than approaches based on crystal therapy, iridology, and radionics. Such variations in evidence for specific forms of CAM have necessitated careful and critical scrutiny of claims about curative or palliative powers.
Even where it is felt that CAM can benefit patients, major challenges remain. For example, complementary and alternative therapies may not be accessible to consumers within state-financed health provision and insurance programs. Furthermore, complementary and alternative therapies are not inexpensive versions of conventional medicines or practices. Some CAM approaches can, in fact, be quite costly, particularly when repeat visits are made to a practitioner. Thus, patients cannot turn to CAM to save on health care costs.
Another issue concerns the extent to which CAM is regulated in terms of protecting the interests of health consumers. The remedies themselves, as well as CAM practitioners, have been increasingly subject to regulation, but the parameters of regulation are not always well balanced. For instance, despite growing trends toward professionalization, the practice of CAM in some countries may be exclusively concentrated among certain doctors, medical groups, or allied health professionals. In other countries, CAM is loosely assigned to anyone who wishes to be engaged in the field, with CAM systems largely based on voluntary regulatory arrangements to which not all practitioners are legally bound.
Finally, CAM does not simply challenge biomedicine in terms of best practice. In its most radical forms, it also challenges some of the assumptions underpinning medical orthodoxy and questions the medical concept of disability. Many of those currently involved in practicing CAM, for example, no longer see consumers in medicalized terms as patients. Rather, individuals are seen as actively participating in their own well-being. Given its links to the counterculture, the self-help aspect of CAM therefore may not be viewed simply as an appendage to medicine. Some see it instead as challenging the power of the medical profession. Scientifically based medicine remains dominant, but the approaches that are categorized as CAM are expected to become more fully integrated into conventional medicine, which ultimately could give rise to a new medical orthodoxy.
