Crack epidemic,  the significant increase in the use of crack cocaine, or crack, in the United States during the early 1980s. Crack cocaine was popularized because of its affordability, its immediate euphoric effect, and its high profitability. The crack epidemic had particularly devastating effects within the African American communities of the inner cities by causing the increase of addictions, deaths, and drug-related crimes.
Crack cocaine is highly addictive and is produced by the conversion of cocaine, a fine white crystallized powder substance, into a smokable form that could be sold in smaller portions but distributed to more people. The name crack is attributed to the crackling noise that is made when the substance is smoked. Crack began to be produced in the early 1980s. The method is to dissolve cocaine hydrochloride into water with sodium bicarbonate (baking soda), which precipitates solid masses of cocaine crystals. Unlike powder cocaine, crack was easier to develop, more cost efficient to produce, and cheaper to buy, which made it more economically accessible. Crack sold for anywhere between $5 and $20 per vial (a small capsule that contains pebble-size pieces of crack that were approximately one tenth of a gram of powdered cocaine). Crack cocaine was noted for its instantaneous and intense high, which kept users craving more, thus causing an upsurge in crack cocaine addictions. Between 1982 and 1985, the number of cocaine users increased by 1.6 million people.
Crack cocaine causes weight loss, high blood pressure, hallucinations, seizures, and paranoia. Emergency room visits due to cocaine incidents such as overdoses, unexpected reactions, suicide attempts, chronic effects, and detoxification increased fourfold between 1984 and 1987.
Cocaine hydrochloride—powdered cocaine—was a major cash crop for South American countries, especially Colombia. Until the 1960s, very few people knew about cocaine, and the demand was limited. As the desire for the drug increased, Colombian trafficking organizations such as the Medellín cartel instituted a distribution system that imported cocaine from South America into the U.S. market using sea and air routes via the Caribbean and the South Florida coast.  Trafficking organizations oversaw all operations, including the conversion, packaging, transportation, and first-level distribution of cocaine in the United States.
Crack cocaine first appeared in Miami, where Caribbean immigrants taught adolescents the technique of converting powdered cocaine into crack. The teenagers eventually introduced the business of producing and distributing crack cocaine into other major cities of the United States, including New York City, Detroit, and Los Angeles.
The initiation of crack cocaine into socially eroded communities took place during President Ronald Reagan’s term in office, when there was a structural shift that caused huge manufacturing industries to move outside the cities. Their relocation created workforce competitions that further widened the gap between social and economic segments in the inner cities of America.
Few skills and resources were needed to sell crack. Many small-time drug dealers worked independently and outside the control of organizations like the Medellín cartel. The rewards clearly outweighed the risks. A small-time drug dealer who sold crack daily earned a median net income of $2,000 per month. The increase in the demand for crack cocaine caused intense competition between drug dealers as they fought to profit from the same customers. Consequently, violence became linked to crack cocaine as these small-time drug dealers defended their economic boundaries.
The emergence of crack cocaine in the inner cities led to a drastic increase in crime between 1981 and 1986. Federal prison admission for drug offenses soared, and murder and nonnegligent manslaughter rates increased significantly. There were also marked increases in robbery and aggravated assault.
The administration of U.S. President Ronald Reagan early on began to prioritize what came to be called the “War on Drugs,” which combatted drug trafficking and aimed to end the crack cocaine epidemic destroying many lives. The efforts included the passing of federal anti-drug laws, increased federal anti-drug funding, the initiation and expansion of prison and police programs, and the establishment of private organizations, such as Partnership for a Drug-Free America, to campaign on its behalf. The idea of the War on Drugs was grounded in deterrence theory, whereby the implementation of legislation and harsher penalties would deter or discourage the use of drugs. The 100-to-l ratio between powdered cocaine and crack cocaine was used as a guideline for minimal mandatory punishment. For instance, a minimum penalty of 5 years was administered for 5 grams of crack cocaine or 500 grams of powdered cocaine.
The War on Drugs resulted in an immense growth in court caseloads and the prison population. The War on Drugs focused on small-time drug dealers, who were generally poor young black males from the inner city. Ultimately, the prison population doubled due to the arrest of drug dealers and their customers. One in every four African American males aged 20 to 29 was either incarcerated or on probation or parole by 1989, which contributed to the United States’ having the highest incarceration rate in the world. By 1995, that statistic had increased to nearly one in three.
Although the consequences of crack cocaine today are not as substantial as they were during the early 1980s, there still is a crusade against the effects of crack cocaine as it continues to plague communities around the world.
