Dalkon Shield,  intrauterine birth control device (IUD) sold in the early 1970s that was responsible for a high number of reported incidents of inflammatory pelvic infections, uterine perforations, and spontaneous septic abortions, as well as at least four deaths. It was manufactured by the A.H. Robins Company. Sales of the Dalkon Shield were suspended at the request of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in October 1974. In 1985, after 9,500 cases had been litigated or settled, the company filed for bankruptcy and set up a $2.3 billion fixed-asset trust fund to deal with the thousands of pending cases.
The Dalkon Shield was invented by physician Hugh Davis and electrical engineer Irwin Lerner in 1968. After promoting the device at medical meetings, they formed the Dalkon Corporation. In 1970 Davis published an article in the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology that described a study of 640 women using the Dalkon Shield with a pregnancy rate of 1.1 percent. The article described the device as “modern,” having “superior performance,” and being a “first choice method”—words not normally used in a rigorous scientific study. He also neglected to say that he was the inventor. The A.H. Robins Company bought the manufacturing rights in June 1970 for royalties and $750,000 and hired Davis as a consultant. They modified the design of the Dalkon Shield, adding a small amount of copper and a multifilament wick to aid in its removal. They also made a smaller version.
At the time, there were more than 70 IUDs on the market, so the A.H. Robins Company began an aggressive marketing campaign to doctors and clinics, touting the device as safer, easier, and less painful to insert and having the lowest pregnancy rate. They used Davis’s article as a marketing tool without disclosing his ties to the company. As the Dalkon Shield was not a drug, it was not subject to the extensive testing required by the FDA. Problems began in 1971 with patients becoming infected and/or pregnant. By June 1974 there had been four deaths linked to the Dalkon Shield, as well as countless spontaneous abortions and pelvic infections leading to continuous pain and sometimes sterility. Many studies showed that the pregnancy rate was much higher than originally thought, some studies showing it at 5.5 percent or even higher. The FDA requested that it be taken off the market, though a formal recall was never issued. The A.H. Robins Company stopped selling the device in 1974, and manufacturing ceased in 1976. In the United States more than 2 million devices had been sold; total global sales were around 4.5 million in 80 countries.
Court records of litigated cases showed inadequate testing, false claims about both safety and rate of pregnancy, and a high incidence of pelvic infections and other complications. Despite evidence that the Dalkon Shield’s wick permitted the passage of vaginal bacteria into the sterile uterus, the A.H. Robins Company’s first response was to blame the doctors for improper insertion. In 1980 the company sent letters to physicians requesting that they remove the Dalkon Shield from their patients, but it was not until 1984 that they launched an advertising campaign urging women still using the device to have it removed at the company’s expense. By the end of March 1985, 4,437 women had complied and filed claims for removal expenses. That year the A.H. Robins Company filed for Chapter 11 reorganization, which prevented more lawsuits. Overall, nearly 8 percent of American women who had used the Dalkon Shield filed claims against the company.
It was not until December 1989, with American Home Products’ acquisition of the A.H. Robins Company and their $2.48 billion trust for claims, that the trust began to be administered. The last case was settled 10 years later. The trust, which was the first fixed-asset trust fund ever administered, had handled 400,000 cases from more than 80 countries and paid 170,000 claimants. All claimants had to provide medical records and detailed descriptions of personal hygiene and sexual activity, and for many this was impossible or embarrassing. In foreign countries many women were never recompensed because of faulty records.
