Deep brain stimulation (DBS),  surgical procedure in which an electrode is implanted into a specific area of the brain in order to alleviate symptoms of chronic pain and of movement disorders caused by neurological disease. DBS is used primarily to treat patients affected by dystonia, essential tremor, or Parkinson disease. In patients with Parkinson disease, DBS has the potential to decrease involuntary movements, improve debilitating problems with gait and slowness of movement, and reduce doses of medications. In addition, unlike ablative surgery for Parkinson disease, which creates a permanent lesion in the brain in an attempt to alleviate severe symptoms, DBS is reversible, since the electrode can be removed.
In DBS the electrode that is implanted in the brain is attached via a lead wire to a neurostimulator inserted under the skin, usually near the collarbone or in the abdomen. The neurostimulator sends electrical signals to the electrode. These signals work by disrupting the neuronal impulses that cause pain or disordered movement. To precisely place the electrode in the brain, surgeons rely on three-dimensional target coordinates obtained using techniques such as magnetic resonance imaging or computerized axial tomography. During surgery, a hole approximately 14 mm (0.6 inch) in diameter is made in the skull. A probe with an electrode attached to the end is then inserted through the hole. Although local anesthesia is used to block pain sensation in the brain and in the area of the skull where the hole is made, in this stage of the surgery the patient is only sedated. Sedation, as opposed to general anesthesia, is necessary because the patient must be able to respond to doctors in order to facilitate the accurate placement of the electrode. This is especially important in the immediate detection of side effects caused by improper electrode placement, since the patient can vocalize or otherwise signal feelings of numbness or weakness in certain parts of the body, such as the face, arms, or legs. Following electrode placement, a general anesthetic is administered to the patient, and the neurostimulator is implanted and is connected to the electrode by lead wires that are inserted under the skin.
An electrode may be placed in one of three parts of the brain: the thalamus, the subthalamus, or the globus pallidus. In essential tremor, the electrode is inserted in the thalamus, where it disrupts the neuronal impulses that cause uncontrollable movements. The electrode is sometimes placed in the thalamus in Parkinson disease patients who are affected by severe tremor. However, it is more common for the electrode to be inserted into the subthalamus or the globus pallidus in Parkinson patients, since aberrant neuronal signaling in these areas gives rise to the most severe movement disorders associated with the disease. These regions of the brain are also targeted for electrode placement in dystonia.
Because DBS is an invasive brain surgery, side effects can be severe. The most dangerous complication associated with DBS is bleeding within the brain, which requires immediate surgery. If bleeding cannot be controlled, stroke or death may result. Another side effect that may manifest shortly after operation is infection at the incision sites or within the brain. This may necessitate the removal of the electrode, lead wire, and neurostimulator. Over the course of time, battery failure or lead wire breakage may occur, requiring surgery to replace the defective DBS components. In addition, the lead wires may move, affecting the placement of the electrode in the brain, or may erode through the skin, possibly causing infection or necessitating removal of the DBS system. Physiological side effects include numbness of the face or limbs, weakness of the limbs, problems with vision, loss of balance, confusion, and disordered cognition.
