Diathermy,   form of physical therapy in which deep heating of tissues is accomplished by the use of high-frequency electrical current. American engineer and inventor Nikola Tesla in 1891 first noted that heat resulted from irradiation of tissue with high-frequency alternating current (wavelengths somewhat longer than the longest radio waves) and pointed out its possible medical uses. K.F. Nagelschmidt, a German physician, in 1909 coined the term diathermy, meaning “heating through.”
Three forms of diathermy are in wide use by physical therapists in hospitals and clinics: shortwave, ultrasound, and microwave. In shortwave diathermy, the part to be treated is placed between two condenser plates, and the highest temperature is concentrated in the subcutaneous tissues. Shortwave usually is prescribed as treatment for deep muscles and joints and is sometimes used to localize deep inflammatory disease. Ultrasound diathermy uses high-frequency acoustic vibrations; their heating effect increases circulation and metabolism and speeds up the rate of ion diffusion across cellular membranes. During treatment the apparatus is moved slowly across the surface of the area to be affected. Ultrasound is used to heat selected muscles that are too deep to be significantly affected by surface heating. Microwave diathermy uses radiation of very high frequency and short wavelength similar to that used in microwave ovens; all physiologic responses are due to its heating effect.
Depending on the amount of heat generated, diathermy can be used to merely warm or to destroy tissue. In the first instance, it is particularly beneficial in relieving muscle soreness and sprain. In the second, as an adjunct to surgery, diathermy is used to coagulate, prevent excessive bleeding, and seal off traumatized tissues. It is particularly effective in eye surgery and neurosurgery. Diathermy therapy is also used effectively to treat back pain, to remove warts and moles, and to destroy or localize bacterial infection of tissues. See also physical medicine and rehabilitation. 
