Do not resuscitate order (DNR order),  an advance medical directive that requests that doctors do not attempt cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) if a person’s heart or breathing stops. A do not resuscitate (DNR) order is placed on the individual’s medical chart, and sometimes a coloured “Do Not Resuscitate” bracelet is put on the person’s wrist. If a person with a DNR order undergoes a respiratory or cardiac arrest, doctors and caregivers must abide by the directive, and the individual is likely to die. A DNR order may be written for individuals in a hospital or nursing home or for patients living at home.
A DNR order does not mean that no medical assistance will be given. For example, emergency care and other health care providers may continue to administer oxygen therapy, control bleeding, position for comfort, and provide pain medication and emotional support. However, they will not initiate cardiac monitoring or administer chest compressions, artificial respiration, defibrillation, or cardioversion. If an individual with a DNR order is at home or in a nursing home, staff and emergency medical personnel will not perform CPR or transfer the patient to a hospital for resuscitation.
A DNR order may be applied before, during, or after a cardiac or respiratory arrest. If individuals are considered rational and able to communicate their wishes in a clear manner, they may write their own advance directives indicating a desire for a DNR order. Such orders should be written into a living will or health care power of attorney and discussed with family members. In the United States, a state-sponsored form must also be filled out and cosigned by the physician for the order to be legally valid. If individuals cannot express their own wishes and cannot give informed consent, the authority to make such decisions passes to a surrogate decision maker, such as a legal guardian, spouse, or parent, who signs it in the presence of witnesses and the doctor. Often there are conflicts between surrogate decision makers and other family members or friends who disagree about the treatment the individuals would have wanted.
Doctors often discuss the need for DNR orders as part of a hospice plan for the very elderly or those with terminal diseases, such as end-stage cancer. Ideally, DNR orders are discussed with all patients for whom cardiopulmonary arrest would be the terminal event in their illness and for whom CPR would be unsuccessful or inappropriate. Given that CPR is traumatic, people who ask for a DNR order in such circumstances often express a desire to “let nature take its course.”
Controversially, some doctors may raise the issue of DNR orders with people who are disabled or who are likely to become disabled. Disability rights activists argue that disability is not an automatic justification for a DNR order and claim that it is wrong to assume that people will have a lower quality of life simply because they are or will be disabled. Many of those activists condemn doctors who promote DNR orders as a reasonable medical response to disability.
