Doula,  person who is a nonmedical assistant in prenatal care, labour, and sometimes postnatal care. The term is derived from the Greek word for “female slave.”
In 1973 American medical anthropologist Dana Raphael used the term doula in the context of breastfeeding by new mothers, the success of which in certain populations appeared to depend on support by other women who often came from outside of the mother’s family. The term gradually came to also refer to people who helped before childbirth. In 1993, following the publication of Mothering the Mother, by American neonatologist Marshall H. Klaus, pediatrician John H. Kennell, and psychotherapist Phyllis H. Klaus, appreciation for doulas rose, and they increasingly became involved in providing support during the labour and delivery process.
Doulas involved in labour support are trained in dealing with the emotional and physical comfort needs of women who are about to give birth. Some doulas work in hospitals and clinics, but many, especially in less-developed countries, work on a semiformal or informal basis, making home visits to expectant women and those who have recently given birth. The role of the doula has expanded in some cases to include housework, meal preparation, and food shopping in order to assist mothers in their recovery after childbirth, particularly when a new mother has no other social network on which she can rely. A doula can also advise authorities if the mother is having any problems before or after birth.
Although doulas in the United States and Canada are not required to be certified, certification programs exist, and many doulas have completed long courses and built up years of experience. They have also been involved in drawing up exercise regimens during pregnancy and giving advice on diet and how to stay relaxed during labour. They may assist with the drafting of a birth plan and advocate on behalf of the mother during labour and delivery.
While the continuous support provided by a doula can benefit mothers and their newborns, doulas are not allowed to practice in some hospitals. Institutions where doulas have been banned frequently have experienced conflicts between doulas and medical staff. In most cases the conflicts have concerned the medical care of the mother or of the mother and newborn.
