Early childhood intervention,  field concerned with services for infants and young children that are intended to prevent or minimize developmental disabilities or delays and to provide support and promote fulfillment of potential and general well-being. Early childhood intervention seeks to initiate interventions to minimize limitations related to individual, social, and environmental factors. It recognizes the central role of the family in the child’s development and is based on the provision of individualized intervention for the child and family. Interventions focus on reducing or removing physical, cognitive, emotional, social, and environmental barriers and promoting the child’s growth, development, and health through stimulation and provision of support. Early childhood intervention builds on biomedical, behavioral, social, and educational research and requires the contributions of specialists from many disciplines. It is a complex and continually evolving field with broad interdisciplinary involvement, attracting researchers from areas as diverse as psychology, early childhood education, occupational therapy, language pathology, social work, and public health.
Children diagnosed with conditions such as Down syndrome, autism spectrum disorders, cerebral palsy, and communication disorders were initially the primary recipients of early childhood intervention. However, children with developmental delays and children with risk factors associated with low birth weight, disadvantaged environments, and neuromotor problems are increasingly likely to be served in early intervention programs.
The age of entry into early childhood intervention services varies from country to country. In North America early childhood intervention covers the years from birth to age three, whereas in Europe it covers the years from birth to age five or six. The form of early childhood intervention services provided varies as a function of the system of services that exist in each country. In some countries early childhood intervention is included in general health care and educational services for all children. In other countries special programs for early childhood intervention are provided that may be centre-based, home-based, hospital-based, or a combination thereof. Services may include disability identification, assessment, and the provision of direct intervention. Variability may be found in eligibility criteria, accessibility to early childhood intervention, and the extent of parental involvement in the intervention process.
The universal framework of early childhood intervention relies on recognition of the individuality of all children in terms of abilities and disabilities and on a comprehensive approach that encompasses the child’s health and well-being. It relies on the knowledge that children are born active and are ready to communicate and learn and that stimulating and responsive social and physical environments are essential for development.
To meet the goals of early childhood intervention, services are personalized for the child and family as a unit and in their specific social and cultural context. A family approach builds on the assumption that developmental problems must be addressed in the environmental context of the child. A basic premise is that the unique and complex needs of each child and family are best met by an interdisciplinary approach in collaboration with the family. A systems approach recognizes that the family and child are influenced by the world of work, the preschool, available services for health, and other major social systems. On the macro level, early childhood intervention is influenced by broader factors of laws, culture, attitudes, values, geography, and economy.
Developmental science has had a major influence on the philosophy and practices of early childhood intervention. A fundamental assumption in child development literature is that the child is seen as active in constructing his or her world and that development occurs through the ongoing transactions over time between the child and the social and physical environment.
As research on early childhood intervention continued to evolve, a distinction was made between first- and second-generation research. First-generation research is concerned with the child and methods to assess and intervene with the child’s impairment and disability. Second-generation research addresses issues that are of value in the daily activities of children and families and that deal with assessment of intervention services and goals.
Early childhood intervention was established in the United States and in some countries in Europe in the 1970s. Since then, interest in early childhood intervention has increased worldwide. Researchers, clinicians, parents, program developers, and policy makers from many countries contribute to the rapidly expanding knowledge base of early childhood intervention. The International Society for Early Intervention (ISEI) provides a forum for professionals to communicate about advances in the field of early intervention. In Europe, Eurlyaid (European Association on Early Childhood Intervention), a working party of professionals and representatives of parent associations, is involved in promoting early intervention for children who are at risk of or are affected by developmental disabilities. The European Agency for Development in Special Needs Education is also involved in promoting early childhood intervention in Europe.
