Epinephrine autoinjector,  device consisting of a syringe and a spring-loaded needle that is used for rapid administration of the hormone epinephrine (adrenaline). Epinephrine is most commonly administered with an autoinjector following the onset of anaphylaxis (a severe systemic and potentially fatal allergic reaction). Hence, epinephrine autoinjectors are prescribed primarily to patients at high risk of severe allergic reactions, including persons with severe food allergies and individuals who suffer severe reactions from insect stings.
The main components of an epinephrine autoinjector are a syringe containing an epinephrine solution and a needle connected to an injection spring. The device also has a mechanical safety feature, which conceals the needle immediately after use. Epinephrine is light-sensitive and is stored in a carrier tube that protects it from the light. Patients typically receive two autoinjectors and a training device. The autoinjector delivers a single dose of 0.3 mg of epinephrine for patients greater than 30 kg (66 pounds). For patients 15 to 30 kg (33 to 66 pounds), the dosage is 0.15 mg. Some epinephrine autoinjectors have been designed to provide audio and visual cues to aid the patient in administering it correctly. The autoinjector is injected into the middle of the thigh and is held for about 3 seconds, followed by massaging of the injection site for 10 seconds to stimulate drug delivery. Following injection, patients are required to seek medical attention.
Although medicines such as antihistamines and inhalers can help treat some symptoms of an allergic reaction, only epinephrine can rapidly treat anaphylactic reactions. Anaphylaxis occurs when the immune system overreacts to an allergen (a foreign substance or irritant) that enters the body through inhaling or swallowing or that comes into contact with the skin. The body produces antibodies, or immunoglobulins, which attach to the allergen as well as to certain immune cells, particularly mast cells and basophils. The activation of those cells results in the release of inflammatory mediators, including histamine, that produce a variety of effects, including tightness of the throat, difficulty in breathing, and low blood pressure, which can lead to cardiac arrest.
Food allergies are the most common triggers of anaphylaxis, followed by drugs and insect stings. Sensitized individuals develop symptoms shortly after exposure, necessitating the prompt administration of epinephrine. The drug acts quickly, reversing anaphylactic effects by constricting the blood vessels to increase blood pressure, by relaxing the muscles in the lungs to improve breathing, and by stimulating the heart. When used correctly, epinephrine autoinjection can prevent the progression of anaphylaxis and thereby reduce the need for hospitalization and the risk of fatality.
The primary risk associated with the use of autoinjection devices is injury from the needle, which can occur from improper handling or when the needle does not retract into the device after use. Epinephrine itself is associated with side effects such as dizziness, anxiety, restlessness, shortness of breath, and headaches.
