Evidence-based medicine, also called evidence-based health care,  approach to patient care in which decisions about the diagnosis and management of the individual patient are made by a clinician, using personal experience and expertise combined with the best, most relevant, and most up-to-date scientific information available.
Evidence-based medicine developed in the 1990s primarily out of a need to assess the reliability of a growing body of current research information and to apply new procedures and products. Although the initial impetus came from academic medicine, the idea appealed especially to funding agencies, given the prospect of the development of services that were particularly appropriate and cost-effective for the population served. As a result, evidence-based medicine received the necessary financial, managerial, and ideological support to sustain its development.
Since its emergence, evidence-based medicine has led to the generation of detailed guidelines and explicit protocols for the delivery of services, developments that in principle have made it easier to monitor and steer the performance of health professionals than was the case in the past. The provision of unbiased information about the effectiveness of interventions has been of special importance for patients who are otherwise dependent on commercial or other potentially biased sources of information and advice.
The practice of evidence-based medicine emphasizes five essential steps. First, the clinician identifies a clear clinical question that arises out of the management of an individual patient; the question leads to a need for information. In the second step, the best source of evidence available to address the need is identified. Third, the evidence is critically appraised for its validity and applicability to the problem at hand. Fourth, the evidence is combined with clinical experience and the patient’s own preferences and values to determine an intervention. Fifth, the outcomes of the intervention in the patient are evaluated.
Central to evidence-based medicine is the use of the best possible evidence in diagnostic and treatment decisions, where best is defined by a hierarchy of quality-of-study designs providing evidence. The most-reliable evidence is generated by systematic reviews of randomized controlled trials (RCTs), which minimize bias and allow for causal interpretations of new interventions. Properly designed RCTs, in which study subjects are assigned by chance to either the new intervention or the standard treatment, themselves represent the next-most-reliable level of evidence. Below RCTs are well-designed cohort or case-control analytic studies, which allow for observational (but not causal) interpretations. Less-reliable evidence can be obtained from quasi-experimental multiple time series designs, which differ from other quasi-experimental designs in that they include a comparison group that did not receive the intervention. Least reliable of all, and therefore at the bottom of the hierarchy, is evidence in the form of the opinions of respected authorities, regardless of whether those opinions are based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, case reports, or reports of expert committees.
Evidence-based medicine has drawn attention to important issues in medicine, some of which have hindered its acceptance. For example, some important questions in health care may never be resolved by RCTs for practical reasons. That may occur when adverse events are so infrequent that trials would require impossibly large sample sizes or when health outcomes lie so far in the future that maintaining a trial would be impractical. In the field of critical care, RCTs are embedded within ethical concerns. In the past there was debate about whether RCTs should be the gold standard in proving an evidence base for practice. Another important technical problem is the relevance of results from clinical trials and systematic reviews to decisions about individual patients. The research evidence is usually about the average effect of an intervention across all types of patients. The extent to which that average effect is applicable to individual patients, however, may be unclear.
A second challenge facing the development of evidence-based medicine stemmed from political critiques. One powerful analysis argued that evidence-based medicine represents a fundamental and undesirable erosion of professional autonomy of health professionals, especially physicians. Some observers argued that the reduction of clinical decisions to explicit guidelines and protocols results in the practice of “cookbook” medicine with important decisions taken at much higher levels in the overall management of health care organizations. Higher-level priorities raised the possibility that business models of efficiency and cost control, rather than the interests of patients, would drive the field. Such critiques viewed evidence-based medicine as one of a number of managerially led developments that encourage the deprofessionalization of medicine, motivated either by the profit motives of business or by government concerns to control costs of the welfare state. It is also argued that significant investments by major organizations in smaller bodies, particularly those that were involved in the assessment of the evidence base for health care interventions, were the outcome of a conflict for power and resources won by statisticians, accountants, and economists over traditionally powerful groups such as the medical profession. The scale, scope, and reality of such scenarios were somewhat exaggerated. Moreover, the political critique underplayed the extent to which the overall goals of evidence-based medicine were welcomed by practicing clinicians and overlooked the extent of collaboration of clinicians with statistical and other nonclinical disciplines in developing the scientific underpinnings of the field.
A third issue surrounding evidence-based medicine was whether it was an approach to medicine that was feasible to implement in practice. In the early 2000s studies in countries worldwide, including Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom, suggested that only a minority of clinicians used evidence-based information resources such as the Cochrane Library, the primary database of systematic reviews. One survey found that only 4 percent of a sample of U.K. general practitioners had ever used the Cochrane Library to help in clinical decisions. Studies identified a range of reasons for the relative lack of uptake. Many clinicians, for example, were unaware of what constituted high-quality forms of evidence and continued to rely on traditional reviews and textbooks. Clinicians were sometimes unaware of how to access systematic reviews. Because of heavy workloads, many simply did not have the time to address evidence-based approaches.
By the second decade of the 21st century, however, evidence-based medicine had entered into a mature phase, where the complexities of what constituted good evidence were accepted and the difficulties of applying evidence to individual practice were acknowledged and addressed. Constant advances in information technology encouraged optimism that increasing numbers of feasible applications of evidence-based medicine would emerge.
