Fibrinolytic drug, also called thrombolytic drug,  any agent that is capable of stimulating the dissolution of a blood clot (thrombus). Fibrinolytic drugs work by activating the so-called fibrinolytic pathway. This distinguishes them from the anticoagulant drugs (coumarin derivatives and heparin), which prevent the formation of blood clots by suppressing the synthesis or function of various clotting factors that are normally present in the blood.
The fibrinolytic system that exists in the human body is also involved in the lysis, or dissolution, of clots as wounds heal. The fibrinolytic system degrades fibrin and fibrinogen to products that act to inhibit the enzyme thrombin. The active enzyme involved in the fibrinolytic process is plasmin, which is formed from its precursor, plasminogen, under the influence of an activating factor released from endothelial cells. If formed in the circulating blood, plasmin is normally inhibited by a circulating plasmin inhibitor.
One fibrinolytic drug is streptokinase, which is produced from streptococcal bacteria. When administered systemically, streptokinase lyses acute deep-vein, pulmonary, and arterial thrombi; however, the drug is less effective in treating chronic occlusions (blockages). When administered intravenously soon after a coronary occlusion has formed, streptokinase is effective in reestablishing the flow of blood through the heart and vessels after a heart attack and in limiting the size of the area of infarct (tissue death). Streptokinase can also be administered directly into the coronary blood vessels to deliver a high dose directly to the site of the clot. Heparin, aspirin, dipyridamole, or a combination of these three drugs can be added to therapy to help prevent the recurrence of occlusive clots. An overdose of streptokinase may lead to bleeding from systemic fibrinogenolysis, which is the breakdown of the coagulation factors by plasmin.
Urokinase, a protease enzyme that activates plasminogen directly, is obtained from tissue culture of human kidney cells. Urokinase lyses recently formed pulmonary emboli and, compared with streptokinase, it produces fibrinolysis without extensive breakdown of the coagulation factors.
Tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) stimulates fibrinolysis, and it has several important advantages over streptokinase and urokinase in treating coronary thrombosis. It binds readily to fibrin and, after intravenous administration, activates only the plasminogen that is bound to the clot; thus, fibrinolysis occurs in the absence of an extensive breakdown of the coagulation factors. It may be used to initiate treatment of heart attack victims en route to the hospital, eliminating the time spent in the hospital preparing the patient for intracoronary injections of streptokinase. This is extremely useful because the rapid reestablishment of coronary blood flow is critically important to minimize the amount of damage to the heart after a heart attack.
An elevation in the level of circulating plasmin due to excessive activation of the fibrinolytic system may result in fibrinogenolysis and hemorrhage. The antifibrinolytic drug aminocaproic acid is a specific antagonist of plasmin and inhibits the effects of fibrinolytic drugs.
