Genetic counseling,  in medicine, process of communication in which a specially trained professional meets with an individual, couple, or family who is affected by a genetic disorder or who is at risk of passing on an inherited disorder.
Some of the first genetic counseling clinics were established in the 1940s in the United States and the United Kingdom. Many of the first genetic counselors identified with eugenics policies, which were aimed at controlling population growth among specific ethnic or racial groups. The clinical practice of genetic counseling, however, soon changed considerably in that it became largely nondirective. The counselor provided information, but the decision of whether or not to act on that information was left to the individual or the family. Genetic counseling services were made available in most developed countries.
The focus of modern genetic counseling is to provide people with balanced information and nondirective support so that they can make informed decisions regarding issues related to genetics. In the late 20th century, advances in genetic knowledge and improvements in diagnostic techniques led to an expansion in the profession. Professional courses in genetic counseling are taught worldwide.
Genetic testing often is performed in infants and adults who are suspected to be at risk of genetic disease. It is also a routine part of pregnancy for many women. Genetic counseling often is an integral part of genetic testing in those circumstances.
Couples who are planning a pregnancy and are concerned about genetic disorders may seek the assistance of a genetic counselor. Members of ethnic communities in which recessive genetic conditions are particularly prevalent also frequently seek genetic counseling during pregnancy planning. The genetic counselor gathers relevant information from the counselees to assess their risk of passing on a particular condition to their offspring. DNA testing (e.g., from a blood sample) is often required for a clear diagnosis.
In developed countries it has become routine for pregnant women, especially those over age 35, to be offered some form of genetic testing. Noninvasive screening tests, such as ultrasound or serum screening, conducted between 10 and 20 weeks of pregnancy, can provide information about whether the fetus is developing normally or is at increased risk (greater than 1 in 250) of being affected by a chromosomal condition (e.g., Down syndrome) or neural tube defect (e.g., spina bifida). Usually, those tests allow counselors to provide risk estimates, not conclusive results. Diagnostic tests such as amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling (CVS) may be performed after a positive screen result to obtain accurate results for chromosomal conditions such as Down syndrome. However, those tests also carry a risk of miscarriage. Pregnancy screening can identify only a limited number of common genetic conditions. Most genetic conditions are rare and difficult to detect.
If a diagnostic test reveals a positive result (i.e., that the fetus is affected by a genetic condition), the woman must decide whether to terminate the pregnancy or to continue with it and give birth to a disabled child. At that point it is essential that the woman receives unbiased and accurate information about the relevant condition and feels supported in making the right decision for her.
Most women who undergo screening or testing in pregnancy receive genetic counseling in some form, possibly from a midwife, general practice physician, or obstetrician rather than from an individual who specializes in genetic counseling. Such counseling may be cursory and directive, sometimes even eugenic. Both before and after testing, a woman should have access to the services of a trained genetic counselor to ensure that she can make genuinely informed decisions and be confident that she has made the right ones, as terminating a wanted pregnancy can be as distressing as giving birth to a disabled child.
Most babies in developed countries undergo genetic screening within the first 72 hours of life, through blood taken from a neonatal heel prick (or Guthrie test). The blood is screened for a number of genetic conditions for which early detection and intervention can offer increased chances of effective disease management. Examples of conditions covered in the screen include cystic fibrosis and phenylketonuria. Although hospitals seek parental consent prior to taking an infant’s blood, no formal genetic counseling is provided unless it is requested or a positive result is found.
Families with children who are directly affected by genetic conditions may seek genetic counseling. They may want to gain more information about particular conditions and why those conditions affect them, to explore the specific ways in which genetic conditions affect them, to seek advice about managing their child’s condition, or to meet others who are similarly affected. Many genetic counselors specialize in certain groups of genetic conditions, such as bone dysplasias and metabolic conditions. Such counselors tend to be familiar with the day-to-day effects of living with particular genetic conditions and can help individuals to find appropriate support groups.
