Gestalt therapy,  a humanistic method of psychotherapy that takes a holistic approach to human experience by stressing individual responsibility and awareness of present psychological and physical needs.
Frederick (“Fritz”) S. Perls, a German-born psychiatrist, founded Gestalt therapy in the 1940s with his wife, Laura. Perls was trained in traditional psychoanalysis, but his dissatisfaction with certain Freudian theories and methods led him to develop his own system of psychotherapy. He was influenced by the psychoanalysts Karen Horney and Wilhelm Reich. Also influential were ideas expressed in existentialism and phenomenology, such as freedom and responsibility, the immediacy of experience, and an individual’s role in creating meaning in life. Gestalt psychology provided a framework for Perls’s system. According to this psychology of perception, when organisms are confronted with a set of elements, they perceive a whole pattern or configuration, rather than bits and pieces, against a background. Perls applied this concept to human experience, postulating that healthy persons organize their field of experience into well-defined needs to which they respond appropriately. For example, when various perceptions lead healthy persons to experience the Gestalt of hunger, they eat. On the other hand, a neurotic interferes with the formation of the appropriate Gestalt and does not adequately deal with the need. In another example of an unhealthy response, a person who has just received an insult may be angry but may partially or completely repress awareness of this anger.
Gestalt therapy seeks to resolve the conflicts and ambiguities that result from the failure to integrate features of the personality. The goal of Gestalt therapy is to teach people to become aware of significant sensations within themselves and their environment so that they respond fully and reasonably to situations. The focus is on the “here and now” rather than on past experiences, although, once clients have become aware of the present, they can confront past conflicts or unfinished business—what Perls referred to as incomplete Gestalts. Clients are urged to discuss their memories and concerns in the present tense. Gestalt therapists also use the dramatization of conflicts as a method to make problems understandable to their clients. Clients may be called on to act out repressed aspects of their personalities or to adopt the role of another individual. Like other humanistic therapies, Gestalt therapy assumes the innate inclination of individuals to health, wholeness, and realization of their potential.
Perls developed most of the techniques of Gestalt therapy in the United States, and he helped establish Gestalt institutes in various parts of the country during the 1960s. Many of his techniques have been incorporated into eclectic approaches to psychotherapy.
