Hormone replacement therapy (HRT),  estrogen or a combination of estrogen and progesterone given to restore concentrations of these hormones to physiologically active levels in menopausal or postmenopausal women. HRT is most often used to control menopausal symptoms such as hot flashes and to prevent postmenopausal bone loss (osteoporosis).
Estrogen replacement therapy, which is typically combined with supplemental calcium, is effective in decreasing bone loss when begun during menopause, although it will provide some benefit if started later. Estrogen therapy is used only in women who have undergone hysterectomy and therefore no longer have a uterus. In women who have an intact uterus, the administration of estrogen alone stimulates continuous proliferation of the endometrial lining. Without progesterone to trigger monthly shedding of the lining, estrogen-only therapy can lead to endometrial cancer in postmenopausal women who have a uterus. These women can still benefit from HRT, but they must take estrogen in combination with progesterone. Combination HRT typically contains a synthetic form of progesterone called progestin.
There are several dangerous risks associated with HRT. For example, estrogen-progesterone combination therapy is associated with an increased risk of stroke, dementia, and breast cancer; estrogen-only therapy is associated with an increased risk of stroke. Therefore, HRT is not recommended for women who may be predisposed to any of these conditions. HRT also may increase the risk of coronary heart disease in some older women, especially those who experience frequent night sweats and severe hot flashes. Despite these risks, there are a number of women who can benefit from HRT. In particular, combination therapy is associated with a decreased risk of colorectal cancer. As a result, it is sometimes used in women who are at high risk for the disease but who also are at low risk for breast cancer and heart disease.
In general, low doses of hormones and short courses of HRT are prescribed in order to limit risks associated with therapy. Low-dose HRT is taken daily in the form of a pill, although the hormones may be absorbed through the skin from a patch or a cream.
