Infant stimulation program,  approach to sensory enrichment for very young children, particularly those who are ill or who are otherwise deprived of typical sensory experiences. Infant stimulation is a process of providing supplemental sensory stimulation in any or all of the sensory modalities (visual, auditory, tactile, vestibular, olfactory, gustatory) to an infant as a therapeutic intervention. The intervention uses supplemental stimulation to compensate for the lack of normal or typical environmental sensory stimulation or the presence of abnormal or atypical environmental sensory stimulation. For example, sick infants born prematurely and hospitalized in a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) are exposed to high levels of intense and aversive sensory stimulation related to necessary medical care (e.g., heal sticks and injections) and to the general NICU environment (e.g., intense lights and alarms). Furthermore, these sick infants do not receive the same caregiver stimulation and interaction that healthy full-term infants generally receive from their parents in the home environment.
Nurses or therapists typically administer the different sensory stimuli treatments. The stimuli used vary based on the patient and the sense involved. Tactile stimulation, for example, may be provided by touching, rubbing, or massage; vestibular stimulation may include rocking and positioning; auditory stimulation may include listening to soft music or a human voice; and visual stimulation may include looking at high-contrast pictures or mobiles. The stimulation is usually presented on a regular schedule for specific amounts of time (e.g., 30 minutes per day for 20 days). The most frequently used stimulations for ill infants kept in an NICU environment are tactile, vestibular, and auditory; each can be administered to approximate the stimulation that the infant received in the womb. As the sick infant gets older and healthier, visual stimulation may be added, and the program may be modified to approximate the typical sensory environment of the home.
Infant stimulation programs have evolved to be more “infant-centred” and to incorporate a social-psychological component (SPC). Infant-centred programs focus on the infant’s communication to the caregiver about the types and amounts of sensory stimulation that the infant can tolerate—e.g., an infant’s eye-to-eye contact with a caregiver indicates tolerance of the stimulation, whereas the infant’s looking away from the caregiver indicates lack of tolerance. This allows the caregiver to cease stimulation of the infant prior to the infant’s becoming overstimulated and to know when the infant is ready for stimulation. The SPC of infant stimulation programs includes the participation of the infant’s primary caregiver (e.g., the mother, as opposed to a nurse or therapist) as the provider of the sensory stimulation. The caregiver administers stimulation interactively with the infant, modulating the stimulation by reading the infant’s communication of tolerance levels and preferences for various sensory stimuli. SPC allows for a more natural interaction between the caregiver and the infant and facilitates the caregiver’s understanding of the infant’s behavioral capacity and potential.
For healthy infants, infant stimulation enrichment programs generally include early experiences with classical music, being read to, educational play, and homeschooling. The effectiveness of such approaches has been debated. However, one of the major rationales for infant stimulation programs for both atypical and typical infants is based on neuroplasticity, the ability of the nervous system to change throughout the life span. Research with a variety of species, including humans, indicates that neuronal growth and the neural connections and circuits of the brain can change as a function of use and experience (e.g., using fingers to learn computer keyboarding, being challenged by enriched and complex environments). The ability of sensory experience to modify the nervous system has been shown to be greater for infants than for adults, because of the high nervous system growth rates already present during early development. There is also evidence that certain sensory experiences are required during important periods for normal development of the nervous system. The visual system, for example, requires early visual experience for normal structural and functional development of the visual cortex, which enables form and depth perception. Research also indicates that sensory stimulation is important for brain and behavioral development of brain-injured populations.
Modern interest in infant stimulation programs emerged in the 1940s, when Austrian-born psychoanalyst René Spitz showed that long-term hospitalization of foundling infants with little or no stimulation was associated with abnormal behavioral development. In the 1950s, American psychologist Harry Harlow showed that monkeys raised in isolation (i.e., without maternal stimulation) displayed abnormal development. These findings indicated a potential need for infant stimulation programs to promote normal development.
Interest in infant development stimulation programs as therapeutic interventions in NICUs grew in the 1970s. The growth was based in part on two realizations: (1) that the long-term hospitalization of infants born prematurely was generally associated with a high frequency of disruptive and painful medical procedures that were associated with aversive conditioning or learning in infants and (2) that the general hospital environment was associated with forms of environmental stimulation that were considerably different from those found in the home and family environment. Thus, early stimulation programs with preterm infants were designed to overcome the abnormal sensory environment of the NICU. The earliest programs focused either on mimicking the environment of the womb (e.g., using water beds to provide for tactile and vestibular stimulation) or on correcting the sensory deprivation or abnormality of the NICU environment. An important finding of early research was that some types of stimulation procedures (including typical medical procedures) could actually be harmful to infants (e.g., producing abnormally low oxygen levels in the blood). Other stimulation procedures were found to be largely ineffective. Such findings led to major changes in infant stimulation programs. For example, programs moved away from the simple presentation of sensory stimulation to infants based on arbitrary timing and intensity schedules. Many programs instead moved toward infant-centred and SPC approaches. Another important change, brought about by the movement toward infant- and family-centred care in the NICU, was the reorganization of the timing of medical procedures and nursing care. Rather than having medical procedures administered to infants at any time throughout the day, procedures often are grouped together within short periods so that infants can experience longer periods without aversive stimulation and increased time in interaction with caregivers.
Infant stimulation programs seem to be particularly beneficial for at-risk and disabled infant populations, and these programs continue to be an important focus of clinical and research attention as well as a topic of public interest. Although infant stimulation programs often supplement sensory stimulation to counter sensory deprivation, they may also focus on reducing sensory stimulation based on sensory appropriateness.
