Lifesaving,   any activity related to the saving of life in cases of drowning, shipwreck, and other accidents on or in the water and to the prevention of drowning in general.
Drowning involves suffocation by immersion in a liquid, usually water. Water closing over the victim’s mouth and nose cuts off the body’s supply of oxygen. Deprived of oxygen, the victim stops struggling, loses consciousness, gives up the remaining tidal air in his lungs, and sinks to the bottom. There the heart may continue to beat feebly for a brief interval, but eventually it ceases and death ensues. Lifesaving consists of aiding or rescuing the drowning persons and reviving the apparently drowned.
The act of saving a drowning person is immensely complicated by the panicked struggles of the victim to stay afloat and breathing. The victim may convulsively grip his would-be rescuer, impeding his movements and quite possibly dragging them both down to the bottom in his efforts to stay alive. Contact with a drowning person poses no threat to the trained lifesaver, however, who is skilled in ways of avoiding or releasing the grip of the victim. For the person unskilled in lifesaving to come within the grasp of a drowning person can mean death for both of them. There are ways, however, in which anyone can give effective aid to a victim whether he is a skilled lifesaver or not, even if he cannot swim at all.
So many persons get into difficulty close to safety that the rescuer may often act without entering the water at all. For those very close to the rescuer, a hand reach while retaining a firm position or handhold on dry support is enough. To make contact with a victim just beyond hand reach, an oar, paddle or anything else to serve as an extension may be held by one end while the other end is thrust into the victim’s grasp and he is drawn to safety. A drowning victim beyond reach of extensions may be aided by flinging within his grasp ring buoys, life vests, inflated tubes, or anything that has enough buoyancy to enable him to keep his head above water until he can be brought to safety.
A swimming rescue may be made as a last resort by a person who is a strong swimmer, provided he is willing to take the risk involved. The rescuer approaches the drowning person from the rear even though it involves circling the victim. Watching his chance, the rescuer swims to within arm’s reach of the victim and assumes an upright position in the water with the legs in stroking position, a little forward of perpendicular. The rescuer then grasps the victim firmly by the hair, collar, or upper body and immediately turns on his side and starts swimming strongly with his legs and free arm. The holding arm is kept rigid. No attempt is made to lift the victim’s head above water, because the act of swimming away not only brings the victim’s face above the surface so that he may breathe but also planes the victim’s body to the horizontal position and thus makes towing him easier.
Lifesaving in the 20th century has been augmented by new techniques involving the use of the life jacket, or vest, which largely replaced the doughnut-shaped life preserver except for use on bridges or waterfronts; and by the use of powered boats and helicopters to rescue the shipwrecked. As the recreation of swimming became popular in the 19th century, a variety of organizations sprang up in the United States and in western Europe that were dedicated to teaching lifesaving and water-safety techniques, as well as certifying persons trained to prevent drowning.
Among the bodies offering such services in the late 20th century were the Royal Life Saving Service, the American Red Cross, whose involvement with lifesaving dates from 1914, and the U.S. Coast Guard, as well as the beach personnel of local and municipal governments and those yacht clubs, marinas, and boating associations which provided training in lifesaving techniques. See also artificial respiration.
