Medical examiner,  any physician who is charged with the diligent investigation and rigorous examination of the body of a person who has died a sudden, unnatural, unexpected, unexplained, or suspicious death, including those that may have been precipitated by physical or chemical trauma. Serving within a delimited geographic jurisdiction and under legal guidelines, medical examiners are responsible for accurately determining the cause and manner of such deaths as well as aiding in making a positive identification of the body when the identity of the deceased is in question. The medical examiner’s findings may be used in court cases. Those findings when compiled are also valuable in determining trends in mortality.
The United States has not chosen a sole system of death investigation and examination; the coroner system exists side by side with the medical examiner system. Both originated in Europe, and both coroners and medical examiners are involved with legal inquiry.
In medieval England the “crowner” was a loyal knight of the realm appointed by the king to investigate untimely, suspicious, and unusual deaths. After the crowner made his determination, he reported his findings to the king. Being a political appointee, the crowner (later “coroner”) was not required to have any particular medical, forensic, or legal knowledge.
Likewise in the 21st-century United States, a coroner is an elected or appointed public official for a specific geographic jurisdiction (city, district, county, or state). Centuries after the role was invented, the coroner was still not required to be a pathologist or a medical doctor in most states, though a specialist’s expertise may have been tapped. In the early 21st century roughly half of American jurisdictions—usually the more-rural regions—supported the coroner system, and the other half relied on medical examiners.
Police officers, morticians, and physicians are required to notify the office of the coroner or medical examiner of deaths, and only the coroner or medical examiner can legally empower the police to secure a site. Deaths usually require an investigation if they are thought to be due to one of the following causes: suicide; homicide; infectious diseases; diseases that constitute a threat to public health; drugs, chemicals, or poisons; accidents (falls, burns, or motor-vehicle crashes); or industrial hazards and occupational injuries. Deaths also are investigated if people are to be cremated, dissected, or buried at sea. There is also generally an investigation if the deceased has been unattended by a physician, has been institutionalized in custody (such as prisoners) or confinement (such as psychiatric inmates), or has died from sudden infant death syndrome.
Medical examiners play an essential role for criminal-justice authorities and the general public. Scientific and forensic techniques used by medical examiners include those from genetics, ballistics, pathology, odontology, hematology, anthropology, and criminology. A complete death investigation will include the initial report of the death, the findings of a death-scene investigation, results of both laboratory tests and autopsy, and a certification of the cause and manner of death.
