Rehabilitation, medical and vocational,  use of medical and vocational techniques to enable a sick or handicapped person to live as full a life as his or her remaining abilities and degree of health will allow. The emphasis is first on the medical aspects, later on physical therapy and occupational therapy, and finally on the vocational and social aspects.
The first step in rehabilitation is to ensure that the patient is receiving adequate and appropriate medical or surgical treatment. It is important for the attendants to know whether the patient’s disease is (1) permanent, but nonprogressive and nonfatal; (2) fluctuating, but not immediately endangering life; or (3) steadily progressive, and, if so, the likely speed of progression, as this will affect the goal of rehabilitation.
Details of treatment depend on the nature of each patient’s disability and personality, physical condition, background, and likely future life; but group treatment may be given as well. The daily programs are made up of periods of exercises, physical and occupational therapy oriented to realistic occupations, and rest. The rehabilitation of heart and lung cases, for example, involves carefully graduated exercise, checked periodically by exercise tolerance tests. Each day the patient is encouraged to attempt more than on the previous day. Few achieve such uninterrupted progress. Often an inexorable “upper limit” becomes apparent; the patient may then go home, having learned by experience the extent of his or her limitations but confident that he or she can live within them. Rehabilitation centres also prescribe, fit, and (in some countries) supply aids such as hearing devices, prostheses, and wheelchairs.
The patient must be taught to cope single-handedly with daily needs, and a great deal can be done to aid the adjustment from his or her old environment. For example, the modification of clothing, such as the substitution of zippers for buttons and elastic-sided or Velcro shoes for lace-ups, and the modification of living environment, such as the addition of railings fixed to walls and mounted near toilets and in showers, allow many patients to carry out routine tasks on their own.
During the patient’s rehabilitation, it must be decided whether he or she will be able to return to work. If this is impossible, the patient may consider a job that involves working from home or may take up some remunerative hobby pursued at home. The emphasis throughout is on self-help and on productive work—not entirely from financial considerations but because self-help maintains self-respect and affords an outlet for the creative drive, while productive work is more pleasurable for most people than enforced idleness.
In its early years vocational rehabilitation consisted largely of attempts to work around the disability by specialized job training and by helping the patient find work, with little emphasis on medical services. In the 1960s some public and private industries set up special workshops for their own convalescent and injured employees, often in conjunction with the local hospital service; and sheltered working conditions were provided for infectious tuberculosis patients or those with mental or physical difficulties. More recently, many countries, including the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, China, and Japan, have government organizations that oversee vocational rehabilitation programs.
