Midwifery,  care of women in pregnancy, childbirth (parturition), and the postpartum period that often also includes care of the newborn.
Midwifery is as old as childbearing. Indeed, midwives historically were women who were mothers themselves and who became midwives when they attended the births of neighbours or family members. Though without formal training, some midwives had extensive knowledge of herbal remedies and performed medical services beyond attending childbirths. Midwifery was an important occupation for married, older, or widowed women that provided them with payment, in kind, or social capital in exchange for their work.
The universality of childbirth makes the practice of midwifery a cultural touchstone, as seen in historic textual and pictorial references to midwives attending births. Midwives in a community occupied many positions along a spectrum of social acceptability, from the well respected to the marginalized. Where midwifery was held in high regard, the practice offered elevated status for the midwife and her family. Where midwifery had a relatively low community status, midwives’ specialized medical knowledge and contact with visceral fluids relegated them to the lowest castes and, as some historians believe, vulnerable to persecution as witches. Some of the earliest laws guiding the practice of midwifery appeared in 15th-century France and were instituted in part to reduce what was believed to be the practice of witchcraft among midwives. Later laws dismissed witchcraft and focused solely on the practice of midwifery. Some of the first such laws included those instituted in 17th-century London, where midwives were licensed by the Church of England, and licensing in Britain was made more stringent by the Midwife Act of 1902. In the 19th century, midwife licensing laws were introduced in Austria, Norway, and Sweden.
In many places prior to the 20th century, midwives were considered qualified once they themselves had borne children. These midwives may have had a period of apprenticeship with an experienced midwife or physician, or they may have been recruited by a neighbour or family member to help in the midst of labour. Among the earliest formal midwifery training programs were those established in the 17th century in the Netherlands, most notably in the city of Amsterdam; programs in Sweden, France, and Scotland followed. These programs coincided with the advent of maternity, or lying-in, hospitals throughout Europe. In Chile and Argentina, formal training programs for midwifery were established in the 19th century, and in the 20th century midwives were included as policy makers in Chile’s ministry of health.
Despite the licensing that existed in some countries, midwifery practice was usually monitored irregularly by local religious or governmental institutions. More often, midwives engaged in private transactions with childbearing families, free from any regulation at all. Regions with trained and regulated midwifery had comparatively lower rates of maternal mortality than those areas where women relied on untrained helpers or delivered alone, even when the overall maternal mortality rates were quite high.
Male physicians collaborated and competed with midwives from the beginning of the 18th century. However, in accord with the mores of that era, the presence of men in the birthing room was typically perceived as offensive. But physicians’ ability to offer pain relief in labour, as well as their testimony about the benefit of forceps for delivery and their insistence that they were more qualified to handle complicated procedures requiring obstetric tools, induced middle-class women to choose male physicians over midwives. In addition, in some countries it was illegal for women to use obstetrical tools. With the acceptance of antisepsis and improved obstetric techniques in the 20th century, more women of all classes began to choose hospital births.
In the 20th century, professionalization of midwifery, medicine, and nursing engendered debates over the future of midwifery that were resolved differently around the world. For much of the century in Britain, for example, midwifery existed as an independent profession that coexisted with nursing and medicine. In Australia midwifery was subsumed under nursing, and in the United States it disappeared almost entirely. Where midwifery continued without any interruption, the public debate focused on the role of the midwife in the future of health care. In North America the debate focused on whether the midwife was necessary at all.
In Britain the Midwife Act of 1902 explicitly required that midwives attend a training program. It also limited midwives to attending normal births, required them to transfer care of a labouring woman to a physician in complicated cases, and restricted midwives from using instruments such as forceps. This early formalization of midwifery practice helped cement its place among health care provision in Britain. Similar processes were under way in other European countries such as Sweden, where midwives were trained in the use of forceps for instrument deliveries in instances when the physician could not arrive in time. The maintenance of midwifery among those countries’ core providers of health care enabled midwifery to remain a viable part of health care delivery in the face of competition from physicians and nurses.
Midwifery training was as culturally bound as its practice. Professional midwifery standards and regulations introduced in colonial settings, for example, reflected the colonizing country’s approach to practice. Hence, many of the former British colonies in Africa and the Caribbean established a British model of postgraduate education for midwifery, and in former French colonial territories a model of direct-entry training and licensure prevailed. In postcolonial development, many countries maintained midwifery education and licensure as essential parts of their health care systems.
In contrast, in the United States and Canada midwives were slowly pushed from the field, in part by the collaboration of medicine and nursing and in part by immigration. In the first half of the 20th century in the United States, midwifery’s association with the underclasses, immigrants, African Americans, and Native Americans created a perception in the medical and nursing community of midwifery as unhygienic and involving unscientific birth practices. At that time, many midwives from Europe and Japan who practiced among their immigrant communities had been trained in their native countries. However, the U.S. medical community’s association of midwifery with superstition and untrained practice outweighed the good birth outcomes those midwives achieved. In addition, high infant and maternal mortality in the United States was frequently attributed—whether correctly or not—to the prevalence of midwife-handled births.
Midwives served as vital links in helping immigrant women and their families adjust to their new country. But as populations acclimated to mainstream American culture, they began to leave their midwives behind. Trained nursing also began to impinge on midwifery: public health nurses supervised untrained midwives and offered mothers lessons in the proper care of infants and children. Scientific medicine, with its promise of safe deliveries without the risk of hemorrhage, infection, and death, brought about the end of most midwifery practice in North America. By the 1950s some 88 percent of births in the United States took place in hospitals with physicians.
Midwifery was never totally eradicated in North America, however; for example, it was maintained in rural and low-income populations, many times with government support, to help improve birth outcomes. In Canada, provincial governments supported midwifery practice in remote northern and coastal regions even after midwifery training programs and practice were eliminated in more populous southern regions. In the United States, midwifery practice was nurtured in training programs such as those at the Frontier Graduate School of Nursing in Kentucky and the Catholic Maternity Institute in New Mexico. Those programs were built on a British style of midwifery education, which focused on normal births and transferred to physician care those with complications. The programs predominantly served the urban and rural poor. Although they never graduated large numbers of midwives, and their graduates faced a dearth of midwifery opportunities, such programs sustained midwifery in North America during the mid-20th century.
