Music therapy,  clinical discipline in which music is used to address nonmusical goals. Therapists use music listening, songwriting, improvisation, and lyric analysis as means of fulfilling goals in movement, cognition, speech and language, and mental health.
Music therapy is an allied health profession, delivering health services that are outside the scope of those traditionally provided by physicians and nurses. Because music is a familiar and powerful medium, it is conducive to application across the lifespan, from use in neonatal intensive care units to nursing homes and hospice facilities. Psychiatric hospitals, correctional institutions, and drug rehabilitation centres may also use music therapy.
The earliest musical instrument that has been found is a bone flute thought to be some 42,000 years old. Given this evidence and the long history of music in human culture generally, music therapy is thought to have ancient roots. Much of what has been studied and recorded about music therapy, however, has been done through the lens of Western ideas. As a result, the use of music as a therapeutic experience clearly has a Western bias. British researcher Peregrine Horden, editor of Music as Medicine: The History of Music Therapy Since Antiquity (2000), distinguished the influence of “first-world” music therapy (in countries such as the United States and the United Kingdom) from the influence of traditional or indigenous forms of musical healing seen elsewhere in the world. There are numerous examples of indigenous healing ceremonies based on music and dance. In some African languages, there is no separate word for music and dance; they are one and the same.
Often key to understanding the use of music as therapy is understanding the prevailing philosophy of healing and disease. The ancient Greeks, by the 5th century bce, had begun to distance themselves from a divine conception of disease (disease as retribution from the gods) and to concentrate on material causes, such as an imbalance of the four humours (bodily fluids); music, they believed, could restore peace and harmony to both body and soul. Greek philosophers Plato and Pythagoras wrote extensively about music and its effects, and they are often quoted in support of music, music education, and music therapy.
In the 1800s, with the refinement of the scientific method, music was investigated for the physiological changes it could effect. The first published study in music therapy appeared in 1789 and was called “Music Physically Considered” (author unknown). Dissertations on the subject published by American medical researchers included one in 1804 by Edwin Augustus Atlee and a second in 1806 by Samuel Mathews. Atlee and Mathews studied under American physician Benjamin Rush, a well-known advocate for the clinical use of music. Also in the 19th century, experiments with music therapy were performed for the first time on patients at an institution, Blackwell’s Island Asylum in New York.
The field of music therapy experienced a surge of activity following World Wars I and II. Veteran’s hospitals in the United States employed musicians to work with soldiers who today would be diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Those experiences spurred the development of a professional music-therapy practice that included a college-level curriculum.
In 1950, after several attempts to start a professional organization in the United States, the National Association for Music Therapy was founded. A second organization with a somewhat different approach to practice, the American Association for Music Therapy (originally the Urban Federation of Music Therapists), was begun in 1971. In 1998 the two organizations joined to form the American Music Therapy Association.
Two international associations of music therapy also were founded: the World Federation of Music Therapy, in 1985, and the European Music Therapy Confederation, in 1990. Those organizations presented conferences and provided oversight of educational programming, professional development needs, and research initiatives and advocacy. Training in music therapy was offered worldwide at both undergraduate and graduate levels. The clinical phase typically entailed more than a thousand hours of training.
A variety of tools and genres of music are used in music therapy. Examples of interventions include improvisation, original songwriting, lyric interpretation, and listening to and singing familiar music. The music used depends on the patient’s needs and preferences. For example, if a music therapist is working with a patient who has a movement disorder (such as those caused by Parkinson disease or stroke), rhythmically driven music may be employed to facilitate gross or fine motor movement. A music therapist may use sedative music to assist a person in achieving a deep state of relaxation in preparation for surgery, childbirth, chemotherapy, or a transition to hospice care. Those practices can also be employed to help individuals enhance their state of well-being by reducing overall reactivity to daily stressors.
In the treatment of autism, music can be an effective approach for young children who have yet to begin talking. Children on the autism spectrum are often drawn to music, which is in stark contrast to their often minimal responses to spoken language or environmental sounds. If music captures their attention, it can be used to facilitate their communication and social skill development. With patients who suffer from dementia, music therapists can bridge the loss of memory through music. The music of one’s youth is embedded deeply in the brain and can be accessed even late into the disease process. Recalling positive memories through music therapy can provide comfort, motivation, and relaxation when the person is anxious, agitated, or in need of completing activities of daily living, such as bathing or dressing.
Similar to other therapists, music therapists work within the context of a relationship. Music therapists are trained in psychology, biology, and neurology, which helps them deliver optimal services to patients young or old.
