narcotic,  drug that produces analgesia (pain relief), narcosis (state of stupor or sleep), and addiction (physical dependence on the drug). In some people narcotics also produce euphoria (a feeling of great elation). A brief treatment of narcotics follows. For full treatment, see drug use.
The main therapeutic use of narcotics is for pain relief, and hence they are often called narcotic analgesics. The best-known narcotics are the opiates—i.e., compounds found in or derived from opium. Opium is obtained as the dried milky juice of the seed pods of the opium poppy (Papaver somniferum). Of the 20 or more alkaloids found in opium, the most important is morphine, which is primarily responsible for opium’s narcotic properties. Drugs with actions similar to morphine that are produced synthetically are known as opioids; the terms opiate, opioid, and narcotics are used interchangeably. In most countries the production, trade in, and use of narcotics are limited because of their addictive properties, detrimental effects, and the incidence of narcotic drug abuse.
Narcotics occurring naturally in the opium poppy have been used since ancient Greek times, both for relieving pain and for producing euphoria. Extracts of the opium poppy were smoked, eaten, or drunk (as laudanum, a crude mixture of alcohol and opium). The pharmacologically active components of opium were isolated during the first half of the 19th century. The first was morphine, isolated by a young German pharmacist, F.W.A. Sertürner, in about 1804. A much milder narcotic, codeine, was in turn isolated from morphine.
The invention of the hypodermic needle in the mid-19th century allowed morphine to be administered by injection, which is useful in medicine because injections of morphine produce much greater effects than taking the same amount of drug orally. However, the availability of morphine injections led to serious problems of abuse, and laws were introduced to control the use, production, and trade of narcotics and other dangerous drugs. Such laws now exist in most countries of the world. In 1898 heroin, or diacetylmorphine, was developed from morphine by the Bayer Company in Germany. Heroin is 5 to 10 times as potent as morphine itself and is used by most narcotic addicts. Because heroin proved to be even more addictive than morphine, a search for synthetic substitutes was undertaken that resulted in such opioids as meperidine (Demerol), methadone, and levorphanol (Levo-Dromoran).
Most persistent users of heroin or other narcotics follow a classic progression from inhaling the drug to injecting it subcutaneously and then to injecting it intravenously; each of these stages usually brings a greater likelihood of addiction with it. With increasing use of the drug, euphoria and relaxation eventually give way to drug tolerance and physical dependence; the addict must use progressively larger doses to achieve the same pleasurable effects, and once the drug wears off he must endure painful symptoms of physical and psychological withdrawal. An overdose of narcotics can severely depress the central nervous system, with respiratory failure and death as a consequence.
Probably the most effective therapy for narcotics addicts involves the synthetic opiate methadone, which, though itself addictive, blocks the addict’s craving for heroin and provides no disruptive euphoric effects of its own.
Medically speaking, narcotics are some of the most powerful painkillers available, but they are used with great caution because of their addictive properties. They are often given to patients who are dying from cancer and are in great pain. Narcotics not only relieve pain but also seem to reduce suffering, worry, fear, and panic associated with severe pain. As terminal cancer patients often do not have long to live and the provision of an acceptable quality of life may be the paramount issue, problems of addiction are largely irrelevant.
Substances known as narcotic antagonists block the actions of the narcotics and reverse their effects; at narcotic receptors in the brain, narcotics act to produce their many effects, whereas narcotic antagonists block these receptors and prevent narcotics from reaching them and exerting their actions. Examples of narcotic antagonists include naloxone, naltrexone, and nalorphine. They are used to reverse the effects of an overdose of narcotics, and they can often save the life of the victim. Naloxone can be given by injection or administered as a nasal spray.
