Occupational therapy,  use of self-care and work and play activities to promote and maintain health, prevent disability, increase independent function, and enhance development. Occupation includes all the activities or tasks that a person performs each day. For example, getting dressed, playing a sport, taking a class, cooking a meal, getting together with friends, and working at a job are considered occupations. Participation in occupations serves many purposes, from taking care of oneself and interacting with others to earning a living, developing skills, and contributing to society.
An occupational therapist works with persons who are unable to carry out the various activities that they want, need, or are expected to perform. Therapists are skilled in analyzing daily activities and tasks, and they work to construct therapy programs that enable persons to participate more satisfactorily in daily occupations. Occupational therapy intervention and the organization of specific therapy programs are coordinated with the work of other professional and health care personnel.
The discipline of occupational therapy evolved from the recognition many years ago that participation in work and other restorative activities improved the health of persons affected by mental or physical illness. In fact, patients have long been employed in the utility services of psychiatric hospitals. In the 19th century the moral treatment approach proposed the use of daily activities to improve the lives of people who were institutionalized for mental illness. By the early 20th century, experiments were being made in the use of arts and craft activities to occupy persons with serious mental disorders. This practice gave rise to the first occupational therapy workshops and later to schools for the training of occupational therapists.
The goal of early occupational therapy was to improve health through structured activities. World War I emphasized the need for occupational therapy, since the physical rehabilitation of veterans provided them an opportunity to return to productive work. In 1917, coincident with the increase in demand to aid veterans in the United States, the National Society for the Promotion of Occupational Therapy (later the American Occupational Therapy Association) was founded. Subsequent advancements in occupational therapy included the development of techniques used to analyze activities and the prescription of specific crafts and occupations for patients, particularly for young people and for patients within hospitals. In 1952 the World Federation of Occupational Therapists was formed, and in 1954 the first international congress of occupational therapists was held at Edinburgh.
In the latter part of the 20th century and early part of the 21st century, the development and refinement of theoretical models to guide occupational therapy assessment and intervention further advanced the practice of occupational therapy. These theories focus on the complex relationships between the motivations and skills of patients, the occupations that bring meaning to their lives, and the environments in which they live. Occupational science was developed to support the study of occupation and its complexity in everyday life. As a result, research in occupational therapy has grown substantially and has played an important role in providing scientific evidence to support many occupational therapy interventions.
Occupational therapists work with individuals of all ages and with various organizations, including companies and governments. The practice of occupational therapy focuses on maintenance of health, prevention of disability, and improvement of participation in occupations after illness, accident, or disability. Thus, therapists typically work with persons who have physical challenges in occupations because of illness, injury, or disability. They also work with persons who are at risk for decreased participation in their occupations. For example, programs for older adults that adapt their living environments to minimize the risk for a fall help them to continue to live in the community.
Establishing therapist-patient partnerships is an important part of a successful therapy program. Initial assessments enable patients to identify the occupations that are most meaningful to them but that they have difficulty performing. This helps therapists tailor programs to each patient’s needs and goals. Modern occupational therapy also focuses on the analysis, adaptation, and use of daily occupations to enable persons to live fully within their community. Each person’s day is filled with a variety of different activities and tasks, such as getting dressed, taking a bus, making a phone call, writing a report, loading equipment at work, or playing a game. Occupational therapists are trained to analyze these activities and tasks to determine what skills and abilities are required to complete them. If a person has difficulty engaging fully in day-to-day occupations, a therapist works with that person to assess why he or she cannot perform the specific activities and tasks that make up an occupation. Factors within the activity, the person, and the environment are examined to determine reasons for difficulties in performance. The occupational therapist and the person then develop a plan to improve performance through active participation in the occupation. Therapy may focus on improving a person’s skills through participation in the activity, adapting the activity to make it easier, or changing the environment to improve performance.
