occupational medicine, formerly called industrial medicine,  the branch of medicine concerned with the maintenance of health and the prevention and treatment of diseases and accidental injuries in working populations in the workplace. Historically, occupational medicine was limited to the treatment of injuries and diseases occurring to production workers while at work. Over the years, this changed, with employees at plants, factories, and offices becoming eligible for medical services. College or school health programs might be considered as extensions of occupational medicine.
Diseases directly related to occupations were recognized by early Egyptian and Roman physicians. Modern occupational medicine may be said to have started with Bernardino Ramazzini, an Italian physician of the 17th century who strongly advised that the physician who wished to learn about the causation of a patient’s complaint should inquire into the occupations of the patient. With the Industrial Revolution the number of persons exposed to potential hazards at work increased rapidly. Traumatic injuries became frequent, and diseases due to inhaled dusts and noxious gases and vapours were recognized, often by nonmedical persons.
Initially, occupational medical programs were directed toward the treatment of injuries or diseases that resulted from or during work. It was soon apparent that prevention was more economical than treatment. Protective devices were developed and placed around moving parts of machinery. Control programs were developed by engineers to remove harmful dusts and vapours by proper ventilation of work areas or by substitution of less toxic materials. When the engineers could not control the environment, the process was contained to prevent or at least minimize the exposure of workers. As a last resort, protective devices such as masks and special clothing were worn by the workers.
With the development of preventive controls, the amount of occupational disease decreased. The development of new processes and new materials, however, produced new hazards at an ever-increasing rate, and constant vigilance was necessary. For example, the recognition that a pulmonary disease can result from exposure to beryllium demonstrated the need for a continued awareness of potentially toxic materials. It also demonstrated that a material once thought to be nontoxic may actually be toxic; this shift may be caused by a change in the physical or chemical characteristics of the material, an alteration in the method by which the material is used, a change in the amount of exposure of individuals to the material, and possible synergism with other materials.
The concern with diseases due to occupation led to concern with the general health of workers, not only because of an interest in their welfare but also because it was good business. A good occupational medical program improved labour-management relations and reduced absenteeism; labour turnover decreased and productivity increased. In many instances, the savings produced by the reduction in premiums paid for workers’ compensation insurance paid for the occupational medical program. Depending on the country and the occupation, the types of health programs vary greatly; large businesses, for example, tend to offer broad coverage, while small plants may have limited medical programs. The comprehensive programs, in addition to providing treatment of diseases and injuries, might include pre-employment examinations and periodic examinations during employment.
Throughout the world there is inadequate knowledge and reporting of occupational disease, and the data are suspect. Published figures for occupational illnesses, for instance, are smaller than for injuries because occurrence of job-related illness is less spectacular than, for example, an explosion of a mine causing a number of deaths. It may take a number of years of observation and research to discover that some particular dust, chemical, or type of physical energy is harmful.
In addition, physicians may have difficulty in deciding that an illness is attributable to the job. Many occupational diseases mimic sickness from other causes, and little is known of the ill effects and signs of continued small exposures to toxic chemicals. Another difficulty arises from the fact that although job-related disease may be suspected, doctors often lack tests to identify such disease as specific. As a result, against every diagnosed case of occupational disease, there may be many incipient or unrecognized cases from the same causes. Introduction of materials of unknown toxicity, as well as changes in industrial operations, may create unrecognized problems in preventing harmful effects until after workers have been affected.
