Oxygen therapy,  in medicine, the administration of oxygen. Oxygen therapy is used for acute conditions, in which tissues such as the brain and heart are at risk of oxygen deprivation, as well as for chronic diseases that are characterized by sustained low blood-oxygen levels (hypoxemia).
In emergency situations, oxygen may be administered by citizen responders via mouth-to-mouth breaths in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) or by emergency medical personnel via a face mask placed over the victim’s mouth and nose that is attached to a small, portable compressed-gas oxygen cylinder. For patients affected by chronic lung diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), home oxygen therapy may be prescribed by a physician. In both the hospital and the home settings, oxygen may be delivered through a face mask or through a nasal cannula, a device inserted into the nostrils that is connected by tubing to an oxygen system. Some patients may require oxygen administration via a transtracheal catheter, which is inserted directly into the trachea by way of a hole made surgically in the neck.
Another form of therapy, known as hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT), employs a pressurized oxygen chamber (hyperbaric chamber) into which pure oxygen is delivered via an air compressor. The high-pressure atmosphere has been shown to reduce air bubbles in the blood of persons affected by conditions such as air embolism (artery or vein blockage by a gas bubble) and decompression sickness. In addition, the high concentrations of oxygen made available to tissues have been shown to help stimulate the growth of new blood vessels (angiogenesis) in healing wounds and to slow the progression of infections caused by certain anaerobic bacteria. HBOT has been promoted as an alternative therapy for certain conditions; however, these applications are controversial, since the procedure can potentially stimulate the generation of DNA-damaging free radicals.
There are various stationary and portable oxygen-storage systems that can be used in the hospital or the home. Oxygen concentrators, which draw in surrounding air and filter out nitrogen, provide a method of storing oxygen at concentrations greater than that occurring in ambient air. The stored oxygen can then be used by the patient when needed and is readily replenished. Stationary and portable oxygen concentrators have been developed for use in the home. Another form of oxygen storage is in compressed-gas cylinders, which maintain oxygen under high pressure and require the use of a regulator to modulate the flow of gas from the cylinder to the patient. Gas cylinders are often used in conjunction with oxygen-conserving devices that prevent oxygen leakage from the cylinder by releasing gas only when the patient inhales, as opposed to releasing gas constantly, which necessitates more-frequent cylinder replacement. Large stationary and small portable gas cylinders can be used in the hospital or the home.
Oxygen also can be stored as a highly concentrated liquid. Oxygen turns to liquid only when it is kept at very cold temperatures; when it is released under pressure from cold storage, it is converted to a gas. Liquid oxygen can be stored in small or large insulated containers, which can be refilled at pharmacies or by delivery services.
Oxygen is usually administered in controlled amounts per minute, a measure known as the flow rate. Flow rate is determined based on measurements of a patient’s blood oxygen levels. Two tests that are commonly used to assess the concentration of oxygen in the blood include the arterial blood gas (ABG) test and the pulse oximetry test. In the ABG test, blood is drawn from an artery, and blood acidity, oxygen, and carbon dioxide levels are measured. In pulse oximetry, a probe, generally placed over the end of a finger, is used to indirectly determine hemoglobin saturation—the percent of hemoglobin molecules in the blood that are carrying oxygen. The device uses light-emitting diodes and a photodetector to measure light absorption in the capillaries. The difference between absorption readings during systole (when the heart contracts) and during diastole (when the heart relaxes) are used to calculate hemoglobin saturation.
If oxygen flow rate is too low, the patient will not receive enough oxygen and could be at risk of injury from severe hypoxemia, which can lead to tissue dysfunction and cell death. Likewise, adverse physiological effects may ensue if the flow rate is too high. For example, premature infants who receive excessive amounts of oxygen in their first days of life may develop a blinding disorder known as retinopathy of prematurity. Excess oxygen flow also can result in conditions such as barotrauma (e.g., tissue injuries arising from excessive air pressure). For example, HBOT is associated with an increased risk of barotrauma of the ear. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia, a chronic disorder affecting infants, is characterized by absent or abnormal repair of lung tissue following high-pressure or excessive oxygen administration.
Oxygen therapy is contraindicated in patients undergoing treatment with certain forms of chemotherapy, such as with the drug bleomycin. Bleomycin damages cancer cells by stimulating the production of reactive oxygen species, a response that is amplified in the presence of excess oxygen, leading to the damage of healthy tissues.
In general, the use of home oxygen therapy can reduce hospital admission and extend survival in patients with diseases such as COPD. However, oxygen therapy does not alter the progression of lung disease. Also, because patients need to use oxygen for a significant portion of each day and because it can lead to additional difficulties in mobility, it does not appeal to some patients. Compressed-gas cylinders present a significant safety hazard in the home as well; if they are not secured and stored properly, they may cause explosions. Likewise, oxygen can readily spread fire, and thus there is a significant safety hazard associated with the use of oxygen in the presence of pilot lights, candles, or other sources of ignition. Furthermore, the prescription of oxygen for patients who smoke or who share a household with smokers is considered controversial.
