Plastic surgery,  the functional, structural, and aesthetic restoration of all manner of defects and deformities of the human body. The term plastic surgery stems from the Greek word plastikos, meaning “to mold” or “to form.” Modern plastic surgery has evolved along two broad themes: reconstruction of anatomic defects and aesthetic enhancement of normal form. The surgical principles of plastic surgery remain focused on preserving vascularity, replacing like tissue with like tissue, respecting anatomic zones, and fostering wound healing by minimizing tissue trauma. As a diverse surgical specialty, the discipline of plastic surgery not only interacts with other disciplines of medicine but also merges medical science with the art of physical restoration. It couples careful evaluation of defects with sophisticated arrangements of tissue to improve the uniformity and natural resemblance of repair. Innovative techniques used in plastic surgery are largely the result of the successful clinical application of advances in tissue engineering, nanotechnology, and gene therapy.
The modern definition of plastic surgery is rooted in ancient medicine. The Sanskrit text Sushruta-samhita, written about 600 bce by ancient Indian medical practitioner Sushruta, describes, with surprising modernity, a quintessential plastic surgical procedure: the reconstruction of mutilated noses using tissue bridged from the cheek. During the Renaissance, Italian surgeon Gaspare Tagliacozzi and French surgeon Ambroise Paré adopted these early procedures and kindled a modern fascination with the use of local and distant tissue to reconstruct complex wounds. In the 19th century German surgeon Karl Ferdinand von Gräfe first invoked the term plastic when describing creative reconstructions of the nose in his text Rhinoplastik (1818). In the United States the organizing bodies of plastic surgery were founded between the world wars, with the American Society of Plastic Surgeons established in 1931 and the American Board of Plastic Surgery established in 1937. In the 1960s and ’70s the pioneering work of Canadian-born American surgeon Harry J. Buncke, Japanese surgeon Susumu Tamai, and Austrian surgeon Hanno Millesi resulted in the integration of procedures and techniques that defined microsurgery (surgery on very small structures requiring the use of a microscope).
Aesthetic, or cosmetic, surgery entered into the public consciousness with the advent of refinements that rendered safe the rejuvenation of the face and body through procedures such as face-lifts, breast augmentation, and liposuction. This was coupled with an increasing emphasis on minimally invasive procedures, such as injections of botulinum toxin (Botox) and cosmetic soft-tissue fillers (e.g., collagen and hyaluronic acid).
The basic premise of soft tissue reconstruction is fixing deformities with normal tissue that shares similar characteristics with the damaged tissue. Respect for tissue physiology and mechanics is important in both reconstructive and aesthetic plastic surgery. Hence, delicate handling of tissue with instruments, judicious elevation of tissue to minimize vascular disruption, and precise alignment of tissue planes are all important elements of technique.
Closure of wounds is a central tenet of reconstructive surgery. Many wounds can be closed primarily (with direct suture repair). However, if the defect is sufficiently large, skin may be taken from other parts of the body and transferred to the area of the wound. Skin grafts are thin layers of skin taken from a remote location that are secured to the site of repair with bolsters, which serve to facilitate eventual integration of the donor skin into the wound.
Larger, more complex wounds have a greater volume and can involve exposed vital structures, such as vessels, nerves, tendon, bone, viscera, and other organs. Such wounds require coverage via transposed or transplanted composite segments of skin, subcutaneous tissue, muscle, and, in some cases, bone and nerve. These tissue constructs are maintained by their own defined blood supply and are called flaps. The pioneering work of Australian plastic surgeon Ian Taylor led to the characterization of angiosomes—the networks of blood vessels that supply flaps—which has allowed for rational matching of flaps to defects. Flaps may be transferred from neighbouring tissue, or they may be disconnected from their original blood supply and reconnected using microsurgical technique to another set of vessels adjacent to the defect.
The use of implants or expander devices can also increase the amount of soft tissue. These devices are useful in cases when a patient has a limited amount of donor skin—for example, in those who are severely burned or in children who have large congenital moles. Implants and expander devices have also been adapted for breast reconstruction following mastectomy in breast cancer patients and for aesthetic breast augmentation.
Congenital and traumatic defects of the head and neck region fall under the scope of plastic surgery. Cleft lip and cleft palate deformities, premature fusion of skull elements, and persistent clefts in the facial skeleton require complex soft tissue and bone rearrangement. The introduction of internal fixation systems that use screws and plates has greatly facilitated congenital reconstructions as well as correction of traumatic fractures. Novel permutations of these fixation devices have been developed; for example, distraction osteogenesis is a technique used to induce bone growth from hypoplastic (incompletely developed) bone by traction exerted by moveable plate systems. Biomaterials, such as absorbable plate systems and bone cements, are being improved continually and are often used in pediatric craniofacial surgery.
By virtue of its unique anatomy and functional importance, restoration of hand deformities is a shared focus of both plastic surgeons and orthopedic surgeons. Congenital defects involving the hand range from absent or incomplete development (agenesis) to anomalies of limb structures. Traumatic insult may give rise to complex wounds, fractured bones, severed nerves and tendons, or amputations. In the appropriate context, severed digits and limbs may be replanted with microsurgical connections of vessels and nerves. Rehabilitation of the hand is a critical aspect of surgical care, since loss of strength and motion may occur following injury and reconstruction.
Aesthetic, or cosmetic, surgery is the enhancement of normal structures that are subject to age-related changes or that have unusual features that are distressing to the patient. The procedures used to address these issues are often performed in the physician’s office (as opposed to a hospital) and are relatively simple, entailing only injections of botulinum toxin or hyaluronic soft-tissue filler. In some cases, however, these procedures are complex, involving elective surgery to correct deformities of the nose or to remove excess sagging skin on the face. The practice of plastic surgery has moved beyond plastic surgeons, and there are many other physicians, such as dermatologists and otolaryngologists, who have the skill to perform these procedures.
The same principles that govern reconstructive surgery are applied to aesthetic surgery: replace like with like, respect anatomic boundaries, minimize tissue trauma, and preserve vascular integrity. Aesthetic surgery is also concerned with scars, especially their length and visibility, and modifications to classic procedures such as face-lifts are made to minimize and hide scars. While age-related changes can weaken the support structures of skin and soft tissue, the advent of bariatric surgery in obese patients can create analogous changes in the tissues of the arms, chest, abdomen, and thighs. Corresponding lifts of these parts of the body can be performed.
Other aesthetic surgeries can reduce or augment parts of the body that are perceived to be too large or too small; common examples include the nose or breasts. In addition, the judicious use of liposuction can improve contour in areas that are unbalanced by excess fat. For the face the use of botulinum toxin can weaken the underlying muscles that create some wrinkles; other wrinkles can be softened by injection of hyaluronic acid. Chemical peels, dermabrasion, and lasers can be used to smooth the fine wrinkles that can form in the uppermost layers of skin.
The heightened public interest in aesthetic surgery also creates clinical, ethical, and medicolegal challenges. A clear understanding of indications, techniques, and complications is important for both surgeon and patient to ensure safe and efficacious outcomes.
