Psychodrama,   group psychotherapeutic technique in which patients more or less spontaneously dramatize their personal problems before an audience of fellow patients and therapists, some of whom may also participate in the dramatic production. A stage setting is generally used, and the chief therapist functions as director, encouraging participants to project as much as possible into their roles and occasionally modifying the parts of the players. The subject of the drama is usually some emotionally charged situation common to the group or from the patient-protagonist’s life, enabling participants to gain some emotional release and control over anxiety provoked in similar situations as well as to learn new ways of responding in the future. Sometimes the therapist-director will have an auxiliary character switch roles with the protagonist, so that the patient may observe and react to himself as others see him. The dramatization is followed by discussion between players and audience.
The technique was introduced in the 1920s by the Viennese psychiatrist J.L. Moreno, who had observed that an actress subject to violent fits of temper in private life behaved more moderately when given violent stage roles. Although the situations in psychodrama are simulated, they can generate real emotion and new insight and help to establish more effective behaviour patterns. Psychodrama also involves a wider range of activity than such methods as psychoanalytic free association and encourages a flexible, active approach to life’s problems.
A less-structured form of psychodrama called role playing is used both as a psychotherapeutic technique and in human relations and personnel training. Participants act out the roles of others or take new roles for themselves. The aim is to develop skills in dealing with such practical social situations as speechmaking, interviewing, or applying for a job. By practicing their own roles and those of others, participants may improve their ability to see situations from other points of view and take more objective views of themselves. 
