quarantine,  the separation and restriction of travel of humans or other animals that may have come into contact with an infectious disease. Individuals remain under quarantine until it is deemed certain that they are free of infection. In the vocabulary of disease control, the terms quarantine and isolation are used interchangeably. In the strictest sense, however, isolation is the separation of a sick individual from healthy individuals.
The earliest recognition that diseases might be communicable (transmitted from one individual to another) led to extreme measures designed to isolate infected persons or communities. Fear of leprosy, for example, caused wide adoption of the control measures set out in Leviticus 13—namely, isolation of the infected and the cleansing or burning of his or her garments. Against acute, highly fatal diseases, such as bubonic plague, which spread rapidly, attempts were made by healthy communities to prevent the entry of goods and persons from infected communities.
In the 14th century the growth of maritime trade and the recognition that plague was introduced via ships returning from the Levant led to the adoption of quarantine in Venice. It was decreed that ships were to be isolated for a limited period to allow for the manifestation of the disease and to dissipate the infection brought by persons and goods. Originally, the period was 30 days, trentina, though this was later extended to 40 days, quarantina. The choice of this length of time is said to be based on the period that Jesus Christ and Moses spent in isolation in the desert. In 1423 Venice set up its first lazaretto, or quarantine station, on an island near the city. The Venetian system became the model for other European countries and the basis for widespread quarantine control for several centuries.
In the 16th century the system was extended by the introduction of bills of health, a form of certification that the last port of call was free from disease. A clean bill, with the visa of the consul of the country of arrival, entitled the ship to free pratique (use of the port) without quarantine. Quarantine was later extended to other diseases besides plague, notably yellow fever, with the growth of American trade, and cholera, which was particularly associated with the pilgrimages to Mecca.
By the mid-19th century the practice of quarantine had become a considerable nuisance. The periods of quarantine were arbitrary and variable from country to country, and there were instances of perverse and bureaucratic application of quarantine regulations. The disinfection of letters and rummaging of papers could be an excuse for political espionage, and opportunities for bribery and corruption were frequently exploited. Great discomfort and delay was caused to travelers. English philanthropist and social reformer John Howard had, in 1786, deliberately sailed from Smyrna (later İzmir) to Venice in a ship with a foul bill of health so that he could gain firsthand experience of lazarettos, and his work An Account of the Principal Lazarettos in Europe (1789) presents a depressing picture.
General dissatisfaction with quarantine practice led to the convening of the first international sanitary conference in Paris in 1851. The arguments were conducted at two levels. Commercially, the conflict was between countries with considerable vested interests in quarantine and major maritime nations, which favoured its abolition. Medically, the opposition was between the “contagionists,” who believed that diseases such as cholera and plague were transmitted from person to person, and the “miasmatists,” who thought that certain diseases were caused by infected atmosphere and that the remedy was sanitation, not quarantine. Despite these differences, agreement was reached on some important general principles for the standardization of quarantine procedures. The convention and regulations were not generally ratified, however.
In the next 50 years a succession of sanitary conferences, with better understanding of the epidemiology of infectious disease, reached some agreement on the maximum permissible measures of control and on the removal of the most irksome restrictions of quarantine practice. The accord reached by the 11th conference, at Paris in 1903, was the first truly effective measure to be signed. Out of it came in 1907 the Office International d’Hygiène Publique (International Office of Public Health), the forerunner of the World Health Organization. (The forerunner of the Pan American Sanitary Bureau had been established five years earlier, in 1902).
Today quarantine is practiced much less rigidly or extensively than it was historically. It may be deemed appropriate in certain cases. Patients with active tuberculosis may be isolated temporarily in order to prevent the infection of persons thought to be susceptible to the disease. It is recognized, however, that isolation may fail for a variety of reasons. For example, it is ineffective for diseases that are transmitted by an intermediate carrier, such as the mosquitoes that transmit yellow fever and malaria. In plague, isolation is important to prevent person-to-person spread, but it does not have an effect on the main route of infection—by bites of the rat flea. It is inappropriate to isolate human cases of a disease that is usually acquired by contact with infected farm animals or their products, as is brucellosis. Even for diseases in which it may protect individuals, isolation will often have little effect on the general epidemic; this may be, as in measles, because infectivity precedes the appearance of the characteristic feature, the rash, by a few days or, as in polio infections, because a number of persons are carriers, harbouring the disease agent without discernible illness. The difficulty of recognizing potentially infective persons often makes isolation impracticable even in situations in which it could be appropriate.
Quarantine is much modified in modern practice because of the better understanding of infectious disease. In its purest form it is applied to animals, such as in the control of rabies. In the control of human disease the common practice is surveillance of contacts, with, possibly, daily reporting to a doctor to receive prompt recognition of illness but without restricting movement; such a policy, coupled with other control measures, is generally accepted. In some instances modified quarantine is imposed: adult contacts of typhoid should be excluded from food handling until repeated bacteriological examination of feces and urine has shown them to be free of the disease. At one time susceptible children exposed to measles were kept home from school, though the practice was declining even before the widespread use of measles vaccines.
Quarantine and exclusion of plants and of plant products are still widely practiced in accordance with international agreements.
