Rapamycin, also called sirolimus,  drug characterized primarily by its ability to suppress the immune system, which led to its use in the prevention of transplant rejection. Rapamycin is produced by the soil bacterium Streptomyces hygroscopicus. The drug’s name comes from Rapa Nui, the indigenous name of Easter Island, where the compound was originally discovered in soil samples in the 1970s.
Rapamycin exerts its immunosuppressive effects by inhibiting the activation and proliferation of T cells. It acts specifically on FK-binding protein 12 (FKBP12), a substance commonly referred to as an immunophilin because it binds to immunosuppressive drugs. In turn, the rapamycin-FKBP12 complex binds to the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a kinase (an enzyme that adds phosphate groups to other molecules) that plays a fundamental role in regulating the progression of the cell cycle. The rapamycin complex inhibits mTOR and, by doing so, disrupts cell division and hence the proliferation of T cells.
Rapamycin is used in combination with other immunosuppressive agents, namely calcineurin inhibitors and glucocorticoids, to prevent transplant rejection. Because aberrant mTOR activity is implicated in cancer, rapamycin is being investigated for use in the treatment of certain malignancies. In addition, studies have indicated that rapamycin-coated stents, which are devices used in the treatment of cardiovascular disease involving the narrowing of a blood vessel, have been associated with reduced rates of restenosis (recurrence of vessel narrowing). Research conducted in 2009 in mice revealed a potential role for rapamycin as an anti-aging drug. The drug’s inhibition of mTOR is suspected to induce metabolic and stress responses that favour longevity, though exactly how this occurs is not clear.
Immune suppression by rapamycin has been associated with potentially serious side effects, including increased risk of infection and lymphoma. Other side effects include fever, diarrhea, joint pain, headache, and vomiting.
