Sangoma,  highly respected healer among the Zulu people of South Africa who diagnoses, prescribes, and often performs the rituals to heal a person physically, mentally, emotionally, or spiritually. The sangoma may address all of these realms in the healing process, which usually involves divination, herbal medicine, and specific customized rituals to cure illness and restore well-being.
In Zulu tradition, God is rarely involved in human affairs and is not a common cause of illness (isifo). However, God delegated many administrative functions to the ancestors (Amadlozi), who, therefore, are actively and constantly involved in the world of the living. As a result, they are frequently suspected of being responsible for sending isifo to the living. They do this not out of wickedness or caprice but to punish the living for not abiding by the ethical standards of the community and to remind them of their imperative duty to live a moral life. Failure, for instance, to conduct certain important rituals or violation of a taboo may result in the ancestors’ wrath, manifested in the form of sickness. One is then in a state of spiritual pollution and imbalance, which must be redressed. Once a sangoma has used divination to establish the exact cause of illness, certain rituals will be conducted to appease the ancestors, thus restoring health. The behaviour that angered the ancestors will also, of course, not be engaged in again.
In addition to the ancestors, witches and sorcerers have the ability and may have the desire to harm others. They may house evil spirits, use medicines, take on animal (or other) forms, and resort to several possible agents to hurt other people. Witchcraft is taken quite seriously in Zulu tradition, and it is dreaded, given the devastation it may cause in a person’s life. As a result, people often take precautionary measures to circumvent evil attempts at harming them. They may engage in rituals whose express purpose is to appeal to the ancestors for protection against witchcraft. They may also choose to wear protective devices, such as amulets known as Ama-khubalo, which are often fragments of barks or roots tied around the neck and sucked on. When witchcraft has already struck, specific rituals, relying heavily on the use of medicinal plants known for their spiritual cleansing powers, will be conducted by sangomas to neutralize the malevolent forces unleashed by the witch or sorcerer. The expected result is the return of harmony, peace, and health in the life of the person affected.
An individual who is called to be a sangoma must be called by spirit. The calling, ukutwasa, denotes an ancestral and cultural responsibility and is initiated usually by an illness, which is accompanied by strange dreams and visions. This disruption in the daily life of the person causes him or her to seek the services of various healers. Because of the availability of Western medicine in South Africa, many individuals who are called, known as twasa (apprentices), often try in vain to be cured by modern medicine before ending up with a sangoma who can correctly identify ukutwasa. This identification begins an initiation period, which can last from months to years depending on the circumstances.
Because sangomas are called, there are no restrictions on gender imposed by society. However, most sangomas are female.
The training and initiation of a twasa generally includes the twasa’s performing a series of rituals and tasks that not only cure that individual’s body but also instruct the twasa about the healing power of herbs and traditional medicine. These actions also teach the twasa’s body to perceive the subtle spiritual energies vital to the work of a sangoma. The twasa also have to confess any negative thoughts to their instructor, abstain from eating certain foods and from all sexual activity, and spend their days sitting with their instructor as the instructor receives clients. Upon completing a stage of initiation, a feast is held where a calf or goat is slaughtered. The twasa then search the ashes for an unbroken bone. Eventually, this collection will become part of the sangoma’s dingaka, or oracle bones, to be used in divination, which is a common activity of the sangoma.
Unlike other healers, sangomas must learn ethnic and communal history and mythology. In this way, they are healers as well as keepers of sacred knowledge.
The sangoma reads the dingaka to detect the presence of spirits around a sick person, resentful ancestral spirits, offended nature spirits, or malevolent spirits. In serious cases, divination is repeated in three areas in nature to establish the validity of the reading. Diagnosis, an important element of the sangoma’s skills, is usually performed through divination. Sangomas are also considered “soul doctors” because they are able to determine the specific part of a person’s soul that is out of balance or afflicted by offending spirits. Among the Zulu, physical or mental illness is understood to originate in the spiritual realm. The spiritual causes of such afflictions are numerous; therefore, sangomas must be proficient in a variety of areas. Highly skilled sangomas are said to be able to make herbal medicines, interpret dreams, incorporate spirits, control weather, and predict the future. Having good communication skills is important for sangomas because they must be able to effectively listen to the patient to gain both information and trust, and then they must be able to clearly respond to the patient in a respectful manner. Sangomas also have to communicate with entities from the spirit world, some of which are or potentially can be violent or hostile. Again, the emphasis is on effective communication and respect, although the goal is to coax the spirit away from the afflicted person.
Sangomas must also function similarly to a psychologist, understanding the power and workings of the human mind. Other skills of sangomas include the ability to distinguish between different types of ghosts and the ability to distinguish a real ghost versus a manifestation of the patient’s mind and various extraterrestrial life forms. Treatments that may be prescribed by sangomas for various afflictions include dietary modifications, herbal preparations, identification of personal taboos such as the avoidance of a particular substance or place, and spirit expulsion.
Sangomas are respected in their communities because of their mystical power and leadership. Sangoma women are identified by the long woolen wig with beads that symbolizes humility before God. A headband indicates purity of thoughts. A leopard skin skirt denotes honesty and courage, and the occasional red blouse says the sangoma is ready to sacrifice herself for her people. A cloth beta has replaced the animal skins of the past but still retains the skins’ symbolic meaning. Sangomas work in groups when necessary, such as when a situation requires much focused power. The source of sangomas’ power is called umbilini, said to feel like a hot coiled snake ascending the spine. Sangomas learn to summon this power at will through the beating of a drum or through deep meditation. They also learn how to access the knowledge of the universe—past, present, and future—said to be contained in a hidden lake in the spirit world.
