Sports medicine,  medical and paramedical supervision, of athletes in training and in competition, with the goal of prevention and treatment of their injuries. Sports medicine entails the application of scientific research and practice to the optimization of health and athletic performance.
Since the revival of the Olympic Games in 1896, increased participation in sport and training for sports have resulted in the need to not only prevent and treat sports injury but also advance the scientific knowledge of the limits of human exercise performance and the causes of fatigue. Moreover, with increased training levels and specialization across the spectrum of recreational sports and with opportunities for sport participants to become professionals, there has been a parallel increase in the careers to support the care and training of athletes and physically active individuals.
Sports medicine is an umbrella term representing a broad array of specialties that bridge the academic disciplines of medicine and physical education as well as the basic sciences (e.g., physiology, chemistry, and physics). Within clinical medicine, physicians in primary care or pediatrics may become team physicians for competitive teams at all levels (interscholastic, intercollegiate, professional, and amateur sports). Other members of a sports medicine team typically include an orthopedic surgeon, a certified athletic trainer, a physical therapist or kinesiotherapist, and a strength-and-conditioning specialist. Other professionals, such as those in the areas of sports nutrition, sports psychology, sports physiology, podiatry, sports vision, sports dentistry, and chiropractic, are valuable consultants.
Although sports medicine is more commonly thought to be related specifically to orthopedic medicine, with respect to the treatment and prevention of injuries occurring in a sport, other medical specialties in cardiology, psychiatry, gynecology, and ophthalmology can also play an important role in comprehensive sports medicine. For example, cardiac rehabilitation is an important area in sports medicine that employs not only doctors but also allied health professionals, such as registered clinical exercise physiologists and nurses. These individuals help patients recover and improve their functional capacity following cardiovascular events such as heart attack or cardiac surgery.
A sports medicine team physician can be called upon to treat a wide variety of sports-related injuries or illnesses. One example is an overuse type of injury, such as a stress fracture in the foot or lower leg. An injury such as this can be caused by any of a variety of problems, including muscle imbalance, muscular weakness arising from a lack of proper strength training, improper footwear or abnormal gait, inadequate mineral or other nutrient intake that upsets the caloric balance necessary for training, hormonal deficiency, and overload of exercise training volume, frequency, and intensity. Thus, to effectively treat an overuse injury, a team physician needs expertise and knowledge in a wide range of sports medicine issues.
The Fédération Internationale de Médecine du Sport (International Federation of Sports Medicine, or FIMS) is the international organization for national sports medicine associations worldwide. Founded as the Association Internationale Médico-Sportive (AIMS) during the Olympic Winter Games in St. Moritz, Switzerland, in 1928, the organization is today strongly tied to the International Olympic Committee (IOC). The primary goal of FIMS is to support elite athletes in their training and competition by providing outstanding medical care in order to prevent and treat injuries. FIMS also has an interest in facilitating fair play while maximizing performance potential through optimal health habits. The organization fulfills this task by promoting the importance of proper nutrition and rest and by advancing the understanding of ideal training regimens.
In 1954 the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) was established to bring together medical doctors, university researchers, and physical educators to advance the study and understanding of the impacts of physical exertion on the human body. The overarching goal of the ACSM is to champion the beneficial aspects—physical, mental, emotional, and social—of sports and fitness activities that enhance the health and quality of life for all individuals, from youth to the elderly and from frail patients with disease to elite sport performers. The organization has members from around the world whose professional careers span the broad array of disciplines already described; notably, clinicians, researchers, and sport practitioners are within its member ranks.
Other professional sports medicine societies and organizations in the United States include the American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine, the American Medical Society for Sports Medicine, and the American Osteopathic Academy of Sports Medicine. These and many other professional associations are represented as members of the Joint Commission on Sports Medicine and Science.
Many other countries also have sports medicine societies and sports science associations. These entities are often geared specifically toward either clinical medicine or sports science.
The use of exercise and sport as a therapy to prevent chronic disease is well established. The wide range of health benefits of exercise stem from the several key elements that comprise physical fitness: cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular strength, muscular endurance, flexibility, agility, and body composition.
The relationship between regular physical activity and health has been well established worldwide. Governments of numerous countries have published guidelines that describe the amount of physical activity needed for health, although these guidelines may vary slightly.
In 2008 the U.S. government released Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans, the country’s first published set of guidelines on the “dose,” or amount, of physical activity needed to maintain health for individuals aged six and older. This document was based on a rigorous review by an expert panel of the scientific literature available on exercise and health. The panel found strong evidence indicating that 150 minutes of moderate to vigorous exercise per week for adults helped prevent a wide range of diseases, including cardiovascular disease, stroke, diabetes, hypertension (high blood pressure), certain types of cancer, and depression. This amount of exercise for adults was also associated with a reduced risk of early death, of falls, and of weight gain. There was also moderate evidence indicating that this level of physical activity aids in the prevention of hip fracture, osteoporosis, lung cancer, and endometrial cancer; facilitates weight maintenance after weight loss; and improves sleep quality.
The 2008 U.S. report also indicated that for individuals aged 6 to 17 the baseline dose of exercise needed to obtain health benefits was 60 minutes or more of physical activity every day (physical activity was defined as aerobic or endurance exercise of moderate or vigorous intensity). The greatest health benefits were associated with vigorous activity at least three days per week. Muscle-strengthening and bone-strengthening activities performed at least three days per week for children and at least two days per week for adults were also found to improve health.
In Canada, youths are encouraged to obtain even more minutes of daily activity (60 moderate and 30 vigorous minutes). In general, similar guidelines have been established for all individuals, and they are not considered to be optimal training doses for various sports and athletes. Training for competitive sports generally requires additional sports medicine expertise.
Exercise in therapeutic doses is powerful in preventive medicine. Therefore, in the broadest of terms, sports medicine is applicable to any individual who includes movement as a part of his or her daily life as well as to those who compete on teams or in individual sports—from youth to masters-level events.
