Telemedicine,  field in which telecommunication technologies and medicine interact to allow for the provision of health care remotely. Telemedicine can be viewed as an area within e-health, because it makes use of a wide variety of digital and interactive technologies with the goal of improving patient health, usually through clinical intervention.
Telemedicine has the potential to improve patient-provider interaction and patient outcome by increasing the ability of patients and health care providers to communicate on clinical and educational issues. Telemedicine can be used for remote consultation between physicians or between physicians and patients regardless of geographic distance. Examples of telemedicine include remote diagnosis and surgery in which a specialist gives advice and assistance to a nonspecialist during actual procedures that are performed in remote locations or in inaccessible environments.
Some specialized uses of telemedicine include teletriage, telesurgery and telediagnostics, and telecollaboration. Teletriage is a specialized type of teleconsultation that is applied to military scenarios in which a military physician receives online health advice from a remote medical expert. In telesurgery and telediagnostics, local and remote physicians share the same virtual space with the patient, allowing the remote physician to see and examine the patient. Telecollaboration is the interactive exchange of audiovisual information or conferencing in real time between two or more participants. Several forms of telecollaboration exist, including telephone calls, voice conferencing, video conferencing, pictoral information exchange, and data or document conferencing.
A major advantage of telemedicine is that it provides for a rapid linkage to experts who can help with patient care in underserved areas. It also can enhance the education of providers and patients through the use of Internet-based interactives. Education is facilitated through the creation of telecommunication-linked classes that provide interactive information on care and prevention to places where such information and expertise is not available.
