thalidomide,  compound in medicine initially used as a sedative and an antiemetic until the discovery that it caused severe fetal malformations. Thalidomide was developed in West Germany in the mid-1950s and was found to induce drowsiness and sleep. The drug appeared to be unusually safe, with few side effects and little or no toxicity even at high doses. Further testing revealed that thalidomide was particularly well-suited to alleviating nausea and other symptoms associated with morning sickness in pregnant women. The drug’s potentially harmful effects on the fetuses of certain mammals was not recognized during testing.
Thalidomide went on the market as a treatment for morning sickness in more than 40 countries beginning in 1958. It was soon found to have teratogenic effects—producing severe malformations in infants born of mothers who had taken the drug during early pregnancy. These included phocomelia (“seal limbs,” in which the long bones in the arms and legs fail to develop) and other deformities such as absence or malformation of the external ear, fusion defects of the eye, and absence of the normal openings of the gastrointestinal tract. Fetuses are vulnerable to the drug’s effects only during the period from 27 to 40 days after conception, but the drug nonetheless caused deformities in an estimated 5,000 to 10,000 infants. Once these effects became known, thalidomide was taken off the market in 1961–62. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) had been slow to approve thalidomide, so it was never distributed for clinical use there.
For many years the mechanism by which thalidomide caused birth defects in humans was not fully understood. In the late 1950s physicians and pharmacologists little suspected that thalidomide could cause deformations in a fetus. The issue was also complicated by the fact that thalidomide is harmful only during specific times in human fetal development. In the 1990s scientists discovered that thalidomide was a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis (blood vessel formation). In the early 2000s researchers investigating the effects of thalidomide on limb development in chick embryos demonstrated that the drug’s inhibition of angiogenesis contributed to the malformation of limbs during fetal development. They also found that exposure of the embryos to thalidomide resulted in temporary inhibition of vessel development in certain tissues of the developing chick but caused a permanent loss of vessels in other tissues. Whether the embryos died or survived with limb defects depended primarily on the timing of drug exposure. The tissue selectivity and the timing of drug administration were suspected of being the underlying factors driving the variability and extent of malformation observed in humans born with thalidomide-related limb defects in the late 1950s and early 1960s.
Thalidomide binds to a protein known as cereblon, which normally is active during embryonic development. Although cereblon’s precise role in development is not well understood, research has shown that its binding to thalidomide results in abnormalities in fin and limb development in zebra fish and chick embryos, respectively. It is unclear whether the drug’s inhibitory actions on angiogenesis and its binding to cereblon work together in producing limb defects.
Though it achieved worldwide notoriety as a cause of birth defects and was withdrawn from use as a sedative, thalidomide eventually proved to have therapeutic uses. In the mid-1960s clinicians discovered that it can effectively treat the painful skin nodules and nerve impairment caused by erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL), a complication of leprosy. Thalidomide achieves this therapeutic effect by limiting the immune system’s powerful—and harmful—inflammatory response to leprosy bacilli within the body. Further testing revealed that thalidomide also has a significant anti-inflammatory effect in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune diseases. Thalidomide derives this effect from its ability to inhibit the body’s production of tumour necrosis factor (TNF), a protein that is a powerful stimulator of inflammation within the body.
In the 1990s thalidomide was found to be effective in treating cachexia, the severe weight loss that occurs in patients with diseases such as AIDS, tuberculosis, and leprosy. Cachexia is apparently caused by the body’s overproduction of TNF. In 1998 the FDA approved the use of thalidomide in the treatment of ENL, although distribution was to be closely regulated because of the drug’s dangerous teratogenic properties. In AIDS patients, in addition to treating cachexia, thalidomide was also useful in treating lesions of the mouth and throat, and early tests indicated that the drug may inhibit the replication of the AIDS virus.
Other studies suggest that thalidomide may have activity against multiple myeloma, a variety of solid tumours, and other hematologic cancers. In addition to its ability to inhibit production of TNF, it appears that thalidomide may inhibit production of other immunoregulatory substances and may inhibit the growth of new blood vessels (angiogenesis), possibly by blocking growth factors that stimulate blood-vessel formation. The use of thalidomide has been shown to improve response rates in patients with multiple myeloma; however, no increase in overall survival has been observed.
