Thoracentesis,  medical procedure used in the diagnosis and treatment of conditions affecting the pleural space—the cavity between the lungs and the thoracic cage. It is most often used to diagnose the cause of pleural effusion, the abnormal accumulation of fluid in the pleural space. Pleural effusion can result in difficulty in breathing and often occurs secondary to conditions that affect the heart or lungs, including heart failure, tumours, and lung infections, such as tuberculosis and pneumonia. Thoracentesis is used therapeutically to relieve the symptoms associated with pleural effusion, as well as to prevent further complications associated with the condition, including pleural empyema—the accumulation of pus in the pleural space.
Prior to thoracentesis, the results of chest percussion and imaging tests, such as chest X-rays or computerized axial tomography (CAT) chest scans, are assessed to precisely locate the site of fluid accumulation and to evaluate the volume of fluid present. In the subsequent thoracentesis procedure, a needle is inserted through the chest wall and into the effusion site in the pleural space. Needle placement is sometimes guided by ultrasound in order to avoid puncturing nearby tissues, including the lungs, liver, and spleen. Once the needle is inserted, fluid is drawn out of the pleural cavity using a syringe or other aspiration technique. For diagnostic applications, a small amount of fluid is drawn and then analyzed for the presence of a variety of substances, including infectious organisms, particles such as asbestos, and tumour cells. The results of these analyses frequently warrant further diagnostic testing, particularly upon detection of cancerous cells, which are suggestive of mesothelioma or lung cancer.
Thoracentesis is a relatively quick procedure, generally lasting about 10 to 15 minutes. However, for several hours afterward patients are often observed for the manifestation of adverse effects. Minor complications associated with thoracentesis include pain and cough. More serious complications include pneumothorax, the accumulation of air in the pleural space, which occurs when a needle punctures the lungs; and aberrant stimulation of the vasovagal reaction, a reflex of the nervous system that causes heart rate to slow (bradycardia) and blood vessels in the lower extremities to dilate, leading to a drop in blood pressure and fainting (syncope). Thoracentesis is contraindicated in persons with bleeding disorders (i.e., coagulopathy).
