Tuskegee syphilis study, official name Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male,  American medical research project that earned notoriety for its unethical experimentation on African American patients in the rural South.
The project, which was conducted by the U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) from 1932 to 1972, examined the natural course of untreated syphilis in African American men. The research was intended to test whether syphilis caused cardiovascular damage more often than neurological damage and to determine if the natural course of syphilis in black men was significantly different from that in whites. In order to recruit participants for its study, the PHS enlisted the support of the prestigious Tuskegee Institute (now Tuskegee University), located in Macon county, Alabama. A group of 399 infected patients and 201 uninfected control patients were recruited for the program. The subjects were all impoverished sharecroppers from Macon county. The original study was scheduled to last only six to nine months.
The subjects were not told that they had syphilis or that the disease could be transmitted through sexual intercourse. Instead, they were told that they suffered from “bad blood,” a local term used to refer to a range of ills. Treatment was initially part of the study, and some patients were administered arsenic, bismuth, and mercury. But after the original study failed to produce any useful data, it was decided to follow the subjects until their deaths, and all treatment was halted. Penicillin was denied to the infected men after that drug became available in the mid-1940s, and it was still being withheld from them 25 years later, in direct violation of government legislation that mandated the treatment of venereal disease. It is estimated that more than 100 of the subjects died of tertiary syphilis.
The Tuskegee syphilis study finally came to an end in 1972 when the program and its unethical methods were exposed in the Washington Star. A class-action suit against the federal government was settled out of court for $10 million in 1974. That same year the U.S. Congress passed the National Research Act, requiring institutional review boards to approve all studies involving human subjects. In 1997 President Bill Clinton issued a formal apology for the study (see Sidebar: Presidential Apology for the Study at Tuskegee).
