Uroscopy,  medical examination of the urine in order to facilitate the diagnosis of a disease or disorder. Examining the urine is one of the oldest forms of diagnostic testing, extending back to the days of the ancient Greek physician Hippocrates. Physicians observed the urine to diagnose all forms of illness because direct examination of a patient, or at least disrobing the patient, was socially unacceptable. Until the mid-19th century, uroscopy remained a common method for diagnosing illness. The colour of the urine, as well as cloudiness, precipitates, and particles in the urine, was believed to indicate the cause of the disorder.
Today urinalysis, which is the laboratory examination of a sample of urine to obtain clinical information, is the most commonly performed test in the physician’s office. It consists of (1) a gross examination, in which the colour, the turbidity, and the specific gravity of the urine are assessed; (2) the use of a dipstick (a plastic strip containing reagent pads) to test for bilirubin, blood, glucose, ketones, leukocyte esterase, nitrite, pH, protein, and urobilinogen; and (3) a microscopic examination of a centrifuged specimen to detect erythrocytes (red blood cells) or leukocytes (white blood cells), casts, crystals, and bacteria. The urine is collected by using a “clean-catch” technique to eliminate contamination with bacteria from skin or vaginal secretions.
Dipstick tests are available that contain from 2 to 10 different tests. The test for glucose, which likely indicates diabetes mellitus, and the test for protein, which indicates kidney disease, tumours of the urinary tract, or hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, are two of the most important assays available.
The microscopic examination is the most valuable urinalysis test. It will show a variety of cells that are normally shed from the urinary tract. Usually up to five white blood cells per high-power field (HPF) are present; however, the presence of more than 10 white blood cells per HPF indicates a urinary tract infection. Red blood cells in the urine sediment can be indicative of urinary tract inflammation and can also be a sign of a malignant tumour of the kidney, the bladder, or the urinary tract. A count of more than two red blood cells per HPF is abnormal, although in women this is often due to vaginal contamination from menstruation.
The identification of red blood cells in the urine (hematuria) always demands follow-up to determine the cause and to rule out the presence of a neoplasm (tumour). Cylindrically shaped urinary casts, shed from the kidney’s tubules, consist of protein mixed with cells or other materials and may indicate renal disease if present in large numbers. Various crystals also are found in the urinary sediment, but these are generally of little clinical significance. Occasionally, the presence of specific crystals may help confirm a diagnosis; for example, uric acid crystals in the urine may be associated with gout.
