vasectomy,  severing of the vas deferens in the male reproductive tract to bring about sterility or to prevent infection. The testes in the male produce the sperm cells that fertilize the ovum, or egg, in the process of producing a new organism. Connected to each testis is the epididymis, a structure that serves as a storage sac for sperm. The duct that passes sperm from the testes to the prostate and other reproductive organs is the vas deferens (see ductus deferens). The testes, the epididymis, and the beginning of the vas deferens are enclosed in the scrotal sac.
Vasectomy is a relatively simple procedure that can be performed in the physician’s office. The scrotum is locally anesthetized, and the vas deferens is isolated by external examination. A small incision is made over the cord, it is clamped in two spots, and severed between the clamps. The two free ends of the vas deferens are then usually cauterized to coagulate the blood and seal off the tubes. The clamps are removed and the small incision is closed with a single stitch.
Vasectomies are usually performed for the purpose of contraception. However, vasectomy may be performed as a prophylactic to prevent further infections from occurring in the epididymes or testes; it is considered much less injurious to the body to produce sterility than to take the risk of losing the functioning testes altogether. After the vas deferens has been severed, the testes still produce hormones that allow the male to perform in a normal sexual manner and the hormones that support the secondary sex characteristics such as pubic hair, facial hair, and deep voice. The male still emits small quantities of sperm for up to six weeks after the operation. Once the residual supply in the remaining reproductive tract has been depleted or washed out, he is sterile.
Some men who have had a vasectomy later decide they would like to have children and therefore choose to undergo vasectomy reversal. This may be achieved using standard surgical techniques or using microsurgical techniques, in which a microscope and special surgical instruments are used to aid the reconnection of the vas deferens. Surgical attempts to reconnect the cords have a success rate of at least 40 percent, with microsurgery offering the highest chance for success. If surgical reconstruction cannot be performed or is unsuccessful, sperm can be harvested and used for in vitro fertilization.
