World Heart Day,  annual observance and celebration held on September 29 that is intended to increase public awareness of cardiovascular diseases, including their prevention and their global impact. In 1999 the World Heart Federation (WHF), in conjunction with the World Health Organization (WHO), announced the establishment of World Heart Day. The idea for this annual event was conceived by Antoni Bayés de Luna, president of WHF from 1997–99. World Heart Day was originally (until 2011) observed on the last Sunday in September, with the first celebration taking place on September 24, 2000.
Cardiovascular diseases are the most common cause of death globally. In the early 2000s roughly 17 million people worldwide died from cardiovascular diseases annually. The majority of these deaths were the result of coronary heart disease or stroke. Although cardiovascular diseases are often considered to be afflictions of people living in developed countries, where sedentary lifestyle is common, more than 80 percent of deaths from these diseases occur in low- and middle-income developing countries. The primary causes of cardiovascular diseases—poor diet, lack of exercise, and smoking—are considered modifiable factors. Thus, even in developing countries, which often lack efficient health care programs, the majority of these diseases can be prevented. Cardiovascular diseases also have a major impact on economic systems within countries, because of the high health care costs associated with treatment and lost productivity associated with disability and absenteeism from work.
Since the first World Heart Day, WHF, which is a nongovernmental organization, has continued to sponsor the annual event, assembling and distributing information and declaring a theme for the day. Educational programs designed to engage the public are a major part of World Heart Day. Information about cardiovascular diseases and ways to prevent them is communicated through public talks, podcasts, posters, and leaflets. Also held in conjunction with World Heart Day are runs, walks, concerts, fund-raising and sporting events, free health checks, and other activities that have a positive impact on public health and overall health awareness. In addition, scientific meetings and gatherings of international cardiovascular research organizations and medical societies are held on or in the days leading up to World Heart Day. More than 90 countries participate in the celebration each year, and as a result of these international efforts, World Heart Day has proved an effective method for spreading information about cardiovascular health. This level of involvement enables information to reach the developing countries that are the most heavily affected by these diseases.
The theme given to World Heart Day each year communicates the focus of that year’s celebration. The theme of the first event was “Physical Activity.” Other themes have included “Women and Heart Disease” in 2003, which was intended to raise awareness of cardiovascular disease in women, and “Know Your Risk!” in 2008, which was aimed at helping individuals identify the factors that place them at risk of cardiovascular disease.
