Human Rights Day,  international day of observance, held annually on December 10, in commemoration of the anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights plays a prominent role in coordinating worldwide efforts to celebrate the day, which routinely features cultural events and performances, public meetings and seminars, and other educational activities in promotion of human rights.
At a plenary session on December 4, 1950, the UN General Assembly passed a resolution (423 [V]) that invited all UN member states and any other interested organizations to commemorate the Dec. 10, 1948, proclamation of the UDHR with an annual celebration, called Human Rights Day, to be held on the anniversary of that landmark date. Each year a theme is chosen to draw attention to a particular facet of the effort to uphold human rights. Themes have included ending discrimination, fighting poverty, and protecting victims of human rights violations. Additionally, since 1968, which the UN designated as the International Year for Human Rights, the organization has periodically awarded a United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights on Human Rights Day.
Human Rights Day has also served as the occasion for protests and other demonstrations in support of human rights, especially in countries that have frequently been beset by allegations of rights violations. Notably, violence and the arrest and imprisonment of protesters during a Human Rights Day demonstration in Kao-hsiung, Taiwan, in 1979 contributed to the democratization process in Taiwan. Similarly, a series of massive demonstrations in Mongolia that began on Human Rights Day in 1989 helped precipitate the collapse of that country’s communist government the following year.
Affirming the symbolic value of Human Rights Day’s calendar date, South African Pres. Nelson Mandela signed his country’s first permanent postapartheid constitution on Dec. 10, 1996. At the same time, since 1995, South Africa has observed a national public holiday known as Human Rights Day on March 21, the anniversary of the 1960 Sharpeville massacre.
