Women’s Equality Day,  annual event in the United States, observed on August 26 since its inception in 1971, marking American women’s advancements toward equality with men. Many organizations, libraries, workplaces, and other institutions have observed the day by participating in events and programs that recognize women’s progress toward equality.
August 26, 1970, marked the 50th anniversary of the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which granted full woman suffrage. On that anniversary, the National Organization for Women (NOW) called upon women to demonstrate for equal rights in a nationwide “strike for equality.” Several demonstrators hung two 40-foot banners from the crown of the Statue of Liberty, while others drew attention to the strike by stopping the ticker at the American Stock Exchange. More than 100,000 other women participated in demonstrations and rallies in more than 90 major cities and towns across the country, making the strike the largest gender-equality protest in the history of the United States. In New York City 50,000 women marched down Fifth Avenue in support of the women’s movement and equal rights; former NOW president Betty Friedan, feminist author Gloria Steinem, and U.S. Rep. Bella Abzug addressed the crowd. The women demanded equal opportunities in both education and employment, as well as access to 24-hour child-care centres.
Although the strike did not bring about immediate change, it was extraordinarily successful in demonstrating the breadth of support for women’s rights, and the press coverage it received drew significant attention to the feminist movement. For example, the New York Times’s coverage of the strike marked the publication’s first article about the movement. The strike also helped to secure passage of the Equal Rights Amendment by Congress in 1971–72; the amendment subsequently failed to be ratified by the required three-fourths of the state legislatures, however. In 1971 Congress officially recognized August 26 as Women’s Equality Day, which not only commemorates the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment but also highlights the continued efforts of women to achieve full equality.
