Abdullah I, in full ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Ḥusayn,  (born 1882, Mecca—died July 20, 1951, Jerusalem), statesman who became the first ruler (1946–51) of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
Abdullah, the second son of Hussein ibn Ali, the ruler of the Hejaz, was educated in Istanbul in what was then the Ottoman Empire. After the Young Turk Revolution of 1908, he represented Mecca in the Ottoman parliament. Early in 1914 he joined the Arab nationalist movement, which sought independence for Arab territories in the Ottoman Empire. In 1915–16 he played a leading role in clandestine negotiations between the British in Egypt and his father that led to the proclamation (June 10, 1916) of the Arab Revolt against the Ottomans.
On March 8, 1920, the Iraqi Congress, an organization of questionable legitimacy, proclaimed Abdullah constitutional king of Iraq. But he declined the Iraqi throne, which was given to his brother Faisal I, whom French troops had driven out of Damascus a year earlier (July 1920). Upon Faisal’s ascent to the throne, Abdullah occupied Transjordan and threatened to attack Syria. He gradually negotiated the legal separation of Transjordan from Britain’s Palestine mandate.
Abdullah aspired to create a united Arab kingdom encompassing Syria, Iraq, and Transjordan. During World War II (1939–45), he actively sided with the United Kingdom, and his army, the Arab Legion—the most effective military force in the Arab world—took part in the British occupation of Syria and Iraq in 1941. In 1946 Transjordan became independent, and Abdullah was crowned in Amman on May 25, 1946. He was the only Arab ruler prepared to accept the United Nations’ partitioning of Palestine into Jewish and Arab states (1947). In the war with Israel in May 1948, his armies occupied the region of Palestine due west of the Jordan River, which came to be called the West Bank, and captured east Jerusalem, including the Old City. Two years later he annexed the West Bank territory into the kingdom—thereupon changing the name of the country to Jordan. That annexation angered his former Arab allies, Syria, Saudi Arabia, and Egypt, all of which wanted to see the creation of a Palestinian Arab state on the West Bank. Abdullah’s popularity at home declined, and he was assassinated by a Palestinian nationalist. The reign of his son Talal, who suffered from severe mental illness, was brief. A second son, Nayef, was passed over, and the throne soon went to Talal’s son Hussein.
