Advocacy network,  organization consisting of independent groups that collaborate in the pursuit of political change.
Advocacy networks are made up primarily of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) but may also include individuals or groups from the public or private sector, foundations, academia, and the media. Nationally, regionally, and internationally, advocacy networks focus on the mobilization, interpretation, and strategic dissemination of information to change the behaviour of governments, private firms, or international organizations. Advocacy networks share many of the characteristics of social movements, but the latter are generally less institutionalized and more likely to use disruptive tactics. Although advocacy networks have long been an important force in domestic governance, they expanded rapidly across international borders starting in the 1990s. In both domains, advocacy networks have become effective drivers of social and political change.
Unlike governments and firms, advocacy networks generally have limited access to traditional sources of power. Instead, advocacy networks rely on the strength of information, membership numbers, organizational structure and leadership, and symbolic power. Their organizational form is characterized by voluntary, reciprocal, and horizontal patterns of collaboration, which allows for flexibility, adaptability, and quick reaction to political exigencies; the advent of social networking media has significantly increased the speed and effectiveness of organization. Yet, advocacy networks remain more likely to emerge where personal and working relationships among key individuals and leaders already exist.
The most important assets at the disposal of advocacy networks are information and communication. Information is deployed to change actors’ perceptions and preferences and ultimately their behaviours. Information is invariably a critical component of conventional and unconventional campaign tactics, including education and capacity building, public relations, petitions, lobbying, and product or producer boycotts.
Advocacy networks use information in three different ways. First, they generate and disseminate new or different information to change the underlying logic of a policy issue. Such information may revise the evaluation of an existing policy, increase the cost of an undesirable policy option, or change the public view of a key actor. Second, information can draw attention to new issues or reframe existing issues in ways that resonate with a greater audience; this often involves the creative use of symbols, performances, and narratives. Third, advocacy networks use information to enlist the support of allies that individual network members could not leverage on their own.
The success and tactics of advocacy networks depend significantly on the system of governance in which they operate. The nature of state-society relations (accommodation or repression), extent of direct democratic institutions (initiative, referendum, and recall), electoral system (majority or proportional), openness of policy-making processes, and access to political leaders significantly affect outcomes of advocacy network efforts. When advocacy networks meet obstacles at the domestic level, they may expand their efforts to the regional or international level.
