Agnes Smedley,  (born Feb. 23, 1892, Campground, Mo., U.S.—died May 6, 1950, Oxford, Eng.), journalist and writer best known for a series of articles and books centred on her experiences in China during the growth of Chinese communism.
Smedley grew up under straitened circumstances. At an early age she began working after school to help support her family, and she dropped out of school completely in 1907. At age 16 she left home, and, over the next several years she studied and worked at a variety of jobs in the West and Southwest and went through a brief, unhappy marriage. After divorcing in 1916 she moved to New York City, where she worked and attended classes at New York University. While there she became involved in politics and the birth-control movement.
Smedley, who worked for Indian nationalist Lala Lajpat Rai, soon became involved in the cause. In 1918 she was arrested under the Espionage Act and charged with failure to register as an agent for the Indian nationalists, who, unbeknownst to her, had accepted funds from Germany. She was held in the Tombs in New York for a few weeks before the charges were dismissed, and she became thoroughly disenchanted with the United States. From 1919 to 1928 she lived in Berlin with the Indian nationalist leader Virendranath Chattopadhyaya. She taught English at the University of Berlin, did graduate work in Asian studies there, wrote articles for several periodicals, and helped establish Germany’s first public birth-control clinic. She began psychoanalysis in an attempt to combat depression, and, as a form of therapy, she began writing the autobiographical novel Daughter of Earth (1929).
In 1928 Smedley went to China as special correspondent for the Frankfurter Zeitung. From her base in Shanghai she traveled widely, befriending the great writer Lu Xun and reporting enthusiastically on the growing communist movement. Although she lost her connection with the Frankfurter Zeitung in 1930, she wrote for several other periodicals and newspapers, including the Manchester Guardian. She also published books about China (Chinese Destinies, 1933; and China’s Red Army Marches, 1934) that endorsed the communist movement. In 1936 she began a journey to reach communist-controlled northern China. She was in Xi’an (Sian) in December 1936 and made English-language broadcasts on the brief capture of Chiang Kai-shek by rebellious Manchurian troops. Early in 1937 she reached Mao Zedong’s headquarters in Yan’an. She underwent great hardships to travel with the Eighth Route Army (the Red Army) during the Sino-Japanese War and in 1938 published China Fights Back: An American Woman with the Eighth Route Army, on her experiences in Shanxi province. In Hankou she worked with the Chinese Red Cross Medical Corps, collected supplies for the Red Army, and served as a publicist for the communists until the city fell in 1938. She then traveled through central China with the New Fourth Army, a communist guerrilla force in Japanese-controlled areas, filing reports from time to time with the Manchester Guardian.
Smedley returned to the United States in 1941 and continued to write and speak widely on behalf of the Chinese communists. Her Battle Hymn of China (1943) is considered an excellent example of war journalism. Her speeches and sentiments, however, provoked an increasingly hostile response. In 1949 General Douglas MacArthur released an army intelligence report that outrageously charged her with being a Soviet spy. She threatened legal action, whereupon the secretary of the army admitted that the charge rested on no evidence. The era of McCarthyism had set in, however; Smedley’s reputation was irreparably damaged, and she could not find work. Later that year she sought refuge in England, where she worked to complete The Great Road: The Life and Times of Chu Teh, her biography of the Chinese communist military leader Zhu De, published posthumously in 1956. Smedley’s ashes were interred in the National Revolutionary Martyrs Memorial Park in Beijing.
