Albion Fellows Bacon, née Albion Fellows,  (born April 8, 1865, Evansville, Ind., U.S.—died Dec. 10, 1933, Evansville),  American reformer and writer, remembered largely for her campaigns to improve public housing standards.
Albion Fellows was the daughter of a Methodist minister and was a younger sister of the writer Annie Fellows Johnston. After graduating from high school in Evansville, Fellows worked as a secretary until her marriage to Hilary E. Bacon, a banker and merchant, in 1888. The next several years were marked by the birth of several children, the publication of a volume of verse, Songs Ysame (1897; with her sister), and a lengthy period of illness.
One day, almost by chance, Bacon discovered Evansville’s riverfront slums and was moved to become a “friendly visitor” for the city’s associated charities. In time she organized the Men’s Circle of Friendly Visitors, the Flower Mission for poor working girls, a Working Girls’ Association, an Anti-Tuberculosis League, and the Monday Night Club of influential citizens interested in charitable work. Becoming convinced that substandard housing lay at the root of all the social ills she had witnessed, Bacon attempted unsuccessfully to have tenement regulation included in a new city building code.
In 1908 she decided to approach the problem at a higher level and drafted a model state law that, after she had directed a yearlong public campaign and lobbying effort, was passed by the Indiana legislature in 1909. Amendments had limited the bill’s application to Evansville and Indianapolis, however, so in 1911 she helped organize the Indiana Housing Association, which successfully pushed through a new bill of statewide application in 1913. She recorded her campaign in the book Beauty for Ashes (1914). She was also instrumental in the passage in 1917 of a law authorizing the condemnation of unsafe or unsanitary dwellings. In later years she remained active as head of the executive committee of the Indiana Child Welfare Association and with the state Commission on Child Welfare, through which she worked to secure establishment of a juvenile probation system and passage of child labour and school attendance laws.
Bacon also wrote several devotional books and a number of pageants.
