Aleksandŭr Stamboliyski,  (born March 1, 1879, Slavovitsa, Bulg.—died June 14, 1923, near Slavovitsa), leader of the Agrarian Party in Bulgaria, supporter of the Allied cause during World War I in opposition to his pro-German king Ferdinand, and prime minister of a reformist government after the war (1919–23).
After attending an agricultural college in Germany, Stamboliyski turned to journalism, becoming editor of the newly formed Agrarian League’s organ in 1902. A lifelong supporter of peasant interests, he entered the National Assembly in 1908 as head of the Bulgarian Agrarian Union (Peasant Party). His recurrent disputes with King Ferdinand finally climaxed in 1915, when Bulgaria prepared to enter World War I on Germany’s side. Stamboliyski, who viewed Russia as the liberator of the Slavs, favoured the Allied cause and threatened the person of the king. Court-martialed, he received a life sentence but was freed in September 1918. While Bulgaria’s armed forces began to disintegrate near the end of World War I, he led an insurrection, forced Ferdinand’s abdication, and proclaimed Bulgaria a republic. Although he was defeated and the monarchy was restored under Ferdinand’s son Boris, Stamboliyski became a cabinet member in January 1919 and prime minister in October of that year. He signed the Treaty of Neuilly with the Allies (Nov. 27, 1919), which considerably decreased Bulgaria’s territory; despite that unpopular act, his Agrarians gained a majority in the March 1920 elections. Stamboliyski’s government, with a strong anti-urban and anti-industrial bias, redistributed land to the peasantry. His Orange Guard, named after his party’s colour, brutally suppressed oppositional activity and countered attempts at parliamentary democracy.
Stamboliyski loyally carried out the stipulations of the Treaty of Neuilly, winning from the Allies a reduction in reparations. He established ties with Polish and Czechoslovak peasant leaders in the hope of creating a “Green International” (in opposition to the Communist “Red International”), but this international peasant movement never lived up to his expectations. Improving relations with Yugoslavia through the Treaty of Niš (1922), Stamboliyski hoped to establish a South Slav federation. He won the 1923 election by a landslide, but his domestic policies, rapprochement with Yugoslavia, and advocacy of a militia alienated the army. A military coup overthrew him on June 9, 1923; Stamboliyski was caught near his village and executed.
