Amelia Stone Quinton, née Amelia Stone,  (born July 31, 1833, Jamesville, New York, U.S.—died June 23, 1926, Ridgefield Park, New Jersey), organizer of American Indian reform in the United States.
Amelia Stone grew up in a deeply religious Baptist household. As a young woman, she worked as a teacher and did charitable work at almshouses and prisons. She joined the Woman’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) in 1874 and worked as its New York organizer until 1877, when she married the Reverend Richard L. Quinton. The Quintons settled in Philadelphia, and Amelia Quinton renewed her friendship with Mary Lucinda Bonney, whom she had met while teaching. Bonney and Quinton shared a concern that the Indian Territory would be opened for white settlement. The two women circulated petitions, eventually collecting the signatures of thousands of Americans who demanded that the government honour its treaties. The signatures were presented to Congress with an appeal personally written by Quinton calling for a new federal Indian policy that would provide Indians with education, equality before the law, and land parcels. By 1883 Quinton and Bonney had formed the Women’s National Indian Association (WNIA), which with several other Indian rights associations led a comprehensive campaign for Indian policy reform. In 1887 Congress enacted the Dawes General Allotment Act, which granted Indians citizenship and allotments of reservation land to be used for farming.
At a time when the plight of the American Indian was given little thought by most white Americans, Quinton almost single-handedly made reform of U.S. Indian policy a national issue. A devout Christian who lived during an era in which cultural diversity was yet to be appreciated, she saw assimilation of the Indian into the white Christian world as the ultimate objective of her campaign. Quinton and her colleagues counted the passage of the Dawes Act as a victory, never suspecting that it would contribute in later years to severe cultural and economic decline among Indians. Quinton continued lobbying for improved conditions on Indian reservations as president of the WNIA from 1887 until her retirement in 1905.
