Antoinette Brown Blackwell, née Antoinette Louisa Brown,  (born May 20, 1825, Henrietta, N.Y., U.S.—died  Nov. 5, 1921, Elizabeth, N.J.), first woman to be ordained a minister of a recognized denomination in the United States.
Antoinette Brown was a precocious child and at an early age began to speak at meetings of the Congregational church to which she belonged. She attended Oberlin College, completing the literary (nondegree) course in 1847 and, after overcoming objections by family, faculty, and friends (even reformer Lucy Stone was taken aback by the idea), completed the theological course in 1850. Although her professors had allowed her to preach, they refused to license her or allow her to graduate. She was an itinerant preacher and lecturer until September 1853, when she was ordained minister of the Congregational church in South Butler, New York; she became thereby the first ordained woman minister in the country.
Brown was active in many reform movements, particularly those for abolition, temperance, and women’s rights. Despite her considerable achievements and her status as an accredited delegate, she was barred from addressing the World’s Temperance Convention in New York in 1853 on grounds of her sex. Her changing religious convictions led her to resign her pastorate in July 1854, and shortly thereafter she became a Unitarian minister and served a church in Elizabeth, New Jersey. In January 1856 she married Samuel C. Blackwell, a brother of Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell, whose other brother Henry had married Lucy Stone a few months earlier. Although she retired then from public activity, she contributed articles to the Woman’s Journal, a suffrage periodical, and carried on a broad and varied program of study in the physical and social sciences and in other fields. This study bore fruit in several books: Studies in General Science (1869), The Sexes Throughout Nature (1875), The Physical Basis of Immortality (1876), The Philosophy of Individuality (1893), The Making of the Universe (1914), and The Social Side of Mind and Action (1915). She also wrote a novel and a volume of verse. Her last years were spent in Elizabeth.
