Antonio José de Sucre, in full Antonio José de Sucre Alcalá,  (born February 3, 1795, Cumaná, New Granada [now in Venezuela]—died June 4, 1830, Berruecos, Gran Colombia [now in Colombia]), liberator of Ecuador and Peru, and one of the most respected leaders of the Latin American wars for independence from Spain. He served as Simón Bolívar’s chief lieutenant and eventually became the first constitutionally elected leader of Bolivia.
At the age of 15 Sucre entered the struggles for independence in Venezuela and Colombia. He displayed great skill at military tactics, and by 1820 he had become chief of staff to the Venezuelan leader of Latin American revolt against Spanish rule, Simón Bolívar. That same year  he was promoted by Bolívar to the rank of general and assigned  to free southern Gran Colombia (now Ecuador) from Spanish control. Leaving Colombia with a small army, Sucre marched along the coast to Guayaquil and proclaimed it a protectorate of Colombia. Then he marched to Quito, 10,000 feet (3,000 metres) above sea level, where he defeated Spanish royalist forces on May 24, 1822, at the Battle of Pichincha. Proceeding southeast, he joined his army with that of Bolívar to form  a force of about 9,000 men that won the Battle of Junín in Peru on  August 6, 1824. Bolívar left the rest of the campaign in the hands of Sucre, who went on to  rout a 9,000-man royalist army at the Battle of Ayacucho in  Peru on December 9. This victory  effectively assured the independence of  Peru. A few insubordinates still held Charcas in Upper Peru (now Bolivia); early in 1825 Bolívar ordered Sucre to dislodge them, which he did.
Sucre then set up a Bolivian government under a complicated constitution written by Bolívar, with Sucre as president.  He tried to rebuild the economy of  war-torn Bolivia and embarked on progressive social and economic reforms, such as the expropriation of most of the Roman Catholic Church’s assets in order to fund a new system of public secondary schools.  Sucre soon became  the target of opposition from Bolivia’s entrenched traditional elites, and a  local uprising at Chuquisaca in 1828 and an invasion by Peruvian troops caused him to resign the presidency in April of that year and retire to Ecuador. He was called, however, to defend Gran Colombia against the Peruvians, whom he defeated in 1829. He was called again the following year to preside over the “Admirable Congress” in Bogotá, a last unsuccessful effort to maintain the unity of Ecuador, Colombia, and Venezuela. While returning home, Sucre was assassinated. The assassins were rumoured to be agents of José María Obando, a Colombian soldier and opponent of Bolívar, but no proof was ever found.
