Arthur Griffith,  (born March 31, 1871, Dublin, Ire.—died Aug. 12, 1922, Dublin), journalist and Irish nationalist, principal founder of the powerful Sinn Féin (“We Ourselves” or “Ourselves Alone”) movement, and acting president of Dáil Éireann (Irish Assembly) (1919–20) and its president from Jan. 10, 1922, until his death.
After working as a typesetter in Dublin and then as a miner and journalist in South Africa (1896–98), Griffith edited political newspapers such as The United Irishman, Sinn Féin, Eire, and Nationality and spent his life in near poverty. Griffith sought to divert the Irish from their attempt to win self-government through legislative action in the British House of Commons. Instead, he urged passive resistance as the way to achieve Irish Home Rule. The Irish were to refuse to pay British taxes, while Irish members of the Commons were to stay away from Westminster and to sit in Ireland as a national assembly. At a meeting in Dublin (October 1902), Cumann na nGaedheal (“Party of the Irish”) announced this policy, which was called Sinn Féin. By 1905 the name had been transferred from the policy to its adherents.
Angered by the suggestion that Ireland be partitioned (which he was later constrained to accept), Griffith attacked the unsuccessful third Irish Home Rule Bill (1912–14). When the formation of the Ulster Volunteers, who supported the Anglo-Irish union, threatened to lead to violence, he aided the counterorganization of the Irish Volunteers. From the beginning of World War I, he opposed Irish participation in the British war effort.
Taking no part in the Easter Rising in Dublin (1916), Griffith lost influence with the extreme nationalists. But he was supportive of the Rising and recovered his reputation when the British authorities incarcerated him in Reading Gaol (May–December 1916). Returning to newspaper work, Griffith was jailed twice more for his anti-British journalism.
After their electoral victory in December 1918, the Sinn Féin members of the House of Commons met as Dáil Éireann, with Eamon de Valera as president and Griffith as vice president. During de Valera’s long absence (in North America 1919–20), Griffith acted as head of the Dáil ministry and carried out his own program of civil disobedience.
In the fall of 1921 Griffith unwillingly went to London as the leader of the Irish delegation to the self-government treaty conference. He was the first Irish delegate to accept the British terms, later embodied in the Anglo-Irish Treaty (Dec. 6, 1921), under which the Irish Free State came into existence as a self-governing dominion in the British Commonwealth a year later. Though not satisfied, Griffith insisted that the treaty offered Ireland the best possible opportunity to advance toward full freedom.
When the Dáil narrowly approved the treaty (Jan. 8, 1922), de Valera resigned, and Griffith was elected its president. He was not, however, the head of the provisional government of 1922 established to implement the treaty; Michael Collins had been awarded its chairmanship. Although the two men greatly respected each other, their official actions and utterances were frequently irreconcilable. Opposition to the treaty led to the outbreak of civil war in Ireland (June 28, 1922). Exhausted from overwork, Griffith died soon afterward.
