Arthur Tappan,  (born May 22, 1786, Northampton, Massachusetts, U.S.—died  July 23, 1865, New Haven, Connecticut), American philanthropist who used much of his energy and his fortune in the struggle to end slavery.
After a devoutly religious upbringing, Tappan moved to Boston at age 15 to enter the dry goods business. Six years later he launched his own firm in Portland, Maine, and then in 1809 moved the business to Montreal. Tappan struggled with the business both in Canada and, after the outbreak of the War of 1812, back in the United States. But in 1826 he started a new company in New York City. This business, a silk-importing firm, was successful, and Arthur and his brother Lewis became wealthy. The Panic of 1837 forced the Tappans to close their doors, but the brothers founded another lucrative enterprise when they opened the first commercial credit-rating service in the 1840s.
Arthur Tappan early and consistently used his wealth to support missionary societies, colleges, and theological seminaries. Conservative in his moral outlook, he founded the New York Journal of Commerce in 1827 to provide a newspaper free of “immoral advertisements.” He also backed movements for temperance and stricter observance of the Sabbath and against the use of tobacco.
It was the abolition movement, however, to which Tappan devoted himself during the latter part of his life. He helped found several abolitionist journals, and he was founder and first president (1833–40) of the American Anti-Slavery Society. Tappan at first backed the efforts of the abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison but broke with him and the American Anti-Slavery Society when Garrison insisted upon linking abolition with other reforms.
Tappan then created a new organization, the American and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society. He advocated trying to achieve abolition through the political process and backed the Liberty Party in the 1840s. With the passage of the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850, however, both of the Tappan brothers became more radical. Arthur Tappan openly declared his determination to disobey the law, and he supported the Underground Railroad.
Old age limited Tappan’s activities as the slavery controversy heated during the 1850s, but he did live to see the Emancipation Proclamation fulfill much of his life’s work.
