Artúr Görgey,   (born Jan. 30, 1818, Toporcz, Hung., Austrian Empire [now in Slovakia]—died  May 20, 1916, Budapest, Hung., Austria-Hungary), Hungarian army officer famous for his role in the Revolution of 1848–49.
Görgey served as a youth in the Austrian army but left it to study chemistry. Later, when Hungarian patriots raised a national army in 1848, he joined it and soon won a reputation for valour and leadership. After commanding a corps in the attempt to relieve Vienna on Oct. 30, 1848, he was placed in command of the Hungarian forces on the upper Danube River. Austrian armies invaded Hungary in December, but Görgey, recognizing the rawness of his troops, withdrew and refused to defend Budapest. The tension that decision created between him and the nationalist leader Lajos Kossuth was increased when on Jan. 5, 1849, Görgey issued an order to his troops that read like a defiance of the authority of the committee of national defense. Later, however, his brilliant spring offensive nearly drove the Austrians from Hungary.
After Hungary’s declaration of independence (April 14), Görgey agreed to merge his command with the post of minister of defense, although his disapproval of the dethronement of the Habsburgs was no secret. He refused suggestions to move his armies to the western frontier, proclaim himself military dictator, and make peace with the Austrians before the expected Russian invasion occurred.
Instead Görgey fought on with great skill and courage against increasing odds. On August 11, however, with Hungary’s situation hopeless, Kossuth abdicated as governor in favour of Görgey, who capitulated to the Russians at Világos two days later.
Only the personal intervention of the Russian emperor Nicholas I spared Görgey from execution. Interned in Klagenfurt, Austria, he was allowed to return to Hungary in 1867. Accusations of treason against him brought by Kossuth and his followers were proved false by documents published in 1918. Although Görgey viewed many actions of Hungarian extremists as foolish and wrong, he sacrificed his own feelings to what he regarded as the higher interest. Görgey defended his own actions in Mein Leben und Wirken in Ungarn, 1848–1849 (1852; “My Life and Work in Hungary, 1848–1849”) and Was verdanken wir der Revolution? (“What Do We Owe to the Revolution?”), an anonymous paper published in 1875.
