Association of Algerian Muslim Ulama, also called Association of Algerian Reformist Ulama, French Association Des Uléma Musulmans Algériens, or Association Des Uléma Reformistes Algériens, Arabic Jamʿiyyat al-ʿUlamāʾ al-Muslimīn al-Jazāʾiriyyīn,  a body of Muslim religious scholars (ʿulamāʾ) who, under French rule, advocated the restoration of an Algerian nation rooted in Islamic and Arabic traditions.
The association, founded in 1931 and formally organized on May 5, 1935, by Sheikh ʿAbd al-Hamid ben Badis, was heavily influenced by the views of the Muslim jurist and reformer Muḥammad ʿAbduh (1849–1905). It adopted his belief that Islam was essentially a flexible faith, capable of adapting to the modern world if freed of its non-Islamic and vulgar accretions. The Algerian Ulama thus conducted widespread campaigns against the superstition and maraboutism that had become common among the public (see marabout). They also implemented ʿAbduh’s belief in the efficacy of modern education by attempting to reform the antiquated educational system. More than 200 schools were opened, the largest at Constantine with about 300 students, and the possibility of a Muslim university was introduced but never realized. The Algerian Ulama stressed the importance of studying Arabic, the language of Algerian Muslims, and fought for its obligatory instruction in Algerian elementary and secondary schools. The organization’s channels of communication included Al-Shihāb (“The Meteor”) and Al-Baṣāʾir (“Clairvoyance”), a religious weekly, both published in Arabic.
In effect, the Association of Algerian Muslim Ulama wished to provide Algerian Muslim society with an identity and tradition rooted in the Islamic community (ummah) and distinct from that of its French colonizer. Sheikh ben Badis condemned the adoption of European culture by Algerian Muslims, issuing a formal fatwa (legal opinion) against it in 1938. In the mid-1930s, the association joined with other organizations, including the North African Star (Étoile Nord-Africaine) led by Ahmed Messali Hadj, to collectively oppose the French.
The association met with opposition from two sources. Gallicized Algerian Muslims, known as évolués—Arabs by tradition and Frenchmen by education—insisted that Islam and France were not incompatible. They rejected the idea of an Algerian nation and stated that Algeria had for generations been identified in terms of its economic and cultural relations with France.
Various Muslim circles also rejected the Association of Algerian Muslim Ulama. The leaders of the Muslim Ṣūfī (mystic) brotherhoods and the marabouts were directly threatened by the purist drive of the association, while the Islamic functionaries—imams (prayer leaders in the mosques), qadis (religious judges), and muftis (religious lawyers)—were affected by their educational reforms and anti-French sentiment.
The popular response to the programs of the association was nonetheless considerable. To counteract the growing influence of the Algerian Ulama, the French government issued the circulaire Michel, which forbade members of the association from preaching in the mosques. The association, however, did not curtail its activities, even with the arrest of ben Badis in 1938. Sheikh Muḥammad al-Bashīr al-Ibrāhīmī succeeded ben Badis upon his death in 1940. During the Algerian war of independence against France (1954–62), the association aligned with the National Liberation Front (1956), and Tawfīq al-Madanī, secretary-general of the Algerian Ulama, sat in the provisional government of the Algerian Republic after independence (1962).
After independence, the association retained significant influence on policy (mainly with regard to education and cultural matters) and in the government, especially under Col. Houari Boumedienne.
