Barthélemy-Prosper Enfantin,   (born Feb. 8, 1796, Paris, Fr.—died  Sept. 1, 1864, Paris), eccentric French social, political, and economic theorist who was a leading member of the St. Simonian movement.
After studies at the École Polytechnique, Enfantin traveled widely and frequented secret societies in Paris. When introduced to the social reformer Claude-Henri de Rouvroy St. Simon (1825), he became one of his most ardent followers and helped organize Le Globe, a major forum for St. Simonian ideas.
After the death of St. Simon (May 1825), Enfantin and St. Amand Bazard emerged as the two pères suprêmes (“supreme fathers”) of what began to take the characteristics of a religious movement. They broke in 1831, for Bazard favoured the formation of a political movement, while Enfantin envisioned an apolitical moral and social revolution. Enfantin, often called “Père Enfantin,” and his followers formed a model community at Ménilmontant (1832); but the “Père” was imprisoned soon after for sponsoring an illicit secret society and encouraging practices contrary to public morality.
Upon his release, Enfantin and some disciples journeyed to Egypt in search of the eternal mère suprême (“supreme mother”). At the same time, they hoped to begin construction of a canal linking the Mediterranean and Red Seas (1837). Failing both, he returned to Paris (1837), and in recognition of his undeniable technical talents, he was appointed to the Scientific Commission on Algeria.
Throughout his life, Enfantin was a prolific writer. In 1829 he published Doctrine de St. Simon and in 1831 Religion Saint-Simonienne. Économie politique et politique (“St. Simonian Religion. Political Economy and Politics”). This was followed by Correspondance politique (1835–40), Correspondance philosophique et religieuse (1843–45), and Colonisation de l’Algérie (1843). Shortly before his death he wrote La Vie eternelle, passée, présente, future (1861), a kind of spiritual testament. In addition, a 47-volume edition of the combined works of St. Simon and Enfantin was published (1865–78).
In 1845, thanks largely to the influence of friends and former students who were now playing an important role in the economic development of France, Enfantin was invited to join in the formation of the new Lyon Railroad Company. He quickly became its first director and leading light. Continuing to be an influential voice in technical and fiscal planning, he was one of the first to advocate the creation of the Crédit Foncier, a government promoted bank designed to offer capital at reduced interest rates for socially productive activity.
