Black Lives Matter (BLM),  international social movement, formed in the United States in 2013, dedicated to fighting racism and anti-Black violence, especially in the form of police brutality. The name Black Lives Matter signals condemnation of the unjust killings of Black people by police (Black people are far more likely to be killed by police in the United States than white people) and the demand that society value the lives and humanity of Black people as much as it values the lives and humanity of white people.
BLM activists have held large and influential protests in cities across the United States as well as internationally. A decentralized grassroots movement, Black Lives Matter is led by activists in local chapters who organize their own campaigns and programs. The chapters are affiliated with the Black Lives Matter Global Network Foundation, a nonprofit civil rights organization that is active in the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom.
BLM was cofounded in 2013 as an online movement (using the hashtag #BlackLivesMatter on social media) by three Black community organizers—Patrisse Khan-Cullors, Alicia Garza, and Opal Tometi. They formed BLM after George Zimmerman, a man of German and Peruvian descent, was acquitted on charges stemming from his fatal shooting of Trayvon Martin, an unarmed Black teenager, in Sanford, Florida, in February 2012. Zimmerman, a neighbourhood-watch volunteer, had seen Martin walking in his neighbourhood and called the police because he thought Martin looked “suspicious.” Although Zimmerman was told not to do anything, he followed Martin, got into an argument with him, and shot and killed him. When law enforcement arrived, Zimmerman claimed that he had been assaulted by Martin and fired in self-defense.
Zimmerman remained free for weeks, but, as the shooting gained national attention, demonstrations demanding his prosecution were held in cities across the United States. He was finally charged with second-degree murder and arrested in April 2012. At his trial more than a year later, Zimmerman claimed that he had acted in self-defense, citing a controversial Florida law known as “stand your ground.” His acquittal in July 2013 was widely perceived as a miscarriage of justice and led to further nationwide protests.
The BLM movement expanded in 2014 after the police killings of two unarmed Black men, Eric Garner and Michael Brown. Garner died in Staten Island, New York, after a white police officer held him in a prolonged illegal choke hold, which was captured in a video taken by a bystander. Brown, a teenager, was shot and killed by a white police officer in Ferguson, Missouri. These deaths—as well as the refusal of prosecutors to bring charges against the officers—led to large protests in the name of Black Lives Matter, which captured national and international attention. The BLM movement thereafter continued to play a prominent role in demonstrations against police brutality and racism. Notably, BLM activists protested the deaths at the hands of police or while in police custody of several other Black people, including Sandra Bland, Philando Castile, Freddie Gray, Laquan McDonald, Tamir Rice, Walter Scott, and Alton Sterling.
In May 2020 George Floyd, an unarmed Black man, was pronounced dead after Derek Chauvin, a white Minneapolis police officer, knelt on Floyd’s neck for more than nine minutes, despite Floyd’s repeated protests that he could not breathe. Wide circulation of a bystander’s video of Floyd’s last minutes triggered massive demonstrations in cities throughout the United States and across the globe. The tragedy also brought to national attention the earlier deaths of two other African Americans: Ahmaud Arbery and Breonna Taylor. In February 2020 Arbery was jogging in Glynn county, Georgia, when two white men, believing he might have committed a series of break-ins, began following him in a truck. The men, who had guns, confronted Arbery, and a struggle ensued, which resulted in the fatal shooting of Arbery. The following month in Louisville, Kentucky, Taylor, an emergency medical technician, was killed during a botched police raid at her apartment. Although Arbery and Taylor had initially received little media coverage, in the wake of Floyd’s death they also became the subject of nationwide demonstrations.
These events swayed American public opinion in favour of the Black Lives Matter movement while drawing wide attention to the problem of entrenched racism in American society. There were calls for greater police accountability, and in 2021 Chauvin was found guilty of murder. It was a rare case of police violence resulting in a conviction.
The Black Lives Matter movement has many goals. BLM activists seek to draw attention to the many ways in which Black people are treated unfairly in society and the ways in which institutions, laws, and policies help to perpetuate that unfairness. The movement has fought racism through such means as political action, letter-writing campaigns, and nonviolent protests. BLM seeks to combat police brutality, the over-policing of minority neighbourhoods, and the abuses committed by for-profit jails. Its efforts have included calls for better training for police and greater accountability for police misconduct. BLM activists have also called for “defunding” the police—that is, reducing police department budgets and investing the freed-up funds in community social services, such as mental health and conflict-resolution programs. BLM activists have worked on voter registration and get-out-the-vote campaigns in Black communities. In addition, BLM programs have celebrated Black artists and writers.
The support for BLM often broke along political-affiliation and racial or ethnic lines. Notably, African Americans and other minorities tended to show the most support, while whites showed the least (often less than 50 percent). The division was even more dramatic between political parties: few Republicans expressed support for BLM, in contrast to the vast majority of Democrats. Critics of BLM made various claims, from maintaining that systemic racism does not exist in the United States to alleging that BLM encouraged violence against police. In response to BLM, opposition groups formed, including Blue Lives Matter, which supports law enforcement, and White Lives Matter, formed by white nationalists.
Given the political polarization—as well as the increased influence of BLM—it was perhaps not surprising that the movement was an issue during the 2020 U.S. presidential election. Facing a tough race, Pres. Donald Trump, a Republican, was harshly critical of BLM, notably citing isolated acts of violence and looting that accompanied some of the demonstrations against racism and police brutality. He also used the protests as a means to promote a law-and-order platform while appealing to the grievances of some whites. His challenger, Democrat Joe Biden, embraced the movement and Black voters, who were instrumental in his eventual victory.
