Bob Barker, byname of Robert William Barker,  (born Dec. 12, 1923, Darrington, Wash., U.S.), American game show host and animal rights activist who was best known for hosting The Price Is Right (1972–2007).
During World War II, Barker trained as a U.S. Navy fighter pilot. After graduating from Drury College (now Drury University; B.A., 1947) in Springfield, Mo., he focused on a career in radio, eventually working at a station in California. He caught the attention of Ralph Edwards, the creator of Truth or Consequences, a popular television game show in which contestants who failed to correctly answer trivia questions had to perform stunts. Barker began hosting the program in 1956, and his affable manner quickly connected with audiences. He remained with the show until 1975. While on Truth or Consequences, Barker also hosted several short-lived game shows.
In 1972 he began hosting a revival of The Price Is Right, which had originally aired from 1956 to 1965. The show featured audience contestants who competed in games that typically involved guessing the prices of various merchandise. A huge hit, The Price Is Right became the longest-running game show on American television. Barker continued to host The Price Is Right until his retirement in 2007; he was succeeded by Drew Carey.
In addition to game shows, Barker also hosted the Miss USA and Miss Universe pageants for a number of years. He appeared as himself on various television series, and in 1996 he made his film debut in the comedy Happy Gilmore, in which he memorably fought Adam Sandler’s titular character.
Barker was also a noted animal rights activist. In 1994 Barker—who ended each episode of The Price Is Right with “Help control the pet population. Have your pet spayed or neutered”—established the DJ&T Foundation to fund the sterilization of pets. In 2009 he donated $5 million to the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society, a group especially known for its antiwhaling efforts. The donation was used to purchase a ship, which was named after Barker (see Paul Watson).
The recipient of numerous honours, Barker won 14 Emmy Awards for his hosting work, and in 1999 he received a lifetime achievement award. He was inducted into the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences Hall of Fame in 2004. His autobiography, Priceless Memories (cowritten with Digby Diehl), was published in 2009.
