Camisard,   any of the Protestant militants of the Bas-Languedoc and Cévennes regions of southern France who, in the early 18th century, organized an armed insurrection in opposition to Louis XIV’s persecution of Protestantism. Camisards were so called probably because of the white shirts (Languedocian camisa, French chemise) that they wore to recognize one another in night fighting.
Having ended religious toleration by revoking the Edict of Nantes in 1685, Louis sought to impose Roman Catholicism on all his subjects. Thousands of Protestants emigrated; those who remained were subjected to severe repression. In the first years of the 18th century, a wave of religious enthusiasm swept the strongly Protestant Cévennes. Prophets predicted the end of persecution, and many felt the time had come to destroy the Catholics. The murder (July 1702) of the Abbé du Chayla, who was considered a harsh Catholic persecutor, marked the start of the rebellion. The program of the Camisards was to sack and burn churches and drive off or even kill priests. The movement’s offensives were conducted by popular leaders: Jean Cavalier was a baker’s apprentice; Pierre Laporte, called Rolland, a sheep gelder. The Camisards fought successfully, even to the point of holding royal armies in check. Their tactics of ambush and night attacks, their knowledge of the mountains in which they operated, and the support of the local populace all were factors in their favour.
In response the government adopted a policy of extermination: hundreds of villages were burned and their populations massacred. In 1704 negotiations failed because the government was willing to grant amnesty but not religious toleration for the Protestants. These terms were rejected by most of the Camisards, and the war continued. By 1705, with many of the Camisard leaders captured and executed, the revolt lost its force. Sporadic fighting continued until 1710, and the royal government’s attempts to stamp out Protestantism in the area continued throughout the first half of the 18th century.
