Carlos Manuel de Céspedes, in full Carlos Manuel Perfecto del Carmen Céspedes y López del Castillo,  (born April 18, 1819, Bayamo, Cuba—died February 27, 1874, San Lorenzo), Cuban revolutionary hero. Although his revolution failed, Céspedes started the Ten Years’ War (1868–78), which ultimately led to Cuban independence.
Céspedes was born into a prominent plantation family who had been granted their Cuban estate in 1517. After receiving his baccalaureate from Havana (1840), Céspedes completed his law studies in Spain. While in Spain he took part (1843) in the revolution led by Juan Prim, for which he was exiled to France. Upon his return to Cuba, Céspedes started a law practice, wrote poems and pamphlets, and secretly organized an independence movement.
By 1868 Céspedes was made chief of the revolutionary movement in the Oriente region, and on October 10, 1868, Céspedes, at the head of only 147 poorly armed men, proclaimed independence for Cuba in the Grito de Yara (“Cry of Yara”). The insurrection gained momentum and, by the end of the month, had 12,000 volunteers and scored some stunning military successes. Céspedes, who favoured the gradual emancipation of the slaves, allowed them to join the rebel army only with their owners’ permission.
The slaves were emancipated by a new constitution adopted in April 1869, the same month that Céspedes was elected president by the revolutionary government. Spanish troops poured into Cuba, and the earlier victories were followed by defeats and retreats. Céspedes’ government lost prestige, and his ambivalent stand on slavery angered both conservatives and liberals. A Cuban tribunal deposed him in absentia (1873), and he was forced into hiding; he was finally discovered and shot by Spanish soldiers, and his body was buried in a common grave. In 1910 his remains were exhumed and placed in the National Pantheon of Heroes of the Cuban Revolution in Havana. His son, Carlos Manuel Céspedes Quesada, was briefly president of Cuba in 1933.
