Caroline Julia Bartlett Crane, née Caroline Julia Bartlett,  (born Aug. 17, 1858, Hudson, Wis., U.S.—died March 24, 1935, Kalamazoo, Mich.), American minister who, after a productive career in Christian social service, undertook a second successful profession in urban sanitation.
Caroline Bartlett grew up in Hudson, Wisconsin, and in Hamilton, Illinois. She graduated from Carthage College in nearby Carthage, Illinois (now in Kenosha, Wisconsin), in 1879, and, suppressing for a time her long-standing wish to enter the ministry, she then taught school for four years in Iowa. In 1884–85 she was on the staff of the Minneapolis (Minnesota) Tribune. After a brief stint as city editor of the Oshkosh (Wisconsin) Daily Times, she obtained appointment in 1886 as pastor of the small All Souls Unitarian society in Sioux Falls, Dakota Territory.
In 1889, having obtained some regular training in divinity at the University of Chicago, Bartlett was formally ordained in the ministry and installed as pastor of the First Unitarian Church of Kalamazoo, Michigan. Her warmth and enthusiasm soon attracted a growing congregation. In 1892 the congregation adopted a nonsectarian and essentially creedless organization, and in 1894, as the People’s Church, it moved into a new building designed as a social, education, and community centre. The People’s Church, emphasizing practical service, included a public kindergarten, a gymnasium, manual training and domestic science departments, musical societies, and other attractions. Later the church turned to civic and sociological studies. In 1896 Bartlett married Augustus W. Crane, and two years later she resigned her pastorate.
Caroline Crane’s second career, as an urban sanitarian, came about almost by chance. Visiting slaughterhouses in Kalamazoo in 1901 for background information for a lecture on meat preparation, she discovered highly unsanitary conditions. Her visits to other cities yielded similar results, and she lobbied a bill permitting local inspection and regulation through the Michigan legislature and then pushed a model ordinance through the Kalamazoo city council. In 1903–04 she founded the Women’s Civic Improvement League, which undertook to identify and publicize unsanitary and unsightly conditions around the city and managed a demonstration project in neighbourhood sanitation. She also organized the Charity Organizations Board, which coordinated all public welfare work in the city and operated visiting nurse and family counseling services and a program of public employment for beggars. Her successes led to a great demand for her services as a consultant, and by 1917 she had conducted consultant sanitation inspections in 62 cities in 14 states. After that time she largely retired, although she remained active in Kalamazoo affairs.
