Chandrasekhar Azad, original name Chandrasekhar Tiwari, Chandrasekhar also spelled Chandrashekhar or Chandra Shekhar,  (born July 23, 1906, Bhabra, India—died February 27, 1931, Allahabad), Indian revolutionary who organized and led a band of militant youth during India’s independence movement.
Azad was drawn into the Indian national movement at a young age. When apprehended by the police at age 15 while participating in Mohandas K. Gandhi’s noncooperation movement (1920–22) at Banares (now Varanasi), he gave his name as Azad (Urdu: “Free” or “Liberated”) and his address as “prison.” Although because of his age he was not imprisoned, he was given a severe flogging by the police. The Indian National Congress (Congress Party) soon lionized him, and he gained popularity among the Indian people.
Azad was disappointed by Gandhi’s suspension of the noncooperation movement in February 1922, after several policemen had been murdered by a revolutionary mob at Chauri Chaura. Joining the radical Hindustan Republican Association (HRA), Azad participated in several violent crimes, notably the  Kakori train robbery (1925) and the revenge killing of a British police officer (1928).
Known for his organizational skills, Azad played a key role in reorganizing the HRA as the Hindustan Socialist Republican Association after most of the HRA’s members had been killed or imprisoned. His crimes had made him a wanted man, but Azad was able to elude the police and its informants for several years. According to Jawaharlal Nehru’s autobiography, it was during this period of underground existence that Azad met Nehru in early 1931 to enquire whether—under the discussions being held that resulted in the signing of the Gandhi-Irwin Pact in March—the revolutionaries could expect a fair deal leading to their honourable rehabilitation.
Determined never to be captured by police, Azad was constantly on the move. On February 27, 1931, Azad arranged to meet a revolutionary at Allahabad’s Alfred Park (now Azad Park). He was betrayed to the police, who surrounded him as soon as he entered the park. A gun battle ensued, in which two police officers were wounded, and Azad was fatally shot.
