Chrétien Guillaume de Lamoignon de Malesherbes,  (born Dec. 6, 1721, Paris—died  April 22, 1794, Paris), lawyer and royal administrator who attempted, with limited success, to introduce reforms into France’s autocratic regime during the reigns of Kings Louis XV (ruled 1715–74) and Louis XVI (ruled 1774–92).
Malesherbes’s father, Guillaume II de Lamoignon, was a prominent member of the noblesse de robe (judicial nobility). After completing his legal training Malesherbes was made a counsellor in the Parlement (high court of justice) of Paris in 1744. When his father became chancellor of France under Louis XV in 1750, Malesherbes was appointed president of the Cour des Aides in Paris and directeur de la librairie (director of the press), the chief censor of published material. The latter office, which he held until 1763, gave him the authority to allow the philosophes (writers of the Enlightenment) to publish many of their works. In particular, most of the volumes of Denis Diderot’s Encyclopédie, which adopted a skeptical attitude toward Roman Catholic and feudal institutions, were published during this period.
Although Malesherbes recognized the need for reforms, his fear of royal absolutism caused him to side with the Parlements in their attempts to block the King’s plans for financial reforms. Hence he opposed the suspension of several of the Parlements (1771) by the chancellor, René-Nicolas de Maupeou; as a consequence, Malesherbes was banished to his estates near Pithiviers.
When King Louis XVI ascended the throne in 1774, the Parlements were reinstated, and Malesherbes was again made president of the Cour des Aides. In July 1775 he became secretary of state for the royal household, thereby gaining control over the administration of a considerable part of the government of Paris and the provinces. He instituted prison reforms, put a stop to the misuse of lettres de cachet (royal orders for the arbitrary arrests of subjects), and supported the far-reaching economic reforms of the comptroller general, Anne-Robert-Jacques Turgot. Nevertheless, Malesherbes failed to win the King’s support for his projects. He resigned in May 1776, a few days before Turgot was dismissed from office. During the next 13 years Malesherbes campaigned for civil rights for French Protestants.
The Revolution broke out in 1789, and in December 1792 Malesherbes emerged from retirement to help conduct the defense of Louis XVI, who was on trial for treason before the Convention (the revolutionary assembly). Arrested in December 1793 and condemned as a counterrevolutionary, Malesherbes was guillotined with his daughter and grandchildren.
