Church of Satan,  counterculture group founded in the United States in the 1960s by Anton Szandor LaVey (1930–1997), born Howard Stanton Levey. Contrary to its name, the church did not promote “evil” but rather humanistic values.
LaVey, a former carnival worker, had absorbed a variety of occult and ritual-magic teachings over the years, which he incorporated into the tenets of the church he founded on Walpurgisnacht, or May Eve (April 30), 1966. His appearances on U.S. television and other media coverage attracted initial converts, though there were never more than a few thousand members at any one time. Reports of the colourful rituals held in LaVey’s San Francisco home—which he had painted black—kept the church in the news; several celebrities, including Jayne Mansfield and Sammy Davis, Jr., associated with the church.
LaVey set down the teachings and rituals of the church in The Satanic Bible (1969). The church did not worship Satan as the Christian embodiment of evil or even as an existing being. Instead, LaVey taught that “His Infernal Majesty” was a symbol of humanistic values such as self-assertion, rebellion against unjust authority, vital existence, and “undefiled wisdom,” LaVey’s term for wisdom without any admixture of error. Rituals were designed as psychodramas that encouraged members to develop their egos and to leave behind their lives as submissive weaklings. Included in the rituals was a black mass, complete with a nude female used as an altar.
During the early years of the church, LaVey authorized the formation of local chapters, or grottoes, across the United States. In the 1970s a number of schisms occurred, including the defection of one of his key lieutenants, Michael Aquino, who founded the rival Temple of Set. In response to these schisms, LaVey disbanded the grottoes, but the church continued as a loose affiliation of individual members associated with the national headquarters. In 1997, following LaVey’s death, Blanche Barton became the leader of the church.
