Cultural imperialism,  in anthropology, sociology, and ethics, the imposition by one usually politically or economically dominant community of various aspects of its own culture onto another nondominant community. It is cultural in that the customs, traditions, religion, language, social and moral norms, and other aspects of the imposing community are distinct from, though often closely related to, the economic and political systems that shape the other community. It is a form of imperialism in that the imposing community forcefully extends the authority of its way of life over the other population by either transforming or replacing aspects of the nondominant community’s culture.
While the term cultural imperialism did not emerge in scholarly or popular discourse until the 1960s, the phenomenon has a long record. Historically, practices of cultural imperialism have almost always been linked with military intervention and conquest. The rise and spread of the Roman Empire provides some of the earliest examples of cultural imperialism in the history of Western civilization and highlights both negative and positive aspects of the phenomenon. During a period known as the Pax Romana, the Romans secured a fairly long period of relative peace and stability among previously war-torn territories through a unified legal system (see Roman law), technological developments, and a well-established infrastructure. However, this peace was secured, in part, by the forced acculturation of the culturally diverse populations Rome had conquered.
Later, cultural imperialism became one of the primary instruments of colonization. While colonization was almost always initiated by some kind of military intervention, its full effects were achieved through practices of cultural imperialism. Fueled by a belief in the superiority of their own way of life, colonizers used law, education, and/or military force to impose various aspects of their own culture onto the target population. Motivated, in part, by a desire to purge local populations of allegedly barbaric, uncivilized customs and mores, colonizers also knew that the best way to mitigate resistance by the colonized was to eradicate as far as possible all traces of their former way of life.
One of the clearest examples of the forced acculturation of a colonized population was the Spanish influence in Latin America, beginning with the conquest of the Aztec empire by Hernán Cortés during the early 16th century. After securing their physical presence in the region, the Spanish suppressed Mesoamerican culture, forbidding the Indians to learn and transmit their culture while simultaneously requiring them to read and write Spanish and convert to Christianity. This kind of behaviour was certainly not unique to the Spanish; other examples include the influence of the British in India, the Dutch in the East Indies, and the French in Africa.
During the 20th century, cultural imperialism was no longer so closely linked with military intervention but rather with the exertion of economic and political influence by some powerful countries over less powerful countries. Many observers viewed the Soviet Union’s forceful attempts to impose communism on other countries as a form of cultural imperialism. Charges of cultural imperialism have been aimed at the United States by critics who allege that cultural-imperial control was being sought economically by creating a demand for American goods and services in other parts of the world through aggressive marketing. This “Americanization” of other cultures is said to occur when the mass exportation of American films, music, clothing, and food into other countries threatens to replace local products and to alter or extinguish features of the traditional way of life. Some countries have attempted to thwart this cultural threat through various kinds of legal action—for example, by banning the sale of certain products. See also cultural globalization.
