Cuong De,  (born 1882—died  April 6, 1951, Tokyo, Japan), Vietnamese prince who was cultivated by Vietnamese nationalists at the turn of the 20th century to serve as a symbol of a free Vietnam.
As a direct descendant of the emperor Gia Long, Cuong De had a legitimate claim to the throne of Vietnam but was excluded by the French, who held a protectorate over the country. By 1904 Cuong De was associating with leaders of the Vietnamese opposition to French rule, including Phan Boi Chau. He was enrolled with other Vietnamese at Shimbu Military Academy in Tokyo, where he strengthened his relationship with Phan Boi Chau, who formed a movement to fight French rule in Vietnam. The strength of the movement increased, with Cuong De representing a link between royalty and commoner. Japan’s desire for French financial assistance, together with Japanese imperial intentions, resulted in Cuong De’s expulsion from Japan at French insistence in 1909. He spent the next few years traveling in Asian and European countries, vainly seeking support for his cause.
In 1915, during World War I, he returned to Japan, where he received a stipend for his support and assurance that, if France were defeated in Europe, the Japanese would guarantee Vietnam’s autonomy. He remained active in the nationalist movement after the war, sending cables to the Versailles Peace Conference, to the French government, and to U.S. President Woodrow Wilson, repeating his demands for a free Vietnam. Meanwhile, the Japanese agreed to withdraw from the issue of Vietnamese independence in exchange for French assistance in controlling the rebellious Japanese colony of Korea.
Cuong De was honoured by Vietnamese nationalist politicians, but he remained in Japan and was kept under surveillance. In March 1945, when the Japanese finally removed all power from the French colonial regime in Indochina, it was thought that Cuong De might be appointed as a puppet emperor. The Japanese, however, retained the existing emperor, Bao Dai, on the throne, and Cuong De died in exile. 
