Dato’ Onn bin Jaafar,  (born 1895, Johor Bahru, Malaya [now in Malaysia]—died January 19, 1962, Johor Bahru), Malayan political figure who played a leading role in the Merdeka (independence) movement and the establishment of the Federation of Malaya, forerunner of the present country of Malaysia.
Born in the sultanate of Johore (later the state of Johor), north of Singapore, Onn was educated in England and served for a time as a government officer in Johore. Turning then to journalism, he edited two Malay newspapers, the Lembaga Malayu (“Malaya Tribune”) and the Warta Malaya (“Malayan Report”), the first independent Malay daily. After World War II he became extremely active in Malayan politics. By 1946 the British had secured signatures from all the peninsular Malay sultans agreeing to a Malayan Union—one that would transfer political power from the sultans to a central government in Kuala Lumpur and that would grant all people in Malaya, regardless of race or religion, equal rights as citizens. Opposing both the British and the sultans, Onn led the protest against this union, holding that giving the economically dominant Chinese and Indians a part in the government would lead to the “extinction” of the Malay race. Convening a meeting of more than 40 Malay organizations in March 1946 to oppose the union, Onn founded the United Malays National Organization (UMNO), a political party representing purely Malay interests. When the plan for a union was eventually withdrawn, the sultan of Johore appointed him prime minister (Mentri Besar) of his state, and in February 1948 he became Member for Home Affairs for the Federation of Malaya.
Although known as an advocate of specifically Malay interests, Onn in 1951 resigned from UMNO because it rejected his proposal that membership be open to persons of all races. He was replaced by Tunku Abdul Rahman, later prime minister of Malaysia. Onn formed two political parties on his own, the Independence of Malaya Party and the Party Negara (National Party) in 1953–55; but, when neither party gained popular support against Rahman’s new Alliance Party, he was eclipsed from Malayan political life.
