Domingo Faustino Sarmiento,  (born February 14, 1811, San Juan, Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata [now in Argentina]—died September 11, 1888, Asunción, Paraguay), educator, statesman, and writer who rose from a position as a rural schoolmaster to become president of Argentina (1868–74). As president, he laid the foundation for later national progress by fostering public education, stimulating the growth of commerce and agriculture, and encouraging the development of rapid transportation and communication. As a writer, he is best remembered for his sociological-biographical study Civilización y barbarie: vida de Juan Facundo Quiroga, y aspecto físico, costumbres, y hábitos de la República Argentina (1845; Life in the Argentine Republic in the Days of the Tyrants; or, Civilization and Barbarism), which is a plea for industrialization and urbanization as opposed to the culture of the gauchos of the Argentine pampas. But it is largely his loving depiction of the gaucho and the pampas that has made this book a classic of Latin American literature.
Largely self-taught, Sarmiento began his career as a rural schoolteacher at age 15 and soon entered public life as a provincial legislator. His political activities and his outspokenness provoked the rage of the military dictator Juan Manuel de Rosas, who exiled him to Chile in 1840. There Sarmiento was active in politics and became an important figure in journalism through his articles in the Valparaíso newspaper El Mercurio. In 1842 he was appointed founding director of the first teachers’ college in South America and began to give effect to a lifelong conviction that the primary means to national development was through a system of public education.
During that period in Chile, Sarmiento wrote Facundo, an impassioned denunciation of Rosas’s dictatorship in the form of a biography of Juan Facundo Quiroga, Rosas’s tyrannical gaucho lieutenant. The book has been criticized for its erratic style and oversimplifications, but it has also been called the single most important book produced in Spanish America.
In 1845 the Chilean government sent Sarmiento abroad to study educational methods in Europe and the United States. After three years he returned, convinced that the United States provided the model for Latin America to follow in its development. Sarmiento returned to Argentina to help overthrow Rosas in 1852; he continued his writing and educational activities and reentered Argentine politics.
Sarmiento was elected president of Argentina in 1868 and immediately began to apply his liberal ideals—his belief in democratic principles and civil liberties and his opposition to dictatorial regimes in any form—to the building of a new Argentina. He ended the war with Paraguay inherited by his administration and concentrated on domestic achievements. To a largely illiterate country he brought primary and secondary schools, teachers’ colleges, schools for professional and technical training, and libraries and museums.
When his term ended in 1874, Sarmiento continued to be active in public life. Most of the 52 volumes of his published work are devoted to educational themes.
