Ernestine Rose, née Ernestine Louise Potowski, Potowski also spelled Potovsky or Polowsky,  (born Jan. 13, 1810, Piotrków Trybunalski, Russian Poland—died Aug. 4, 1892, Brighton, Eng.), Polish-born American reformer and suffragist, an active figure in the 19th-century women’s rights, antislavery, and temperance movements.
Born in the Polish ghetto to the town rabbi and his wife, Ernestine Potowski received a better education and more freedom than was typical for Jewish girls of that time and place. She was taught to read Hebrew by her father but could not accept the tenets of his faith. By the age of 14 she had renounced the Jewish laws and customs that relegated women to an inferior status. Her mother died when Potowski was 16, and she inherited a significant amount of property. Without consulting her, however, her father arranged for her to marry a man his own age and signed over her inheritance as the dowry. She took her inheritance claim to a Polish court, where she won a legal endorsement of it, and then left Poland the following year, leaving most of her inheritance to her father.
Potowski lived in Berlin for the next two years and then in the Netherlands and Paris before settling in England at the age of 21. There she joined a circle of reformers and philanthropists that included jeweler and silversmith William E. Rose, whom she married in 1836. The couple soon immigrated to the United States, where Ernestine Rose began to spearhead the drive for equal rights for women. She strongly opposed the law of the day that deprived married women of the right to control property they had owned before marriage, and in the 1840s she led a drive in New York state to reverse that law. In 1848 the state legislature enacted a measure permitting married women to keep control of the property that had been theirs as single women. (See Married Women’s Property Acts.) By 1850 Rose had become involved in the new women’s rights movement that had been born two years earlier at the Seneca Falls Convention in Seneca Falls, N.Y. An effective speaker, Rose promoted not only women’s rights but also the abolition of slavery and a ban on the manufacture of alcoholic beverages. In 1869 she cofounded, with Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, the National Woman Suffrage Association, whose chief aim was a constitutional amendment giving women the right to vote.
By that time Rose’s health had deteriorated. She and her husband left for a year’s vacation in Europe and then settled in England, where she made occasional speeches on behalf of a variety of causes. In 1873 she returned briefly to the United States, where she addressed a convention of the National Woman Suffrage Association.
