Evelyn Baring, 1st earl of Cromer, also called (1883–92) Sir Evelyn Baring,  (born Feb. 26, 1841, Cromer Hall, Norfolk, Eng.—died  Jan. 29, 1917, London), British administrator and diplomat whose 24-year rule in Egypt as British agent and consul general (1883–1907) profoundly influenced Egypt’s development as a modern state.
Born of a family distinguished in politics and banking, Evelyn Baring received his training at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, from which he graduated at the age of 17. He received a commission in the Royal Artillery and served in Corfu (where he met his first wife, Ethel Errington), Malta, and Jamaica. He then entered the Staff College and a year later in 1869 he graduated first in his class. For a while he served in the War Office, but military life was not to his taste, and when in 1872 his cousin, Lord Northbrook, just named viceroy to India, offered to take him along as his private secretary, Baring accepted.
In India Baring rapidly made his mark. His administrative qualities were obvious and highly appreciated by his superiors. His colleagues, however, dubbed him “Vice-Viceroy” and “Over-Baring,” nicknames which clearly bespoke his self-assured efficiency and ability to command—traits invaluable in a leader of men, though not necessarily conducive to popularity among his equals. His manner was gruff to his equals, condescending and patronizing to his subordinates and to the people he chose to describe as the “subject races.” Imbued with immense common sense and a profound belief in himself and his country, he could not abide cant or hypocrisy. He was the typical Victorian colonial administrator, eminently fair and just but with little to endear him save an occasional flash of humour.
It was while serving in India that Baring buried his early notions of self-determination for colonial peoples and decided that strong rule accompanied by reform programs was the only way to help the downtrodden peasant. Baring’s subsequent experiences in Egypt strengthened his views on the tyranny of native rulers and the need for reform by the British. Reform became translated into one enduring principle that governed all his administrative actions—the need for a sound financial system.
Baring first went to Egypt in 1877, when he served as representative of the British holders of Egyptian bonds on the recently created Egyptian Public Debt Commission. The commission was designed to help the Egyptian viceroy, the khedive Ismāʿīl Pasha, out of his financial difficulties, and also to safeguard the interest of the bondholders. Egyptian finances, however, were in a worse state than Baring had imagined, and he was the prime mover behind the creation of a Commission of Inquiry into Egyptian finances. When his advice was turned down by the khedive Ismāʿīl Pasha, he resigned and returned to England; but, when Ismāʿīl Pasha was deposed in 1879, Baring was invited to return to Egypt as British controller of the debt. In 1880 he became the financial member of the viceroy’s council in India, where he remained for three years. After the British occupied Egypt in 1882, Baring returned to Egypt once again in 1883 as British agent and consul general with plenipotentiary powers, having in the interim been knighted.
Baring’s mandate in Egypt was to carry out wide-scale administrative reforms in a country that was bankrupt and had just gone through a popular revolution and a foreign occupation, and eventually to effect the evacuation of the British forces stationed there. Quickly he concluded that reforms and evacuation were incompatible, that reforms were of more lasting value to the mass of the Egyptians, and that evacuation should come only in the distant future when the Egyptians had been taught self-rule. He therefore instituted a form of government that came to be called the Veiled Protectorate, whereby he ruled the rulers of Egypt, with the assistance of a group of English administrators trained in India, who were placed in key positions as advisers to the Egyptian government. Until his resignation in 1907 he remained the real ruler of Egypt. The system worked well during the first 10 years, for the khedive Tawfīq Pasha was a weakling who abdicated all responsibility to the English. Egypt was made financially solvent by 1887, and after the British forced the Egyptian government to give up its attempt to reconquer the Sudan—wrested from its control by the religious rebellion of the Mahdī—there followed a period of peace and stability that allowed the country to recover from the chaos of the previous decade. Baring’s parsimony in public spending and his encouragement of public irrigation works and other agricultural projects soon increased prosperity.
In 1892 a young new ruler, ʿAbbās Ḥilmī II, struggling to divest himself of the onus of the Veiled Protectorate, gave encouragement to a budding nationalist movement. Baring, who had been raised to the peerage as Lord Cromer, was as inflexible in his dealings with the young khedive as he had been with his predecessor and succeeded in intimidating him quite thoroughly.
Throughout his years in Egypt, Cromer won the respect and admiration of the many men who occupied the British foreign office and who usually deferred to his judgment in matters concerning Egypt. An exceedingly hard worker, his day began at sunrise and continued well after sunset with a two-hour break in the afternoon for physical exercise, which he pursued with as much deliberation as the rest of his duties. During his periods of relaxation he steeped himself in the classics that he so admired. As a young officer he had learned Greek and Latin as well as French and Italian; he was later to learn Turkish, the language of the Turco-Circassian elite in Egypt. Yet, in spite of his long stay in Egypt, he never attempted to learn Arabic and was never able to communicate either with the peasant whom he claimed to know so well or with the middle class that was to produce a new breed of nationalists. He had little liking for the Oriental mind, which he termed “slipshod,” and even less understanding of it, despite his claims to the contrary. With age his aloofness increased, and he dismissed the young nationalist movement as unimportant. Instead he worked hard at effecting the Entente Cordiale of 1904 with France, which set the seal on the permanent occupation of Egypt. His first wife died in 1898; he married a second time in 1901, to Lady Katherine Thynne, the daughter of the 4th Marquess of Bath.
In 1907 an incident in an Egyptian village, Dinshwai, in which a British officer was killed, resulted in brutal sentences being passed on the Egyptian peasants involved. Public outrage created a storm both in Egypt and in the British House of Commons and led the new Liberal Cabinet under Prime Minister Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman to adopt a more accommodating attitude toward Egypt. Cromer, who had little to do with the sentences since he was on home leave at the time, realized that a change was impending and, as his health had deteriorated, resigned office in 1907.
On his return to England he spent his time writing and in the House of Lords, where he was the foremost exponent of free trade. In 1916 he presided over the Dardanelles Commission, but the strain proved too taxing and he died early the next year.
