FALN, abbreviation of Spanish Fuerzas Armadas de Liberación Nacional (“Armed Forces of National Liberation”),  separatist organization in Puerto Rico that has used violence in its campaign for Puerto Rican independence from the United States.
Although not formed until about 1974, the FALN had antecedents that can be traced to the 1930s, when the violent Nationalist Party under Pedro Albizu Campos provoked riots, assassinations, and other acts of protest and bloodshed. In Washington, D.C., on November 1, 1950, Puerto Rican nationalists tried but failed to assassinate President Harry S. Truman. On March 1, 1954, another militant Puerto Rican group sprayed gunfire into the chambers of the U.S. House of Representatives, wounding five congressmen. In 1971 bombs were set off in San Juan and other Puerto Rican cities.
The FALN first surfaced on October 26, 1974, when five large bombs exploded in Manhattan—in the Wall Street area, in Rockefeller Center, and on Park Avenue—causing considerable property damage but no injuries. The FALN claimed responsibility for these acts, as it did later for bombings in Puerto Rico. Throughout the following year, the FALN boasted of a series of bombings, beginning on January 24 with a Wall Street explosion that killed four people and injured more than 50 and climaxing on October 27 with nine nearly simultaneous explosions in New York City, Washington, and Chicago that produced only property damage. Bombings continued sporadically thereafter.
In April 1980, 11 FALN members were arrested in Evanston, Illinois, on charges including robbery, conspiracy, and weapons violations; they were convicted in both state and federal courts and sentenced to prison terms of as long as 90 years. Amid political controversy and over the objections of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, in 1999 President Bill Clinton granted clemency to 14 convicted FALN members—none of whom had been involved in the bombings—claiming that their sentences were disproportionate to the crimes. Of the 14, 11, including eight of those involved in the 1980 robbery and three others convicted of conspiracy and other charges in 1985, were released from prison; one, who had been sentenced in 1989 to 55 years in prison for bank robbery, was scheduled to be released in five years; and two, who already had served prison terms for bank robbery, were granted waivers of their fines.
