Fannie Barrier Williams, née Fannie Barrier,  (born February 12, 1855, Brockport, New York, U.S.—died March 4, 1944, Brockport), American social reformer, lecturer, and clubwoman who cofounded (1893) the National League of Colored Women.
Williams graduated from the local State Normal School (now the State University of New York College at Brockport) in 1870. Thereafter she taught in freedmen’s schools at various places in the South and in Washington, D.C. She also studied for periods at the New England Conservatory of Music in Boston and at the School of Fine Arts in Washington, D.C. While helping her lawyer-husband, S. Laing Williams, establish his practice in Chicago in the late 1880s (at one time he was a partner of Ferdinand Lee Barnett, husband of Ida B. Wells-Barnett), she became active in civic affairs.
In 1891 Williams helped organize Provident Hospital and its training school for nurses, both interracial institutions. In May 1893 she gave an address on “The Intellectual Progress of the Colored Women of the United States Since the Emancipation Proclamation” to the World’s Congress of Representative Women (held in conjunction with the World’s Columbian Exposition). In September she addressed the World’s Parliament of Religions. These two public appearances brought her national recognition, and for a decade or more afterward she was in great demand as a lecturer. Also in 1893 she helped found the National League of Colored Women, and she remained a leader in its successor organization, the National Association of Colored Women.
In 1894 Williams was proposed for membership in the prestigious Chicago Woman’s Club. Debate within the club raged for more than a year. One of Williams’s stoutest supporters was Dr. Sarah Stevenson, the first woman member of the American Medical Association. In 1895 Williams became the club’s first African American member. She wrote regularly for the Chicago Record-Herald and the New York Age and worked quietly in many ways to open new opportunities to Black women. From 1900 she became an outspoken supporter of Booker T. Washington’s program of accommodation and self-improvement. In 1924 the widowed Williams became the first woman and the first African American to be named to the Chicago Library Board. In 1926 she returned to her native Brockport.
