Feofan Prokopovich,  (born June 18, 1681, Kiev, Ukraine, Russian Empire—died  Sept. 19, 1736, St. Petersburg), Russian Orthodox theologian and archbishop of Pskov, who by his administration, oratory, and writings collaborated with Tsar Peter I the Great (1672–1725) in westernizing Russian culture and centralizing its political structure. He also directed the reformation of the Russian Orthodox church in accordance with a Lutheran model and effected a political integration of church and state that was to last two centuries.
After an Orthodox education, Prokopovich, through the Latinizing influence of the Poles in Kiev, became a Roman Catholic and in 1698 entered the Greek College of San Anastasio in Rome. Declining the opportunity to enter the Society of Jesus (Jesuits), he returned to Kiev in 1701, reverted to his Orthodox faith, and later became abbot of the Kiev monastery and rector of its celebrated ecclesiastical academy, where he taught theology, literature, and rhetoric. After publicizing laudatory statements on the cultural-political reform of Peter the Great, he was called to the court at St. Petersburg in 1716 and was made a counselor to the tsar on church and educational affairs. As principal theorist in the restructuring of the Russian church as a political arm of the state, Prokopovich cooperated in replacing the patriarchate with a Holy Synod, or supreme ecclesiastical council, by drawing up in 1720 the Spiritual Regulations, a new constitution for Orthodoxy. Appointed synodal first vice president, he was responsible for the legislative reform of the entire Russian church, subordinating it to the secular and spiritual authority of Tsar Peter, and for effecting a church-state relationship, sometimes termed a Protestantized caesaropapism, that was to continue until the Russian Revolution of 1917. Such a theory was derived by combining concepts from the 17th-century English political philosopher Thomas Hobbes with Byzantine theocratic thought.
As a theologian, Prokopovich promoted the autonomy of doctrinal theology from moral and ascetical teaching. Basing his theology mainly on liberal Protestant sources, he formed a body of doctrine markedly Lutheran in orientation, particularly in its insistence on Sacred Scripture as the sole source of Christian revelation and in its account of grace, free will, and justification. His design of the theological curriculum for St. Petersburg’s ecclesiastical academy was patterned after the Lutheran faculty of Halle, Ger., and became the centre for the propagation of his Orthodox reform.
By his principal work, a systematic Latin exposition of the entire corpus of doctrinal theology—including tracts De Deo (“On God”), De Trinitate (“On the Trinity”), De Creatione et Providentia (“On Creation and Divine Providence”)—and on theological anthropology, Prokopovich’s teachings prevailed until about 1836, when a reaction toward traditional Orthodox beliefs set in. During the reign of Peter’s second successor, the empress Anna Ivanovna (1730–40), Prokopovich himself assumed a more conservative outlook than his earlier view of the papacy as Antichrist. His funeral eulogy for Tsar Peter reflected his devotion to his monarch and is considered a classic example of Russian oratory. To advance Peter’s cultural revolution, Prokopovich assisted in organizing the Russian Academy of Sciences and composed several didactic poems and plays acclaiming the new Russia.
