Francisco de Miranda,  (born March 28, 1750, Caracas, Venez.—died  July 14, 1816, Cádiz, Spain), Venezuelan revolutionary who helped to pave the way for independence in Latin America. His own plan for the liberation of Spain’s American colonies with the help of the European powers failed, but he remains known as El Precursor—i.e., “the forerunner” of Bolívar and other more effective revolutionaries.
Educated in Caracas, Miranda purchased a captaincy in the Spanish army at the age of 22. He was imprisoned for disobedience but was released in 1780 and sent to Cuba to fight against Great Britain. There he was accused of misuse of funds. Protesting his innocence, he fled to the United States in 1783.
There he met many of the leaders of the American Revolution and formed his plans for the liberation of South and Central America from Spanish domination. Hounded by Spanish agents, he fled to London, where he tried to enlist the aid of Prime Minister William Pitt in his plan of revolution. Pitt, realizing that Spain would eventually lose its grip on its American colonies, thought that Miranda was useful for Britain’s purposes and provided him with limited support and protection. Miranda envisioned an independent empire, stretching from the Mississippi to Cape Horn, under the leadership of a hereditary emperor from the Incan royal family and with a legislature of two houses.
The French Revolution delayed Miranda’s plans for a few years. He served as a French Revolutionary general and was jailed for suspected treason and then acquitted. Returning once again to London, he became the leader of all the exiled plotters against Spain. With volunteers gathered from the United States, he embarked on an invasion of Venezuela in 1806, but he was forced to turn back when Venezuelans failed to rally to his side. In 1810 he met Simón Bolívar, who was in London attempting to get British support for the revolution that had finally begun in South America. Bolívar persuaded Miranda to return to Venezuela, where he was made a general in the revolutionary army. When the country formally declared independence on July 5, 1811, he assumed dictatorial powers.
The Spanish forces counterattacked, and Miranda, fearing a brutal and hopeless defeat, signed an armistice with them in July 1812 at San Mateo. The other revolutionary leaders, including Bolívar, believed his surrender was treasonable and thwarted Miranda’s attempt to escape; they allowed him to be handed over to the Spanish. Transported in chains to Cádiz, he eventually died in his prison cell.
