Frederick William I, German Friedrich Wilhelm I,  (born August 14, 1688, Berlin—died May 31, 1740, Potsdam, Prussia), second Prussian king, who transformed his country from a second-rate power into the efficient and prosperous state that his son and successor, Frederick II the Great, made a major military power on the Continent.
The son of the elector Frederick III, later Frederick I, king of Prussia, Frederick William grew up at a glamorous court, but his own temperament was ascetic, and he disapproved of the court’s dissolute atmosphere. In 1706 he married Sophia Dorothea, the daughter of George Louis, elector of Hanover (later George I of England). His experiences in the War of the Spanish Succession (1701–14) decisively shaped his future, leading him to realize that the army was his vocation. Leopold I, prince of Anhalt-Dessau, who commanded the Prussian contingent in that war, became his lifelong friend and principal adviser in military matters.
Frederick William was to spend the rest of his life building the Prussian army into Europe’s best fighting instrument. Realizing that Prussia’s military and financial weakness made it dependent on the relations between the great powers, Frederick William resolved to make his state financially independent.
In 1713 Prussia’s armed forces numbered 38,000 soldiers, supported in large part by foreign subsidies. When Frederick William died in 1740, he left his son an army of about 83,000 out of a population of 2,200,000, a war chest of more than 8,000,000 taler, and a Prussia that had become the third military power on the European continent, after Russia and France.
The canton system of recruitment and replacement, introduced in 1733, provided one-half the manpower of Frederick William’s army from the Prussian peasantry. The rest of the soldiers were recruited from all over Europe. Frederick William also created from his fractious nobility the loyal Prussian officer corps. Prince Leopold I of Anhalt-Dessau, a brutal, if efficient, drillmaster, provided the instrument wielded by these officers—the Prussian infantry, which could outmarch and outshoot all others.
The need for funds, coupled with Frederick William’s genuine concern for his subjects, led to a number of sweeping reforms and innovations. A thrifty, practical Protestant, the king on his accession all but dissolved his extravagant court. Prussia’s eastern territories, depopulated by the plague of 1709, were resettled and made prosperous once again. The lot of the peasantry improved. In his own domains, which eventually comprised one-third of all the land, Frederick William freed the serfs completely (1719) and abolished hereditary leases. In 1717 a yearly tax replaced the aristocracy’s feudal war service. Against considerable opposition, he levied additional taxes in Prussia and Lithuania. Prussia’s commercial policies were strictly mercantilist, encouraging industry and manufacture, especially the wool industry, which clothed the king’s army. Convinced that an efficient state could not afford illiterate subjects, Frederick William instituted compulsory primary education in 1717. In 1723 he centralized his administration under a general directory through which his ministers executed his orders. Near the end of his reign, he initiated a program of extensive legal codification. Thus, Frederick William left his heir an efficient, centralized state with sound finances and an excellent army.
Frederick William’s foreign policy proved to be much less effective than his domestic programs. He acquired Swedish Pomerania by the Treaties of Stockholm (1719–20), but his lifelong ambition, the incorporation of the duchies of Jülich and Berg on the lower Rhine, remained unfulfilled. Relations with Austria and England cooled considerably and by 1739 Prussia’s only ally was France.
