Gilbert John Elliot-Murray-Kynynmound, 4th earl of Minto, in full Gilbert John Elliot-Murray-Kynynmound, 4th earl of Minto, Viscount Melgund of Melgund, Baron Minto of Minto,  (born July 9, 1845, London—died March 1, 1914, Minto, Roxburgh, Scot.), governor general of Canada (1898–1905) and viceroy of India (1905–10); in India he and his colleague John Morley sponsored the Morley–Minto Reforms Act (1909). The act moderately increased Indian representation in government but was criticized by Indian nationalists because of its creation of separate electorates for Hindus and Muslims, which they believed fostered divisions among the Indian population in order to facilitate British rule.
Educated at Eton College and Trinity College, Cambridge, Minto served in the Scots Guards (1867–69), left for a brief career in riding, and then was a newspaper correspondent in Spain and Turkey (1874–77). He participated in the Second Afghan War (1879) and in the Egyptian campaign (1882) before going to Canada in 1883 as a military secretary. In 1886 he returned to England, where he succeeded to his father’s titles and earldom in 1891. Appointed governor general of Canada in 1898, he moderated conflicts between Canadian prime minister Sir Wilfrid Laurier and British colonial secretary Joseph Chamberlain.
In 1905 Minto was appointed viceroy of India, with John Morley as secretary of state. The two men agreed that certain political reforms were needed to satisfy educated Indians, to strengthen moderate leaders of the Indian National Congress Party, and to control rising nationalism. Consequently, two Indian members were appointed to the council of the secretary of state and one to the viceroy’s executive council. Minto’s desire to secure better representation for the landed and commercial interests and for Muslims in the legislative councils resulted in the establishment of separate Hindu and Muslim electorates. He also encouraged the foundation of the Muslim League as a rival organization to the Congress. His critics saw this as part of a “divide and rule” policy that has been blamed for the eventual partition of India.
Minto revived the government’s power of deportation without trial in order to deal with the revolutionaries Lajpat Rai and Ajit Singh, and he instituted stringent measures against those who advocated armed resistance to British rule.
