Helen Hamilton Gardener, original name Alice Chenoweth,  (born Jan. 21, 1853, Winchester, Va., U.S.—died July 26, 1925, Washington, D.C.), American writer, reformer, and public official, a strong force in the service of woman suffrage and of feminism generally.
Alice Chenoweth graduated from the Cincinnati (Ohio) Normal School in 1873. After two years as a schoolteacher she married Charles S. Smart in 1875, and she moved with him to New York City in 1880. There she contributed to newspapers, studied biology at Columbia University, lectured on sociology at the Brooklyn Institute of Arts and Sciences, and came under the influence of the famous freethinker Colonel Robert G. Ingersoll. She gave a series of lectures on freethinking in 1884 and published them in 1885 as Men, Women, and Gods, and Other Lectures under the name Helen Hamilton Gardener, which she subsequently adopted. She came to wide attention among feminists in 1888 with her carefully researched refutation of a widely publicized claim by a leading neurologist that the female brain was inherently and measurably inferior to the male brain.
In 1890 Gardener published Is This Your Son, My Lord?, an outspoken and lurid novel whose attack on the double standard gave it a wide sale. She followed it with A Thoughtless Yes (1890), Pray You, Sir, Whose Daughter? (1892), Pushed by Unseen Hands (1892), and An Unofficial Patriot (1894), a fictionalized biography of her father that was later successfully dramatized by James A. Herne as Griffith Davenport, Circuit Rider. Many of her articles on social questions were collected in Facts and Fictions of Life (1893). After her husband’s death in 1901 and her second marriage in 1902, she spent five years in world travel before settling in Washington, D.C.
In 1913 Gardener was appointed to reorganize the Congressional Committee of the National American Woman Suffrage Association, which had been depleted by mass resignations of radical suffragists and followers of Alice Paul. She was elected a vice president of the association in 1917. Her contacts, notably with President Woodrow Wilson and Speaker of the House Champ Clark, along with her wit and tact, made her a central figure in the practical business of maneuvering the federal suffrage amendment through a maze of obstacles. In 1920 Wilson appointed her to the U.S. Civil Service Commission, the highest federal position occupied by a woman to that time. She served until her death five years later.
