Henry Flood,  (born 1732—died Dec. 2, 1791, Farmley, County Kilkenny, Ire.), Anglo-Irish statesman, founder of the Patriot movement that in 1782 won legislative independence for Ireland.
The illegitimate son of Warden Flood, chief justice of the Court of King’s Bench in Ireland, Henry entered the Irish Parliament in 1759. Irish Protestants were becoming impatient with the British Parliament’s right to legislate for Ireland over the wishes of the Irish Parliament. Moreover, the British government controlled a majority in Ireland’s House of Commons through the distribution of crown patronage by the owners of parliamentary boroughs. Flood’s outstanding oratorical powers soon enabled him to create a small but effective opposition inside the Irish Parliament that agitated for political reforms. They demanded provisions for new Irish parliamentary elections every eight years (instead of merely at the start of a new British king’s reign). Their long-range goal was legislative independence. In 1768 Flood’s Patriots engineered passage of a bill limiting the duration of Parliament to eight years, and in 1769 and 1771 they defeated measures to grant funds for the British administration in Ireland.
Although Flood had become the first independent Irish statesman, he sacrificed this position in 1775 by accepting the office of vice treasurer under the British viceroy, Lord Harcourt. Henry Grattan, an even greater orator than Flood, replaced him as leader of the Patriots. (Grattan described Flood as a man “with a metaphor in his mouth and a bribe in his pocket.”) Flood had, however, left the Patriot cause at the wrong time; the movement grew rapidly as more and more Irish people were influenced by the North American colonists who were rebelling against the British in the American Revolution (1775–83). In 1779 Flood rejoined his old party, and two years later he was officially dismissed from his government post. Although Flood had lost his following, he helped Grattan force the British government to renounce its restrictions on Irish trade (1779) and grant legislative independence to Ireland (1782). Flood then decided to challenge Grattan’s leadership. Charging that Grattan had not gone far enough in his reforms, Flood obtained passage of a measure requiring the British Parliament to renounce all claims to control of Irish legislation. Nevertheless, Flood’s newly acquired popularity was destroyed upon the defeat of his attempt to reform the Irish Parliament in 1784. From 1783 until his retirement in 1790, he was a member of both the British and Irish parliaments, though in England he failed to achieve the kind of political successes that characterized his Irish parliamentary career.
