Sir Henry Montgomery Lawrence,  (born June 28, 1806, Matura, Ceylon [now Sri Lanka]—died July 4, 1857, Lucknow, India), English soldier and administrator who helped to consolidate British rule in the Punjab region.
After joining the Bengal artillery in 1823, Lawrence served at the capture of Arakan in the First Anglo-Burmese War (1824–26). He studied the Urdu, Hindi, and Persian languages and in 1833 joined the survey department of the North-Western Provinces. Placed in charge of Firozpur, in the Punjab (1839), he acquired a substantial knowledge of Sikh politics. After holding several other posts, he in 1846 was appointed agent, and later resident, at Lahore (now in Pakistan). He reduced the Sikh army, suppressed mutinies in the Kangra region and in Kashmir, and deposed the wazīr (Muslim executive officer) Lal Singh.
After the Treaty of Bhairowal (1846), the British part in Sikh rule was apparent when Lawrence prepared a Sikh legal code that gave him the power to forbid suttee (self-immolation by widows on their husbands’ funeral pyres), infanticide, and forced labour. Knighted in 1848 while on home leave, he returned to India when the Second Sikh War (1848–49) broke out. He was made president of the board of administration of the newly annexed Punjab. He was in charge of political affairs while his younger brother, John, supervised finance. Henry favoured treating the Sikh aristocracy with generosity by granting them life pensions and large estates, while John wished to improve the status of the common people by reducing taxes and limiting landlords’ rights.
Policy conflicts with his brother led Henry to seek a transfer, and in 1852 he was assigned to Rajputana. In 1857 he was summoned to Oudh (Ayodhya), where annexation, precipitate land reforms, and a mutinous army had created a grave situation. He effectively delayed the mutiny at Lucknow and prepared the residency for its famous defense of a six-month siege during the Indian Mutiny (1857–58). He was mortally wounded on July 2, and at his death he did not know that the British government had nominated him provisional governor-general.
