Homestead Movement,   in U.S. history, movement that promoted the free ownership of land in the Midwest, Great Plains, and the West by people willing to settle on and cultivate it. The movement culminated in the Homestead Act of 1862.
From the beginning of the republic, the dominant view of the federal government was that public land should be sold to raise revenue. Seeking to change this view came petitions from western farmers asking that land in the public domain be given without charge to settlers willing to work the land.
Up to about 1830 there was little resembling a concerted drive for homestead legislation. But starting in that decade, eastern labourers and reformers of all stripes began to join the farmers in pressing for a homestead act. In 1848 the Free-Soil Party included a plank in the party platform urging distribution of public land to settlers free of charge.
Yet there was always significant opposition to the Homestead Movement. Eastern employers did not want workers to have the option of leaving low-paying jobs for a farm in the West. And eastern landowners feared the threat to land values posed by a huge public domain given away to anyone willing to settle on it. Southern slaveholders saw homesteaders as antislavery advocates, and so they too blocked homestead legislation.
In 1846 Andrew Johnson of Tennessee emerged as one of the leading spokesmen of the Homestead Movement. But bills introduced in Congress in 1846 and 1852 failed. Only when Southern participation in the federal government ceased in 1861 did homestead legislation become a genuine possibility.
The Republican Party, in control of the government, had come out in support of a homestead measure during the 1860 campaign. On May 20, 1862, President Abraham Lincoln signed the Homestead Act, providing 160 acres of public land free of charge (except for a small filing fee) to anyone either 21 years of age or head of a family, a citizen or person who had filed for citizenship, who had lived on and cultivated the land for at least five years. By the turn of the century, more than 80 million acres had been claimed by a total of 600,000 homestead farmers.
