Huang Zongxi, Wade-Giles romanization Huang Tsung-hsi, also called Huang Lizhou,  (born Sept. 24, 1610, Yuyao, Zhejiang province, China—died  Aug. 12, 1695, Yuyao), one of the foremost Chinese scholars and reformers in the early Qing dynasty (1644–1911/12), whose major contribution was a critique of the excessive authoritarianism of the Chinese political system. Study of his works was revived by Chinese reformers around the beginning of the 20th century.
The son of a prominent scholar-reformer of the Ming dynasty, Huang refused to serve the subsequent Qing. He fought with the last Ming resisters in South China and after their defeat retired to a life of scholarly pursuit. Although his range of interests included mathematics, geography, calendrical science, literature, and philosophy, he is best known as a historian and founder of the eastern Zhejiang school, which attempted to develop objective rather than personal and moral standards for historical study. The school also insisted on the study of recent history as opposed to the traditional Chinese belief that value lay solely in ancient studies.
Huang’s first major work, the Mingyi daifang lu (1663; Waiting for the Dawn: A Plan for the Prince), was a critique of despotism in Chinese history. He proposed that the office of prime minister, which had been in existence in ancient times, be revived as a way for the emperor to share his power with his high officials. He suggested reforms of the imperial court and of education, civil service examination, military, and taxation systems. He also recommended reforms of the legal code that would have made the law the impersonal embodiment of justice rather than the arbitrary dictates of despotic regimes. His Ming Ru Xue’an (1676; “Survey of Ming Confucianists”) is considered to be the first systematic history of Chinese philosophy. His Song-Yuan Xue’an (1838, posthumous; “Survey of Song and Yuan Confucianists”), although unfinished, attempts the same kind of systematic study of Chinese thought for the Song (960–1279) and Yuan (1206–1368) periods.
