Humane Society of the United States (HSUS), byname Humane Society,  nonprofit animal-welfare and animal rights advocacy group founded in 1954. The Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) is one of the largest such organizations in the world, with more than 10 million members and regional offices and field representatives throughout the country. Its international affiliate, Humane Society International, has offices in Asia, Australia, Europe, Costa Rica, and Canada. Headquarters of the HSUS are in Washington, D.C.
The HSUS was founded in 1954 by former members of the American Humane Society, an organization established in 1877 to promote the humane treatment of children and animals. The founders intended the new organization—based in the capital—to advocate for animal welfare on a national level, using strategies and resources beyond the reach of local and state organizations. Since its founding the HSUS’s activities have included lobbying and drafting of model legislation, conducting undercover investigations, educating and training animal-control and animal-care professionals, and mounting public-awareness campaigns on a variety of issues, including animal fighting and cruelty, factory farming, the fur trade, sports hunting, puppy mills, the use of chimpanzees in scientific and medical research, horse slaughter, pet care and adoption, the protection of animals in the wild, and the relation between religious values and animal welfare.
The HSUS is arguably the world’s most influential animal-welfare organization. Important pieces of federal legislation that were passed largely owing to the society’s efforts include the Humane Slaughter Act (also known as the Humane Methods of Animal Slaughter Act) of 1958, which protects food animals during slaughter; the Laboratory Animal Welfare Act of 1966, which (as amended several times) mandates the humane treatment of animals in research, commercial breeding and transportation, and public exhibition; and the Pets Evacuation and Transportation Standards (PETS) Act of 2006, which requires that animals be taken into account in the disaster plans of local, state, and federal agencies. As the leading disaster relief agency for animals in the United States, the HSUS operates a variety of sanctuaries, rescue facilities, rehabilitation centres, and mobile veterinary clinics; the society also provides disaster relief for animals in other countries.
The HSUS’s regular undercover investigations have exposed significant animal abuse in a number of industries and research facilities. In 2008 the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) recalled more than 140 million pounds of beef (the largest meat recall in U.S. history to date) following an HSUS investigation at the Hallmark/Westland Meat Packing Company in California.
Humane Society University, the society’s training division, provides academic courses, certificates, and workshops. In 2000 the HSUS launched the Humane Society Press, which publishes professional and scholarly books on animal-welfare topics. The society also produces several magazines and newsletters on a wide range of issues.
The HSUS is funded almost entirely by bequests, contributions, foundation grants, and membership dues. It receives a small amount of funding from the federal government to support specific programs. The society is governed by an independent board of directors whose members serve on a volunteer basis.
