Huynh Tan Phat,  (born 1913, near My Tho, Vietnam—died  Sept. 30, 1989, Ho Chi Minh City), one of the leading theoreticians of the National Liberation Front (NLF), the Vietnamese guerrilla organization formed in 1960 to oppose the U.S.-backed Saigon government and to reunite the country. From 1969 he was president of the South Vietnamese Provisional Revolutionary Government, which replaced the Saigon government in 1975.
While at Hanoi University in the 1930s, Huynh Tan Phat became active in the struggle for the liberation of Vietnam from French rule. During World War II he opposed the Japanese occupation. From 1944 to 1945 he edited an anti-French newspaper, Thanh Nien (“Youth”). After the war he joined the Vanguard Youth organization, a movement for social reform and political change, and eventually became secretary-general of the liberal Democratic Party. Despite his high standing in the Democratic Party, which claimed to be opposed to communism, Phat joined the Viet Minh, the united front guerrilla organization headed by Ho Chi Minh, as the only group constituting an effective resistance against the French. During the First Indochina War (1946–54), Phat, although twice imprisoned, was in charge of the organization’s information service.
After the Viet Minh defeated the French and an international conference at Geneva divided Vietnam into northern and southern zones, Phat remained in Saigon, working as an architect while continuing to be active in the Democratic Party. In 1958, when President Ngo Dinh Diem moved to suppress all opposition parties in South Vietnam, Phat and his organization were forced to go underground. In 1960 he became chairman of the Saigon-Cho Lon-Gia Dinh Special Zone Central Committee, which opposed the Diem government; the same year he joined the newly formed NLF. From 1964 to 1966 he served as secretary-general of the NLF Central Committee, the most powerful position in the organization, and, in 1969, when the NLF established its Provisional Revolutionary Government, Phat became its president. In 1976 he was elected a vice premier in the Council of Ministers of Vietnam, and in 1982 he also became chairman of the State Commission for Capital Construction.
