Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (IMRO), Macedonian Vatreshna Makedonska-Revolutsionerna Organizatsiya(VMRO), Bulgarian Vŭtreshna Makedono-Odrinska Revolutsionna Organizatsiya (VMRO),  secret revolutionary society that was active in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Its many incarnations struggled with two contradictory goals: establishing Macedonia as an autonomous state on the one hand and promoting Bulgarian political interests on the other.
IMRO was founded in 1893 in Thessaloníki; its early leaders included Damyan Gruev, Gotsé Delchev, and Yane Sandanski, men who had a Macedonian regional identity and a Bulgarian national identity. Their goal was to win autonomy for a large portion of the geographical region of Macedonia from its Ottoman Turkish rulers. In 1903, having gained substantial support among the Slav Christian populations of Macedonia, IMRO staged the Ilinden Uprising, a significant but unsuccessful rebellion that was rapidly suppressed by the Ottoman authorities. Subsequently IMRO split into two separate factions: a leftist, pro-Macedonian wing based in Macedonia, which continued to advocate for an independent Macedonia, and a rightist, pro-Bulgarian wing (referred to as the Supremacist, or Vrhovist, wing) based in Sofia, which  sought to annex Macedonia to Bulgaria and promoted Bulgarian political and military interests more generally. For the next few decades, the rightist wing engaged in a campaign of terror and assassination against its opponents.
During the Balkan Wars of 1912–13 (when the region of Macedonia was divided among Serbia, Greece, and Bulgaria) and World War I, which followed, IMRO’s increasingly indiscriminate use of terror alienated both its Macedonian and its Bulgarian supporters. The rightist, pro-Bulgarian wing of IMRO under Todor Aleksandrov assassinated Bulgaria’s prime minister, Aleksandŭr Stamboliyski, in 1923. The next year Aleksandrov himself was assassinated, at which time Alexander Protogerov assumed control of the organization, only to be displaced by Ivan Mihailov.  The Mihailovists, as they were known, continued to identify closely with Bulgaria and to support Bulgarian irredentism. They had close ties to diaspora organizations abroad, the most important of which was the Macedonian Political Organization in the United States and Canada. When a new Bulgarian government came to power in 1934, it outlawed IMRO and arrested or expelled its leaders.
The leftist, pro-Macedonian wing of IMRO, which coalesced in 1925 as IMRO (United), continued to promote the cause of Macedonian nationalism and the establishment of an independent Macedonian state. While it gained some early support from the Balkan communist parties, it was later persecuted by the Yugoslav authorities on the grounds that its supporters were Macedonian separatists or Bulgarian nationalists and therefore posed a threat to the unity of the Yugoslav state. By 1937 IMRO (United) was disbanded. Later, in 1944, some of its leaders participated in the establishment of Macedonia as a federal state of the country that would become the Federal People’s (and later Socialist Federal) Republic of Yugoslavia.
In the early 21st century the historical legacy of IMRO could still be felt. In 1996 a Bulgarian political party was founded with the name IMRO–Bulgarian National Movement, and in 1990, the year before the Republic of Macedonia (now the Republic of North Macedonia) declared its independence from Yugoslavia, a Macedonian political party was founded with the name IMRO–Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity.
