Ivan III, also called Ivan the Great or Russian Ivan Veliky, byname of Ivan Vasilyevich,  (born January 22, 1440, Moscow—died  October 27, 1505, Moscow), grand prince of Moscow (1462–1505) who subdued most of the Great Russian lands by conquest or by the voluntary allegiance of princes, won again parts of Ukraine from Poland–Lithuania, and repudiated the old subservience to the Mongol-derived Tatars. He also laid the administrative foundations of a centralized Russian state.
Ivan was born at the height of the civil war that raged between supporters of his father, Grand Prince Vasily II of Muscovy, and those of his rebellious uncles. His early life was dramatic and tumultuous: when his father was arrested and blinded by his cousin in 1446, Ivan was first hidden in a monastery and then smuggled to safety, only to be treacherously handed over to his father’s captors later in the year; shortly after his father’s release in the same year Ivan was solemnly affianced—for purely political reasons—to the daughter of the Grand Prince of Tver, whom he married in 1452. During the last years of his father’s reign, he gained experience in the arts of war and government. At the age of 12 he was placed nominally in command of a military expedition dispatched to deal with the remnants of his father’s internal enemies in the far north; and at 18 he led a successful campaign against the Tatars in the south. Vasily II died on March 27, 1462, and was succeeded by Ivan as grand prince of Moscow.
Little is known of Ivan’s activities during the early part of his reign. Apart from a series of sporadic and largely successful campaigns against his eastern neighbours, the Tatars of Kazan, there was evidently not much beyond the routine business of ruling to occupy him. But his private life soon changed radically. In 1467 his childhood bride died (perhaps poisoned), leaving him with only one son. In view of the primitive state of Muscovite medicine and the demonstrable reluctance of Ivan’s brothers to see the royal line continued longer than was necessary, the likelihood of the son predeceasing his father and thus robbing him of an heir appeared only too real, and another wife had to be sought. Curiously, the initiative seems to have come from outside; in 1469 Cardinal Bessarion wrote from Rome offering Ivan the hand of his ward and pupil, Zoë Palaeologus, niece of the last emperor of Byzantium. It took three years before Zoë, who, on entering Moscow, changed her name to Sofia (and perhaps her faith to Orthodoxy), was married to Ivan in the Kremlin.
At Ivan’s accession many Great Russian lands were not yet under Muscovite control; the entire Ukraine and the upper Oka districts were part of the Polish–Lithuanian union and Ivan himself, in name at least, was a tributary of the Khan of the Golden Horde. He set himself the task of reconquering from Poland–Lithuania the Ukrainian possessions of his forefathers. But first the independent Great Russian lands had to be annexed or subdued and subservience to the Tatars had to be repudiated.
After rendering the Kazan Horde on his eastern flank temporarily impotent by a series of campaigns (1467–69), Ivan attempted to subdue Novgorod and its huge northern empire. He repeatedly invaded Novgorod, formally forced it to accept his sovereignty (1478), stripped it of the last vestiges of political freedom, secularized large tracts of its church lands, annexed its colonies, and replaced many of its citizens with reliable elements from his own domains. By 1489 Novgorod could offer no more resistance to Ivan. Of the remaining Russian lands still technically independent in 1462, Yaroslavl and Rostov were annexed by treaty (1463 and 1474, respectively). Tver offered little resistance and meekly yielded to Moscow in 1485. Ryazan and Pskov alone retained their independence at the cost of abject subservience to their virtual suzerain.
Freedom from subjection to Khan Ahmed of the Golden Horde came in 1480. To counterbalance Ahmed’s friendship with Poland–Lithuania, Ivan concluded an invaluable alliance with Khan Mengli Girei of Crimea. After a victorious campaign by Ivan in 1480, Ahmed withdrew his forces from Ivan’s dominions, and although Ahmed’s sons continued to worry Moscow and Crimea until their final defeat in 1502, Ivan from 1480 no longer considered himself a vassal of the Khan and entered the field of European diplomacy as an independent sovereign. By tact and diplomacy he managed to maintain his friendship with Mengli and to avoid serious trouble in Kazan for the rest of his reign.
In 1480 Ivan also had to cope with the danger of rebellion by his two brothers Andrey and Boris, who had been incensed by his high-handed appropriation of their deceased elder brother’s estates. They defected with their armies to the western frontiers but eventually returned and acknowledged Ivan’s territorial acquisitions and primacy.
In 1490 Ivan’s eldest son by his first wife died of gout. He had been ineptly treated by a Jewish doctor who had been brought to Russia by Sofia’s brother, and Ivan suspected foul play. He now had to solve the problem of who was to be his heir—his eldest son’s son Dmitry (born 1483) or his eldest son by Sofia, Vasily (born 1479). For seven years he vacillated. Then, in 1497, he nominated Dmitry as heir. Sofia, anxious to see her son assured of the throne, planned rebellion against her husband, but the plot was uncovered. Ivan disgraced Sofia and Vasily and had Dmitry crowned grand prince (1498).
However, in 1500 Vasily rebelled again and defected to the Lithuanians. Ivan was forced to compromise. At that stage of his war with Lithuania he could not risk the total alienation of his son and wife. And so, in 1502, he gave the title to Vasily and imprisoned Dmitry and his mother, Yelena.
At home Ivan’s policy was to centralize the administration by stripping the appanage princes of land and authority. As for the boyars, they were stripped of much of their authority and swiftly executed or imprisoned if suspected of treason. Ivan’s reign saw the beginning of the pomestie system, whereby the servants of the grand prince were granted estates on a basis of life tenure and on condition of loyal service.
Ivan’s last years were years of disappointment. The war against Lithuania had not ended as conclusively and satisfactorily as he had expected—much of Ukraine was still in the hands of a strangely buoyant enemy; his ecclesiastical plans for secularizing church lands had been thwarted at the Council of 1503, and the Khanate of Kazan, which had been so carefully neutralized during Ivan’s reign, was beginning to rid itself of Muscovite tutelage. Ivan died in the autumn of 1505.
In terms of political success, the 15th-century grand prince Ivan III was easily the greatest of all the descendants of Rurik, the reputed founder of Russia. No ruler of Muscovy until Peter I the Great, two centuries later, did more to consolidate and develop the achievements of his predecessors, to strengthen the authority of the monarch, or to lay the foundations for a centralized state. By means of cunning diplomacy and shrewdly calculated aggression, Ivan not only established Muscovy as a great power to be reckoned with by the rulers and diplomats of Europe but also set in motion the reconquest of the Ukraine from Poland and Lithuania.
In spite of his great achievements, Ivan died unmourned and seemingly unloved. Singularly little is known about him as a man. He was tall and thin and had a slight stoop. It is said that women fainted in his presence, so frightened were they by his awesome gaze. His only known pleasures were those of the bed and the table. His contemporaries are silent about his virtues. Yet few scholars have underestimated the role of Ivan in the creation of the Russian state, and none dispute the significance of his diplomatic and military successes. It may be that the excessive cautiousness of his character, the lack of élan and glamour, and the very dullness of the man have prevented historians from universally recognizing the appellation of “the Great,” first attributed to him by the Austrian ambassador to his son’s court.
