Jiaqing, Wade-Giles romanization Chia-ch’ing, personal name (xingming) Yongyan, posthumous name (shi) Ruidi, temple name (miaohao) (Qing) Renzong,  (born Nov. 13, 1760, Beijing, China—died  Sept. 2, 1820, Jehol [now Chengde], Hebei province), reign name (nianhao) of the fifth emperor of the Qing dynasty (1644–1911/12), during whose reign (1796–1820) a partial attempt was made to restore the flagging state of the empire.
He was proclaimed emperor and assumed the reign title of Jiaqing in 1796, after the abdication of his father, the Qianlong emperor (reigned 1735–96). Power, however, remained in the hands of his father and his corrupt minister Heshen until 1799; the Jiaqing emperor’s duties were confined to directing ceremonial functions.
Meanwhile, the great White Lotus Rebellion (1796–1804) had broken out in central and western China. Under Heshen’s management, the campaign was prolonged so that he and his friends could embezzle money meant for the war effort. The Qianlong emperor died in 1799, and Jiaqing immediately ordered Heshen’s arrest and forced him to commit suicide. Capable generals were appointed to quell the rebellion, but it took the depleted Qing armies five more years to put it down. Pirates had begun to infest the southern coast, nearly stopping trade; almost 10 years (1800–10) were required to suppress them.
After the death of his father and the arrest of Heshen, the Jiaqing emperor made efforts to restore the finances of the imperial treasury; but he was not a strong ruler and rather than cut down on the rampant official corruption, he attempted to hold down the expenses of the court—a program that rankled members of the imperial family. Although this policy was partly successful in refilling the treasury, it did not deal with mounting governmental ineffectiveness. In fact, corruption may even have increased as a result of the practice of selling high office as a means of collecting more revenue. In addition, the burden of taxes on the people remained high. In 1803 the emperor was attacked by a mob in the streets, and in 1813 a band of conspirators attempted to storm the palace. Jiaqing died one of the most unpopular emperors of the Qing dynasty.
