Jivatram Bhagwandas Kripalani, also called Acharya Kripalani,  (born November 11, 1888, Hyderabad, India [now in Pakistan]—died March 19, 1982, Ahmadabad), prominent Indian educator, social activist, and politician in both pre- and post-independence India, who was a close associate of Mohandas K. Gandhi and a longtime supporter of his ideology. He was a leading figure in the Indian National Congress (Congress Party) during the 1930s and ’40s and later was a founder of the Praja Socialist Party (PSP).
Kripalani was born in Hyderabad (now in Sindh province, Pakistan) and was raised in the Sindh and Gujarat regions in a middle-class Hindu family. His father was a minor government official. He earned a master’s degree in history and economics from Fergusson College in Pune. In 1912 he embarked on a teaching career.
As a student, Kripalani had participated in social and political activism. It was during his time as a teacher that he first encountered Gandhi, and he was associated with Gandhi by 1917, after Gandhi had taken up the cause of indigo workers in Gujarat. Kripalani subsequently joined the Congress Party and worked on Gandhi’s ashrams (religious retreats) in Gujarat, Maharashtra, and Bihar. From 1922 to 1927 he was the principal of Gujarat Vidyapith in Ahmadabad, a school founded by Gandhi, and it was during his tenure there that he acquired the nickname Acharya (“Teacher”). After 1920 Kripalani also participated in many of the acts of civil disobedience associated with Indian opposition to British rule, in the process earning several prison terms.
Kripalani rose to become a senior leader within Congress. His first major post was as general secretary of the All India Congress Committee in 1928–29, and from 1934 to 1945 he served as general secretary of the party. In 1946 he was elected president of the party, but his tenure in that post was controversial. Jawaharlal Nehru, independent India’s first prime minister, objected to the high level of involvement that Kripalani wanted the party to play in governing the country. In My Times, his autobiography published posthumously in 2004, Kripalani strongly condemned nearly the entire Congress leadership—Gandhi being one of the few exceptions—for allowing a united India to be partitioned in 1947. Late that year he resigned as party president..
While that drama was unfolding, he was a member (1946–47) of India’s interim government and (1946–51) of the Constituent Assembly that drafted the country’s new constitution.. In 1951 Kripalani resigned from Congress, a year after he was defeated in a bid to become president of the party again, and he helped form the Kisan Mazdoor Praja Party that in 1952 became the core of the Praja Socialist Party (PSP); he later resigned from the PSP. Also in 1951 he was elected to the Lok Sabha (the lower chamber of the Indian parliament) and won reelection to that chamber in 1957, 1963, and 1967. His only electoral defeats came in 1962, when he lost his seat to V.K. Krishna Menon (then minister of defense), and in 1971, his last bid for public office.
Kripalani was an avowed follower of Gandhi. After Gandhi’s assassination in 1948, he took upon himself the task of standard bearer for Gandhian principles in a world he thought was losing respect for idealism. Kripalani later included in his autobiography this passage that he had once written to Gandhi, “I cannot live in the light of the doctrines I have learnt from you. But intellectually I am convinced that humanity’s salvation lies that way.” He long championed social and environmental causes and became a spiritual leader of the socialists in India.
Kripalani was a harsh critic of both Nehru and Nehru’s daughter, Indira Gandhi. He opposed Nehru’s policies, which he thought went against the Gandhian ideal of village republics, and he strongly denounced Indira Gandhi’s authoritarian rule as prime minister. In 1972–73 he, Jaya Prakash (or Jayaprakash) Narayan, and other socialist leaders toured the country urging nonviolent protest and civil disobedience against Indira Gandhi’s government. Kripalani was among the first lot of political leaders to be arrested in June 1975 after she had imposed a nationwide state of emergency, but because of his prominence he was only briefly held in custody.  Kripalani was the author of several books, including Gandhi: His Life and Thought (1970).
