John Hume,  (born January 18, 1937, Londonderry, Northern Ireland—died August 3, 2020, Londonderry), leader of the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) in Northern Ireland from 1979 to 2001. He served in the British Parliament from 1983 to 2005 and the European Parliament from 1979 to 2004; he was a member of the Northern Ireland Assembly from 1998 to 2000. In 1998 he and David Trimble, leader of the Ulster Unionist Party, were awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace.
Originally a schoolteacher, Hume, a Roman Catholic, became a moderate leader in the Northern Ireland civil rights movement in the 1960s and won a seat in the Northern Ireland parliament in 1969. A founding member of the SDLP, he was elected its leader in 1979. From the outset Hume was recognized as the chief strategist for the SDLP. He played a crucial role in negotiations leading to the short-lived power-sharing assembly and executive body of 1973–74, which had been designed to give proportional representation to the Catholic minority in Northern Ireland. He was elected to the British Parliament in 1983.
Believing that internal solutions to the conflict in Northern Ireland had failed, Hume turned his attention to the United States, cultivating relationships with Irish-American political leaders such as Senators Edward Kennedy and Daniel Patrick Moynihan; speaker of the House Thomas Philip (“Tip”) O’Neill; and Governor Hugh Carey of New York. Together they condemned the use of violence and urged Irish Americans not to support the Irish Republican Army (IRA). Gradually expanding its membership to include both Republican and Democratic leaders, the “Friends of Ireland,” as the group called itself from 1981, encouraged United States President Ronald Reagan to persuade British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher to pursue closer relations with Ireland. The improved relations made possible the Anglo-Irish Agreement of 1985, which gave the Irish Republic an official consultative role in the affairs of Northern Ireland.
Elected to the European Parliament in 1979, Hume developed his connections with political leaders on the continent. As a strong advocate of European integration, he urged the European Union (EU) to become involved in efforts to end the conflict in Northern Ireland. Hume made his influence felt in a number of EU reports and initiatives reflecting his commitment to a peaceful settlement.
In the late 1980s Hume attempted to persuade Irish supporters of the IRA to abandon the armed struggle against Britain and enter democratic politics. In three separate initiatives from 1988 to 1993, Hume, facing criticism from Nationalists opposed to the IRA, risked his personal safety to engage in sometimes secret dialogues with Sinn Féin leader Gerry Adams, which resulted in the Hume-Adams statement of 1993. This document encouraged the British and Irish governments to adopt a “three-stranded” approach to peace negotiations, one that would address issues within Northern Ireland; between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland; and between the Republic of Ireland and Britain. Subsequent discussions based on this approach were the first multiparty peace talks to involve Sinn Féin, which joined them in 1997. Hume is generally credited with the vision that lay behind the Good Friday Agreement (Belfast Agreement), the multiparty peace accord reached in April 1998.
