Joseph Chamberlain,  (born July 8, 1836, London, Eng.—died July 2, 1914, London), British businessman, social reformer, radical politician, and ardent imperialist. At the local, national, or imperial level, he was a constructive radical, caring more for practical success than party loyalty or ideological commitment. The ideas with which he is most closely associated—tariff reform and imperial unity—were in advance of his time and pointed the direction that British policy would take in the 20th century.
Chamberlain, the son of a prosperous shoe manufacturer in London, was reared in an atmosphere of political Liberalism and Nonconformist religion and, eschewing a university career, entered the family business at age 16. Two years later he moved to Birmingham to join his cousin’s screw-making concern, and there his tycoon characteristics came to the fore. His relentless energy and organizational genius drove out his competitors, and in 1874, at age 38, he was able to retire with a substantial fortune.
Meanwhile, he had become involved in civic affairs and had been elected mayor of Birmingham in 1873. His pioneer efforts in educational reform, slum clearance, improved housing, and municipalization of public utilities vaulted him into national prominence. At the age of 40, the “gas-and-water Socialist,” widely caricatured for his spare frame, incisive features, and ribboned monocle, was one of the most successful men in England.
Wasting no time, in 1876 he was elected to Parliament, where he was distrusted as a Dissenter and an upstart, and his genuinely radical speeches, delivered with a haughty confidence, frightened the Conservatives. Yet his industrial middle-class constituency in Birmingham adored him, and his efficient party organization there (the “caucus”) turned out big Liberal votes in the Midlands. Known as a wire puller, he became Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone’s lieutenant in the House of Commons and in 1882 was appointed president of the Board of Trade in Gladstone’s second ministry (1880–85). Chamberlain, along with his fellow radical Sir Charles Wentworth Dilke, led the left wing of the Liberal Party, and in 1885 they stumped the country in support of their “unauthorized programme,” calling for a graduated income tax, free education, improved housing for the poor, local government reform, and “three acres and a cow” for agricultural labourers.
During the 1880s, when Irish demands for land reform and an autonomous parliament (Home Rule) increasingly bedeviled British politics and caused a deep rift in the Liberal Party, Chamberlain favoured Irish reform, especially at the local level, and stood with Gladstone in opposition to the use of repressive force in quashing Irish agitation. Chamberlain’s instincts, however, were already on the side of imperial unity, and he could not go along with Gladstone in 1885, when the latter committed the party to Home Rule for Ireland. In 1886, when the Home Rule issue came to a vote in Commons, Chamberlain joined with other dissident Liberals (Liberal Unionists) to defeat the government.
The split in the Liberal Party proved permanent; the Conservatives, supported by the Liberal Unionists, dominated British politics for most of the period from 1886 until 1906. Chamberlain used his control of the Liberal Unionists to pressure the Conservatives into adopting a more progressive social policy; before 1892 he had the satisfaction of seeing the Conservatives pass various measures of social reform.
The Conservative hegemony reflected a growing disenchantment with social reform in the country and marked a new emphasis upon empire and foreign affairs. Chamberlain, too, began to abandon his radicalism and turned increasingly to imperialist rhetoric, popular with the increasingly jingoistic industrial masses. In 1895 he joined the Conservative Cabinet of Robert Cecil, 3rd marquess of Salisbury, asking to be made secretary of state for the colonies.
In that office Chamberlain quickly became involved in South African affairs and was accused of complicity in the Jameson Raid, an abortive invasion of the Boer republic of Transvaal by British settlers from the neighbouring Cape Colony (December 1895). Though he was later cleared by a Commons investigation, his anti-Boer stance was evident. When worsening Anglo-Boer relations erupted in the South African War (1899–1902), Chamberlain supported it enthusiastically.
This war, in which Great Britain was roasted in world opinion as a bully, brought home to Chamberlain the fact that Britain was militarily vulnerable and diplomatically isolated in Europe. Germany, with which he had always wanted an alliance, had proved particularly hostile. In view of Britain’s isolation, Chamberlain looked to the self-governing colonies, which had given encouraging support to Britain during the war. Returning from his negotiation of the peace settlement in South Africa in 1902, Chamberlain announced a new tariff scheme that he hoped would draw Britain and its dependencies together in a kind of common market. Protected by stiff tariffs without and united by preferential tariffs within, the new union would add to Britain’s international security, protect manufactures threatened by new competition from the United States and Germany, and raise revenue for social projects at home.
Characteristically, Chamberlain energetically set out to convert his party to the new scheme. When Conservative leader Arthur Balfour (later 1st earl of Balfour) refused to commit himself, Chamberlain resigned his cabinet post and from 1903 to 1906 conducted a forceful private campaign, exhorting his listeners to “think imperially.” But protection was a political bombshell. Free trade (which to the English meant cheap imported food) had been the touchstone of Britain’s conventional wisdom for more than a half century. Liberals everywhere raised the cry of cheap bread, and Conservatives split as irrevocably as the Liberals had 20 years earlier over Home Rule. In the general elections of 1906 the Conservatives and Liberal Unionists went down to a resounding defeat, in great part because of Chamberlain’s abandonment of free trade. Chamberlain, however, was reelected in his native Birmingham by an astonishing majority.
It was his last political victory, for shortly after, in July 1906, he suffered a paralytic stroke that left him a helpless invalid for the rest of his life.
