Josephine Sophia White Griffing, née Josephine Sophia White,  (born Dec. 18, 1814, Hebron, Conn., U.S.—died Feb. 18, 1872, Washington, D.C.),  American reformer and a strong presence in the women’s rights movement in the mid-19th-century. She also campaigned vigorously and effectively for Abolition and later for aid to former slaves.
Griffing moved with her husband to Ohio about 1842 and settled in Litchfield. Within a short time she became active in the antislavery cause and made her home a station on the Underground Railroad. Soon she was active in the new women’s rights movement as well. From 1851 to 1855 she was a paid agent of the Western Anti-Slavery Society, and in 1853 she was elected president of the Ohio Woman’s Rights Association, of which she had been a founding member. She traveled and spoke widely on behalf of both causes and was a frequent contributor to newspapers, particularly the Anti-Slavery Bugle of Salem, Ohio. In 1863–65 she was a lecturer for the Women’s National Loyal League, a group concerned with the full implementation of emancipation. At the end of the Civil War she moved to Washington, D.C., to work in assisting the landless and jobless freedmen.
In 1865 Griffing became the general agent of the National Freedman’s Relief Association of the District of Columbia, which collected and distributed funds, food, and fuel to the thousands of former slaves who had converged on Washington and which also established temporary settlements for them. She lobbied effectively for the creation of the federal Freedmen’s Bureau, and, although she disapproved of its military character and impersonality, she cooperated with the bureau and for two brief periods in 1865 and 1867 was employed by it. During the latter period she was especially effective in maintaining employment offices for freedmen in several Northern cities. In support of the women’s rights movement,  she helped found and was first vice president of the American Equal Rights Association in 1866, was a founder and president of the Universal Franchise Association of the District of Columbia in 1867, and in 1869 followed Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton into the National Woman Suffrage Association, of which she was chosen corresponding secretary.
