José López Portillo, in full José López Portillo y Pacheco,  (born June 16, 1920, Mexico City, Mexico—died February 17, 2004, Mexico City), Mexican lawyer, economist, and writer, who was president of Mexico from 1976 to 1982.
López Portillo attended the National Autonomous University of Mexico and the University of Chile. He then practiced law and later was professor of law, political science, and public administration at the National University of Mexico before beginning his political career. He held various administrative positions under Presidents Gustavo Díaz Ordaz and Luis Echeverría before becoming minister of finance in 1971. In this position he modernized tax-collection procedures, pursued tax evaders, and reduced public spending.
As president of Mexico, López Portillo followed a more conservative approach than that of his predecessor, Echeverría, deemphasizing land redistribution and favouring the creation of nonagricultural jobs, exploitation of oil and natural gas, tax concessions to stimulate industrial development, and attraction of foreign investment. He continued Echeverría’s population-control program, which achieved a modest reduction in the country’s high birth rate. López Portillo’s most significant political reform was to increase the size of the Chamber of Deputies to 400 members, with a minimum of 100 seats reserved for opposition parties. This measure was designed to permit more minority participation in Mexican politics, which had been dominated by the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) since 1929.
López Portillo mounted an ambitious program for the exploitation of huge, newly discovered petroleum reserves in Veracruz and Tabasco states by Petróleos Mexicanos (Pemex), the state-owned Mexican oil agency. The program resulted in rapid economic growth and a dramatic increase in Mexico’s oil exports, but much of the resulting wealth was squandered on inefficient state-run enterprises or was pocketed by government and labour union officials. Rampant government corruption and unrestrained government borrowing resulted in $60 billion in foreign debt, and when world oil prices collapsed in 1981 Mexico defaulted on its debt, triggering a global debt crisis. By the time his term ended in 1982, his administration had been discredited, and López Portillo lived abroad for several years to escape the animosity Mexicans felt toward him. He eventually returned to Mexico and published his memoirs, Mis tiempos: Biografía y testimonio político (1988; “My Times: Biography and Political Testament”).
López Portillo adopted a somewhat conciliatory approach toward supplying the United States with oil and gas while exerting pressure for the easing of U.S. trade and immigration restrictions. In 1978 Mexico reopened diplomatic relations with Spain after a 38-year hiatus. In 1983 President Miguel de la Madrid dissociated himself from López Portillo’s administration, accusing it of aggravating the “grotesque” maldistribution of wealth and defrauding Pemex.
