Juan Bosch, in full Juan Bosch Gaviño,  (born June 30, 1909, La Vega, Dominican Republic—died November 1, 2001, Santo Domingo), Dominican writer, scholar, and politician elected president of the Dominican Republic in 1962 but deposed less than a year later.
Bosch, an intellectual, was an early opponent of Rafael Trujillo’s dictatorial regime. He went into exile in 1937 and in 1939 founded the leftist Dominican Revolutionary Party (Partido Revolucionario Dominicano; PRD). The PRD was the first well-organized political party of the Dominican Republic and the only one with a constructive program ready to implement after Trujillo’s death in 1961. Bosch, a dazzling and charismatic orator, won a landslide victory in the elections of December 20, 1962. He was the first politician to directly address the peasantry, a heretofore ignored group that gave him an overwhelming majority in the election. Bosch not only appealed to the poor but also cut across class lines to win the favour of the middle class and intellectuals.
Entering office on February 27, 1963, Bosch faced serious problems at the outset of his term. The United States was at odds with Fidel Castro’s government in Cuba and leery of the slightest hint of leftist politics in the Caribbean. This fear was fed by damaging reports of the new regime from a skeptical U.S. ambassador in the Dominican Republic. Bosch’s constitution of April 29, liberal and democratic, alienated four powerful groups in the country: landholders, even small ones, were frightened by his prohibition against latifundia (large plantation-type farms); the Roman Catholic church was angered by the secular nature of the constitution; industrialists felt the constitution was worker-oriented; and the military considered that its powers were curtailed. On September 25, 1963, the military deposed Bosch. Two years later his followers staged a rebellion in hopes of returning Bosch to power. The United States, fearful of a communist revolution, sent troops to end the revolt.
After a two-year exile in Puerto Rico (September 28, 1963–September 1965), Bosch was allowed to return, and he reluctantly agreed to take part in the new elections. Fearful for his safety, he campaigned half-heartedly, making no public appearances, and lost to Joaquín Balaguer, the conservative candidate with heavy backing from the United States. Bosch and his party abstained from participating in the 1970 elections, but by 1973 the PRD wanted to rejoin the political process. Bosch resigned from the PRD and formed a third party, the Dominican Liberation Party (Partido de la Liberación Dominicana; PLD). In subsequent presidential elections, Bosch repeatedly lost but claimed vote fraud. He last ran for president in 1994, finishing third.
His term in office was too short for a judgment of his effectiveness as president, but Bosch’s contribution to his country’s political development was of paramount importance. After 31 years of dictatorship, Bosch created a genuine political party, forcing the opposition to do the same and enabling his country to have legitimate representative elections.
Bosch was a respected historian and essayist, having written mostly on Dominican and Caribbean politics. He also wrote novels and a biography, Simón Bolívar (1960).
