Julia Strudwick Tutwiler,  (born Aug. 15, 1841, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, U.S.—died March 24, 1916, Birmingham, Alabama), American educator and reformer who was responsible for making higher education in Alabama more readily available to women through her association with several colleges and universities. She was also active in the state’s prison reform.
Tutwiler attended a school operated by her father. Later she attended Madame Maroteau’s boarding school in Philadelphia for two years, and during the Civil War she taught in her father’s school. In 1872–73 she studied Greek and Latin privately with professors at Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Virginia, and in the latter year she began a three-year period of study in Germany and France. On her return to the United States in 1876 she joined the faculty of the Tuscaloosa Female College, where she taught modern languages and English literature for five years.
In 1881 she was named coprincipal of the Livingston (Alabama) Female Academy. In 1882, largely at her urging, the Alabama legislature voted an appropriation that made possible the establishment in February 1883 of the Alabama Normal College for Girls as a department of the Livingston Academy, which shortly became known as Livingston Normal College (now Livingston University). In 1890 Tutwiler became sole principal; her title was later changed to president. After a long campaign of public education and legislative lobbying, Tutwiler finally won state support for an Alabama Girls Industrial School (later Alabama College), which opened in Montevallo in 1896. She was also responsible for securing the admission of women to the University of Alabama.
Another abiding interest of Tutwiler’s was prison reform. In 1880 she formed the Tuscaloosa Benevolent Association to work toward that end. A statewide examination of county jails by questionnaire induced the legislature to make improvements. Some years later she became state chairman of prison and jail work for the Woman’s Christian Temperance Union. She worked for the adoption of such penal practices as classification of offenders and state inspection of jails and prisons, and she succeeded in having a pioneering prison school established, but she failed in her campaign to abolish the convict lease system.
Tutwiler retired as president of Livingston Normal College in 1910. Her poem “Alabama,” written in 1873 in Germany, was later adopted as the state song.
