Karen Silkwood,  (born February 19, 1946, Longview, Texas, U.S.—died November 13, 1974, near Crescent, Oklahoma), American laboratory technician and activist who attempted to expose the safety violations and negligence at Kerr-McGee’s Cimarron River nuclear facility and died in a car crash before she was able to present her evidence. The circumstances of her death brought attention to bear on the dangers and wide-ranging and previously little-known influence of the nuclear power industry. She subsequently became a heroine to antinuclear activists and whistle-blowers alike.
Silkwood grew up in Nederland, Texas, the oldest of three daughters. In high school she developed an interest in chemistry, and after graduation she enrolled at Lamar College in Beaumont, Texas, with a full scholarship to study medical technology. She left school, however, after her first year, married, and had three children. In 1972 she and her husband separated. Silkwood left custody of the children to her husband and took a job with Kerr-McGee, working at the company’s plant near Crescent, Oklahoma, where she helped make plutonium fuel rods for nuclear reactors. (A major firm dealing in inorganic chemicals and petroleum and natural gas exploration, Kerr-McGee was also, until 1989, a leader in Oklahoma’s nuclear power industry. One of its founders, Robert Kerr, had been a powerful U.S. senator [1949–63].)
Silkwood joined the Oil, Chemical, and Atomic Workers Union (OCAW) and, shortly after starting her job, participated in a nine-week union strike. As a member of the union’s bargaining committee, Silkwood began to monitor the plant’s health and safety practices, which she found lacking; spills, falsification of records, inadequate training, health-regulation violations, and even some missing amounts of plutonium, a highly radioactive material, were among the problems she identified. Silkwood and two other local union members testified before the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) in Washington, D.C., about the plant. Like many whistle-blowers before and since, Silkwood was deemed a troublemaker and was subject to ongoing harassment.
During the week of November 5, 1972, she was repeatedly exposed to plutonium radiation. She further was accused of stealing plutonium, traces of which were found by Kerr-McGee officials in her apartment. (She attributed its presence in her home to her having spilled a urine sample.) She was sent to the Los Alamos (New Mexico) National Laboratory on November 11 for testing and was found to have acceptable levels of radiation. On November 13 Silkwood was scheduled to meet with a federal union official and a newspaper reporter to provide them with evidence of negligence at the plant. She carried a manila envelope that contained her documentation. On her way to the meeting in Oklahoma City, Silkwood crashed her car on a concrete abutment and sustained fatal injuries. Although state troopers attributed her death to her having fallen asleep at the wheel, marks on her bumper seemed to indicate that she had been forced off the road. Her autopsy revealed that—contrary to the Los Alamos lab report—she had been exposed to dangerously high levels of radiation. The manila envelope with documentary evidence of the plant’s malfeasance was never found.
After her death Silkwood was discredited by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the AEC, and Kerr-McGee. The Silkwood estate was awarded $10.5 million in 1979, but that amount was reduced to $5,000 upon appeal. The case was not closed until 1986 when an out-of-court settlement awarded the estate $1.38 million. The Kerr-McGee plant at Cimarron River was deaccessioned in 1976.
A movie of Silkwood’s story, Silkwood (1983), was directed by Mike Nichols. It featured Meryl Streep as the protagonist and Cher as her roommate.
