Katay Don Sasorith, byname William Rabbit,  (born July 12, 1904—died  Dec. 29, 1959, Vientiane, Laos), Lao nationalist and author of eloquent resistance pamphlets in his youth, who later held many government posts, among them that of premier in 1954–56.
Katay’s 33 years of government service began with a civil service post in the French administration of Laos from 1926 to 1945. Of part Vietnamese descent, he was the chief spokesman of the national resistance movement during World War II, joining with others to form the Lao Issara, or Free Laos, movement, which fought first against the Japanese and then against the French, who tried to reoccupy Laos after the fall of the Tojo government in Japan in 1945. A provisional government was formed, and Katay was named minister of finance; but its triumph was short-lived, and in 1946 he was forced to flee to Thailand, where the government maintained itself in exile. He published a newspaper in which he exhorted the overthrow of the French, and he wrote Contribution à l’histoire du mouvement d’indépendance national Lao (1948; “Contribution to the History of the Lao National Independence Movement”), under his pen name, William Rabbit, adapted from his own name, Katay, which means “rabbit” in Lao.
In 1949 Katay returned to Vientiane and in 1951 he won election to the National Assembly. From then on his rise to power was rapid; when Laos finally achieved independence from France in 1954, Katay was named premier. Always suspicious of the Pathet Lao, the Communist-dominated but overwhelmingly nationalist military organization, he was able to secure U.S. financial support to combat what he termed “foreign Communist aggression.” Claiming that the Viet Minh (North Vietnamese Communist forces) were invading Laos through the Pathet Lao, Katay was able to obtain aid from the U.S. government to resist them. In 1955 Katay lost parliamentary support and was forced to give Prince Souvanna Phouma the premiership. The Prince continued an intricate balancing act in domestic politics; both he and the government of Phoui Sananikone came under attack by Katay whenever they proposed compromises with the Pathet Lao.
