Katherine Philips Edson, née Katherine Philips,  (born Jan. 12, 1870, Kenton, Ohio, U.S.—died Nov. 5, 1933, Pasadena, Calif.),  American reformer and public official, a strong influence on behalf of woman suffrage and an important figure in securing and enforcing labour standards both in California and at the federal level.
While studying music at a Chicago conservatory, Katherine Philips met and married Charles F. Edson in 1890. They settled in Antelope Valley, California, where Katherine Edson soon became active in organizing support for woman suffrage. In 1900 they moved to Los Angeles, and she joined the Friday Morning Club, a pioneering women’s club (founded nine years earlier by Caroline M. Severance) and the original inspiration for her work in Antelope Valley. Through the Friday Morning Club’s various public reform and health campaigns, Edson became involved in public affairs. In 1910 she was chosen a member of the board of the California Federation of Women’s Clubs, a post she held for six years. She played a significant part in the campaign that secured a woman suffrage amendment to the state constitution in 1911. In 1912 she was elected to the Los Angeles Charter Revision Commission and became the first woman to be named to the executive committee of the National Municipal League. She also became a member of the Progressive Party’s state central committee.
In 1912 Edson was appointed a special agent of the California Bureau of Labor Statistics. In that post she carried out investigations of violations of or shortcomings in state labour law. Her investigation and lobbying eventually closed a loophole by which student nurses had escaped the protection of the eight-hour law for women, and she drew up a comprehensive wages and hours law that was enacted by the legislature in 1913. She was then appointed to the five-member Industrial Welfare Commission created under the law to set standards of hours, wages, and working conditions; she became executive commissioner in 1916.
During World War I Edson served the federal government as industrial mediator for California and the navy as a mediator and inspector of labour conditions at firms working under navy contracts. In 1921 President Warren G. Harding appointed her to be an adviser to the U.S. delegation to the Washington Limitation of Arms Conference. In 1927 she became chief of the California Division of Industrial Welfare. She was relieved of her post and her membership on the Industrial Welfare Commission by a new administration in 1931, but she remained as an adviser to her successor. In 1932 she was elected to the board of directors of the national League of Women Voters (she had been a director of the California League since 1922).
