Kublai Khan, Kublai also spelled Khubilai or Kubla, temple name Shizu,  (born 1215—died 1294), Mongolian general and statesman, who was the grandson and greatest successor of Genghis Khan. As the fifth emperor (reigned 1260–94) of the Yuan, or Mongol, dynasty (1206–1368), he completed the conquest of China (1279) started by Genghis Khan in 1211 and thus became the first Yuan ruler of the whole of China. Kublai was, at the same time, the overlord of all the other Mongol dominions, which included areas as diverse as that of the Golden Horde in southern Russia, the Il-Khanate of Persia (present-day Iran), and the steppe heartlands where Mongol princes were still living the traditional nomadic life. To govern China, with its long and individual political and cultural history, demanded statecraft of a special order.
The Mongols were a parvenu nomadic power. Before Genghis Khan consolidated them under his centralized control in 1206, they were no more than a group of largely autonomous tribes, more or less unknown to recorded history. Except for some organized hunting and the management of their herds, they had little experience of economic activity. Until a few years before Kublai’s birth, they were illiterate. They had almost no experience in statecraft prior to the establishment of the Yuan, and concepts such as the taxation of urban societies were brought to their attention by their foreign advisers, upon whom they relied heavily.
The Mongols’ limited political competence contributed much to the relatively rapid collapse of their empire; Yuan control of the whole of China lasted less than a century. With a few outstanding exceptions, such as Kublai himself (whom the Mongols always called Setsen Khan, the “Wise Khan”), the rulers of the Mongols seem to have looked on power as a personal, or at most a family, possession to be exploited for immediate gain. Hence, except in areas like China where there was a firm native political tradition, they never succeeded in organizing a durable state. In China, too, everything depended ultimately on the willpower and ability of the ruler.
The Mongols had come to power in China, as elsewhere, by sheer force of arms. With that prestige to back him, relying on his dominant personality, and building on the foundations of the brilliant civilization developed in China by the preceding Song dynasty (960–1279), Kublai could maintain the illusion for a while that Mongol supremacy was firmly based. Indeed, his reign must have appeared to be a period of solid expansion and lasting achievement to his contemporaries, including Marco Polo, the Venetian traveler who became Kublai’s agent and whose book Il milione (“The Million”; known in English as the Travels of Marco Polo) is the chief Renaissance source of information on eastern Asia.
Yet Kublai Khan at the outset of his reign was faced by an insoluble dilemma, which was given vivid expression in a memorial presented to him by one of his Chinese advisers: “I have heard that one can conquer the empire on horseback, but one cannot govern it on horseback.” In other words, to administer China the inexperienced Mongols would have to adopt Chinese methods and even live according to a Chinese pattern. To the extent that they did so, however, they would be bound to become increasingly assimilated and perhaps lose their identity altogether. If, on the other hand, they worked through Chinese and other agents, they would become alienated from the mass of the population, which would reject them. In either case the Mongols—culturally less advanced than the Chinese, numerically overwhelmed by them, and used to a different pattern of life—could not continue to rule China for long as a distinct and privileged caste. Only the brilliance of Kublai’s personal achievement obscured that truth.
Kublai Khan was the fourth son of Tolui, the youngest of Genghis’s four sons by his favourite wife, and Sorghaghtani Beki. He began to play an important part in the extension and consolidation of the Mongol empire only in 1251, when he was in his mid-30s. His brother, the emperor Möngke (reigned 1251–59), resolved to complete the conquest of China’s Nan (Southern) Song dynasty (1127–1279)—centred on Lin’an (present-day Hangzhou, Zhejiang province)—which had been planned by Genghis’s third son, Ögödei. Möngke also intended to subdue Persia, a task allotted to Kublai’s brother Hülegü. At that time Kublai was invested with full civil and military responsibility for the affairs of China. He appears never to have learned to read or write Chinese, but already he had recognized the superiority of Chinese thought and had gathered around himself a group of trustworthy Confucian advisers.
His attitude toward government was formed under the influence of those learned Chinese, who convinced him of the necessary interdependence of ruler and ruled and reinforced his innate tendency toward humanity and magnanimity. At home, in the fief allotted to him in the Wei River valley (in modern Gansu and Shaanxi provinces), he established a competent administration and a supply base. In the field he stressed to his generals the precepts of his mentors—the importance and effectiveness of clemency toward the conquered. That treatment of the vanquished was a great advance in civilized behaviour compared with the methods of Genghis Khan and those of Kublai’s contemporaries in Central Asia, where the massacre of the population was still the expected sequel to the capture of a city.
Kublai took on the Nan Song in the flank, subjugating the Dai kingdom of Nanzhao (in present-day Yunnan province) before handing over command to his general, Uriyangqadai. In 1257 Möngke assumed personal charge of the war, but he died in 1259. When Kublai, who with another army was besieging a city, heard that his brother, Arigböge, who had been left in charge of the homeland because he was younger, was planning to have himself elected khan, he patched up a truce with the Song. In April 1260 he arrived at his residence of Shangdu (the Xanadu of Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s famous poem), in southeastern Mongolia. There his associates held a kuriltai, or “great assembly,” and on May 5 Kublai was unanimously elected khan, thus succeeding Möngke.
Ten days later he announced his succession in a proclamation drawn up in Classical Chinese. Because primogeniture was not a recognized principle at that time, Arigböge, with some powerful supporters, held a kuriltai of his own at Karakorum (the original capital of the Mongol empire, now in northern Mongolia) and had himself declared khan, ignoring Kublai’s action. In spite of Marco Polo’s insistence that Kublai was the lineal and legitimate descendant of Genghis Khan and the rightful sovereign, there have always been doubts about that legitimacy. A legend recorded in Mongol chronicles to the effect that the dying Genghis designated the child Kublai as a future khan seems to have been contrived so as to provide retrospective justification of an act of usurpation.
In 1264 Kublai defeated Arigböge in battle and forced him to submit. Arigböge died two years later, but the family feud, of which the rivalry with Arigböge was one manifestation, continued throughout Kublai’s reign. Against him were ranged those who resented the abandonment of the old ways of the steppe and the adoption of an alien, China-centred culture. The split was all the deeper because the leader of the opposition was Kaidu, who—as a grandson of Ögödei, who had been designated personally by Genghis as his successor—represented the cause of legitimacy. The throne had passed from the line of Ögödei to that of his brother Tolui in 1251 with the accession of Möngke. Kaidu never relaxed his hostility toward Kublai and remained master of Mongolia proper and Turkistan until his death in 1301.
The war with Kaidu showed how decisively Kublai had identified himself with the Chinese world and turned against the world of the nomads. Genghis had been strong and ruthless enough to compel the Mongols, always inclined to family feuds, to serve his cause. Kublai, powerful though he was, could no longer control the steppe aristocracy effectively.
