Lajos Kossuth,   (born Sept. 19, 1802, Monok, Hung.—died  March 20, 1894, Turin, Italy), political reformer who inspired and led Hungary’s struggle for independence from Austria. His brief period of power in the revolutionary years of 1848 and 1849, however, was ended by Russian armies.
Kossuth’s father came of Slovak, his mother of local German stock. The family was noble and of ancient creation but not wealthy, and Kossuth’s father earned his living as an attorney for local landowning families. The Kossuths were Lutherans, and young Lajos studied at the Protestant academy of Sárospatak. After applying unsuccessfully for a post in government service, he found employment in his native county of Zemplén as agent to one of his father’s clients, Countess Etelka Andrássy, with whom he formed an attachment. He did notable work during the great cholera epidemic of 1831 but found his life narrow and frustrating; he was also suffering, as he would all his life, from financial embarrassment. In 1832 his employer had him sent to the national Diet in Pozsony (now Bratislava) as substitute delegate for one of her relatives.
At this “long Diet” the new generation of Hungary’s reformers was mounting its first full-scale offensive against the absolutist and obscurantist system under which Hungary was then ruled from Vienna, and in its excited atmosphere Kossuth developed his political and social philosophy of advanced radicalism. There was no postulate of the European liberalism of the day that he did not burn to see realized in Hungary—no abuse or injustice there left unremedied. But liberty meant for him, above all else, national liberty, and he felt passionately that, until Hungary enjoyed de facto the internal freedom to which its laws entitled it, no social or economic progress was possible. The first battle, therefore, must be the political one. Sanguine and impulsive, he was blind to the dangers involved in too strong a challenge to Vienna.
Kossuth’s mandate did not entitle him to participate in the Diet’s debates, but he found a way of voicing his views. At that time the Diet’s proceedings were not published, and Kossuth hit on the idea of issuing letters describing them. These reports, which were not verbatim records but colourful impressions barely distinguishable from political pamphlets, were copied by hand by enthusiastic young helpers and circulated throughout Hungary. Brilliantly written, they were widely and avidly read, and, when the Diet ended in 1836, the county assembly of Pest invited him to write a similar series on its proceedings. Now, however, he was no longer protected by parliamentary immunity, and on May 4, 1837, he was arrested and, after 18 months’ detention, sentenced to three years’ imprisonment for subversion.
Released under an amnesty in 1840, Kossuth found himself a popular hero. The proprietor of a biweekly journal, the Pesti Hirlap, made him its editor. His articles were written in a fluent and beguiling style and gained him innumerable devotees at the same time that they alarmed the Austrian authorities, the Hungarian conservatives, and even Hungary’s moderate reformers. He also antagonized the Croats and non-Magyars of Hungary by his chauvinistic insistence on the supremacy of its Magyar element. In 1844 his publisher dismissed him, and he was refused permission to start a journal of his own. Metternich offered him journalistic employment in the service of the government, but this he refused. His next enterprise, inspired by the writings of the German economist and industrial promoter Friedrich List, was to found a society for promoting Hungarian industry, with the ultimate objective of achieving greater economic independence. This program proved a fiasco but afforded him a platform for continued agitation.
In 1847 the county of Pest elected Kossuth to represent it in the next Diet, in which he assumed leadership of the “national opposition,” which had agreed on an extensive program of political and social reform. The reformers made a little progress in subsidiary fields, but deadlock had been reached on the central issue of political control when the news of the revolution in Paris (February 1848) gave Kossuth his opportunity. On March 3, in a speech of extraordinary power—for his tongue was as magical as his pen—he demanded the removal of the dead hand of Viennese absolutism as the only way to safeguard the liberties of Hungary and of all the peoples of the monarchy. He practically dictated to the Diet an address to the crown, embodying the reformers’ program. When news of the revolution in Vienna reached the Diet on March 14, Kossuth expanded the address, and, as a member of the deputation that carried it to Vienna the next day, saw it accepted by the panic-stricken court.
Count Lajos Batthyány, the new Hungarian prime minister, allotted Kossuth the portfolio of finance in his government, a choice that proved dangerous, for the ultimate control of finance proved, with that of the defense services, to be precisely the chief bone of contention between Hungary and Vienna. Kossuth was soon at loggerheads with the new Ministry of Finance in Vienna—meanwhile, he had made himself the life and soul of the more extreme nationalist movement in Hungary, often to the embarrassment of his fellow ministers, who were striving to prevent a breach with Vienna. Kossuth often acted without consulting them or even in defiance of agreed decisions, appealing over their heads to the public in a journal edited and mainly written by himself. Yet they dared not dismiss him and could not even dispense with his services, for his nationwide popularity was their greatest asset.
It was Kossuth who, so far as any Hungarian did so, precipitated the final clash by persuading the Diet, in July, to tie the dispatch of Hungarian troops to Italy to political conditions obviously unacceptable to Vienna, at the same time calling for a big national force to defend Hungary against the danger he declared, not without reason, to be threatening it from the Croats and Serbs. When, in September, the Austrian-inspired Croat army invaded Hungary and Batthyány resigned, Kossuth became head of the committee of national defense appointed by the Diet as provisional authority. He was now virtual dictator of Hungary. The next months brought out all of his greatness and his weaknesses: his magnetism and his courage, his intolerance and his lack of realism, his wanton provocation of insuperable difficulties and his genius at overcoming them. No one but Kossuth could have given his people the heart to face the overwhelming odds against them, but he increased those odds by his intransigence and aggravated difficulties by his jealousy and suspicion of his best general, Artúr Görgey, and by his meddling in military affairs. The refusal of the Diet to recognize the abdication of the Austrian emperor Ferdinand I (December 2) was his work, as was the Diet’s declaration of April 14, 1849, proclaiming the dethronement of “the perjured House of Habsburg-Lorraine.” The Diet then elected Kossuth himself “governor” of Hungary, but when, after the arrival of the Russian armies, even he had to recognize the hopelessness of the situation, he resigned this post to Görgey (August 11) and took refuge in Turkey.
