Leslie A. White, in full Leslie Alvin White,  (born Jan. 19, 1900, Salida, Colo., U.S.—died  March 31, 1975, Lone Pine, Calif.), American anthropologist best known for his theories of the evolution of culture and for the scientific study of culture that he called “culturology.”
After serving in the U.S. Navy, White entered Louisiana State University, but after two years he transferred to Columbia University. He received his B.A. and M.A. in psychology from Columbia and his Ph.D. in anthropology and sociology (jointly) from the University of Chicago. In his early career, White did fieldwork among the Keresan Pueblo Indians of the American Southwest. From 1930 to 1970 he taught at the University of Michigan, where he won great popularity as a teacher and lecturer. In the last years of his life he was associated with the department of anthropology of the University of California, Santa Barbara. His most important works include The Evolution of Culture (1959) and The Concept of Culture (1973, with Beth Dillingham).
White firmly supported cultural evolution along the lines laid down by the 19th-century writers Lewis H. Morgan and Edward Tylor, even when this view was in great disfavour. For White, cultural evolution was generated by technological changes, particularly with regard to the increased harnessing of energy per capita. White’s evolutionary views put him in conflict with the anti-evolutionary theories of Franz Boas and his supporters, who were then dominant in the field of cultural anthropology.
White considered his greatest contribution to anthropology to be his conception of culturology, outlined in a series of essays called The Science of Culture (1949). By culturology, White meant the application to culture of the organismic analogy of structure-function that Herbert Spencer had applied to society. This approach to culture was philosophically materialistic and nonreductionist. However, White was never a social Darwinist, and he opposed Spencer’s interpretations of the Darwinian terms “competition” and “survival of the fittest.” He promoted Tylor’s definition of culture and denied that cultural variation derived from racial differences among humans.
