Lin Zexu, Wade-Giles romanization Lin Tse-hsü, courtesy name (zi) Shaomu,  (born August 30, 1785, Houguan [now Fuzhou], Fujian province, China—died November 22, 1850, Chaozhou, Guangdong province), leading Chinese scholar and official of the Qing (Manchu) dynasty, known for his role in the events leading up to the first Opium War (1839–42) between Britain and China. He was a proponent of the revitalization of traditional Chinese thought and institutions, a movement that became known as the Self-Strengthening Movement.
Lin’s father was a teacher, who, though poor, was determined that his sons should have the grounding in the Confucian Classics that alone could advance them in the governmental bureaucracy. Lin Zexu, the second son, proved immensely capable and passed the initial examinations in 1804. He then was selected as an aide to the governor of his native province, an informal apprenticeship that served to balance the abstract, moral, and largely literary content of his early education. In 1811 Lin passed the highest of the examinations, the jinshi, and joined the Hanlin Academy, which advised the emperor and helped him to draft documents. In 1820 Lin took up his first regular administrative post and rose through a number of the most responsible offices in the bureaucracy. After starting in the salt monopoly, he supervised water-control systems in several localities, administered the collection of taxes, and served a term as a local judge, during which he earned the respectful nickname “Lin the Clear Sky.” Lin’s quick rise showed him to be an effective organizer and ambitious bureaucrat.
Following the traditional period of mourning and retirement at the death of his father, a time that also served for reflection and literary activity, Lin returned to official life in the upper reaches of the government. When, in the middle of the 1830s, the Daoguang emperor became alarmed over the growth of the opium trade carried on by British and Chinese smugglers—both for the obvious moral reasons and for the more practical one that even illegal imports had to be paid for with the export of Chinese silver—Lin submitted a memorial condemning a suggestion that the trade be legalized. In support of his position he cited the measures by which he had suppressed the drug traffic in the provinces of which he was then governor general. The emperor, who for almost two decades had vainly attempted to enforce the ban on the importation of opium, responded by appointing Lin imperial commissioner in late 1838, vesting him with extraordinary powers. After an unusual 19 personal audiences with the emperor, Lin proceeded to Guangzhou (Canton), the hub of the trade. His diary for this period survives and conveys a vivid picture of a Chinese official of the time at work: making the arduous journey from Beijing; perspiring in the heat of Guangzhou’s subtropical climate as he kowtows before the very written instructions of the emperor; peremptorily summoning the British merchants and officials; vainly trying to make the corrupt Chinese officials, grown soft on the profits and use of opium, perform their duties; and composing an ode of apology to the god of the sea for defiling his ocean with confiscated opium.
Lin was only too successful. He forced foreign merchants to surrender their stocks of opium for destruction and put pressure on them to guarantee that they would cease importing the cargo. Yet, when the British retaliated by ravaging large parts of South China, the emperor, who had personally approved Lin’s tough policies, quickly dismissed him. Although exiled to the northwest frontier, Lin served quietly and loyally, was soon called back to important service, and was rewarded with the title of grand guardian of the heir apparent for pacifying rebel Muslims in the province of Yunnan. He died in 1850, on his way to help suppress the  Taiping Rebellion.
Lin’s significance goes beyond his career. He belonged to a small but later influential group of reform officials and scholars whose slogan was “find in antiquity the sanction for present-day reform.” This “Statecraft school” pioneered in the compilation of practical information for use in governing on many subjects, including geography and the knowledge of the history of foreign countries. Yet when Lin, one of the most experienced and best-informed men of his day, went to Canton, he had no idea that his success in stopping the opium trade would only open up his country to the humiliating and ruinous penetration by foreign interests that was to hasten its downfall. He simply drew on the precedents of generations of officials whose policy against the Central Asian tribes had been to play them off against each other and to whom commercial considerations were somewhat petty matters; he did not comprehend the significance of the British demands for free trade and international equality, which were based on their concept of a commercial empire. This concept was a radical challenge to the Chinese world order, which knew only an empire and subject peoples; at his arrival in Guangzhou, Lin still thought of the British as dependent on the Chinese and believed that they would perish from constipation without Chinese tea and rhubarb. In a famous letter to Queen Victoria, written after he had reached Guangzhou, Lin asked whether she would allow the importation of a substance as poisonous as opium into her own country and asked her to forbid her subjects to bring it into his.
Lin relied on aggressive moral tone, meanwhile proceeding relentlessly against British merchants in a manner that could only insult their government. The only lesson Lin drew from China’s humiliation was that it was necessary to learn more about these “barbarians” and to import their technology. He could neither comprehend the implications of the European challenge nor overcome the weakness and conservative opposition of his contemporaries. Later, the so-called Self-Strengthening Movement adopted Lin’s program of reform; still later generations of revolutionaries abandoned Chinese culture in order to save China but accepted Lin as a national hero because of his courage and example in opposing the British.
