Lin-Manuel Miranda,  (born January 16, 1980, New York, New York, U.S.), American actor, composer, lyricist, and writer who created and starred in stage productions that blended modern musical forms with classic musical theatre. Perhaps his best-known work was Hamilton, a hip-hop musical about Alexander Hamilton.
Miranda was born to parents of Puerto Rican origin and grew up in a Hispanic neighbourhood in northern Manhattan. His father was a political consultant to several New York City mayors, and his mother was a psychologist. His childhood home was filled with the sounds of salsa and show tunes. Miranda saw his first Broadway musical, Les Misérables, at the age of seven, and it made a lasting impression on him. His tastes also ran to hip-hop and R&B, and he became a proficient rapper. In high school he won the lead role in W.S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan’s The Pirates of Penzance and became a fixture in the school’s drama program. During that time he met Stephen Sondheim, who later became a mentor to Miranda, along with fellow musical-theatre legend John Kander. Miranda studied theatre at Wesleyan University, where he continued to perform in musicals and to write his own songs and shows. It was there that he penned the first draft of the musical In the Heights, which was set in Washington Heights, a northern Manhattan neighbourhood similar to that of his own childhood.
Miranda graduated (2002) from Wesleyan and embarked on an acting career, appearing in films and on television. He also performed with a hip-hop improv group, Freestyle Love Supreme, around New York City and at festivals, including the Edinburgh Festival Fringe. The improv show Freestyle Love Supreme played on Broadway in 2019–20. With fellow Wesleyan alumnus Thomas Kail, he continued to develop In the Heights. The musical blended hip-hop and salsa (with music and lyrics by Miranda) with a book by Quiara Alegría Hudes. It opened Off-Broadway in February 2007 and ran until July, with Miranda in the lead role; it won two Drama Desk Awards. In the Heights had its Broadway debut in March 2008 and won four Tony Awards, including those for best musical and best original score. The show was also nominated for the Pulitzer Prize for drama, and its original-cast recording won the 2008 Grammy Award for best musical show album. A film adaptation of the musical was released in 2021, and it featured Miranda in a small role.
After reading Ron Chernow’s 2004 biography about Alexander Hamilton, Miranda began creating a musical about the Founding Father. In the life of Hamilton—who rose from obscure origins on the small Caribbean island of Nevis to become a leading U.S. statesman and the first U.S. secretary of the treasury—Miranda saw a quintessential American story, one that he perceived as akin to the humble beginnings of rappers. The resulting Hamilton was energetic and infectious, and it featured a racially diverse cast, with Miranda starring in the title role. In January 2015 the musical opened Off-Broadway at New York City’s Public Theater, where its huge success led to an early move to Broadway in July. In 2016 Hamilton was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Drama, and that year it received an unprecedented 16 Tony nominations, with Miranda earning several nods, including best actor in a leading role in a musical. The production eventually won 11 Tonys, falling one short of the record. Hamilton was named best musical, and Miranda won for best book and best original score. In July 2016 he made his final appearance in the show.
The following year the musical opened in London’s West End, where it was a critical and commercial success. It won seven Olivier Awards, including best new play. In addition, Miranda garnered the award for outstanding achievement in music. As one of the creators of Hamilton, he received a special Kennedy Center Honor in 2018 for developing a groundbreaking work that defies category. In 2019 he reprised the title role for a brief run in Puerto Rico to benefit the Flamboyan Arts Fund, a nonprofit he founded after Hurricane Maria (2017) to ensure support for the arts. He had been active in causes on behalf of Puerto Rico throughout his career. A filmed performance of Hamilton aired on television in 2020.
Miranda later contributed to the soundtrack for the Disney animated film Moana (2016), and he earned an Academy Award nomination—his first—for the song “How Far I’ll Go.” In the musical Mary Poppins Returns (2018) he assumed the mantle of lamplighter and sidekick to the eponymous nanny. Miranda then starred in the TV series His Dark Materials (2019– ), which was based on Philip Pullman’s best-selling fantasy trilogy.
In September 2015 it was announced that Miranda had won a MacArthur Foundation “genius grant.”
