Lobbying,  any attempt by individuals or private interest groups to influence the decisions of government; in its original meaning it referred to efforts to influence the votes of legislators, generally in the lobby outside the legislative chamber. Lobbying in some form is inevitable in any political system.
Lobbying, which has gained special attention in the United States, takes many forms. Group representatives may appear before legislative committees. Public officials may be “buttonholed” in legislative offices, hotels, or private homes. Letters may be written or telephone calls made to public officials, and campaigns may be organized for that purpose. Organizations may provide favoured candidates with money and services. Massive public-relations campaigns employing all the techniques of modern communication may be launched to influence public opinion. Extensive research into complex legislative proposals may be supplied to legislative committees by advocates of various and often conflicting interests. Substantial election campaign contributions or other assistance may be supplied to favoured legislators or executives. The persons who lobby in those ways may be full-time officials of a powerful trade or agricultural association or labour union, individual professional lobbyists with many clients who pay for their services, or ordinary citizens who take the time to state their hopes or grievances. Cities and states, consumer and environmental protection and other “public interest” groups, and various branches of the federal government also maintain staff lobbyists in the United States.
Most legal scholars and judges consider lobbying to be protected by the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which guarantees the right “to petition the government for a redress of grievances.” Nevertheless, the federal government and a majority of the states regulate lobbying. Most such laws, including the Federal Regulation of Lobbying Act (1946), require that lobbyists register and report contributions and expenditures and that groups whom they represent make similar reports.
The efficacy of those laws is doubtful, however. Especially difficult to regulate is any kind of indirect lobbying—such as group activity designed to influence government by shaping public opinion.
