Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA),  militant group led by Joseph Kony that has waged a war of attrition against the government and peoples of Uganda and nearby countries since the late 1980s. Unlike most antistate terrorists, the LRA has been largely devoid of any national vision or unifying social objective, other than speaking in general terms of deposing Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni, who seized power in 1986, and establishing a new government based on the Ten Commandments.
The British colonial enterprise in Uganda that began in the late 19th century was met with resistance from indigenous communities, most notably the Acholi of northern Uganda. Numerous factors in the north, including the Acholi’s active resistance to colonial rule, the harsh physical environment, and the region’s pastoralist livelihood system, made it difficult for the British to “civilize” the Acholi. Therefore, peoples in the north were officially stigmatized as primitive, warlike, and comparatively less evolved than peoples of the south, who were more cooperative with the British and thus were deemed to be more civilized. As a result, in comparison with the north, southern Uganda received more economic and infrastructure development, and colonial civil service jobs and the relative power attached to them went to southerners. The northerners were used as laborers or conscripted into the colonial army. Serving in the King’s African Rifles, they became instruments of suppression and internalized contempt for the people. Large segments of the army under the British were Acholi.
The colonially created socioeconomic divisions and belligerence between north and south were institutionalized even further after independence. During the military dictatorship of  Idi Amin (1971–79), the social fabric of Uganda was decimated. The situation was exacerbated during the war to overthrow Amin and the resultant conflicts among competing parties to fill the power vacuum left in the wake of his removal. Two of the main parties were the National Resistance Movement (NRM) headed by Museveni, consisting primarily of peoples from the south and the west of the country, and the Uganda People’s Democratic Army headed by an Acholi, General Tito Okello, consisting primarily of Acholi and other northern peoples.
Regional antagonisms between the northern and southern parts of the country were further aggravated when Museveni came to power after defeating Okello in 1986. Acholi political and sectarian leaders revolted, invoking Acholi nationalism and historical resistance to marginalization. Many of Okello’s Acholi soldiers fled north to their home districts along the border with Sudan (now South Sudan). Some of the fleeing soldiers crossed into Sudan and joined up with other opponents of Museveni to form a rebel alliance.
In 1986 a spirit medium named Alice Lakwena established the Holy Spirit Movement, a resistance group that claimed to be inspired by the Holy Spirit of God. Lakwena preached that the Acholi could overthrow the government of Uganda if they followed her messages from God.  The Holy Spirit Movement was defeated by government troops c. 1987, and Lakwena escaped into exile in Kenya.
The son of subsistence farmers, Joseph Kony was likely born in 1961 in the village of Odek, in northern Uganda. He learned to be a healer and spirit medium from his older brother, Benon Okello. His father was a lay apostle in the Catholic Church, and Kony served as an alter boy for several years. Kony, a purported relative of Lakwena’s, first appeared on the Ugandan national stage in 1986 as the leader of a movement which would later take the name the United Holy Salvation Army (UHSA) and would include the remnants of Lakwena’s Holy Spirit Movement. By 1988, with the addition of remnants from the defeated Uganda People’s Democratic Army (UPDA), the UHSA was becoming a formidable resistance movement. Among the remnants of UPDA was Commander Odong Latek, who persuaded Kony to adopt standard military tactics, as opposed to previous methods that involved attacking in cross-shaped formations and depending on oil or holy water to ward off bullets and evil spirits. Around this time, the name of Kony’s group changed to Ugandan Peoples’ Democratic Christian Army. The group finally settled on the current name, the Lord’s Resistance Army, around 1992.
Preaching a message similar to Lakwena’s, Kony insisted that he received messages from God, and he proclaimed that the LRA was fighting in the name of God to overthrow the government of Uganda and establish a government with the Ten Commandments as its constitution. The group’s strategy was to use terror to render Uganda ungovernable, disrupt life and normal social function, spread fear and insecurity, and cause the national government to appear weak and unable to protect its citizens. People in the northern districts of Gulu, Kitgum, and Pader were terrorized in this manner beginning in the late 1980s. More than a million Acholi had to move to protected camps. The LRA became infamous for its reliance on child soldiers and abducted more than 30,000 boys and girls. Children were put on the front lines of combat and were even forced to kill, mutilate, and rape family members, schoolmates, neighbors, and teachers. This went on for many years until the LRA was largely expelled from Uganda by the end 2006 and then became a problem for nearby countries, including the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).
Meanwhile, on July 8, 2005, the International Criminal Court (ICC) issued warrants against Kony and some of his commanders. They were indicted on 12 counts of crimes against humanity, including murder, enslavement, sexual enslavement, and rape, and on 21 counts of war crimes, including murder, cruel treatment of civilians, intentionally directing an attack against a civilian population, pillaging, inducing rape, and forced enlisting of children into the rebel ranks. The ICC warrants raised international awareness of the atrocities committed by Kony and the LRA.
In May 2006 Kony extended an offer of peace, but the subsequent negotiations were long and drawn out. Hopes that an agreement had been reached in April 2008 were dashed when Kony later refused to sign the document, instead insisting that the ICC suspend the warrants for him and his commanders. At the end of that year, a military offensive led by Ugandan troops with support from Congolese and southern Sudanese forces, known as Operation Lightning Thunder, was launched against LRA bases in the DRC. The operation, however, did not succeed in apprehending Kony or ending the LRA’s actions, and the group moved farther into the DRC, Sudan (now South Sudan), and the Central African Republic. Exploiting the inability of these countries to control their frontiers, small mobile bands of LRA fighters attacked unprotected villages to pillage food and clothing and abduct recruits. Killings and mutilations were part of the strategy to terrorize the population and discourage anyone from cooperating with the Ugandan or other national armies.
By the 2010s, the LRA were under constant pursuit, and the leadership core appeared to be growing thin. Despite these organizational stresses, LRA fighters remained a danger and a source of fear and terror.
