Louis-Joseph Papineau,  (born October 7, 1786, Montreal, Quebec [Canada]—died September 25, 1871, Montebello, Quebec, Canada), politician who was the radical leader of the French Canadians in Lower Canada (now Quebec) in the period preceding an unsuccessful revolt against the British government in 1837.
Papineau was elected a member of the House of Assembly of Lower Canada in 1809. During the War of 1812 against the United States, he served as an officer in the Canadian militia. He became speaker of the House of Assembly in 1815 and was already recognized as leader of the French Canadian party in its struggle against the English-dominated government of Lower Canada. In 1820 he was appointed a member of the Executive Council by the governor, Lord Dalhousie, but he resigned three years later, realizing that he had no real influence. Papineau went to England in 1823 to speak out on behalf of the French Canadians, and he thereafter remained bitterly opposed to British government in Canada. Lord Dalhousie refused to confirm Papineau’s speakership in 1827 and resigned when the House of Assembly supported Papineau.
To achieve reforms for French Canadians, Papineau began to work with William Lyon Mackenzie, leader of the Reform Party in Upper Canada (now Ontario). In 1834 Papineau inspired the 92 Resolutions, a statement of French Canadian demands and grievances, which was passed by the assembly. Lord Gosford, the governor, was authorized in 1837 to reject the demands and to appropriate provincial revenues without the assembly’s consent. Papineau protested with inflammatory speeches. Hostilities broke out that November, and Papineau fled to the United States. He went to Paris in 1839 and remained there until 1844, when a general amnesty was granted.
During his absence the British Parliament had united Upper and Lower Canada (known as Canada West and Canada East, respectively) in the Act of Union, 1840. Papineau sat in the House of Commons in 1848–54, but he never regained his dominance or his leadership of the French Canadians. He frequently agitated for the redivision of Canada and for independence from Great Britain and then retired to private life in 1854.
