Louis Blanc, in full Jean-josephcharles-louis Blanc,  (born Oct. 29, 1811, Madrid, Spain—died  Dec. 6, 1882, Cannes, Fr.), French utopian socialist, noted for his theory of worker-controlled “social workshops.”
Louis Blanc was born while his father was serving as inspector general of finances in the Spanish regime of Joseph Bonaparte. When that regime collapsed in 1813, the Blancs returned to France. Louis studied at schools in Rodez and Paris. While working as a tutor in northern France, he came in contact with liberal political circles and found employment on a Republican newspaper. In 1837 he became a member of a committee for electoral reform directed by leaders of the opposition to King Louis-Philippe. In 1839 he founded the Revue du Progrès. It was in this newspaper that his most important work, L’Organisation du travail (“The Organization of Labour”), appeared serially in 1839. The principles laid down in that essay, which first brought him to public attention, formed the basis of his subsequent career.
Blanc believed that the competitive capitalism then developing in France tended to stunt the human personality, pitting one man against another and driving the weaker to the wall. The first step toward a better society would be to guarantee work for everyone by establishing “social workshops” financed by the state. These workshops, controlled by the workers themselves, would gradually take over most production until a socialist society would come into being. Blanc did not believe in human equality. But he did not agree with the followers of the socialist Henri de Saint-Simon, who held that workers should be paid according to their performance; he argued that justice would be satisfied only “when each one in accordance with the law written in some shape in his organization by God Himself, produces according to his faculties and consumes according to his wants.”
In 1843 Blanc joined the committee of La Réforme, the journal of the extreme left-wing Republicans. In 1847 he became prominent in the so-called banquets campaign for electoral reform, holding large audiences with his oratory. The culminating banquet, arranged to take place in Paris on Feb. 22, 1848, was banned, but a riot on the following day led to an insurrection and the fall of the monarchy. Blanc became a member of the provisional government of the Second Republic. On Feb. 25, 1848, following a motion by Blanc, the government undertook “to guarantee the livelihood of the workers by work” and “to guarantee work for every citizen.” But the government was divided. For the majority the revolution represented a political change in which a monarchy with a restricted franchise was to be replaced by a free democratic republic based upon universal suffrage; for the minority, including Blanc, it also heralded a social and economic transformation.
Although Blanc and his friends were a minority in the government, they had many supporters in the streets; and their colleagues made important concessions to their ideas by reducing working hours, proclaiming the right to work, appointing Blanc chairman of a permanent commission to investigate labour problems, and establishing national workshops to relieve the more acute unemployment. The national workshops were a travesty of those envisaged by Blanc; they were established by his opponents to discredit him and became little more than a gigantic system of outdoor relief. Meanwhile, unemployment grew from 6,100 on March 7 to 118,310 on June 15. The celebrated Luxembourg Commission, of which Blanc had been made chairman, became an arbiter in trade disputes and a centre of socialist propaganda; it was unable, however, to win acceptance of its recommendations for the reorganization of labour and industry.
Blanc was forced to flee to England after the workers unsuccessfully revolted in June 1848. He did not return to France until the fall of the Second Empire of Napoleon III in 1870. He supported himself during his exile by teaching and lecturing; he wrote a history of the Revolution of 1848 and a history of the French Revolution as well and also a series of books on British political and social conditions.
When he returned to France after 22 years, he was still a famous man and was elected a deputy to the National Assembly. He refused to join in the revolutionary commune that seized control of Paris in the spring of 1871, but after the commune was crushed he sought to obtain a political amnesty for the communards. He remained a man of the left, although without much following. One of his last speeches in 1881 was in support of a proposal to reduce the length of the working day.
