Lycurgus,  (flourished 7th century bc?), traditionally, the lawgiver who founded most of the institutions of ancient Sparta.
Scholars have been unable to determine conclusively whether Lycurgus was a historical person and, if he did exist, which institutions should be attributed to him. In surviving ancient sources, he is first mentioned by the Greek writer Herodotus (5th century bc), who claimed that the lawgiver belonged to Sparta’s Agiad house, one of the two houses (the other being the Eurypontid) that held Sparta’s dual kingship. According to Herodotus, the Spartans of his day claimed that Lycurgus’ reforms were inspired by the institutions of Crete. The historian Xenophon, writing in the first half of the 4th century bc, apparently believed that Lycurgus had founded Sparta’s institutions soon after the Dorians invaded Laconia (c. 1000 bc) and reduced the native Achaean population to the status of serfs, or helots.
By the middle of the 4th century bc, it was generally accepted that Lycurgus had belonged to the Eurypontid house and had been regent for the Eurypontid king Charillus. On this basis Hellenistic scholars dated him to the 9th century bc. In his Life of Lycurgus, the Greek biographer Plutarch pieced together popular accounts of Lycurgus’ career. Plutarch described Lycurgus’ journey to Egypt and claimed that the reformer had introduced the poems of Homer to Sparta.
In the light of the conflicting opinions about Lycurgus held by writers before 400 bc, some modern scholars have concluded that Lycurgus was not a real person. They point out that the Greeks tended to discuss the origins of political and social institutions in terms of the personal intentions of a single founder. Nevertheless, many historians believe that a man named Lycurgus should be associated with the drastic reforms that were instituted in Sparta after the revolt of the helots in the second half of the 7th century bc. Those scholars claim that, in order to prevent another helot revolt, Lycurgus devised the highly militarized communal system that made Sparta unique among the city-states of Greece. If that view is correct, it is probable that Lycurgus also delineated the powers of the two traditional organs of the Spartan government, the gerousia (council of elders, including the two kings) and the apella (assembly).
