Mary Kenney O’Sullivan, née Mary Kenney,  (born Jan. 8, 1864, Hannibal, Mo., U.S.—died Jan. 18, 1943, West Medford, Mass.),  American labour leader and reformer who devoted her energies to improving conditions for factory workers in many industries through union organizing.
Mary Kenney at an early age went to work as an apprentice dressmaker. Later she worked in a printing and binding factory, and about 1889 she made her way to Chicago, where she worked in a succession of binderies. Appalled by the squalid conditions of the city, and particularly of working-class life, she took the lead in organizing the Chicago Women’s Bindery Workers’ Union within the Ladies’ Federal Labor Union No. 2703 (AF of L). She soon formed a close friendship with Jane Addams, who opened Hull House to the women bindery workers. Kenney also assisted Florence Kelley in her investigation of sweatshops and tenements in 1892. In April of that year Samuel Gompers, president of the American Federation of Labor, appointed her the federation’s first woman general organizer. During the year she held the post, she organized garment workers in New York City and Troy, New York, and printers, binders, shoe workers, and carpet weavers in Massachusetts. She then returned to Chicago, where she was appointed one of the 12 inspectors in the new Factory Inspection Department under Kelley. In 1894 she married John F. O’Sullivan, a former seaman and labour editor of the Boston Globe.
In Boston, Mary O’Sullivan organized the Union for Industrial Progress to study factory and workshop conditions. Through the Women’s Educational and Industrial Union and its president, Mary Morton Kehew, she organized rubber makers and garment and laundry workers. After her husband’s death in 1902 she worked as manager of a model tenement in South Boston, where she also conducted classes in English and domestic skills for her tenants. In 1903 she attended the annual convention of the AF of L, and with William E. Walling, a New York settlement worker, she organized the national Women’s Trade Union League. In November 1914 she was appointed a factory inspector for the Division of Industrial Safety (from 1919 a part of the state Department of Labor and Industries), and she held that post until January 1934, when she retired.
