Mary Hannah Hanchett Hunt, née Mary Hannah Hanchett,  (born June 4, 1830, South Canaan, Conn., U.S.—died April 24, 1906, Dorchester, Mass.), American temperance leader who adopted a physiological basis for her campaign against the use of alcoholic beverages.
Mary Hanchett taught school for a year before attending the Amenia (New York) Seminary and the Patapsco Female Institute near Baltimore, Maryland. After graduating from the latter, she remained for a time as a science teacher and collaborated with Almira Hart Lincoln Phelps, principal of the school, on a series of science textbooks. In 1852, after a year as a governess on a Virginia plantation, she married Leander B. Hunt, with whom she settled in Massachusetts. They moved in 1865 to the Boston suburb of Hyde Park (now part of Boston). In the middle 1870s, while helping her son Alfred E. Hunt (later a distinguished chemist and engineer) study for a chemistry course at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, she became interested in the existing literature on the physiological effects of alcohol.
Hunt’s interest in the temperance movement had been inherited from her father, and she soon began promoting temperance on scientific grounds, an idea that had been proposed but never before effectively applied. In 1878, having drawn up a series of graded lessons, she persuaded the Hyde Park school board to adopt them for use in physiology and hygiene classes in the local schools. Her experience in attempting this program in other Massachusetts towns soon demonstrated to her the necessity of a greater force than individual persuasion. At that point (1879) she was invited by Frances E. Willard to present her ideas to the national convention of the Woman’s Christian Temperance Union. The following year the WCTU established a Department of Scientific Temperance Instruction, of which Hunt was named national superintendent. A year’s experiment with a program of lectures and petitions at the local level convinced her that only legislation could accomplish the goal of making temperance instruction mandatory in public schools.
In 1882 a state-by-state campaign was mounted to secure such legislation, beginning in Vermont, where a law to that effect was passed in November. Hunt traveled widely to direct the state campaigns, supervised the production of suitable textbooks, and from 1892 edited the Scientific Temperance Monthly Advices (later the School Physiology Journal) for teachers. By 1901 the desired legislation had been adopted in every state, and from 1886 a federal law required temperance instruction in schools under federal control. In 1890 she was named to a position in the World’s WCTU comparable to the one she held in the national organization. She published A History of the First Decade of the Department of Scientific Temperance Instruction in Schools and Colleges (1891) and An Epoch of the Nineteenth Century (1897). Her campaign was not without its controversial aspects, and outright opposition to it climaxed in the 1903 report of a distinguished “Committee of Fifty” educators, scientists, and clergymen. She continued to direct her campaign until her death in 1906, after which it soon waned.
