Mary Ashton Rice Livermore, née Mary Ashton Rice,  (born Dec. 19, 1820, Boston, Mass., U.S.—died May 23, 1905, Melrose, Mass.), American suffragist and reformer who saw the vote for women as integral to ameliorating many social ills.
Mary Rice attended the Female Seminary in Charlestown, Massachusetts, where she remained to teach for two years after her graduation in 1836. From 1839 to 1842 she was a tutor on a Virginia plantation, and the experience made her an ardent foe of slavery. She then took charge of a private school in Duxbury, Massachusetts, where she remained until her marriage in May 1845 to Daniel P. Livermore, a Universalist minister and ardent temperance advocate. During the next 10 years, Mary Livermore wrote for various religious and reform periodicals. The Livermores decided to immigrate to Kansas in 1857, but the illness of a daughter ended their journey at Chicago, where for 12 years they edited the New Covenant, a Unitarian periodical.
In 1863 Mary Livermore published Pen Pictures, a collection of essays and sketches. Soon after the outbreak of the American Civil War, she volunteered her services to the Chicago (later Northwestern) Sanitary Commission. Early in 1862 she and her friend Jane C. Hoge made a tour of military hospitals at St. Louis, Missouri; Cairo, Illinois; and elsewhere, and in December of that year they were made codirectors of the Chicago branch of the U.S. Sanitary Commission. Their joint efforts at inspiring and maintaining a flow of clothing, medical, food, and other supplies for the war effort from local aid societies across the upper Midwest were so successful that the Chicago office was credited with two-thirds of the material collected by the Sanitary Commission. During July–October 1863 the two women organized the great Sanitary Fair, which raised more than $70,000 and inspired similar efforts in several other cities. Through her work with the Sanitary Commission, Livermore became convinced that extending the vote to women was the key to many social reforms, including temperance, and she began to devote an increasing amount of energy to the woman suffrage movement.
Elected president of the Illinois Woman Suffrage Association in 1868, after she had called a suffrage convention in Chicago, she launched the Agitator, a suffragist paper, in January 1869. Later in the year she attended the founding convention of the American Woman Suffrage Association in Cleveland, Ohio, and was elected a vice president. In the same year, she moved back east to Melrose to become editor of the Woman’s Journal, a new Boston periodical, with which the Agitator merged. In 1870 she helped found the Massachusetts Woman Suffrage Association. After two years she resigned the editorship of the Woman’s Journal in order to accommodate a vigorous schedule of lecturing. An accomplished public speaker, she never tired in her efforts to arouse public opinion on the need for educating women and for changing the liquor laws. She remained active in the suffrage movement, serving as president of the American Woman Suffrage Association from 1875 to 1878 and succeeding Lucy Stone as president of the Massachusetts association from 1893 to 1903. She also was president of the Association for the Advancement of Women in 1873 and of the Massachusetts Woman’s Christian Temperance Union from 1875 to 1885. In 1895 she retired from the lecture circuit.
Her lectures and articles were published in numerous periodicals. My Story of the War: A Woman’s Narrative of Four Years Personal Experience appeared in 1887 and was followed in 1897 by The Story of My Life; or, The Sunshine and Shadow of Seventy Years. She was joint editor, with Frances E. Willard, of A Woman of the Century, a highly successful compilation of biographies that first appeared in 1893.
