Mikhail Mikhaylovich, Count Speransky,  (born Jan. 12 [Jan. 1, old style], 1772, Cherkutino, Russia—died Feb. 23 [Feb. 11, O.S.], 1839, St. Petersburg), Russian statesman prominent during the Napoleonic period, administrative secretary and assistant to Emperor Alexander I. He later compiled the first complete collection of Russian law, Complete Collection of the Laws of the Russian Empire, 45 vol. (1830), leading to his supervision of the Digest of the Laws, 15 vol. (1832–39).
Mikhail, or Misha, Mikhaylovich was the son of the village priest of Cherkutino in central Russia. He was sent at the age of 12 to the ecclesiastical seminary in Vladimir, the provincial capital. His lack of a surname (Mikhaylovich indicating simply “son of Mikhail”) was overcome by an imaginative uncle, who dubbed him Speransky, a Russified form of the Latin word for hope. The boy soon distinguished himself by his ability to analyze problems and to express his thoughts with grace and clarity, but he already displayed an aloofness that emphasized his consciousness of his intellectual superiority yet cloaked his very real desire to feel the affection of those whom he respected, a quality that was to be a handicap in his later official career.
As a priest’s son, he was sent at government expense to the Main Seminary newly founded in St. Petersburg. On completion of the course, he should have returned to his native diocese as a teacher. But a practice sermon so pleased the Metropolitan of St. Petersburg that the Synod granted permission to retain Speransky as a teacher of mathematics in the Main Seminary. Speransky resisted the urging of the Metropolitan that he take monastic vows, a step that would have opened to him the possibility of rising to the highest offices in the church. Despite his refusal, he was, in 1795, appointed instructor of philosophy and prefect of the seminary.
At this point, Speransky’s future prospects were radically changed. Prince A.B. Kurakin took him into his household as secretary. Here he deepened his knowledge of the thought of the French Enlightenment and was introduced to the Idealist philosophy of Immanuel Kant. On the accession of Emperor Paul I (1796), Kurakin was appointed procurator general of the Senate, a post as close as possible in the Russian system of that time to that of prime minister. He was, thus, powerful enough to secure Speransky’s release from his priestly status, which enabled him to enter government service. Speransky was pushed rapidly upward through the lower bureaucratic grades; by the end of 1798, still not 27 years old, he had already risen high enough in the Table of Ranks to be entitled to enjoy, on a hereditary basis, all the privileges of “the most ancient nobility.”
In the same year, Speransky met an English girl whose widowed mother had come to Russia as a governess. He became so enamored of her that, although she knew no Russian and he understood no English, a courtship in fractured French led to their marriage. In the following year a daughter was born, but the mother, suffering from tuberculosis, died a few months later. Speransky, completely shattered, disappeared for a time. He never remarried but immersed himself wholly in his work. When Kurakin suddenly fell from favour, Speransky’s tact, his evident ability, and his industry enabled him to continue his career.
Under Paul’s successor, Alexander I, he was assigned to ever more responsible positions, at first in the new Ministry of the Interior, where he gained invaluable experience in drafting legislation and was the prime mover in founding Severnaya pochta or Novaya Sankt-Petersburgskaya gazeta, Russia’s first official newspaper. In 1807 he became intimately associated with the Emperor himself, as his administrative secretary and assistant. In 1808 he accompanied Alexander to his meeting with Napoleon, who described him as “the only clear head in Russia.” Though he proved not yet able to cope successfully with the task of codifying the country’s laws, he reorganized the seminaries and secured the establishment of the first Russian lycée (state secondary school).
In 1809 he laid the basis for his own downfall by two measures that outraged the bureaucratic nobility: one required that holders of court titles perform actual service to the state; the other required that all officials must pass examinations in order to be promoted at various stages of their careers. The angry nobles began to refer contemptuously to him as the popovich (“priest’s son”). It was in this year, also, that Speransky proposed his new “constitution” (the Plan of 1809). Well aware that Alexander wanted no tampering with the essence of the autocracy or with its basis in serfdom, Speransky prepared complicated plans for dividing the population into three classes with varying degrees of political and civil rights and for creation of elective assemblies, the dumas, and an appointive State Council. The latter was set up on Jan. 1, 1810, but the dumas, innocuous though they would have been, remained on paper.
In these years (1807–12) when he had the Emperor’s confidence, Speransky was responsible for a number of financial and administrative reforms designed not to change the essence of the state structure but to improve its functioning. His obvious pro-French leanings, however, added to the hostility of the nobles, whose pocketbooks had suffered by Russian participation in the Continental System, the systematic economic warfare employed by Napoleon against England.
Speransky’s aloof personality and his continued association with persons inferior to him in social standing had prevented him from making friends among men with political prestige. He was thus left defenseless against his high-placed enemies at court, including the Emperor’s sister, Catharine of Oldenburg. In 1811 the renowned historian N.M. Karamzin attacked him in his well-known memoir, Of Old and New Russia.
In March 1812, Speransky was summarily dismissed. Returning to his home at midnight, he found a police carriage waiting at his door. Without even taking leave of his daughter, the fallen minister started on the long journey to exile in Nizhny-Novgorod, whence he was soon transferred to the even more distant Perm, in the Urals.
Two years later he was permitted to return to his estate near Novgorod, but it was not until 1816 and only after he had stooped to appeal to his successor in Alexander’s favour, Count A.A. Arakcheyev (whom the poet Pushkin contrasted with Speransky as Alexander’s “evil genius”), that he was permitted to reenter state service—though only as provincial governor in remote Penza. In 1819, however, he was promoted to be governor general of Siberia, where he effected significant administrative reforms. In 1821 he was summoned to St. Petersburg and appointed a member of the State Council, in which he was too prudent to advocate further reforms, lest he again irritate his master.
Under Alexander’s successor, Nicholas I, Speransky’s great talents were again utilized, first as a member of the special tribunal that tried and sentenced the Decembrists, a group of officers who staged a liberal revolt on Nicholas’ accession in December 1825. Here he again demonstrated his ability to read an emperor’s mind; it was he who drafted the letter to the court that secured a significant reduction of the sentences the tribunal had imposed. In the same year he became, in effect, the head of the Second Division of the Emperor’s personal chancellery. Still an efficient workhorse, he took part in the labours of Nicholas’ secret committees for study of the peasant problem. His major achievement, however, was the publication, in 1830, of the first Complete Collection of the Laws of the Russian Empire (Polnoye sobraniye zakonov Rossiyskoy imperii). On the basis of this compilation, which began with the Code (Sobornoye ulozheniye) of 1649, he supervised preparation of a Digest of the Laws (Svod zakonov Rossiyskoy imperii). In 1837 he was awarded the highest grade of the Order of Andrew the First-Called and, in January 1839, was accorded the title of count. He died a few weeks later in St. Petersburg.
