Nora Astorga,  (born 1949, Managua, Nicaragua—died February 14, 1988, Managua), Nicaraguan revolutionary and diplomat. Astorga took part in the revolution that overthrew the regime of Anastasio Somoza Debayle in 1979 and later served (1986–88) as Nicaragua’s chief delegate to the United Nations (UN).
Astorga studied sociology at the Catholic University of America in Washington, D.C., before transferring to the   Universidad Centroamericana in Managua, Nicaragua, to pursue a law degree. While studying law, Astorga became involved with the Sandinista National Liberation Front (Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional; FSLN), a leftist revolutionary movement. She married, had two children, and became a corporate lawyer, a profession that served as a cover for her clandestine activities. She earned a reputation as a Mata Hari (a seductive female spy) when, on March 8, 1978, she lured the deputy commander of Somoza’s National Guard, General Reynaldo Perez Vega, an alleged torturer, to her house. When Perez Vega began to disrobe in her bedroom, three of her accomplices burst out of hiding, supposedly to kidnap, question, and then exchange him for prisoners. However, when he resisted, they killed him. Astorga later described the incident by saying: “It was not murder but political justice.” She escaped to a Sandinista training camp and became a commander of a military squad.
After the Sandinistas took power in July 1979, she was appointed chief special prosecutor for the trials of some 7,500 members of Somoza’s National Guard. In 1984 the United States refused to accept her appointment as ambassador to Washington because of her involvement in the death of Perez Vega, who apparently had worked with the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). She served as deputy foreign minister from 1984 until her appointment as chief delegate to the UN in 1986. At the UN she was instrumental in convincing a majority of the Security Council (1986) to vote in favour of a resolution calling on the United States to comply with an  International Court of Justice (World Court) decision that barred U.S. aid to the Contras, a counterrevolutionary group dedicated to overthrowing the Sandinistas. (The United States vetoed the resolution.) She succumbed to cancer in 1988.
