Ōkawa Shūmei,  (born Dec. 6, 1886, Yamagata Prefecture, Japan—died  Dec. 24, 1957, Tokyo), ultranationalistic Japanese political theorist whose writings inspired many of the right-wing extremist groups that dominated Japanese politics during the 1930s. Ōkawa personally organized and participated in many of the major rightist attempts at direct action, and during World War II he helped shape much of the Japanese government’s domestic propaganda. 
Ōkawa was graduated in philosophy from the University of Tokyo in 1911 and became an early associate of the other famous right-wing advocate of the period, Kita Ikki. Together they founded the influential nationalistic Yūzonsha (Society for the Preservation of the National Essence) in 1919. Through its magazine, Otakebi (“War Cry”), the Yūzonsha advocated the return of Japan to the simpler military values of its feudal past as well as the institution of a national socialist government. Yūzonsha gained a tremendous following, especially among the military forces. Ōkawa soon fell out with Kita, however, and in 1924 he began to publish his own magazine, Nippon, which advocated the creation of a Japanese military government at home and the extension of Japanese rule to Manchuria (Northeast Provinces). His popularity continued to grow, as did his identification with the Japanese economic penetration of Manchuria; in 1929 he was appointed chairman of the government’s new East Asian Economic Investigation Bureau as well as special lecturer to the army and navy academies.
In early 1931 Ōkawa, together with a group of young army officers, organized a plan for a military takeover of the government. Although the coup was aborted, it was the first direct attempt against the government by a right-wing group. A second attempted coup the following October also failed. In 1932, however, Ōkawa was arrested and sentenced to nine years’ imprisonment for his involvement in the assassination (May 15) of Prime Minister Inukai Tsuyoshi.
Paroled in 1937, Ōkawa rejoined the East Asian Economic Investigation Bureau two years later, serving simultaneously as head of a special program created at Hōsei University in Tokyo to foster ultranationalist sentiments among the Japanese people. So famous did his broadcasts and announcements become that he was popularly known as Tōyō no ronkaku (“Voice of the Orient”).
In 1945 Ōkawa was arrested as a Class A category war criminal suspect, but charges against him were dropped on the grounds of insanity. After two years of confinement, he devoted the rest of his life to writing, completing a Japanese translation of the Qurʾān.
