Pedro Albizu Campos,  (born September 12, 1891, Ponce, Puerto Rico—died 1965, San Juan), Puerto Rican attorney, social activist, and nationalist.
Albizu Campos was the son of a mixed-race mother who was the daughter of slaves and a Basque father from a farming and landowning family. The latter not only provided no financial support but also did not legally recognize his son until he was 19, and Albizu Campos grew up in poverty. In 1912 he was awarded a scholarship to study chemistry and engineering at the University of Vermont. He transferred a year later to Harvard University, majoring in chemistry and literature and becoming the first Puerto Rican Harvard graduate. He served in an African American military unit during World War I, and the racism that he encountered during his service instilled in him a negative view of the United States. After an honourable discharge he entered Harvard Law School, graduating in 1921. His fluency in eight languages brought him offers of official posts with the U.S. government. However, he rejected them and returned to Puerto Rico in 1921 in order to devote himself to the cause of Puerto Rican independence.
A passionate orator, he quickly became a leading force within the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party. In 1927, as vice president of the party, he conducted diplomatic visits to the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Cuba, Mexico, Panama, Peru, and Venezuela in an effort to garner support for a unified anticolonial struggle. Elected party president in 1930, Albizu Campos initiated a massive political organizing and education campaign for Puerto Rican self-determination. In 1932 the nationalist campaign, unable to make headway in the formal political system of the island or to contend with increasing police repression, began to advocate violent revolution. When two Nationalist Party members assassinated insular police chief Elisha Francis Riggs in 1936, the leadership of the party was arrested and charged with seditious conspiracy. Despite court appeals, Albizu Campos and other party leaders were sent to the federal penitentiary in Atlanta in 1937. Albizu Campos’s health suffered in prison, and he was released in 1947.
Upon his return to Puerto Rico, he helped to reignite the battle for independence in the hopes of disrupting a proposed plan to grant Puerto Rico commonwealth status. Albizu Campos, along with 3,000 independence supporters, were arrested in 1950 after leading islandwide attacks, including one on the Puerto Rican governor’s mansion, and an attack on Blair House in Washington, D.C., where U.S. Pres. Harry S. Truman was staying during renovations of the White House. Albizu Campos was promptly arrested and sentenced the following year to an 80-year term in prison. He received a pardon in 1953 from Gov. Luis Muñoz Marin. However, the pardon was revoked a year later following an attack by Nationalists on the U.S. House of Representatives. Albizu Campos had praised the attack and was suspected of having planned it.
Albizu Campos’s health again deteriorated while he was in prison. He suffered a stroke in 1956. He alleged that he had been poisoned with radiation (the U.S. Department of Energy confirmed in 1994 that human radiation experimentation had been conducted on prisoners without their consent). He was pardoned once more by Muñoz Marin in 1964, and he died the following April.
