Peisistratus, also spelled Pisistratus,  (born 6th century—died 527 bce), tyrant of ancient Athens whose unification of Attica and consolidation and rapid improvement of Athens’s prosperity helped to make possible the city’s later preeminence in Greece.
In 594 Peisistratus’s mother’s relative, the reformer Solon, had improved the economic position of the Athenian lower classes, but the Solonian reorganization of the constitution had not eliminated bitter aristocratic contentions for control of the archonship, the chief executive post. As Peisistratus reached manhood, the two major vying factions were called the Plain, led by Lycurgus, and the Coast, led by Megacles.
During a war with the city of Megara about 565, Peisistratus gained military fame by taking the Megarian harbour. He organized his own faction, named the Hillsmen, a group that included noble families from his own district, the eastern part of Attica, and also a very considerable part of the growing population of the city of Athens. At one point Peisistratus slashed himself and the mules of his chariot and made a dramatic entrance into the agora (marketplace) to show how his enemies had wounded him. The people voted him use of a bodyguard of citizens armed with clubs, with the aid of which he seized the Acropolis and held power briefly in 560/559. To increase his support he contracted a short-lived marriage with the daughter of Megacles and again acquired temporary power in Athens (probably 556–555), but Lycurgus and Megacles united to force him out.
For several years Peisistratus was an exile in northern Greece. He laid a solid base for his return, exploiting the silver and gold mines of Mount Pangaeum and gaining the support of conservatives in Thebes, Argos, Naxos, and elsewhere. In 546 he went to Eretria on the island of Euboea, with the force provided by his own funds and by his friends, and from this base invaded Attica. At Pallene, near Mount Hymettus, he launched a surprise attack on the Athenian army in the heat of midday, while his enemies were gambling or sleeping. After a complete victory, Peisistratus became master of Athens for the third time and remained in power until his death in 527. His sons Hippias and Hipparchus succeeded him.
The occasional modern efforts to interpret the factions involved in the rise of Peisistratus as representing simply different economic interests or purely geographical blocs seem misconceived, nor can one hope to penetrate the legends about Peisistratus to discern his personality. His career down to 546 shows persistence, dexterity, and diplomatic ability; once master, he followed a program that pleased the city population especially but that also appealed to the rural majority.
Peisistratus was master of Athens by the use of force, so in Greek terms he was a tyrannos. He maintained a mercenary bodyguard, composed in part of Scythian archers; he may have disarmed the citizens; and he certainly placed hostages from major families in safekeeping on the island of Naxos. Yet he preserved the constitutional forms of government and made them operate more efficiently. Some aristocrats cooperated and were permitted to hold the yearly post of archon; others went into exile. Once Peisistratus, accused of homicide, appeared before the court on the day of the trial, but his accuser dared not press the charge.
His internal policies appear to have been designed to increase the unity and majesty of the Athenian state. Since religion was closely interwoven with the structure of the Greek polis, or city-state, many of his steps were religious reforms. He brought the great shrine of Demeter at Eleusis under state control and constructed the first major Hall of the Mysteries (Telesterion) for the annual rites of initiation into the cult. Many local cults of Attica were either moved to the city or had branch shrines there. Artemis, for instance, continued to be worshiped at Brauron, but now there was also a shrine to Artemis on the Acropolis. Above all, Athena now became the main deity to be revered by all Athenian citizens. Peisistratus constructed an entry gate (later destroyed and replaced by Pericles’ Propylaea) on the Acropolis and perhaps built an old Parthenon under the temple that now stands on the crest of the Acropolis. Many sculptured fragments of limestone from Peisistratid buildings have been found on the Acropolis, and the foundations of a major, unfinished temple can still be seen.
Festivals and literature also flourished in Peisistratid times. The tyrant enhanced the glory of the Panathenaea, a yearly festival to Athena, by accentuating the Great Panathenaea (every four years) with athletic contests and prizes for bards who recited the Homeric epics. After the cult of Dionysus was placed under state sponsorship, prizes were awarded at the yearly Dionysia for the singing of dithyrambs and, from 534, for the performance of tragedies. Poets such as Anacreon lived at the court of Peisistratus and his sons, who also encouraged the collection of oracles and supported the famous soothsayer Onomacritus.
At this time Athens itself was becoming a city, rather than an agglomeration of villages. Peisistratus improved its water supply by building an aqueduct that fed the Enneakrounos fountain on the edge of the agora. He also beautified and systematized the marketplace itself; 6th-century markers of its borders have been found in agora excavations. Just outside the city, on the banks of the Ilissus stream, he began a temple to Olympian Zeus, but this was not finished until the reign of the Roman emperor Hadrian.
In the countryside, Solon had encouraged the growing of olive trees and vines to produce cash crops; Peisistratus made loans to small farmers for tools and equipment. In a few cases the estates of exiled aristocrats appear to have been broken up, but the major force in reducing aristocratic control over rural Attica seems to have been the regularization of government. Peisistratus instituted a system of traveling judges to provide state trials of rural cases on the spot; he himself made inspection tours.
This extensive cultural and political activity was financed by Peisistratus’s revenues from the mines of Mount Pangaeum and from internal sources. The silver mines of Laurium were state property, and dues were exacted from the growing trade at Athenian harbours. Peisistratus instituted a tax, probably of 5 percent, on agricultural production. On one tour of inspection, according to a famous story, he saw a farmer digging in a field of stones and asked what his income was. When the farmer replied, “Just so many aches and pains; and of these aches and pains Peisistratus ought to take his 10 percent,” the tyrant remitted all taxes to the frank farmer.
Athenian industry and commerce expanded tremendously in the latter half of the 6th century; the main contribution of Peisistratid rule to these developments was probably the guarantee of internal tranquility and the protection of foreign immigrants.
Externally, the tyrant pursued a policy of peace, probably because he dared not allow the Athenian citizenry to bear arms in a major war. But at this time the Greek world was also in a temporary state of balance. In the Aegean, Peisistratus helped such friends as Lygdamis of Naxos to become local tyrants. He purified the sacred island of Delos by removing the old graves near its temple of Apollo. His main efforts, however, were concentrated in gaining control of the Hellespont, through which came the exported grain of south Russia. To this end he secured command of Sigeum and installed a younger son, Hegesistratus, as its ruler. More important, he encouraged the Athenian Miltiades to lead a private venture that gained mastery over Chersonesus (near modern Sevastopol, Ukraine).
On the death of Peisistratus, Athens was still much less important politically and militarily than was Sparta. Commercially, states such as Miletus, Corinth, and Aegina were at least as active, and the contemporary tyrant Polycrates of Samos was as important a patron of the arts and letters. Nonetheless, the religious and patriotic unification of Athens had made great progress during Peisistratus’s calm, even rule. As Aristotle reports, it became a common saying that the tyranny of Peisistratus had been the age of Cronus, the golden age.
