Phan Chau Trinh, also spelled Phan Chu Trinh,  (born 1872, Tay Loc, Quang Nam province, Vietnam—died  March 24, 1926, Saigon), nationalist leader and reformer who played a vital role in the movement for Vietnamese independence and who was the leading proponent of a reformist program that joined the aims of expelling the French and of restructuring Vietnamese society.
Trained in military skills by his father, Phan Chau Trinh fought in 1885 against French forces that were searching for the fugitive rebel king Ham Nghi, the symbol of the resistance. In an encounter with the French, his father was killed, possibly by a member of a nationalist-royalist organization who thought him a traitor. Thereafter, Trinh would not associate with any plans to oppose the French that involved a monarchist symbol.
Trinh resumed his education in 1887, studying the Chinese classics in preparation for the mandarin examinations, which he passed in 1900. By 1906 he had come to view the mandarin bureaucracy and the Vietnamese monarchy as symbols of a backwardness that would forever prevent technological progress and the development of an autonomous state. That year he went to Japan, where he discussed plans for overthrowing the French regime with another Vietnamese nationalist, Phan Boi Chau (q.v.). Trinh argued for the gradual development of an autonomous state by laying firm foundations in economic and industrial development. His primary goal was modernization, from which he believed a Vietnamese democratic republic would follow.
Returning to Vietnam, Trinh started small business enterprises and spread propaganda encouraging the development of local industries and a modern education for all Vietnamese. Gaining a large following, he tried to persuade the French to undertake major reforms, and he urged replacing the mandarin civil service system with vocational schools and commercial firms. He asked wealthy Vietnamese to develop national commerce through personal investments.
Greatly influenced by the writings of Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Montesquieu, Trinh began by appealing in vain to French colonialists in terms of their own revolutionary tradition. In 1908 he was seized in Hanoi during a series of arrests of anticolonialist agitators. He maintained a silent protest through a hunger strike while awaiting trial at Hue. After a trial in a joint mandarin and French court, Trinh was sentenced in May 1908 to life imprisonment on Poulo Condore (now Con Son). He was pardoned and released in 1911, however, apparently to work with the colonial regime for modernization. Subsidized by the French, he went to Paris; he was again imprisoned early in World War I, this time for draft evasion and pro-German leanings. He was released in 1915 but received no more subsidies from the French. Trinh returned to Vietnam in 1924 and died of tuberculosis in 1926. He was mourned by Vietnamese of all classes in a national funeral ceremony that lasted a week.
