Philip Wharton, 4th Baron Wharton, in full Philip Wharton, 4th Baron Wharton of Wharton,  (born April 18, 1613—died  Feb. 4, 1696), prominent English reforming peer from the English Civil Wars to the Glorious Revolution of 1688–89.
Wharton succeeded his grandfather as Baron Wharton in March 1625 and then studied at Exeter College, Oxford. A committed Puritan, Wharton advocated reform in the Short Parliament (May 1640), insisting on redress of grievances before voting money for King Charles I. In the Long Parliament, Wharton backed the reforming program of John Pym and helped destroy the king’s adviser, the earl of Strafford. In 1642 Wharton was appointed lord lieutenant of Lancashire and Buckinghamshire and commanded a regiment of foot. Allegedly, after fleeing from the Battle of Edgehill (October 1642), he hid in a saw pit, covering himself with shavings, but was discovered. He suffered ever after from the sobriquet “Saw-Pit Wharton.”
Wharton favoured the establishment of the New Model Army and in 1645 negotiated with the Scots on behalf of Parliament. Yet he opposed the purge of Parliament in 1648 and Charles I’s execution. Despite his closeness to Oliver Cromwell, Wharton refused to serve in the Republic and declined a seat in Cromwell’s upper house in 1657. Although he accepted the Restoration in 1660, he opposed the Clarendon Codes, which penalized religious dissent. He was imprisoned in 1677 for insisting that Parliament was dissolved because of an illegal adjournment. Wharton acquiesced unwillingly to the accession of James, duke of York, to the throne as James II in 1685. For supporting William of Orange (William III) in the Glorious Revolution, Wharton was rewarded in 1689 with a seat on the Privy Council. As a reformer Wharton favoured parliamentary confirmation of royal ministers, privy councillors, and newly created lords. A patron of the arts, he owned a large collection of paintings by Van Dyck and Lely.
He was succeeded in the barony by his son Thomas, who became marquess of Wharton and was in turn succeeded by a son, Philip, who became duke of Wharton. Ironically, the titles were all lost when the latter was indicted and outlawed for treason, for supporting the cause of James II’s son, the Old Pretender.
