Prince Phetsarath Ratanavongsa,  (born January 19, 1890, Luang Prabang, Laos—died 1959, Vientiane), Lao nationalist and political leader, who is regarded as the founder of Lao independence.
Phetsarath was the eldest son of Viceroy Boun Khong of the kingdom of Luang Prabang and the elder brother to Souvanna Phouma and Souphanouvong. He studied in Saigon and in France, and on his return to Laos in 1913 he joined the civil service of Luang Prabang under the French protectorate. By 1919 he had become head of the indigenous branch of the civil service, and for the next two decades he worked to unify Laos by creating a bureaucracy that would transcend the principalities and provinces into which the country had been divided by the French.
In 1941 the French ceded additional provinces (including Vientiane) to the Luang Prabang kingdom and granted executive powers to a Lao cabinet in which Viceroy Phetsarath served as premier. The Japanese soon occupied the country. When the Japanese surrendered at the end of World War II, Phetsarath sought to prevent the return of the French and proclaimed the unification of Laos as a single, independent kingdom. When King Sisavangvong dismissed him from office, he joined the opposition Lao Issara (Free Laos) government in Vientiane, and, when the French reoccupied Laos in 1946, he fled to Thailand. Phetsarath took the lead in forming the Free Laos government-in-exile and became its head in December 1946.
As the French began making concessions to Lao nationalism, Phetsarath’s brothers withdrew their support from him and his government-in-exile. Souphanouvong joined with the Viet Minh to form the communist Pathet Lao and continue armed opposition, and Souvanna Phouma decided to cooperate with the French and participate in French-sponsored Lao governments. Phetsarath refused to return to Laos unless assured that efforts would be made to end the civil war that had developed between rightist and leftist factions, but his hopes for such a reconciliation were dashed soon after his return to Laos in 1956. Phetsarath’s autobiography, Iron Man of Laos, was published in 1978.
