Quebec Act,  act of the British Parliament in 1774 that vested the government of Quebec in a governor and council and preserved the French Civil Code, the seigneurial system of land tenure, and the Roman Catholic Church. The act was an attempt to deal with major questions that had arisen during the attempt to make the French colony of Canada a province of the British Empire in North America. Among these were whether an assembly should be summoned, when nearly all the inhabitants of the province of Quebec, being Roman Catholics, would, because of the Test Acts, be ineligible to be representatives; whether the practice of the Roman Catholic religion should be allowed to continue, and on what conditions; and whether French or English law was to be used in the courts of justice.
The act, declaring it inexpedient to call an assembly, put the power to legislate in the hands of the governor and his council. The practice of the Roman Catholic religion was allowed, and the church was authorized to continue to collect the tithe. The Test Act was waived and an oath of allegiance substituted so as to allow Roman Catholics to hold office. French civil law continued, but the criminal law was to be English. Because of these provisions the act has been called a generous and statesmanlike attempt to deal with the peculiar conditions of the province.
At the last moment additions were made to the bill by which the boundaries given the province by the Proclamation of 1763 were extended. This was done because no satisfactory means had been found to regulate native affairs and to govern the French settlers on the Ohio and Mississippi rivers. It was decided, therefore, to put the territory between the Ohio and the Mississippi under the governor of Quebec, and the boundaries of Quebec were extended westward and southward to the junction of the Ohio and the Mississippi and northward to the height of land between the Great Lakes and Hudson Bay.
This provision of the act, together with the recognition of the Roman Catholic religion, was seen to threaten the unity, security, and, not least, the territorial ambitions of British America. Many American colonists viewed the act as a measure of coercion. The act was thus a major cause of the American Revolution and helped provoke an invasion of Quebec by the armies of the revolting colonies in the winter of 1775–76. Its provisions, on the other hand, did little at the time to win French support of British rule in Quebec; and, except for the clergy and seigneurs, most of the French colonists remained neutral. The act eventually became important to French Canadians as the basis of their religious and legal rights.
