Reza Shah Pahlavi, also spelled Riza Shah Pahlevi, original name Reza Khan,  (born March 15, 1878, Alasht, Mazanderan province, Iran—died July 26, 1944, Johannesburg, South Africa), Iranian army officer who rose through army ranks to become shah of Iran (1925–41) and began the regeneration of his country.
After the death of his father, Maj. Abbas Ali Khan, Reza’s mother took him to Tehrān, where he eventually enlisted as a private in an Iranian military unit under Russian instructors. Tall and powerfully built, the young soldier, from the beginning, showed an uncommonly strong will, remarkable intelligence, and a capacity for leadership. He was highly regarded by his seniors.
After centuries of misrule by its former rulers and the ravages of the war waged by foreign belligerents on its soil from 1914 to 1919, Iran in 1921 was prostrate, ruined, and on the verge of disintegration. The last of the shahs of the Qājār dynasty, Aḥmad Shah, was young and incompetent, and the cabinet was weak and corrupt. Patriotic and nationalist elements had long been outraged at the domination of Iran by foreign powers, especially Great Britain and Russia, both of which had strong commercial and strategic interest in the country. This situation led Reza Khan to decide on an attempt at putting an end to the chaos by taking over power and forming a strong government, bolstered by an effective and disciplined military force. He enlisted some young progressive Iranian elements and also received some encouragement from British diplomats for the endeavour. On February 21, 1921, he occupied Tehrān at the head of 1,200 men. A young journalist, Sayyid Zia al-Din Tabatabaʾi, became prime minister, while Reza Khan took command of all the military forces and was appointed minister of war a few weeks after.
Reza Khan cherished the idea of regenerating the Iranian nation and leading it on the path of progress. Many had imagined that Reza Khan, whom they took to be an unsophisticated regimental officer, would be content with a high-sounding title and a sword of honour given by the shah. But he was not about to step aside to allow a mixed group of inexperienced though sincere idealists and foreign-influenced opportunists to rule the country. His progress toward supreme power was extraordinarily rapid. Of a forbidding appearance, he talked very little and never revealed his intentions. Displaying great political talent against his opponents, he divided and weakened them. He also understood that to reach his ultimate objective he had to have complete control over a military force and that that required money. Able to levy some taxes, he built up the army with the proceeds and then used the army to collect more taxes, until finally he had gained control over the entire country. As war minister, he was the real power behind several prime ministers in succession until 1923, when he became prime minister himself.
The sovereign, Aḥmad Shah, was ill and undergoing a lengthy cure in Europe. In spite of the entreaties of Reza Khan and the speaker of the Majles (Iranian parliament), the shah refused to return to Iran. Reza Khan then considered proclaiming a republic but was dissuaded by the strong opposition to the idea by the majority of the people. In 1925 the Majles deposed the absentee monarch, and a constituent assembly elected Reza Khan as shah, vesting sovereignty in the new Pahlavi dynasty.
After his coronation in April 1926, Reza Shah continued the radical reforms he had embarked on while prime minister. He broke the power of the tribes, which had been a turbulent element in the nation, disarming and partly settling them. In 1928 he put an end to the one-sided agreements and treaties with foreign powers, abolishing all special privileges. He built the Trans-Iranian Railway and started branch lines toward the principal cities (1927–38). He emancipated women and required them to discard their veils (1935). He took control of the country’s finances and communications, which up to then had been virtually in foreign hands. He built roads, schools, and hospitals and opened the first university (1934). His measures were directed at the same time toward the democratization of the country and its emancipation from foreign interference.
His foreign policy, which had consisted essentially of playing the Soviet Union off against Great Britain, failed when those two powers joined in 1941 to fight the Germans. To supply the Soviet forces with war material through Iran, the two allies jointly occupied the country in August 1941.
Reza Shah then decided to abdicate, to allow his son and heir, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, to adopt a policy appropriate to the new situation, and to preserve his dynasty. He wanted to go to Canada, but the British government sent him first to Mauritius and then to Johannesburg, where he died in July 1944.
