Robert Clive, in full Robert Clive, 1st Baron Clive of Plassey,  (born September 29, 1725, Styche, Shropshire, England—died November 22, 1774, London), soldier and first British administrator of Bengal, who was one of the creators of British power in India. In his first governorship (1755–60) he won the Battle of Plassey and became master of Bengal. In his second governorship (1764–67) he reorganized the British colony.
Young Clive was a difficult boy and was sent to several schools, including the Merchant Taylors’ School in London, though without much visible result. In 1743, when Clive was 18, he was sent to Madras (now Chennai) in the service of the British East India Company.
At Madras, Clive was moody and quarrelsome; he attempted suicide and once fought a duel. He found solace in the governor’s library, where he virtually educated himself. Hostilities between the British and French East India companies and their competitive support of rival Indian princes drew Clive into military service and gave him a chance to demonstrate his ability. In 1751 Chanda Sahib, an ally of the French, was besieging his British-connected rival, Muḥammad ʿAlī, in the fortress of Trichinopoly (now Tiruchchirappalli). Clive offered to lead a diversion against Chanda’s base at Arcot. With 200 Europeans and 300 Indians, he seized Arcot on August 31 and then successfully withstood a 53-day siege (September 23–November 14) by Chanda’s son. This feat proved to be the turning point in a contest with the French commander, Joseph-François Dupleix. In the next months Clive established himself as a brilliant exponent of guerrilla tactics.
In March 1753 he left Madras with his bride, Margaret Maskelyne, and something of a fortune, having been appointed in 1749 a commissary for the supply of provisions to the troops. In 1755, after unsuccessfully standing for Parliament, he was sent out again to India, this time as governor of Fort St. David and with a lieutenant colonel’s commission in the Royal Army. With him went troops intended to expel the French from India. On the way, at the request of the government in Bombay (now Mumbai), he stormed the pirate stronghold at Gheriah on the western coast.
Reaching Madras in June 1756, Clive immediately became involved in the affairs of Bengal, with which, henceforward, his fate was to be linked. Hitherto Bengal had been ruled by viceroys of the figurehead Mughal emperor, and it was under their protection that the British East India Company carried on its trade. The principal city, Calcutta (now Kolkata), had come to rival Madras as a trading centre, and its commerce was the most valuable in India. In 1756 a dispute with the British about fortifying the city caused the new nawab (Mughal viceroy) of Bengal, Sirāj al-Dawlah, to attack and capture the fort there.
News of the fall of Calcutta reached Madras in August 1756. After some delay, Clive was given command of the relief expedition and set out on October 16, 1756, with 900 Europeans and 1,500 Indians. Clive retook Calcutta on January 2, 1757, and forced the nawab to restore the company’s privileges, pay compensation, and allow the British to fortify Calcutta. Determined to take advantage of discontent with the nawab’s regime, he sponsored a new ruler in order to ensure conditions that were agreeable to the company’s trade. His candidate was Mīr Jaʿfar, an elderly general secretly hostile to Sirāj al-Dawlah. Clive broke with Sirāj al-Dawlah and overthrew him at the Battle of Plassey on June 23. The conflict was more of a cannonade than a battle, and only 23 of Clive’s men were killed. This victory made Clive the virtual master of Bengal.
Clive’s first government lasted until February 1760. He was confirmed as governor by the company and went about the business of strengthening Mīr Jaʿfar’s authority, though at the same time keeping him under control. A challenge from the Mughal crown prince was repulsed at Patna in 1759. The Dutch, who sought to play on the nawab’s discontent with Clive’s restraints, sent a force to their settlement at Chinsurah, but, through a series of adroit moves, Clive destroyed this force even though England was at peace with the Netherlands. By 1760 Mīr Jaʿfar’s authority was unchallenged throughout Bengal and Bihar, and his subservience to the company was complete. In addition, by the dispatch of a force under Col. Francis Forde in 1758, Clive secured the Northern Sarkars from the French garrison.
His settlement of the company’s affairs was less skillful. First, he accepted not only full compensation for losses to the East India Company and the Calcutta citizens but also large payments to himself and the council. He received £234,000 in cash, a Mughal title of nobility, and a jagir, or estate, with an annual rental of about £30,000. This example opened the way to a flood of corruption that nearly ruined both Bengal and the company and which Clive himself later struggled to control. Second, he obtained from the nawab the practical exemption from internal duties not only on the company’s goods but also on the private trade of the company’s servants as well. Since the company possessed paramount force and its servants believed in working on their own behalf, this had a most harmful effect on the economy of Bengal.
Though stained by corruption and duplicity, Clive’s first government was a tour de force of generalship and statecraft. He had snatched the richest province of India out of the hands of his political superiors and with the authority of the Mughal regime. Returning to England in February 1760, he was given an Irish peerage as Baron Clive of Plassey in 1762 and was knighted in 1764. He was described by William Pitt the Elder as “a heaven-born general.” He became member of Parliament for Shrewsbury, purchased an estate, and tried to use his Indian wealth to carve out an English political career. But he had to reckon with the current jealousy toward any upstart, however brilliant, the unpopularity of returned Indian “nabobs” (a corruption of nawab), and suspicions within the East India Company resulting from his suggestion to Pitt that the state should take over its territories. His critics, led by a former friend who was then chairman of the company, tried to cut off the income from his Indian estates. Though they failed to ruin him, they did prevent him from becoming a national statesman.
In 1764 opinion within the company turned in Clive’s favour because of the news from India. Clive’s protégé Mīr Jaʿfar had been deposed in favour of Mīr Qāsim, who in turn had been deposed in 1763. Shah ʿĀlam II, the Mughal emperor, attacked again, and the company seemed to be on the brink of disaster. Clive was appointed governor and commander in chief of Bengal with power to override the council. Arriving in Calcutta for the second time on May 3, 1765, he found that the decisive Battle of Baksar (Buxar) had already been won; Shujāʿ al-Dawlah, the nawab of Oudh (Ayodhya), was in flight, and the emperor had joined the British camp. But there was a political and military vacuum between Bengal and Delhi (the Mughal capital), and the whole Bengal administration was in chaos.
