Roman Dmowski,  (born Aug. 9, 1864, Kamionek [now in Warsaw, Pol.]—died  Jan. 2, 1939, Drozdowo, Pol.), Polish statesman, a leader of Poland’s struggle for national liberation, and the foremost supporter of cooperation with Russia as a means toward achieving that goal.
As a student in Warsaw, Dmowski involved himself in the movement for Polish liberation and in 1895 helped found the influential Przegląd Wszechpolski (“All-Polish Review”) at Lwów (now Lviv, Ukraine). A leader of the National Democratic Party from its foundation (1897), he opposed revolutionary methods of establishing an independent Poland and favoured an autonomist solution to national aspirations within the Russian Empire. During the Russo-Japanese War (1904–05) he actively combated the plans of Polish revolutionaries—especially Józef Piłsudski, to secure an understanding with Japan as a prelude to national insurrection. He later distinguished himself in the second and third Russian Dumas (legislative assemblies) as the chief spokesman for Polish collaboration with Russia. By 1912, however, his policy had been largely discredited, and in October of that year he failed to be elected to the fourth Duma.
During the early months of World War I, Dmowski helped form a “National Committee” that sought to achieve Polish national aims through cooperation with Russia and its Western allies. From the summer of 1915, however, he looked solely to the Western powers for deliverance and discarded his autonomist program for one demanding full national sovereignty for Poland. In August 1917 he formed a National Committee at Lausanne, Switz., which later was recognized by the Allies as the official representative of Polish interests.
After the war Dmowski represented the new Polish national government at the Paris Peace Conference, and in June 1919 he signed the Treaty of Versailles. He subsequently sat in the constituent Sejm (Polish national assembly) until 1922 and briefly served as foreign minister during 1923, but thereafter he largely retired from active politics. His book Niemcy, Rosya i kwestya polska (1908; “Germany, Russia, and the Polish Question”) is an exposition of his prewar views.
