Sarah G. Bagley,  (born, probably Meredith, N.H., U.S.—died 1847?),  American labour organizer who was active in trying to institute reform in the mills of Lowell, Massachusetts.
Bagley’s early life is unknown. In 1836 she went to work in a cotton mill in Lowell, Massachusetts, then widely considered a model factory town. She was apparently content with her lot for several years, but she shared in the unrest that grew among the factory girls in the early 1840s following a series of speedups and wage cuts. In December 1844 she organized and became president of the Lowell Female Labor Reform Association, whose program called for improved working conditions and a 10-hour day and whose immediate object was to influence an investigation of Lowell conditions by a committee of the Massachusetts legislature. Despite petitions, pamphlets, and other pressures extending over a period of a year, the legislature declined to take any action.
By early 1845 Bagley had left her mill job, and she soon had organized branches of the Female Labor Reform Association in Waltham and Fall River in Massachusetts and Manchester, Nashua, and Dover in New Hampshire. In 1845 she was appointed corresponding secretary of the New England Working Men’s Association, to whose journal, Voice of Industry, she was a frequent contributor. She organized an Industrial Reform Lyceum to bring radical speakers to Lowell, wrote a series of pamphlets on labour topics, and by her militant criticism contributed decisively to the demise of the pro-owner Lowell Offering, edited by Harriet Farley, in December 1845. The 10-hour movement largely disintegrated in 1846 following the legislature’s refusal to act, and Bagley, her health declining, turned to a utopian philosophy of social reform espoused by Charles Fourier. She became superintendent of the Lowell telegraph office and is believed to have been the nation’s first female telegraph operator. After her replacement as president of the Lowell Female Labor Reform Association in February 1847, there is no record of her.
