Sayyid Shaykh bin Ahmad al-Hadi,  (born Nov. 9, 1867, Malacca, Straits Settlements [now Melaka, Malaysia]—died  Feb. 20, 1934, Penang, Straits Settlements), Malay Islāmic writer and polemicist, journalist, and publisher who made significant contributions to modern Malay nationalism.
Taken when young to Pulau Penyengat, Riau (now in Indonesia), Sayyid Shaykh was adopted there by a half brother of the sultan and brought up in the intellectual climate of that centre of Malayo-Muslim thought and writing. After moving to Singapore in 1901, he joined with a group of other Malay-Arabs to start the noted Islāmic reform journal Al-Imam (1906–08), which, modeled on Al-Manar of Cairo, propounded the modernist ideas of Muḥammad ʿAbduh and his followers and played a prominent role in introducing reformist thought to the Muslim portions of Southeast Asia. From that time forward, Sayyid Shaykh, though not a profound religious scholar, was at the centre of the modernist cause in Malaya.
After starting and helping to run several madrasahs (Islāmic schools) in Singapore (1907), Malacca (1915), and Penang (1919), Sayyid Shaykh founded the Jelutong Press in Penang in 1927. For the next 14 years, until the Japanese invasion, Jelutong published a stream of books, journals, and other publications broadly reformist in general tendency but encompassing modern literature of all kinds, from popular journalism to the first Malay novels. Sayyid Shaykh himself wrote the novel Faridah Hanum (adapted from an Egyptian love story) in 1926; translated Qasim Amīn’s Tahrir al-Marʾāh, on the emancipation of women (1930), into Malay; and edited and wrote extensively on religious, political, and social questions for his monthly journal Al-Ikhwan (“The Brotherhood”) from 1926 to 1930 and for his weekly (later biweekly) newspaper Saudara (“Brother”) from 1928 until his death. Both publications, like most of his other writings, circulated widely throughout the Malay Peninsula and exerted a powerful literary and modernist influence.
