Sheikh Muhammad Abdullah, byname Lion of Kashmir,  (born December 5, 1905, Soura, near Srinagar, Kashmir [now in Jammu and Kashmir state], India—died September 8, 1982, Srinagar), prominent figure in India’s struggle for independence from British rule, who fought for the rights of the Kashmir region. He won a semiautonomous status for Jammu and Kashmir state within independent India, a status which the state continued to enjoy into the 21st century until its autonomy was suspended in 2019.
Abdullah was educated at the Prince of Wales College (Jammu) and the Islamia College (Lahore; now in Pakistan) and received a master’s degree in physics from Aligarh Muslim University in 1930. He championed the rights of the Muslim majority in the Kashmir region during British rule in India and fought against the discrimination exercised by the Hindu ruling house there. In 1932, after Abdullah served the first of what would be many terms of imprisonment, he founded a political party, the All Jammu and Kashmir Muslim Conference, which seven years later was renamed the Jammu and Kashmir National Conference (JKNC). He supported the concept of a secular state, and, when India achieved independence in 1947, he strongly opposed the idea of Kashmir’s joining Muslim Pakistan.
In 1948 Abdullah became prime minister (head of government; from 1965 called chief minister) of Jammu and Kashmir state. Despite his early support for Indian leader Jawaharlal Nehru, many Indians believed that Abdullah’s ultimate aim was independence for Kashmir; therefore, in 1953 he was dismissed and imprisoned. During the next 11 years he refused to pledge his loyalty to India and spent most of the time under detention. When he was released by Nehru in 1964, he received an enthusiastic reception from the Kashmiri people. In subsequent talks with the Indian government, he worked out the basis of a possible solution to the Kashmir problem.
He was dispatched on a foreign tour to gain the goodwill of Pakistan and Algeria, but India’s relations with Pakistan had by then deteriorated, and Abdullah’s foreign tour came to be seen as seditious by the Indian government. At the same time, his support in Jammu and Kashmir had been eroded by the apparent lack of progress in negotiations with India. Abdullah was again arrested and was not released until 1968. From then until his appointment as chief minister of Jammu and Kashmir in 1975 (following the signing of an accord that finalized the status of the state), his Plebiscite Front party (a splinter group of the JKNC) gained some successes, but it lost to the Indian National Congress (Congress Party) in the 1972 state legislative assembly elections. He subsequently reunited with the JKNC, and the party won a solid victory in the 1977 assembly elections. Abdullah was again named chief minister and served in that post until his death.
Abdullah’s relations with Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi were sometimes strained, but the 1975 accord he negotiated with her allowed Jammu and Kashmir to continue a form of autonomy within the Indian union. His government was later accused of corruption, but, though his popularity waned, he was still admired for his outstanding contribution to the cause of Kashmiri national rights. Upon his death, his son, Farooq Abdullah, succeeded him as leader of the JKNC. Farooq was then succeeded as leader by his son, Omar Abdullah, in 2002, but Farooq again took over the party’s leadership in 2009. Jammu and Kashmir lost its autonomy in 2019, but the JKNC continued to advocate for its restoration.
