Shimazu Nariakira,  (born Nov. 5, 1809, Edo [now Tokyo], Japan—died Aug. 24, 1858, Kagoshima, Satsuma province), mid-19th century Japanese daimyo (lord) of the Satsuma han, or feudal fief, whose adoption of Western military techniques and armaments helped make Satsuma one of the strongest fiefs in the country and put the han in a position to play a leading role in the overthrow of the Tokugawa state and the establishment of a new imperial central government in 1868.
The Shimazu house had long maintained special relations with the Ryukyu Islands, and the family therefore was more familiar with foreign affairs than were most of the other Japanese clans. After Nariakira became the lord of Satsuma in 1851, he put this knowledge to good use by experimenting with Western drill in his army and constructing blast furnaces to produce modern firearms. In a short time, docks were built, a steamer was launched, a cavalry force modeled after that of France was trained, a Western-style navy was started, and a number of nonmilitary industries were begun. His policy of promoting young men of lesser rank into higher positions in his government put many of the men who in 1868 led the Meiji Restoration into positions of authority.
Nariakira himself played an important role in national politics, becoming one of the major advisers to the Tokugawa government during the crisis brought on by the 1853 arrival in Japan of U.S. Commodore Matthew C. Perry, whose mission was to open Japan to contact with the outside world. Nariakira was one of the few great lords to advise a policy of moderation during this period, urging that Japan temporarily accede to Perry’s demands in order to gain time to strengthen its armaments.
But the shogun went even farther in acceding to Perry’s demands for opening up Japan and brought on the criticism of Nariakira, who joined other great lords in urging the selection of Tokugawa Yoshinobu as shogunal successor. For this he was ordered into retirement, thus increasing the growing friction between the houses of Shimazu and Tokugawa that led to the 1868 Meiji Restoration, 10 years after Nariakira’s death.
