Sixtus V, original name Felice Peretti,  (born Dec. 13, 1520, Grottammare, Ancona, Papal States—died  Aug. 27, 1590, Rome), pope from 1585 to 1590, who reformed the Curia.
He entered the Franciscan order in 1533 and was ordained at Siena, Republic of Florence, in 1547. He served twice (1557–60) as inquisitor general in Venice, his severity there causing his recall. Pope Pius V made him vicar general of the Franciscans and bishop (1566), later elevating him to the cardinalate on May 17, 1570. He retired during the pontificate (1572–85) of Pope Gregory XIII and edited the works of Bishop Ambrose of Milan (1st vol., 1580). On April 24, 1585, he was unanimously elected successor to Gregory, who had left the Papal States in chaos. The Papal States had been financially drained to satisfy the multifarious needs of the Counter-Reformation, and lawlessness, particularly banditry, was widespread.
Sixtus swiftly restored peace and safety by harsh and repressive means, but his extreme measures in dealing with bandits created many enemies. His financial policies, which were intended to strengthen the church’s reserves, included the sale of offices, the creation of new monti (loans), the imposition of new taxes, and the regulation of prices. Immense sums were spent on his huge building program, including the completion of St. Peter’s dome, the rebuilding of the Lateran Palace and the Vatican, revision of street plans, and the general embellishment of Rome that transformed it from a medieval to a Baroque city. Yet he was able to end his reign as one of Europe’s richest princes.
Sixtus’ greatness is founded on his achievements in reforming the central administration of the church. By a bull of 1586 he defined the Sacred College of Cardinals, setting the number of cardinals at no more than 70, a limit that was not exceeded until the pontificate of John XXIII (1958–63). The secretariat of state was reorganized, and in January 1588 the Curia’s entire administrative system was overhauled. He established 15 congregations (the principal departments), specifying the form and function that remained substantially unchanged until the reforms after the second Vatican Council (1962–65). He is considered one of the founders of the Counter-Reformation because it was through his new curial machinery that the decrees of the ecumenical Council of Trent (1545–63) were effectively enforced.
Sixtus V was faced with a dilemma in international relations. He desired to stop the spread of Protestantism, especially in France, which was being torn by the complex civil Wars of Religion (1562–98) between the Huguenots and the Roman Catholics. During the War of the Three Henrys, in 1585, Sixtus excommunicated the Protestant Henry of Navarre (the future Henry IV of France) and promised subsidies in return for a Spanish invasion of England.
His attitude toward Henry changed, however, when Henry began considering conversion to Roman Catholicism. Sixtus died while negotiating with Henry over the kingship of France.
