Stephanus Jacobus du Toit,  (born 1847, Paarl, Cape Colony [now in South Africa]—died  May 29, 1911, Cape Province, South Africa), South African pastor and political leader who, as the founder of the Afrikaner Bond (“Afrikaner League”) political party, was an early leader of Boer/Afrikaner cultural nationalism and helped foment the political antagonism between the British and the Boers in Southern Africa, which prior to the 1870s had been relatively muted. He was also instrumental in laying the groundwork for the establishment of Afrikaans (the South African dialect of Dutch) as an official language in South Africa.
Du Toit was a pastor of the Dutch Reformed Church in the Cape Colony and his political career began in 1875 when he founded an organization, the Die Genootskap van Regte Afrikaners (“Society of True South Africans”). Soon after, du Toit and other Afrikaner intellectuals living in Paarl established the first Afrikaans newspaper, Die Afrikaanse Patriot, first published on Jan. 15, 1876. The newspaper propagated the idea of the Afrikaners as a separate nation whose destiny was to rule over a united South Africa. In 1879–80 du Toit founded the Afrikaner Bond, an anti-British political party of Boer (Dutch) Cape colonists to pursue these objectives. He also began publishing books in Afrikaans and translated the Bible into that language. His actions had the simultaneous effects of establishing Afrikaans as a literary language and of rallying Boer political consciousness around a common Afrikaner culture.
Du Toit, who had been strongly opposed to the British seizure of the Transvaal in 1877, supported the Transvaalers in their war against Britain in 1880–81. He migrated to the Transvaal and became superintendent general of education there in 1881. In 1883 the Afrikaner Bond absorbed Jan Hendrik Hofmeyr’s Boeren Beschermings Vereeniging (“Farmer’s Protection Association”). Under Hofmeyr’s leadership, it was the most important Boer party in Britain’s Cape Colony by 1884. Du Toit’s attempts to establish the Afrikaner Bond in the Transvaal and the Orange Free State, however, were opposed by the respective presidents of the two Boer republics, Paul Kruger and Johannes Henricus Brand. Relations between Kruger and du Toit were strained after du Toit’s attempts to extend Boer rule into neighbouring Bechuanaland (present-day Botswana) instead helped provoke the British annexation of Bechuanaland as a protectorate in 1885.
In 1890 du Toit migrated back to Cape Colony, where he used his influence to initiate an alliance between the Afrikaner Bond and the British colony’s new prime minister, Cecil John Rhodes. The alliance was shattered in 1896 when an Afrikaner Bond faction led by Hofmeyr withdrew in protest against the controversial Jameson Raid of December 1895, in which one of Rhodes’s close associates led a team of forces in an unsuccessful attempt to invade the Transvaal. Despite du Toit’s strong Boer/Afrikaner nationalist sentiments, he tried to delay the split with Rhodes, perhaps feeling that Rhodes’s policy of aggressive expansionism, his usual solicitude for Afrikaner interests, and his wish for a South Africa ruled by white colonists made them natural allies in spite of their differences.
