Tanuma Okitsugu,  (born 1719, Edo [now Tokyo], Japan—died  Aug. 25, 1788, Edo), renowned minister of Japan’s Tokugawa shogunate (1603–1867); traditionally considered one of the corrupt geniuses of the period, he actually helped restore the financial footing of the government and greatly fostered trade.
Tanuma was the son of a minor Tokugawa official but rose to power in spite of the extremely restricted social mobility of the Tokugawa period. Beginning as a page in the apartments of Tokugawa Ieshige (reigned 1745–60), the ninth Tokugawa shogun, or military dictator of Japan, he rose to occupy the highest ministerial position in the administration of the 10th shogun, Tokugawa Ieharu (reigned 1760–86). At the same time he became the head of one of the important feudal fiefs into which Japan was then divided.
Able to dominate the central government completely, Tanuma made a vigorous effort to spur the development of trade and commerce. In his attempt to increase government revenues, he not only instituted the usual land reclamation and irrigation promotion policies to stimulate agricultural productivity but he also took steps to encourage foreign trade, especially with Russia. To this end he fostered the colonization and development of the northernmost Japanese islands of Hokkaido and Sakhalin, which bordered the Russian sailing routes.
Tanuma tightened the existing government monopolies in gold, silver, and copper trading, and he added new government monopolies in such important commodities as alum, camphor, ginseng, iron, brass, lime, and even lamp oil. He also made an attempt to increase mining production. Finally, he licensed many merchant guilds and established government moneylending institutions, thus finding important new sources of official revenue. To further increase government profits, he attempted to debase the currency.
Tanuma was criticized, however, for his policy of encouraging the giving of presents to superiors in the government bureaucracy. Many felt that he was wrong to encourage mercantile expansion; they also thought the government should take punitive action against the increasingly luxurious way of life of the merchant and noble classes and attempt to reinstate the martial vigour and feudal virtues of the past. Tanuma was thus blamed for much of the corruption that flourished during his regime and was considered responsible for the prevalence of famines, peasant rebellions, and worker discontent.
Thus, Tanuma became one of the most unpopular officials in Japanese history. In 1784 his son, a junior official, was assassinated in an attempt to destroy the family. Two years later, when Tokugawa Ieharu died, his successor stripped Tanuma of all his offices and severely reduced the size of his fief. In 1787 Tanuma’s holdings were reduced even further, and he was ordered into confinement. 
