Tanzimat,   (Turkish: “Reorganization”), series of reforms promulgated in the Ottoman Empire between 1839 and 1876 under the reigns of the sultans Abdülmecid I and Abdülaziz. These reforms, heavily influenced by European ideas, were intended to effectuate a fundamental change of the empire from the old system based on theocratic principles to that of a modern state.
Many of the key provisions of the Tanzimat reforms were set forth in the Hatt-ı Şerif of Gülhane (1839; “Noble Edict of the Rose Chamber”). This document called for the establishment of new institutions that would guarantee security of life, property, and honour to all subjects of the empire regardless of their religion or race. It also authorized the development of a standardized system of taxation to eliminate abuses and established fairer methods of military conscription and training. The promises of equality for non-Muslims (mainly Christians and Jews) living in the empire were not always carried out, but the balance of the changes provided for in the Noble Edict, along with other reform measures, were implemented principally under the leadership of Mustafa Reşid Paşa, who served six terms as grand vizier. The reforms included the development of a new secular school system, the reorganization of the army based on the Prussian conscript system, the creation of provincial representative assemblies, and the introduction of new codes of commercial and criminal law, which were largely modeled after those of France. These laws, moreover, were administered by newly established state courts independent of the ʿulamāʾ, the Islāmic religious council.
The Tanzimat reform movement came to a halt by the mid-1870s during the last years of Abdülaziz’s reign. Under the Tanzimat effort to centralize administration, all legal authority became concentrated in the hands of the sultan. As a result, little could be done when Abdülaziz began abusing his power and adopted revisionary policies. This fact notwithstanding, the Tanzimat reforms succeeded in laying the groundwork for the gradual modernization of the Ottoman state. See also Abdülaziz.
