 Dinanath Gopal Tendulkar first published his eight-volume biography of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, Mahatma, in 1951–54. He published a revised and expanded edition in 1960–63. The biography that he wrote for the Encyclopædia Britannica first appeared in the 1964 printing of the 14th edition, and it was used until 1973, when the version below appeared. In his biography for Britannica, Tendulkar used the same approach he used in Mahatma: drawing heavily on archival research, he quoted extensively from Gandhi himself, giving this biography a vivid injection of Gandhi’s own voice.
GANDHI, MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND (1869–1948), architect of India’s freedom through a nonviolent revolution, was born at Porbandar, Kathiawar, on Oct. 2, 1869. His father and grandfather, of the Vaishya (trading) caste, were both chief ministers in Kathiawar princely states. His mother, Putlibai, was deeply religious and possessed a strong personality. Her influence, more than any other, formed his character.
When 12 years old, Gandhi was married to Kasturbai who was of the same age and by whom he had four children. He attended Alfred high school at Rajkot and matriculated at 18. After three years’ stay in London he was called to the bar (Inner Temple). For two years he practised in Bombay and Rajkot with little success, but an unexpected offer to proceed to South Africa opened a new vista before him. A week after his arrival in Durban in May 1893 he visited the court only to be asked by the magistrate to take off his turban. His second shock came at Pietermaritzburg when, holding a first-class railway ticket, he was pushed out of the compartment by a white guard and left shivering in a dark waiting room. This was a critical experience: “There was a white man in the room; I was afraid of him. What was my duty, I asked myself. Should I go back to India or should I go forward, with God as my helper, and face whatever was in store for me? I decided to stay and suffer. My active non-violence began from that date.”
He founded the Natal Indian Congress party in 1894. He came to the aid of the British empire in the South African War and in the Zulu rebellion by organizing an ambulance corps. Meanwhile his reputation as a lawyer was rising; he varied his work with visits to India, where G.K. Gokhale became his friend and guide. In 1904 he took over a weekly publication, Indian Opinion, to fight the Indian settlers’ cause. As the struggle advanced Gandhi found the term “passive resistance” inadequate. He changed it to satyagraha, “force which is born of truth and love or non-violence.” Satyagraha in South Africa lasted eight years, beginning in 1906, when the Transvaal government passed a bill which required every Indian to register his fingerprints. Under Gandhi’s leadership the Indians refused to obey this humiliating law; 2,000 men and women courted imprisonment by marching in protest and ultimately the Indians won their case.
Gandhi’s outlook was changing rapidly. He studied the Upanishads, the Koran and the Bible. He memorized the Bhagavad Gita as a dictionary of daily reference. Ruskin’s Unto This Last affected him profoundly with its message that the good of the individual is the good of all, that the life of the labourer is the life worth living. In his Phoenix settlement (1904) and Tolstoi farm (1910) Gandhi worked as scavenger, cobbler, farmer and printer, a practical idealist bending mind and body in unison. He abandoned his law practice and embraced voluntary poverty.
In 1909 Gandhi wrote Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule, which is the quintessence of his ideas. The goal set forth in the book is “an exploitation-free society in which the ordinary individual can claim and defend his rights.” His ideas were almost anarchical and as a condemnation of modern machine civilization the book remains a classic. Correspondence followed with Leo Tolstoi, who liked the book and considered satyagraha an idea of world-wide importance.
Gandhi returned to India in Jan. 1915 and Rabindranath Tagore hailed him as Mahatma (“great soul”). In May 1915 Gandhi founded a satyagraha ashram at Ahmedabad with 25 inmates, who took vows to observe truth, nonviolence, celibacy and fearlessness; to practise self-control; to work for the removal of untouchability and for education through the mother tongue; and to wear only khadi (hand-spun and hand-woven cloth). They were to practise swadeshi (the use of products made in the home country), accepting only what was offered by their immediate neighbourhood.
For two years Gandhi traveled extensively. In April 1917 a peasant from Champaran in Bihar took him to study the plight of ryots who were compelled by law to plant indigo on their land for sale to European planters. Gandhi began his inquiry assisted by Rajendra Prasad, and was ordered to leave the district. He disobeyed the order and was summoned to court and tried. He simply pleaded guilty. The governor intervened and appointed an inquiry committee with Gandhi as a member. The committee’s recommendations, favourable to the ryots, were translated into the Champaran Agrarian act. This was the first case of satyagraha in India.
In April 1918 Lord Chelmsford, the viceroy, invited Gandhi to a war conference. Gandhi told the viceroy: “In Champaran by resisting an agelong tyranny I have shown the ultimate sovereignty of British justice…. If I could popularize the use of soul force, I know that I could present you with an India that could defy the whole world.”
He plunged himself into recruiting, but the response was meagre. The war soon ended and in March 1919 the government, aware of widespread discontent, enacted the Rowlatt bills which empowered the authorities to imprison without trial those suspected of sedition. In protest Gandhi called upon the people to observe a hartal (“suspension of business”) on Sunday, April 6, preceded by a fast and prayer. On the way to Delhi he was arrested, which led to mob violence. He owned to a “Himalayan” miscalculation and suspended civil disobedience. In the same month 10,000 people who had assembled at Jallianwalla Bagh in Amritsar were machine-gunned. Martial law was declared in the Punjab. In Oct. 1919 Gandhi started two weeklies, Young India in English and Navajivan in Gujarati, to teach nonviolence and fearlessness.
In 1920 Gandhi took up the Khilafat (Caliphate) question over which the minds of Muslims were agitated. They strongly resented the terms to be imposed on Turkey by the treaty of Sèvres (1920). Gandhi proposed that a non-co-operation movement should start on Aug. 1 with the surrender of all titles and honours and with a boycott of schools, colleges, law courts and councils. He himself returned his Kaisar-i-Hind medal (awarded for distinguished humanitarian work) and the decorations he had received in South Africa.
There then began for India, with Gandhi as leader, a period of struggle and transformation. In his speeches and writings, Gandhi was unsparing in his denunciation of British imperialism as “a satanic system.” “Non-co-operation,” he declared, “though a religious and strictly moral movement, aims at the overthrow of the government.” Critics meanwhile made fun of his insistence on hand-spinning. Gandhi knew that the spinning wheel was an uneconomic machine, but it was cheap, needed little skill and brought in a supplementary income to families which were unemployed or underemployed for several months in the year. Further, he saw in the spinning wheel the means of freeing India from its dependence on Lancashire. India, in his view, could dispense with most of its imports but cloth it must have. That is why the charkha (spinning wheel) became for Gandhi the symbol of swaraj. He intensified the campaign by taking to the loincloth in Sept. 1921. “Millions are too poor to buy enough khadi to replace their discarded cloth. Let them be satisfied with a mere loin cloth.”
In Feb. 1922 Gandhi decided to lead a mass campaign of civil disobedience in the Bardoli district (Gujarat). The payment of taxes to the government would be discontinued. On the eve of the campaign, however, the people of Chauri Chaura (in Uttar Pradesh) were provoked into attacking the police. Gandhi then decided to suspend his mass campaign and imposed on himself a five days’ penitential fast. He was arrested at his ashram at Ahmedabad on March 13, 1922, and was tried by C.N. Broomfield, sessions judge at Ahmedabad, on a charge of sedition, based upon his writings in Young India. He pleaded guilty. “I am here to invite and submit to the highest penalty that can be inflicted upon me, for what in law is a deliberate crime, and what appears to me to be the highest duty.” He was sentenced to six years’ imprisonment. Two years after his confinement in Yeravda jail in Poona Gandhi had to undergo an operation for appendicitis; he was released in Feb. 1924.
The Indian political landscape was then rapidly changing, the most decisive event being the collapse of the Khilafat movement. C.R. Das and Motilal Nehru founded an independent Swaraj party to oppose the government in the legislatures and did well in the general elections. Since Gandhi realized that the majority of congressmen favoured entry to the councils, he kept aloof from politics. He presided over the Congress at Belgaum in 1924 and spoke only about spinning and the boycott of foreign cloth. As a result the All-India Spinners’ association was founded for the development of khadi under Gandhi’s guidance, and for the next four years his work was to be preaching and organizing khadi centres in the villages.
In Nov. 1927 Lord Irwin, the viceroy, summoned Gandhi to apprise him of the appointment of a statutory commission on constitutional reform under the chairmanship of Sir John Simon. Even the moderates were shocked because not a single Indian was appointed to the commission. Congress boycotted it effectively. In Oct. 1929 a statement by Lord Irwin foreshadowed a Round Table conference between British and Indian representatives. Gandhi asked the viceroy whether the Round Table conference would establish full dominion status for India. The viceroy could give no such assurance. Congress then had no choice. Under Jawaharlal Nehru’s presidency it declared that its goal was complete independence and called on the people to be prepared for the struggle.
On March 12, 1930, Gandhi started another campaign of civil disobedience, this time against the tax on salt, which affected the poorest section of the community. He set out with 78 followers to cover the distance of 240 mi. that lay between Ahmedabad and the seashore at Dandi. On April 6 he bathed in the sea at Dandi and picked up a lump of natural salt thereby symbolically defying the law under which salt collection was a government monopoly. Everywhere people followed his example and mass arrests followed. On May 4 Gandhi was arrested and interned, but he was released on Jan. 26, 1931. The Irwin-Gandhi agreement by which civil disobedience was discontinued was signed on March 5. The making of salt for personal use was permitted and about 100,000 nonviolent prisoners were released.
On Sept. 12, 1931, Gandhi reached London to represent the Congress at the second Round Table conference. Through his personal contacts, he brought India nearer to the British intelligentsia and the commoner. At the conference he sensed that attention was concentrated on the problem of minorities and that this took precedence over the central issue, the transfer of power. Then, as always, he was convinced that it was British rule which had driven a wedge between India’s creeds and classes; once this foreign influence was removed, Indians would solve their communal differences. He spent a week in a vain endeavour to reach an agreement with Muslims and other minorities. Confronted with the imposing numbers against him, he had to remind the conference that Congress represented 85% of the Indian population. He argued that the proposed scheme for minorities would vivisect the nation.
On his return to India at the end of 1931, he had to face a grim situation. Jawaharlal Nehru and Ghaffar Khan, the Congress leader in the North-West Frontier province, were imprisoned and special ordinances had been issued. Gandhi requested Lord Willingdon, the viceroy, to see him “as a friend,” but he wound up by enclosing a copy of the resolution just passed by the Congress Working committee “tentatively sketching a plan of civil disobedience,” which would be suspended “pending our discussion.”
On Jan. 4, 1932, Gandhi and Vallabhbhai Patel were arrested and again interned in Yeravda jail. In March the struggle against the government entered a new phase. A communal (electoral) award was imminent. Gandhi sent from prison to the secretary of state for India a reminder of his own objection to the segregation of untouchables in a separate electorate, and warned him that he would resist this by a fast unto death. When, in August, an award was published that ignored his objections Gandhi announced that he would start a fast on Sept. 20. The first day of the ordeal was celebrated all over India as a day of prayer and fasting. Many temples were thrown open to the untouchables. B.R. Ambedkar, a leader of the depressed classes, was induced to join a representative conference and by the fifth day of the fast a solution had been found. Gandhi then broke his fast.
Gandhi then identified himself with the untouchables, whom he called Harijans (“children of God”) for “the most despised people are the most favoured of God.” In Feb. 1933 he started Harijan, a weekly which was his mouthpiece for the rest of his life; by 1942 it was published in ten Indian languages.
After his many fasts Gandhi withdrew to recover his strength in an ashram at Wardha (in central India). Then he toured extensively for ten months on behalf of the Harijans. He collected Rs. 800,000 for their cause, much of it in copper coins, some of it in women’s jewelry.
Gandhi resigned not merely his leadership but even his membership of Congress in 1934. He had gained the impression that congressmen had adopted nonviolence, for him a fundamental creed, only as a political expedient.
His work now lay in the villages and with the newly founded All-India Village Industries association. He settled at Sevagram, a village near Wardha. By 1934 the making and marketing of khadi had been organized in 5,000 villages. “The movement of the spinning wheel is an organized effort to displace machinery from the state of exclusiveness and exploitation and to place it in its proper state,” said Gandhi. “Under my scheme, therefore, men in charge of machinery will not think of themselves or even of the nation to which they belong, but of the whole human race.”
Congress swept the polls in 1937 because of Gandhi’s constructive program. “India,” Gandhi wrote, “is still a prison, but the superintendent allows the prisoners to elect the officials who run the jail.” So he advised Congressmen to enter the councils. Presently he was drafting a program for the ministries which Congress formed in 9 of the 11 provinces. He stressed prohibition, basic education and the relief of indebted peasants; broadly he hoped that the interests of the villages would be a first consideration.
At the outbreak of war in Sept. 1939, Gandhi found himself alone at a Congress Working committee meeting in seeking that whatever support was to be given to the British should be given unconditionally; nevertheless, recognition of India as a free and independent nation seemed to be “the natural corollary of the British profession as to democracy.” When the viceroy took India into the war without consulting the leaders or legislatures the Congress ministries resigned.
In Jan. 1940 there was an exchange of letters between Gandhi and M.A. Jinnah, the leader of the Muslim league and later founder of Pakistan. “You start with the theory of the Indian nation that does not exist,” wrote Jinnah. “Your reply dashes to the ground all hope of unity,” replied Gandhi.
The events in Europe of May 1940 had their repercussions in India. The Congress Working committee found itself unable to accept in its entirety Gandhi’s attitude to the war and, in particular, his view that India should not maintain its own armed forces to defend its freedom against external aggression and internal disorder. In fact, he was against all war. The Working committee absolved him from further responsibility for Congress activities. In July the Working committee offered its co-operation in the war effort and in return called for an acknowledgment by Britain of the complete independence of India and a declaration that, as an immediate step in giving effect to it, a provisional national government at the centre would be formed. When the viceroy rejected the offer Congress sought Gandhi’s lead.
In Oct. 1940 Gandhi launched individual civil disobedience to win freedom of speech against war. Vinoba Bhave was the first of hundreds of satyagrahis to court jail. In Dec. 1941 the government released the satyagrahis and, as the Japanese swept across the Pacific and through Burma and Malaya, the urgency of some settlement in India became clear. In March 1942 Sir Stafford Cripps, a British cabinet minister, came to India with an offer, which Gandhi found worthless. The conception of the slogan “quit India” now began to take shape in his mind and was developed in a succession of articles in Harijan. On Aug. 8 the All-India Congress committee presided over by Maulana Azad, adopted the “quit India” resolution. On Aug. 9 the government arrested Gandhi and other Congress leaders. A mass rising immediately broke out. Repression was intense. During Gandhi’s detention at Poona, his devoted secretary, Mahadev Desai, and wife Kasturbai, who stood by him for 63 years, died in the camp.
In Jan. 1943, Gandhi wrote a letter to the viceroy, Lord Linlithgow, blaming the government for their “leonine violence” and announced a fast of 21 days, which began on Feb. 10. He was released on May 6, 1944, on grounds of health.
In March 1946, after the end of the war and the advent of a Labour government in Britain, a British cabinet mission consisting of Lord Pethick-Lawrence, Sir Stafford Cripps and A.V. Alexander arrived in Delhi. Gandhi declared himself completely opposed to the two-nation theory on which Jinnah’s claim for Pakistan was founded. The cabinet mission would have to decide this main issue.
On May 16 the cabinet mission issued a statement proposing the complete withdrawal of the British authority from India. They recommended a united India, with one federal government to deal with foreign affairs, defense and communications.
The Muslim league then decided to withdraw its previous acceptance of the mission’s proposals and to prepare a program of direct action. Fresh efforts were made by the viceroy, Lord Wavell, to form an interim government but Jinnah declined. A new government headed by Jawaharlal Nehru took office on Sept. 2, 1946. For Gandhi it was a day of deep significance. He wrote a note for Nehru and his colleagues: “Abolish the salt tax; remember the Dandi march; unite Hindus and Muslims; remove untouchability; take to khadi.”
Meanwhile communal differences were taking an ugly form. In Calcutta, riots broke out on Aug. 16, the Muslim league’s Direct Action day, and massacres followed. They spread to other parts of Bengal and to Bihar. During the cold weather of 1946–47, Gandhi went to live in East Bengal. He walked barefoot from village to village in the devastated areas of Noakhali and Tippera and mingled freely with Muslims and Hindus and expounded his gospel of nonviolence to them equally. In March 1947 he moved to Bihar to instill courage in the Muslim minority and to help them in their distress.
On June 3, 1947, Clement Attlee, the British prime minister, announced the plan for partition; it was accepted by Congress and the Muslim league. Gandhi considered partition “a spiritual tragedy”: “I do not agree with what my closest friends have done or are doing; 32 years of work have come to an inglorious end.” On Aug. 15, 1947, Independence day, he was fighting riots in Calcutta. He fasted all day and prayed. He issued no message to the nation. At the end of August fresh riots broke out in Calcutta. Gandhi embarked on a fast unto death to be broken only if the communal killing stopped. This had an immediate effect. On Sept. 9 Gandhi reached Delhi. At his first prayer meeting he expressed his regret over the terrible atrocities which were being committed all round. A few days later he spoke about the wholesale migrations which were taking place both ways across the frontier between India and Pakistan. It was the duty of both governments, he said, to protect their minorities. He advised the Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs that they should all be prepared to die to a man rather than leave their homes.
He could bear it no longer. On Jan. 12, 1948, he announced that he would undertake yet one more fast. “I have no answer,” he said, “to the Muslim friends who see me from day to day as to what they should do. My impotence has been gnawing at me of late. It will go immediately the fast is undertaken.” The fast began the following day and went on until Jan. 18 when the news reached him that a peace committee representative of all communities in Delhi had signed a pact pledging brotherly amity and the protection of the life, property and faith of the Muslim minority.
On Jan. 20, during a prayer meeting outside Gandhi’s residence in Delhi, a bomb was thrown by a youth. It exploded harmlessly. Referring to the incident next day, Gandhi said that no one should look down upon the youth, who probably regarded him as an enemy of Hinduism.
On Friday, Jan. 30, 1948, shortly after 5 P.M., Gandhi was on his way to attend his usual prayer meeting. As he was going up the steps to the prayer platform, a Hindu fanatic suddenly broke through the congregation and fired three shots. Gandhi uttered “He Rama” (O God), and died. The house and ground where he was killed were dedicated to the nation on Oct. 2, 1971, in observance of the 102nd anniversary of his birth.
