Tokugawa Yoshimune,   (born Nov. 27, 1684, Kii Province, Japan—died  July 12, 1751, Edo), eighth Tokugawa shogun, who is considered one of Japan’s greatest rulers. His far-reaching reforms totally reshaped the central administrative structure and temporarily halted the decline of the shogunate.
Yoshimune was originally the head of Kii, one of the three hereditary Japanese feudal fiefs ruled by descendants of the original Tokugawa ruler not in the main line of succession to the shogunate. A lack of sons in the main branch of the family, however, resulted in Yoshimune’s succession to the position of shogun in 1716. Upon assuming his new office, he tried to institute the program he had used successfully in Kii to alleviate that fief’s monetary problems. He began by reducing the number of hereditary governmental retainers, who were paid fixed governmental stipends. To slow the increase in their numbers, he refused to allow most inheritances past the first generation. He also attempted to set a good example by eliminating court luxuries and returning to the simple and austere life of the Tokugawa founder. At the same time, he tried to improve the quality of the administration and to raise national morale by instituting a vigorous program of education for all his subordinates, designed to improve their literary skill and to imbue them with the old warrior values of discipline and leadership. Finally, he adopted methods designed to combat corruption.
Since the chief source of revenue was the tax on agricultural produce, Yoshimune attempted to increase crop yields by developing new land and popularizing new crops, such as sweet potatoes and sugarcane, that could be grown in soil not used for rice cultivation. In an effort to find other sources of income, he licensed commercial monopolies and attempted to regulate rice prices. But his limitation on trade merely had a depressing effect on the economy. While his reforms did revitalize the government, his reputation as one of the greatest of Japanese reformers has been questioned because his efforts resulted in little more than a temporary respite; following his reign, corruption and inefficiency again became rampant.
There can be no doubt, however, that Yoshimune’s inquiring spirit led to the growth of interest in Western science; he himself had a large globe made, and he also imported a telescope from the Netherlands. He helped develop the first law code of the Tokugawa era (1603–1867). The resulting Kansei Code, not completed until after Yoshimune’s death, laid the basis for a more humane law than had previously been in existence. He retired in 1745 in favour of his son, although he acted as a guardian of shogunal power until his death. 
