Tom Mboya, in full Thomas Joseph Odhiambo Mboya,  (born Aug. 15, 1930, Kilima Mbogo, near Nairobi, Kenya—died  July 5, 1969, Nairobi), major political leader in Kenya until his assassination six years after his country had achieved independence.
A member of the Luo people and a graduate of mission schools, Mboya first worked as a sanitary inspector in Nairobi and almost immediately became involved in the nascent Kenyan trade-union movement. He was a key nationalist figure in the days of the Mau Mau rebellion, led by the Kikuyu people against European ownership of land. From 1953 to 1963 he was general secretary of the Kenya Federation of Labour (KFL), an especially important post since no strictly political African national organizations were allowed in Kenya until 1960.
Although the KFL was not able to participate overtly in politics, Mboya won the 1957 legislative council elections as a workers’ candidate, becoming one of only eight elected African members on the council. Unlike most of his colleagues, he opposed the policy of multiracial political representation put forward by the British colonial government in the late 1950s. He helped form the Kenya independence movement in the council and the People’s Convention Party in Nairobi. In the critical pre-independence decade he also spent a year at the University of Oxford and twice visited the United States. In 1959 he helped found the African-American Students Foundation to raise money to send East African (originally only Kenyan) university students to the United States on charter flights, thus making it possible for many more students to study abroad.
Mboya was a founder-member of the Kenya African National Union (KANU) in 1960. He was minister of labour in the coalition government before independence and actively participated in the constitutional talks that led to independence in 1963. That year Jomo Kenyatta appointed him minister of justice and constitutional affairs. From 1964 to 1969 Mboya served as minister for economic planning and development, laying the foundation for a strong mixed economy and capitalist-oriented policies; this upset others in Kenyatta’s administration, such as Oginga Odinga, who advocated policies of a more socialist nature. Mboya’s assassination in 1969 shocked the nation and exacerbated tensions between the dominant Kikuyu and other ethnic groups, especially Mboya’s own Luo.
