U Saw, also called Galon U Saw,  (born 1900, Tharrawaddy, Burma—died  May 8, 1948, Rangoon), Burmese political leader who conspired in the assassination of Aung San, the resistance leader who negotiated Burma’s independence from the British.
Unlike most other Burmese politicians, U Saw was not university-educated. He held a license to plead some types of legal cases, however, and helped in the defense of Saya San, the leader of the peasant rebellion of 1930–32. U Saw subsequently adopted the honorific title Galon (a fabulous bird in Hindu mythology) from the name of Saya San’s rebel “Galon Army.” He served for several terms in the Burma legislative council and was owner and editor of a nationalist newspaper in Burma, Thuriya (“The Sun”).
Greatly impressed by Japan, which he visited in 1935, U Saw aspired to rebuild Burma along similar, totalitarian lines. In 1938 he founded the Myochit (“Patriot”) Party and organized a private Galon army, modeled on the Nazi storm troopers. U Saw helped engineer the overthrow of prime minister Ba Maw in 1939, and, after serving as minister of forests, he was prime minister from 1940 to 1942.
In 1941, when U Saw failed in London to obtain dominion status for Burma, he went to Lisbon to negotiate secretly with the Japanese. Arrested by the British at Haifa in January 1942, he was interned in Uganda for the duration of the war. In 1945, however, he returned to Burma, reestablished the Myochit Party, and became a major opponent of the Anti-Fascist People’s Freedom League (AFPFL), which was led by Aung San. U Saw went with Aung San to London to negotiate with British Prime Minister Clement Attlee, but he refused to sign the agreement for Burma’s independence of Jan. 27, 1947, on the grounds that Aung San had made too many concessions to the British. Although he urged a boycott of the April 9 elections, the AFPFL won an overwhelming victory.
On July 19, 1947, U Saw sent gunmen to assassinate Aung San and the ministers of the new government. Convicted of conspiracy to murder, he was executed.
