Vladimir Zhirinovsky, in full Vladimir Volfovich Zhirinovsky,  (born April 26, 1946, Almaty, Kazakhstan, U.S.S.R.), Russian politician and leader of the far-right Liberal Democratic Party of Russia (LDPR) from 1991. Known for his fiery Russian nationalism and broad anti-Semitic asides, he later acknowledged his Jewish roots.
Much of Zhirinovsky’s personal history is vague, unknown, or disputed. He left his hometown at age 18 to attend Moscow State University, where he studied Turkish and other languages. After graduating about 1969, he went to work as a translator in Turkey, but he was expelled under murky circumstances eight months later. From 1970 to 1972 he served as an army lieutenant in the Caucasus. After returning to Moscow in 1972, he worked in various state committee and union posts. He completed an evening law program at Moscow State University, earning his degree in 1977 and then working in a state-run law firm (from which he was later asked to resign). In 1983 Zhirinovsky landed a position as head of the law department at the Mir publishing company, a post that served as a springboard for his political career. When the local council held elections in 1987, Zhirinovsky sought to run as the firm’s candidate and as an independent, but he was disallowed by the Communist Party and by Mir, which cited a letter from his previous employer that questioned his ethics.
Zhirinovsky cofounded the LDPR in 1989. The following year the party was launched in Moscow, and Zhirinovsky was asked to become its chairman, but by October his views had provoked his expulsion. In the spring of 1991 Zhirinovsky created his own party, giving it his previous party’s name, and in June he ran for the Russian presidency. Zhirinovsky’s campaign proclamations that he was “the last hope of a cheated and humiliated people” and “the very same as you” and his promise to “bring Russia up off its knees” resonated more keenly among many voters than did those of more conventional politicians. “If there were a healthy economy and security for the people, I would lose all the votes I have,” he said. He won 7.8 percent of the vote, which placed him third and brought his party more recognition.
In December 1993 the West was shocked when Zhirinovsky’s LDPR won 22.8 percent of the vote in the Russian parliamentary elections. This success caused Western observers to scrutinize his boorish, bullying behaviour and to take more seriously his rhetoric and views, which included a promise to create a dictatorship when elected president and threats to expand the borders of Russia to include Alaska and Finland, to use large fans to blow radioactive waste into the Baltic states, and to reduce crime by instituting summary executions.
A figure as colourful as Zhirinovsky was bound to be the object of rumour and speculation. It was widely reported that his career could have been possible only under the auspices of the KGB. Another rumour, that Zhirinovsky was Jewish, gained strength when documents that surfaced in 1994 showed that the surname of his father (who was killed the year Zhirinovsky was born) had originally been Eidelshtein, that Zhirinovsky had changed his name at age 18, and that he had been a member of a state-sponsored Jewish group in the late 1980s. Zhirinovsky, however, heatedly denied that he was Jewish or that he had been affiliated with the KGB.
Zhirinovsky was the LDPR’s candidate for president in 1996, but he placed fifth in the first round of voting, with only 5.7 percent of the vote. His party roster was disqualified in the 1999 parliamentary elections because two of its top three candidates were charged with money laundering. Zhirinovsky rapidly created another roster, the Zhirinovsky Bloc, by joining with smaller political movements—including one run by his sister—and was able to win 17 seats in the Duma, the lower legislative chamber. He ran for president again in 2000, placing fifth once more, with just 2.7 percent of the vote. Nonetheless, he was elected deputy speaker of the Duma in 2000 and in 2004. The LDPR nominated Zhirinovsky as their presidential candidate in the 2008 presidential elections, and he came in third with just more than 9 percent of the vote.
In 2001 Zhirinovsky admitted for the first time that his father was indeed Jewish. After he visited his father’s grave in Israel in 2006, his anti-Semitic remarks appeared to subside. His inflammatory style was undiminished, though, when he again stood for the Russian presidency in 2012. He called for the transfer of presidential powers to the Duma and for the creation of a ceremonial head of state (to be known as a “tsar”) as well as for agricultural import and export bans. Zhirinovsky, with only about 6 percent of the vote according to official results, placed behind all but one of the candidates. Prime minister and former president Vladimir Putin captured the post, with some 60 percent of the vote according to Russian election officials; Communist Party leader Gennady Zyuganov, independent candidate Mikhail Prokhorov, Zhirinovsky, and social democrat Sergey Mironov trailed with far lower proportions of the official tally.
