William O’Brien,  (born October 2, 1852, Mallow, County Cork, Ireland—died February 25, 1928, London, England), Irish journalist and politician who was for several years second only to Charles Stewart Parnell (1846–91) among Irish Nationalist leaders. He was perhaps most important for his “plan of campaign” (1886), by which Irish tenant farmers would withhold all rent payments from landlords who refused to lower their rents and would pay the money instead into a mutual defense fund on which evicted tenants could draw.
A journalist from 1869, O’Brien was appointed editor of the Irish Land League’s weekly United Ireland by Parnell in 1881. In October of that year the British authorities suppressed the paper and put O’Brien in Kilmainham jail, Dublin, along with Parnell and others. There he drew up a “No Rent Manifesto,” which, when read at a Land League meeting, resulted in the outlawing of the League. Released in 1882, he resumed the editorship of United Ireland, and in 1883 he was elected to the British House of Commons (remaining there until 1895). His “plan of campaign” was disavowed by Parnell but nonetheless stirred up fierce agitation. To suppress the movement, the British government passed the Coercion Act of 1887, under which O’Brien was jailed again.
For some time following the O’Shea divorce case (1889–90), in which Parnell was corespondent, O’Brien attempted to mediate between the Parnellites and their opponents, although he sided with the majority in rejecting Parnell’s continued leadership of the Irish Home Rule struggle. In 1902 he supported the Land Conference, which secured agreement between landlords and tenants’ representatives and resulted in the Wyndham Land Purchase Act of 1903, which was designed to turn Irish tenant farmers into occupying owners.
In 1898 O’Brien had founded the United Irish League, and in 1910, after control of that group had passed to the Parnellite John Redmond, he established the All-for-Ireland League in opposition to the older organization. Most of his personal following, however, had joined Arthur Griffith’s Sinn Féin Party by the end of World War I.
