Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, original name Nomzamo Winifred Madikizela, original Xhosa name Nkosikazi Nobandle Nomzamo Madikizela,  (born September 26, 1936, Bizana, Pondoland district, Transkei [now in Eastern Cape], South Africa—died April 2, 2018, Johannesburg, South Africa), South African social worker and activist considered by many Black South Africans to be the “Mother of the Nation.” She was the second wife of Nelson Mandela, from whom she separated in 1992 after her questionable behaviour and unrestrained militancy alienated fellow anti-apartheid activists, including her husband.
The daughter of a history teacher, Nomzamo Winifred Madikizela moved to Johannesburg in 1953 to study pediatric social work. She met Mandela in 1956, became his devoted coworker, and married him in 1958. At the start of her husband’s long imprisonment (1962–90), Madikizela-Mandela was banned (severely restricted in travel, association, and speech) and for years underwent almost continual harassment by the South African government and its security forces; she spent 17 months in jail in 1969–70 and lived in internal exile from 1977 to 1985. During these years she did social and educational work and became a heroine of the anti-apartheid movement. Her reputation was seriously marred in 1988–89, however, when she was linked with the beating and kidnapping of four Black youths, one of whom was murdered by her chief bodyguard.
After Mandela was released from prison in 1990, Madikizela-Mandela initially shared in his political activities and trips abroad. In May 1991 she was sentenced to six years in prison upon her conviction for kidnapping, but the sentence was later reduced to a fine. She made a political comeback in 1993 with her election to the presidency of the African National Congress Women’s League, and in 1994 she was elected to Parliament and appointed deputy minister of arts, culture, science, and technology in South Africa’s first multiracial government, which was headed by her husband. Madikizela-Mandela continued to provoke controversy with her attacks on the government and her strident appeals to radical young Black followers, however, and in 1995 Mandela expelled her from his cabinet. She and Mandela had separated in 1992 and were divorced in 1996.
Madikizela-Mandela was reelected to Parliament in 1999. She resigned in 2003, however, after she was convicted on charges of fraud and theft stemming from her involvement with fraudulently obtained bank loans, many of which benefited economically disadvantaged persons. Madikizela-Mandela was partially vindicated a year later when the conviction for theft was overturned because she had not recognized any personal gain from her actions.
In 2016 Madikizela-Mandela was recognized by the South African government with the award of the Silver Order of Luthuli for her contributions to the liberation struggle during the apartheid era. On April 2, 2018, she died at the age of 81 after a long illness. Her life and legacy were honoured with numerous memorial services throughout the country as well as a state funeral, held on April 14 at Orlando Stadium in Soweto, South Africa.
