Yongzheng, Wade-Giles romanization Yung-cheng, personal name (xingming) Yinzhen, temple name (miaohao) (Qing) Shizong, posthumous name (shi) Xiandi,  (born Dec. 13, 1678, Beijing, China—died  Oct. 8, 1735, Beijing), reign name (nianhao) of the third emperor (reigned 1722–35) of the Qing dynasty (1644–1911/12), during whose rule the administration was consolidated and power became concentrated in the emperor’s hands.
As the fourth son of the Kangxi emperor, Yinzhen was not immediately in line for the throne; but when the designated heir apparent became mentally deranged, the future emperor saw an opportunity to seize the throne and began to intrigue against his brothers. Several of the chronicles of the period allege that Yinzhen murdered his father. In any case, he succeeded to the throne (as the Yongzheng emperor) by having military support in Beijing when his father died. The first years of Yongzheng’s reign were spent consolidating his power. He imprisoned or executed some of his brothers and their supporters and undermined the power of the others. His espionage system was so efficient that every action of his ministers was said to have been reported to him. He even tampered with the imperial records from the last years of his father’s reign and the first years of his own, ordering the suppression of any accounts unfavourable to himself or favourable to his opponents.
More significant was his removal of the imperial princes from control of the Eight Banners, the major Qing military units. When the Yongzheng emperor ascended the throne, three of the Eight Banners were controlled directly by the throne, but the rest were under the rule of Qing princes. Fearing that they could use this control for personal advantage—as the Yongzheng emperor had done in his own ascension to the throne—he compelled all the princes to attend a special palace school, where they were indoctrinated with the idea of subservience to the throne. As a result the Eight Banners remained loyal throughout the existence of the dynasty.
In 1729 the Yongzheng emperor increased the administrative centralization of the government. The Grand Secretariat was replaced as the top ministerial body by the previously informal Grand Council. The five or six members of the Grand Council worked directly with the emperor, who conferred with them every day. Their business was handled quickly and secretly. The emperor thus personally scrutinized and directed all important matters of government.
Although the official records claim he died peacefully, he had made many enemies during his life, and according to legend he was murdered by the daughter of a man he had had executed. An able ruler, he left office having checked corruption among his officials, enforced the laws of the empire, and reorganized finances so that the state revenue was increased. In addition to temporal matters, he pursued also the study of religion, writing extensively on the subject of Chan (Zen) Buddhism.
