Henry Darger,  (born April 12, 1892, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.—died April 13, 1973, Chicago), American outsider artist and writer known for his epic fantasy more than 15,000 pages long and his colourful, often disturbing watercolours and collages. His works were discovered shortly before his death and recognized only posthumously by the wider world. Darger’s illustrations are recognizable by the artist’s lavish palette, the use of the entire page, and complex compositions that often include repetitive figures of young girls.
Darger led his life on the margins of society. His childhood was fairly bleak. When Darger was four, his mother died while giving birth to his sister, who was promptly put up for adoption by his father. That early trauma seems to have had a profound impact on his creative output. His father’s poor health prevented him from caring for his son, who became increasingly unmanageable. Darger was sent away, first to a Roman Catholic home for the homeless, Mission of Our Lady of Mercy (now Mercy Home), and then, because of his continuing poor behaviour, he was moved much farther away to a state hospital then called the Illinois Asylum for Feeble-Minded Children, in Lincoln, Illinois (some 165 miles [266 km] southwest of Chicago). Like many such facilities at the turn of the 20th century, it was a place where societal outcasts, many of whom were mentally ill or mentally disabled, were warehoused and severely mistreated and neglected. Once Darger had moved to Lincoln, he never again saw his father, who died in 1908. His time in the state hospital was another harsh episode in his early life that is evident in his drawings and paintings. In 1908, at age 16, Darger attempted to escape from the asylum by freight train, only to be thwarted by the police when he reached Chicago; he was immediately sent back. He made a second attempt in 1909, this time succeeding.
In Chicago Darger took menial jobs as a janitor or dishwasher in several city hospitals—St. Joseph’s, Grant, St. Joseph’s again, and then Alexian Brothers. In 1932 he rented a room at 851 West Webster Avenue in the Lincoln Park neighbourhood of Chicago and lived there for the next 40 years. A recluse, he made time daily to attend mass and had an intense and vivid relationship with God. After severe chronic leg pain forced him to retire in 1963, he sometimes attended mass as many as four times a day. 
In 1969 Darger was hit by a car and never fully recovered from the accident, finding it progressively harder to climb the stairs to his room. He moved to the St. Augustine Home for the Aged in 1972, a few months before he died. After Darger moved to the nursing home, his landlord, photographer Nathan Lerner, began to sort through Darger’s cluttered apartment. He found countless empty Pepto-Bismol bottles, balls of string, rubber bands, piles of newspapers, magazines, comic books, shoes, eyeglasses, and art supplies. He also discovered that Darger had led a highly secretive creative life. When he asked Darger what to do with his art and writings, Darger told him to do what he wanted or to “throw it all away.” Lerner, of course, did no such thing. Among the materials already noted, Darger had kept a number of journals, in which he was especially prolific once he had retired. There were diaries recording how many times he went to mass and recounting his daily activities, journals on the flags, maps, and officers in the American Civil War, and a weather journal outlining the daily meteorological conditions for a span of exactly 10 years. 
Darger’s most-astounding work, however, was an epic that was more than 15,000 pages long, titled in full The Story of the Vivian Girls, in What Is Known as the Realms of the Unreal, of the Glandeco-Angelinnian War Storm, Caused by the Child Slave Rebellion, or In the Realms of the Unreal. The story follows seven girls, the Vivian Girls of the Catholic nation Abbieannia, who attempt to rescue kidnapped children enslaved by the atheistic and villainous Glandelinians. The tale, loosely based on events from the American Civil War, pits heroic children against evil, abusive adults. Darger first wrote the story in longhand and later typed it and added illustrations.
The 300 watercolours he made to accompany his story bring the tale of destruction and heroism to life, often in graphic detail. The paintings, some of which measure up to 12 feet (3.7 metres) wide, illustrate the children’s vulnerability against their captors. The enslaved children are white, pale, and unclothed and are typically rendered androgynous or with boys’ genitalia. Darger traced and cut figures from comics and children’s books into his work, because, it is thought, he did not have the skill to draw people without them. As a space- and cost-saving measure, Darger used both sides of the paper. In addition to watercolour, he also worked in pastel washes, pencil, and collage.
Among the other writings he left behind were Further Adventures in Chicago: Crazy House, a sequel to In the Realms of the Unreal, and his 5,000-page, 8-volume tome titled The History of My Life, an autobiography that was dominated by his description of a tornado that he had witnessed. His biography has been reconstructed from his personal writings.
Darger is widely regarded as the paradigmatic outsider artist. His fame rests not only on the quality of his work but also on the late recognition of his secret creative output and his tragic and reclusive life. The largest repository of his work is at the American Folk Art Museum in Manhattan. His room in Lincoln Park was dismantled and installed—together with some of its contents—at Intuit: The Center for Intuitive and Outsider Art in Chicago. Art critics and scholars continue to debate whether his work was born of genius or of mental illness. However, the sheer number of exhibitions and publications of his work firmly places Darger within the discourse of art history.
