Jean Cousin the Elder,  (born 1490, Sens, France—died  1560/61, Paris), French painter and engraver whose rich artistic contribution also included tapestry, stained-glass design, sculpture, and book illustration.
A man of many accomplishments, Cousin worked as an expert geometer in his native village of Sens in 1526 and designed a walled enclosure for the city of Courgenay in 1530. The same year, he repaired a clock and restored a tableau representing the Virgin for the cathedral of Sens. Cousin created several stained-glass windows in the chapels of Saint-Eutrope and Notre-Dame de Lorette, both in the Sens cathedral.
About 1540 he ventured to Paris, where he soon qualified as a master painter and a citizen. In 1540 he helped design the decorations in honour of the Holy Roman emperor Charles V’s entry into Paris. In 1541 he was commissioned to design three models of tapestries commemorating the life of St. Geneviève, and in 1543 he painted eight cartoons of tapestries depicting scenes from the life of St. Mammès. In 1549 Cousin designed a portal in front of the Chatelet to honour the entry of Henry II into Paris. He also painted the life of St. Germain and in 1557 was commissioned to design stained-glass windows for the hospital constructed by the Parisian goldsmiths. His engravings Annunciation and Deposition probably also date to this period. Despite his lengthy and productive career in Paris, he still managed to contribute work to his native city of Sens.
Few extant works can be definitely attributed to Cousin. The painting Eva Prima Pandora (1540s), now in the Louvre, is generally agreed to be his. It shows that he was not influenced by the dominant Fontainebleau school; rather, it reflects the influence of, among others, Leonardo da Vinci and Albrecht Dürer in composition, physiognomy, and lighting. Its style fits neatly into the French Renaissance and also shows the influence of Benvenuto Cellini, whose Nymph of Fontainebleau uses similar techniques. The painting Charity is also widely considered to be his creation. Cousin’s Traité de perspective (1560; “Treatise of Perspective”) summarizes his knowledge of art, science, and geometry. After his death, his son, also called Jean Cousin, took over the Paris studio.
