Rosso Fiorentino, byname of Giovanni Battista di Jacopo,  (born March 8, 1494, Florence [Italy]—died  Nov. 14, 1540, Fontainebleau, France), Italian painter and decorator, an exponent of the expressive style that is often called early, or Florentine, Mannerism, and one of the founders of the Fontainebleau school.
Rosso received his early training in the studio of Andrea del Sarto, alongside his contemporary Jacopo da Pontormo. Scholars have argued that he was influenced as much by Pontormo as by Sarto. The earliest works of these two young painters combined influences from Michelangelo and from northern Gothic engravings in a novel style, which departed from the tenets of High Renaissance art and was characterized by its highly charged emotionalism and departure from classicism. From 1513 to 1514, Rosso painted the fresco Assumption in the Annunziata, Florence. In 1518 he was commissioned to paint an altarpiece, Virgin and Child Enthroned with Four Saints, for a Florentine church. When his patrons saw what they perceived as harsh, devilish depictions of the saints in the picture, they rejected it. After this incident, Rosso left Florence for Volterra, and there he painted Deposition (1521). In 1521 or 1522 he returned to Florence, where he probably painted the dramatic Moses Defending the Daughters of Jethro (c. 1523).
At the end of 1523 Rosso moved to Rome, where his exposure to Michelangelo’s Sistine ceiling, the late art of Raphael, and the work of Parmigianino resulted in a radical realignment of his style. His Dead Christ with Angels (c. 1526) exemplifies this new style with its feeling for rarefied beauty and subdued emotion. Fleeing from the sack of the city in 1527, he worked briefly in several central Italian towns. By 1530 Rosso was in Venice but desired to enter the artistic community centred on the court at Fontainebleau; he was fortunate to receive such an invitation from Francis I later that year. In exchange for a home in Paris, a handsome salary, and French citizenship, he went to France and remained in the royal service there until his death.
At court Rosso was responsible for all manner of artistic design, from costumes and scenery to architectural drawings and tableware. His principal surviving work is the decoration of the Galerie François I at the palace of Fontainebleau (c. 1534–37), where, in collaboration with Francesco Primaticcio, he developed an ornamental style whose influence was felt throughout northern Europe. His numerous designs for engravings also exercised a wide influence on the decorative arts both in Italy and in northern Europe.
