Carl Schurz,   (born March 2, 1829, Liblar, near Cologne, Prussia [now in Germany]—died  May 14, 1906, New York, N.Y., U.S.), German-American political leader, journalist, orator, and dedicated reformer who pressed for high moral standards in government in a period of notorious public laxity.
As a student at the University of Bonn, Schurz participated in the abortive German revolution of 1848, was imprisoned, escaped, and eventually came to the United States (1852). He settled in Wisconsin (1856), quickly became active in the antislavery movement, and, as a delegate to the Republican National Convention of 1860, worked for the nomination of Abraham Lincoln for president.
Schurz joined the Union army in 1862 and was made brigadier general of volunteers. In the next year and a half he commanded troops at the Second Battle of Bull Run (August 1862) and at the battles of Chancellorsville, Gettysburg, and Chattanooga (all 1863). The conduct of his troops at Chancellorsville and Gettysburg was criticized, but he apparently retained the respect of his fellow officers.
After the war Schurz toured the South to report on conditions for President Andrew Johnson. Strongly advocating support of rights for blacks, the report emphasized granting the franchise to freedmen as a condition of the Southern states’ readmission to the Union. Johnson, however, resisted these views and shelved the report. In 1866 Schurz became editor of the Detroit Post and then editor and part owner of the German-language St. Louis Westliche Post.
In Missouri he won his only elective office, serving as U.S. senator from 1869 to 1875. In that period he broke with President Ulysses S. Grant on the issue of political corruption, on Reconstruction policy, and on the proposed annexation of Santo Domingo. These conflicts led him in 1872 to help organize the Liberal Republican Party, opposing Grant’s renomination. Four years later, however, he rejoined the regular Republicans, supporting Rutherford B. Hayes on the issues of good government and hard money. In return, he served as President Hayes’s secretary of the interior (1877–81), promoting civil-service reform and an improved Indian policy.
Returning to journalism and writing, Schurz edited the New York Evening Post and The Nation in the early 1880s and wrote biographies. Pursuing his advocacy of honest government, he headed the National Civil Service Reform League from 1892 to 1901. He encouraged reform-minded Republicans, commonly referred to as Mugwumps, to support the presidential candidacy of Democrat Grover Cleveland in 1884.
