Henry Wilson, original name Jeremiah Jones Colbath,  (born Feb. 16, 1812, Farmington, N.H., U.S.—died  Nov. 22, 1875, Washington, D.C.), 18th vice president of the United States (1873–75) in the Republican administration of President Ulysses S. Grant and a national leader in the antislavery movement.
Wilson was the son of Winthrop Colbath, Jr., a labourer, and Abigail Witham. Indentured as a farm labourer at age 10, he legally changed his name to Henry Wilson when he was freed at age 21. He learned to make shoes and became a small-scale manufacturer in Natick, Massachusetts. After attending slavery debates and observing slave auctions in Washington, D.C., he determined to devote his life to emancipation. He attracted attention as a stump speaker and was elected as a Whig to the Massachusetts legislature in 1840, serving almost continuously for the next 12 years. Disappointed at the Whigs’ ambivalence on slavery, he helped form the Free-Soil Party in 1848 before joining the nativist Know-Nothing Party (1854), hoping to convert it to abolitionism. He switched to the Republican Party a few years later. Elected to the United States Senate (1855–73) originally as a member of the Know-Nothing Party, he served as chairman of the Committee on Military Affairs during the American Civil War (1861–65) and opposed President Andrew Johnson’s postwar policy of accommodation toward the defeated South. Although he was a Radical Republican and supported federal laws protecting the rights of emancipated slaves, he opposed seizure and redistribution of Southern plantations. Defeated for the vice-presidential nomination in 1868, he was nominated four years later and served during Grant’s second term. Like many 19th-century vice presidents, he was frustrated by his lack of influence on administration policy. He died in office, suffering a stroke in the vice president’s room in the United States Capitol.
Wilson wrote on the war and Reconstruction; his best-known work is  History of the Rise and Fall of the Slave Power in America, 3 vol. (1872–77).
