William Lowndes Yancey,  (born Aug. 10, 1814, Warren County, Ga., U.S.—died July 27, 1863, Montgomery, Ala.), American southern political leader and “fire-eater” who, in his later years, consistently urged the South to secede in response to Northern antislavery agitation.
Though born in Georgia, Yancey in 1822 moved with his mother and stepfather, an antislavery Presbyterian minister, to Troy, N.Y. Yancey attended Williams College from 1830 to 1833 and then studied law in Greenville, S.C. In 1834 he was admitted to the bar. As editor of the Greenville Mountaineer during the nullification crisis, he took a firm Unionist stand.
In 1836 Yancey moved to Alabama, where he rented a plantation and purchased two local newspapers. It was as a lawyer, however, that he became prominent, and in 1841 he was elected to the Alabama legislature; he became a state senator in 1843. He urged many progressive reforms as an Alabama legislator, and there is no evidence that he was a proponent of secession prior to the Mexican War.
In 1844 Yancey was elected to the U.S. Congress. He was reelected the following year but resigned in September 1846 to devote himself to fostering a grassroots movement in the South to counter Northern antislavery agitation. In 1848 he drafted the Alabama Platform, the foundation of his political creed until the outbreak of the American Civil War. Drawn up in response to the Wilmot Proviso—a proposed ban on slavery in the territories newly acquired from Mexico—the Alabama Platform insisted that slaveowners had the right to take their chattel property with them into the territories, that Congress had the duty to protect the rights of slaveholders everywhere, that a territorial legislature could not ban slavery, and that the Democratic Party should endorse only proslavery candidates for national office.
Although it was endorsed by the Alabama legislature, Yancey’s Alabama Platform was overwhelmingly rejected when he presented it at the 1848 Democratic National Convention. Yancey, however, was resolute, and, after the Compromise of 1850, he added secession to his creed. For the next decade he sought to arouse Southerners to the peril of remaining in the Union. He organized Southern-rights associations and in 1858 assisted in the creation of the League of United Southerners. He delivered hundreds of speeches, trying to draw Southerners of all parties and persuasions into a movement backing his uncompromising proslavery states’ rights position.
By 1860 the Alabama Platform had won substantial support throughout the South. At the Democratic National Convention in Charleston, a slightly revised version won only qualified acceptance, prompting the Southern delegates to withdraw and nominate a rival ticket. In essence, therefore, Yancey was responsible for the dissolution of the last national institution of the antebellum era.
Yancey then campaigned for John C. Breckinridge, nominee of the Southern wing of the party, the Constitutional Democrats. Following Lincoln’s election, it was Yancey who drafted Alabama’s secession ordinance. Early in 1861, he went to England and France in quest of official recognition of the new Confederate government, but his mission proved unsuccessful. He returned in 1862 and was elected to the Confederate Senate, where he served until his death.
