Béarn,   historic and cultural region encompassing mountainous regions of the southwestern French département of Pyrénées-Atlantiques and coextensive with the former province of Béarn.
Béarn’s name can be traced to the town of Beneharnum (Lescar). Béarn was conquered by the Vascones (the ancestors of the modern Basques) in the 6th century and in 819 became a viscounty feudally dependent on the dukes of Aquitaine; in the 11th century the viscounts ceased to acknowledge any suzerain. Their coinage, the “morlans” (of Morlaas), was famous.
In 1290 the viscounty passed to the counts of Foix, from whom it was transmitted to the kings of Navarre. When Henry III of Navarre became Henry IV of France in 1589, Béarn became a holding of the French crown.
From the 12th century until the French Revolution in 1789, the Béarnais had a form of representative government with cours plénières (“plenary courts”) composed of deputies from the three estates (nobility, clergy, people).
Until the early 20th century the inhabitants of the mountains were largely seminomadic and practiced transhumance, moving their flocks between the highlands of Ossau in the summer and the lowlands around Pau in the winter. Pastures were collectively owned. Settlements in the valleys of the centre subsequently grew at the expense of the mountain regions, and the population has become predominantly urban. The usual farmstead of the valleys has two stories and is roofed with slate shingles. Stables occupy the ground floor; living quarters are upstairs. Immigrants from other French regions and repatriates from North Africa are of considerable social and economic importance.
Roman Catholicism predominates; Protestantism made some inroads during the second half of the 16th century but is now largely limited to the town of Orthez. The regional dialect, which shows strong Gascon influence, was used in public acts between 1589 and 1789. The Gaston Phébus School was founded in 1897 in Pau and has been instrumental in preserving the literary traditions of Béarn.
Regional cuisine features trout, mushrooms, and cheese from sheep’s milk. Tourin is a soup of onions, tomatoes, and garlic; cousinette is a soup whose ingredients include mallow, chard, sorrel, and chicory. Jurançon produces renowned white wines. Madiran is an outstanding red wine from Gers.
