Borgu,   traditional emirate, Niger State, western Nigeria. After a race by the colonial developer Frederick Lugard, on behalf of the Royal Niger Company, in 1894 to beat the French to Nikki (now in Benin), the capital of the Borgu kingdom, to sign a commercial treaty, France and Britain settled their territorial claims to Borgu by a convention of 1898. Eastern Borgu, the area of which contained the 12,000-square-mile (31,000-square-km) Bussa, Kaiama, and Illo chiefdoms, was ceded to the British, who created Borgu Province in 1900, recognized Bussa chiefdom (founded c. 1730) as an emirate, and established Kaiama’s Chief Mora Tsaude (Murata Sidi) as emir of Kaiama. After Illo was transferred to Sokoto province in 1905, what remained of Borgu was given (1907) to Kontagora province; Borgu division was incorporated into Ilorin province in 1923. In 1954, when Kaiama’s emir resigned, Kaiama and Bussa emirates were joined; Muhammadu Sani, emir of Bussa, then became the first emir of Borgu. Today, the emir functions in a traditional and religious capacity.
Borgu’s area of plains and wooded savanna is drained by several small streams that flow eastward to the Niger River, the area’s eastern boundary. Poor soils, low rainfall (especially in the dry season), and Fulani slave raids in the 19th century have made Borgu one of Nigeria’s least-populated regions. Most inhabitants are of the Bargu (Borgu, Bariba, Borgenci), Busa (Bussa, Bussangi), Boko (Bokoboro), Reshe (Gungunci, Gungawa), Fulani, Kamberi, or Yoruba ethnic group and mainly engage in cattle and poultry raising, subsistence farming (sorghum, millet, shea nuts, onions, corn [maize], peanuts [groundnuts], cotton, tobacco), and fishing. Gold mining, once important around Kaiama and Bussa, is no longer significant. The creation of Kainji Lake (1968) forced the evacuation of several towns along the Niger, including Bussa, the former spiritual headquarters of the Borgu kingdom. Kaiama, New Bussa (built in 1966; 24 miles [39 km] south of old Bussa), Okuta, and Wawa are the chief towns.
