Central Greece, Modern Greek Stereá Ellás,  region of mainland Greece lying south of the provinces of Epirus (Modern Greek: Ípeiros) and Thessaly (Thessalía), and north of the gulfs of Pátrai and Corinth (Korinthiakós) and the Saronic Gulf.
Because the main mountain ranges of the Greek peninsula have a definite northwest-southeast trend in their major axes, the valleys, basins, and ranges of Central Greece are largely southern extensions of those of Epirus and Thessaly. Topographically, Central Greece is bounded on the north by westerly portions of the Pindus (Píndos) Mountains and on the east by spurs or outliers of the same range. The latter are continued in the northern part of Euboea (Évvoia) Island. Farther south and entirely within Central Greece, three massifs, offshoots of the Pindus, assume a more easterly trend: the Oeta (Oíti), which reaches 7,060 feet (2,152 m); the Gióna, 8,235 feet (2,510 m); and the Parnassus (Parnassós), 8,061 feet (2,457 m). Outliers of the Parnassus are the Helicon (Elikónas), Kithairón, Párnis, and Imittós (Hymettus), the last a great ridge east of the most populous area of Greece, Greater Athens.
East of Levádhia, capital of the nomós (department) of Boeotia, few peaks are more than 5,000 feet (1,525 m). These regions have few agricultural areas of significance. Exceptions are the valley of the Kifisós River of Boeotia, which was expanded for cotton cultivation after the draining of Kopaïs Lake, and the smaller Asopós River valley east of Thebes (Thíva). Other major agricultural basins are the Akhelóös (Achelous) and Évinos River basin system in Aetolia and Acarnania and the Sperkhiós River valley in Fthiótis around Lamía. A smaller but still prosperous region is the Amfissian plain that lies southwest of Delphi (Delfoí).
In contrast to these, the depressions of Attica (Attikí) are among the least fertile basins of Central Greece. To compensate, Athens (Athína) in the Kifisós Plain has the ancient advantage of a central position, with easy access to both the Saronic Gulf and the Peloponnese (Pelopónnisos) and to the lead and zinc mines of Lávrion, a port of embarkation to the Aegean Islands. Near Athens, resources of timber, pasture, olives, wine, and quality marble are plentiful. An aqueduct was built in the late 1970s to supplement the water supply of Athens, which had relied almost exclusively on the Lake of Marathon, by tapping the waters of the Mornos River, which marks the boundary between the nomós of Aetolia and Acarnania and the traditional province of Phocis (Fokída).
