Copperbelt,  in African geography, zone of copper deposits and associated mining and industrial development dependent upon them, forming the greatest concentration of industry in sub-Saharan Africa outside the Republic of South Africa. The belt extends about 280 miles (450 km) northwest from Luanshya, Zamb., into the Katanga (formerly Shaba) region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The zone is up to 160 miles (260 km) in width and contains more than a tenth of the world’s copper deposits, found mostly in Late Precambrian sedimentary deposits with the ore concentrated in zones indicative of hilltop and beach, or near-shore, environments.
The deposits had been known and worked for centuries before 1867, when Scottish missionary and explorer David Livingstone described the smelting of ore into 50- to 100-pound (22.5- to 45-kg) ingots by Katanga-area peoples. Exploitation of the deposits during the colonial period was always separate in the two countries. It began in the Belgian Congo (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo) with the formation in 1906 of the Union Minière du Haut-Katanga (nationalized in 1967 as Gécamines, La Générale des Carrières et des Mines), which during the early 1930s was the largest copper-producing company in the world. The first copper-mining claim in Zambia, the Roan Antelope, was pegged in 1902 after W.C. Collier, a Bulawayo (Southern Rhodesia) prospector, shot the eponymous animal, which fell upon a deposit of green malachite copper ore. Commercial development in Zambia began in 1909 after the railroad reached Broken Hill, Northern Rhodesia (now Kabwe, Zamb.); the same rail line also opened the Katangan deposits of the Belgian Congo when it later reached northward to Elizabethville (now Lubumbashi, Dem. Rep. of the Congo) in 1910. Extensive commercial exploitation did not occur in Zambia until the late 1920s, when concessions were granted by the British South African Company. One of these concessionaires, the Selection Trust, developed the first modern mine at the Roan Antelope deposit near Luanshya; it came into production in 1929.
The exploitation and export of these ores has long been one of the most complicated geopolitical and economic questions of the region, not only because of colonial (and later nationalistic) rivalries but also because of the energy requirements of the smelters. These requirements were satisfied earliest by coal from Wankie, Southern Rhodesia (now Hwange, Zimb.), and later by hydroelectric power transmitted from the Kariba power station to the Copperbelt about 230 miles (370 km) southeast of Luanshya and to the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s smelters from Inga, on the Congo River about 1,000 miles (1,600 km) northwest of Katanga. These difficulties have been exacerbated by the problems of exporting the ore via, successively: the Cape rail route (after 1909); the Benguela Railroad (after 1933); the Belgian Congo’s Voie National, a railroad connecting Elizabethville (Lubumbashi) with Port-Francqui (Ilebo) for transshipment to Kinshasa-Matadi; the Kamina-Albertville rail route; the Kigoma–Dar es Salaam–Umtali–Beira rail route; and the Tazara railroad.
Upon Zambia’s independence in 1965, its thriving economy was heavily reliant on copper exports. In 1969 the Zambian government nationalized the copper-mining industry, which was then to be run by a parastatal organization, Zambian Consolidated Copper Mines. By the mid-1970s the price of copper on the world market had steeply dropped, resulting in a damaging economic decline. In the 1990s the mining industry began to be privatized, and most of the copper mines were sold.
The copper-mining industry also suffered on the Democratic Republic of the Congo side of the Copperbelt, in part because of low world prices and partly because of the recurring political instability that has plagued the country since independence.
