Dhofar, also spelled Dhufar, Arabic Ẓufār,  historical region in southern Oman, extending from Cape Al-Sharbatāt on the coast of the Arabian Sea southwestward to the Oman-Yemen border. The region’s northern boundary has never been defined, but generally included in the territory is the Wadi Mughshin, located about 150 miles (240 km) inland. To the northeast of Dhofar is a large desert of stony plains and sand dunes that contribute to the region’s isolation from northern Oman. The Ṣalālah coastal plain, about 40 miles (64 km) long and ranging from 1 to 6 miles (1.5 to 9.5 km) wide, facing the Arabian Sea, is considered one of the most beautiful in Arabia, particularly in its southwestern part, because of its monsoon climate and temperate vegetation and bird life; the region has constantly flowing streams, making it Oman’s most fertile area. About 10 miles (16 km) inland the rugged Al-Qarāʾ Mountains rise to heights between 3,000 and 4,000 feet (900 and 1,200 metres). Farther north the Al-Qarāʾ Mountains give way to a pebbly desert, beyond which lies the Rubʿ al-Khali (“Empty Quarter”) of Saudi Arabia.
Dhofar is one of the locations suggested for the Ophir of the Bible. The earliest known settlement in the region dates back to the 12th century bce. By the close of the 12th century ce the region was ruled as a tributary of Oman by Aḥmad ibn-Muḥammad al-Manjawa. In the early 19th century it was governed by Muḥammad ibn ʿAqil al-Ajaybī. In 1965 Ohotari tribesmen, supported by neighbouring Yemen (Aden), rebelled against Sultan Saʿīd ibn Taymūr’s restrictive policies; they were defeated in 1975.
Major crops in Dhofar include coconuts, alfalfa, sorghum, bananas, and vegetables. The region is the world’s leading source of frankincense. Dhofar is Oman’s cattle-raising area, primarily for milk. There are oil fields in the northeast. The coastal town of Ṣalālah, sprawled along a sandy beach, was the permanent residence of the former sultan of Oman. Other major towns, all situated on the plain, include Mirbāṭ, Ṭāqah, Raysūt, and Rakhyūt. A road from Ṣalālah crosses the Al-Qarāʾ Mountains north to Thamril, where a graded road continues northward. The mountain sector is inhabited almost exclusively by the Qara, Sheva, and Mahra peoples; the majority of the peoples on the Ṣalālah plain are Najd and Kathier.
