Fārs, also spelled Fars, also called Farsistan,  geographic region, south-central Iran. The ancient region, known as Pārs, or Persis (q.v.), was the heart of the Achaemenian empire (559–330 bc), which was founded by Cyrus the Great and had its capital at Pasargadae. Darius I the Great moved the capital to nearby Persepolis in the late 6th or early 5th century bc. Alexander the Great defeated the Achaemenian army at Arbela in 331 and burned Persepolis. Persis (Fārs) became part of the Seleucid kingdom in 312 after Alexander’s death. The Parthian empire (247 bc–ad 224) of the Arsacids (corresponding roughly to the modern province of Khorāsān in Iran) replaced the rule of the Seleucids in Persis during 170–138 bc. The Sāsānid empire (ad 224–651) had its capital at Istkhr. Not until the 18th century, under the Zand dynasty (1750–79) of southern Iran, did Fārs again became the heart of an empire, this time with its capital at Shīrāz. In the 20th century the role of Fārs in Iran declined considerably with the building of the Trans-Iranian railway outside the region and the discovery of oil in Khūzestān province.
The terrain of Fārs is composed mostly of ridges that are prolongations of the Zagros Mountains; the ridges run southeast–northwest and are intersected by plains. Climatically, it divides into two regions: the garmsīr and the sardsīr. The sparsely settled garmsīr (hot climate) region lies at elevations up to 2,500 feet (750 m). It is humid on the coastal plain bordering the Persian Gulf; this area supports the cultivation of fruit, cereals (rice, corn [maize]), vegetables, and tobacco. The plains and plateaus of the sardsīr (cold climate) region are other centres of cultivation, being watered by the Kūr and other rivers and springs. These plains form closed basins (with salty lakes) that merge into the interior deserts. Most ranges in the sardsīr and the transitional zone (elevation, 2,500–4,500 feet [750–1,400 m]) originally had oak forests, which have largely been cut; summer pastures lie in the higher elevations.
The most important ethnic groups in Fārs are the Qashqāʾī (Kashgai) of Turkic origin and speech, the Khamseh of Arab and Turkic stock, and the Lak, who speak an East Caucasian language. Agriculture and the herding of sheep are important occupations, while carpet weaving still continues. The discovery of oil and natural-gas fields in the region stimulated industrial development. Government-run industries include cold storage, petrochemicals, a telephone-equipment manufacturing plant, and milk pasteurization. Other industries produce processed foods, pharmaceuticals, cement, textiles, sugar, and nonalcoholic beverages. There is a meat-processing complex at Shīrāz, the chief city of Fārs. Other urban centres are Kāzerūn, Lār, Jahrom, and Dārāb in the garmsīr and Neyrīz, Fasā, Ābādeh, Ardakān, and Fīrūzābād in the sardsīr or the transitional zone. Shīrāz and Ābādeh are on the main road from Bushire to Tehrān. Shīrāz also has an airport.
