Haute-Normandie,  former région of France, incorporated since January 2016 into the région of Normandy. As an administrative entity, it comprised the northern départements of Eure and Seine-Maritime and encompassed the northeastern portion of historical Normandy.
Haute-Normandie is mostly lowland belonging to the Paris Basin and is drained by the Seine River. The coastline of chalk cliffs is cut by valleys that shelter a number of towns. The climate is humid; in fact, the Seine valley is frequently shrouded in mist, while the Rouen area is one of the wettest in France, with an average of about 120 rainy days per year.
Haute-Normandie is densely populated, largely because of an urban concentration along the Seine, notably at Rouen and Le Havre. Population declined slightly between 1851 and 1946, as in much of rural France during that period, but immigration and a relatively high birth rate have accounted for an increase since World War II. Recent growth has favoured the eastern part of Eure, partly because of its proximity to Paris.
Agricultural production is divided approximately equally between arable farming and cattle raising. Highly productive cereal farms are found in the east, while dairying predominates in areas such as the Pays de Bray in Seine-Maritime and the Pays d’Ouche and Lieuvin in Eure. Dieppe is an important fishing port.
Le Havre, Rouen, and other areas along the Seine River are highly industrialized. Petroleum refineries outside Le Havre and between Le Havre and Rouen established Seine-Maritime as a major petrochemical centre. More recently, Haute-Normandie became a locus for nuclear power production based on coastal sites near Dieppe. The automobile industry developed at various sites, including Cléon, located outside Elbeuf, and near Le Havre at Sandouville. In Eure, close to Paris, various manufacturing activities include those of the pharmaceutical industry.
Tourists are attracted to the region to visit seaside resorts as well as the ruins of Jumièges Abbey, Saint-Wandrille-Rançon Abbey, and the church at Saint-Martin-de-Boscherville. Other historic sites include the 12th-century ruin of Château Gaillard, built by Richard I, and the town of Les Andelys.
The Seine valley acts as a major transportation artery. The ports of Le Havre and Rouen are two of France’s most important ports. The région of Haute-Normandie also has an electrified rail link between Paris and Le Havre and a well-developed motorway network. In 2016 Haute-Normandie was merged with the neighbouring région of Basse-Normandie as part of a national plan to increase bureaucratic efficiency.
