Hokuriku,   industrial region, west-central Honshu, Japan, lying along the Sea of Japan. It is neither an administrative nor a political entity. The northeastern portion of the area, occupying parts of Niigata and Toyama ken (prefectures), specializes in heavy and chemical industries and has close economic ties with the Keihin (Tokyo-Yokohama) Industrial Zone. The southwestern area, occupying portions of Ishikawa and Fukui prefectures, concentrates on textile and machinery production and has economic ties with the Keihanshin (Kyōto-Ōsaka-Kōbe) Industrial Zone.
The Echigo and Hida mountain ranges dominate the relief of the area. During the Tokugawa period (1603–1867), Hokuriku, then a paddy-rice-growing area, traded with Ōsaka and Kōbe via the Sea of Japan. Hokuriku’s traditional industries included the manufacture of silk, timber products, lacquer ware, and agricultural tools.
Modern industrial techniques introduced during the Meiji period (1868–1912) expanded industrial production. Hydroelectric development in the mountains began near the city of Toyama during the early 1900s. During the 1930s, electrical smelting and electrochemical factories settled there to use the hydroelectric energy. Toyama and Takaoka cities were amalgamated into the new industrial city of Toyama-Takaoka in 1969. Aluminum and related factories have operated there since 1973 and are responsible for Hokuriku’s lead in aluminum processing and refining.
In 1909 the city of Niigata began building oil-drilling machinery, later producing ships, motor vehicles, machine tools, and diesel engines. Chemical industries later settled in Niigata city during the 1960s, utilizing natural gas from the area. As Niigata grew, it extended across the Shinano River and was redefined as a new industrial city under the Comprehensive National Development Plan in 1969. Niigata also produces metals, machinery, electrical appliances, and lumber products. Other industrial cities in the region include Habutae, a textile centre, and Kanazawa, a centre for transport-machinery production. Kurobe began producing zippers during World War II and has become a world leader in zipper production. Kurobe is also Japan’s major producer of window sash.
Hokuriku experienced an economic decline following World War II. While production increased in other regions, industrial development lagged in Hokuriku because the mountains and heavy snowfall blocked communications with the Pacific coastal industrial areas to the east. The sinking of land, resulting from the overuse of groundwater, has been a problem exacerbated by the exploitation of natural gas near Niigata city. The scarcity of energy sources also presents problems. Air, shipping, highway, and railway connections now render the region accessible, however.
