Kalimantan,  southern three-fourths of the island of Borneo that is politically part of Indonesia; the rest of the island is divided between the Malaysian states of Sabah and Sarawak and, between them, the small sultanate of Brunei. Indonesians, however, use the word as a geographic term for the entire island. The origin of the name Kalimantan is obscure. In Sarawak the term Kelamantan refers to the sago-eating peoples of northern Borneo. Indonesian Kalimantan is divided into five provinces (propinsi or provinci): Central Kalimantan (Kalimantan Tengah), East Kalimantan (Kalimantan Timur), North Kalimantan (Kalimantan Utara), South Kalimantan (Kalimantan Selatan), and West Kalimantan (Kalimantan Barat).
The history of Indonesian Borneo is closely linked to that of India, and there is considerable evidence of Indian cultural influences. Inscriptions in Sanskrit that date from the late 5th century ce have been found there, as well as an early statue of the Buddha. Numbers of other Buddhist and Hindu images that date from the 7th to the 11th century and that show Javanese influence have also been found in eastern Borneo. The Srivijaya empire of Sumatra was, in fact, the predominant power in southern and western Borneo from the 7th century until the Majapahit empire of eastern Java conquered the area in the 14th century. With the arrival of Islam in the 16th century, a number of separate Muslim states were formed.
In the first half of the 17th century, the Dutch extended their influence in Borneo by a series of trade and fortification agreements with individual states and by intervening in internal disputes. British involvement in the affairs of the sultanate of Brunei and the British acquisition of territory eventually led the Dutch to adopt a more active policy of expansion. By 1863 they had established colonial rule, though sporadic resistance continued until 1905. The island was occupied by the Japanese during World War II. A strong Indonesian independence movement arose in the region after Japan surrendered in 1945. At first, the Dutch attempted to retain control, but Kalimantan became a part of the Republic of Indonesia in 1949–50.
The population of Kalimantan is largely ethnic Malay and Muslim, who live mostly in coastal areas. However, there is also a significant minority of non-Muslim indigenous peoples collectively called Dayak. The Dayak live in the interior, traditionally along rivers in longhouses, and are now largely Christian. Area, including adjacent islands, 210,098 square miles (544,150 square km). Pop. (2010) 13,787,831.
