Khūzestān, also spelled Khuzistan, formerly ʿArabestān,  geographic region in southwestern Iran, lying at the head of the Persian Gulf and bordering Iraq on the west. It is notable for its oil resources.
The area that is now Khūzestān was settled about 6000 bc by a people with affinities to the Sumerians, who came from the Zagros Mountains region. Urban centres appeared there nearly contemporaneously with the first cities in Mesopotamia in the 4th millennium. Khūzestān came to constitute the heart of the Elamite kingdom, with Sūsa as its capital. Beginning with the reign of the legendary Enmebaragesi, about 2700 bc, who (according to a cuneiform inscription) “despoiled the weapons of the land of Elam,” Sumerian, Akkadian, Babylonian, Kassite, Neo-Babylonian, and Assyrian invasions periodically crossed Khūzestān in response to Elamite involvement in Babylonian politics; the campaign of Ashurbanipal in 646–639 bc destroyed the Elamite kingdom and its capital, Sūsa. Incorporated into the Assyrian empire about 639, Khūzestān next passed under Achaemenid control at the collapse of Assyria; and after Cyrus the Great conquered Babylon in 539, it became a satrapy (province) of the Persian empire, with Sūsa serving as one of the Persians’ three great capitals.
Alexander the Great took Sūsa shortly after the Battle of Gaugamela in 331, and from 311 to 148 Khūzestān was a satrapy (named Susiana) of the Seleucid empire, with its capital at Seleucia on the Eulaeus River. It passed firmly into Parthian control between 148 and 113 bc and then under Sāsānian rule about ad 226. It was a frontier zone between the Roman-Byzantine and the Parthian-Sāsānian empires and finally was taken by the Arabs about 642. It was part of the Ṣafavid and Qājār dynasties that successively ruled Iran.
In the 20th century the region’s prosperity revived with development of oil fields, the building of the Trans-Iranian railway, and the expansion of ports at Abadan and Khorramshahr. In an attempt to annex the oil-rich region while Iran was still disorganized by its Islāmic revolution, Iraq’s armed forces in 1980 invaded and occupied the western half of Khūzestān, including the city of Khorramshahr, and bombed the oil refineries at Abadan. But Iran’s resistance quickly stiffened, and the Iranians had recaptured the region by 1982. The economic rehabilitation of the region and the revival of oil and natural-gas production there gained momentum only after the Iran-Iraq War ended in 1988.
Khūzestān comprises a southeastern extension of the Mesopotamian plain and includes part of the forested Zagros Mountains to the northeast. These mountains are drained by several rivers, the most important being the Kārūn, which flows into the Al-Arab River, and the Karkheh Kūr River. These and other rivers have built up large alluvial fans and partially saline mud flats that merge into a zone of tidal marshes near the Persian Gulf. An isolated ridge (Hamrin Hills) borders the piedmont with its large gravel plains.
The plains of Khūzestān have a desert climate, and they are excessively hot and dry in the summer. Rainfall, which is concentrated in the winter, ranges from 12 to 20 inches (300 to 500 mm) in the plains and increases in the mountains. The climate allows for the irrigated cultivation of date palms, citrus and other fruit trees, wheat, barley, cotton and rice, sorghum, sesame, melons, and vegetables. Sugarcane, oilseeds, indigo, and pulses were introduced into the region’s agriculture during the 1970s.
More than half the population are Arabs who live in the plains; the rest are Bakhtyārīs and other Lurs (peoples of West Persia), with many Persians in the cities. Some of the Bakhtyārīs and Lurs are still nomads.
Oil exploitation in Khūzestān began in 1908, when oil was found at Masjed Soleymān, and it developed into the country’s foremost industry under the Pahlavi dynasty. Petroleum production was from seven fields but mainly from Āghā Jārī (Āqā Jarī). All the fields were connected with the refinery at Abadan. At full production, the Khūzestān oil fields contributed more than three-fourths of the total natural-gas production of Iran. Kharg Island off Bushire (now Bandar-e Būshehr) became Iran’s main petroleum export terminal after 1961.
A dam was completed in 1962 on the Dez River upstream of Dezfūl, and irrigation projects on several other rivers attracted people to Khūzestān from other parts of Iran. The area subsequently experienced a major growth in rural population and in agricultural production near the city of Ahvāz. Khūzestān’s industries produce paper, cement, petrochemicals, processed foods, and light-engineering products. A road network links Ahvāz with Dezfūl, Khorramshahr, Abadan, Bandar-e Būshehr, and Bandar-e Khomeynī (formerly Bandar-e Shāhpūr). A railway line runs through the western part of Khūzestān, linking Ahvāz with Dezfūl and Abadan. Sūsa (now Shūsh) and Choga Mish are important archaeological sites.
