Makran, also spelled Mekran, Persian Mokrān, Pakistani Makrān,  coastal region of Baluchistan in southeastern Iran and southwestern Pakistan, constituting the Makran Coast, a 600-mi (1,000-km) stretch along the Gulf of Oman from Raʾs (cape) al-Kūh, Iran (west of Jask), to Lasbela District, Pakistan (near Karāchi). The name is applied to a former province of Iran, and the Makran of Pakistan is sometimes known as Kech Makran to distinguish it from the Iranian portion.
Pakistani Makran, a former princely state that acceded in 1948, was constituted after 1955 a district (area 28,164 sq mi [72,944 sq km]) of Kalāt division. Now a part of Baluchistan Province, Pakistan, it is bounded east by Khuzdār and Lasbela districts, south by the Arabian Sea, west by Iran, and north by the Siāhān Range. Turbat is district headquarters and Panjgūr the chief town of the interior. Aside from the coastal areas, the terrain is mostly mountainous, consisting of east–west parallel ranges rising to about 7,000 ft (2,100 m) and enclosing fertile narrow valleys, including those of the Kech (upper Dasht) and Bolida. The chief spring crops ( jopag ) are wheat and barley, and the autumn crop (eraht) is jowār (sorghum). Dates, however, are the main crop; cultivation has been extended by irrigation projects. Laghati (compressed dates) constitute the staple food of the poor. Irrigation is provided by flooding, subterranean channels (kārez), riverbed pools (kaurjo), and springs. Sheep are also bred. Makran’s 200-mi sandy coastline in Pakistan lies longitudinally with many hammerhead peninsulas. Past volcanic action is evidenced by occasional volcanoes of boiling mud along the coast. The chief ports are Gwādar, which belonged to the Sultanate of Muscat and Oman till 1958; Ormāra; and Pasni, all being difficult of approach because of off-shore sandbars. Fishing is the main coastal occupation.
Makran, the ancient Gedrosia of the Persian and Macedonian empires and the scene of Alexander the Great’s retreat from India (325 bc), has been strategically significant in the history of Iran and India. The etymology of the name is uncertain, chiefly regarded either as a corruption of Māhī Khūrān (Fish Eaters), identified with the Ichthyophagoi (now represented by the Mēds) mentioned in the Indica of the 2nd-century-ad Greek historian Arrian, or as a Dravidian name appearing as Makara in the Bṛhat-saṃhitā of the 6th-century-ad astrologist Varāhamihira in a list of tribes contiguous to India on the west.
The population is predominantly Arab, the Arabs having held Makran before they conquered Sind in the 5th century. Other groups are the Darzadis, regarded as of aboriginal descent; Mēds (fishermen); and Koras (seamen). The coastal blacks are descended from imported slaves.
