Niagara Frontier,  recreation and heavy-industrial area in western New York, U.S., extending mainly along the Niagara River between Lakes Ontario and Erie and lying principally in the counties of Erie and Niagara. The recreational area sometimes includes the Canadian side of the river, while the industrial region includes metropolitan Buffalo, which encompasses Niagara Falls, Tonawanda–North Tonawanda, Lackawanna, and Lockport. The Niagara Frontier is also defined as encompassing the eight westernmost counties of New York state.
The focus of the recreation region is the Niagara Falls State Park, established in 1885 at Niagara Falls. It is New York’s oldest state park, and it includes an observation tower, elevators that descend into the gorge at the base of the American Falls, and boat trips into the turbulent waters at the base of the Horseshoe Falls. Fort Niagara State Park, at the mouth of the Niagara River on Lake Ontario, includes old Fort Niagara; the fort’s main structure, known today as the “Castle,” was built by the French in 1725–26 on the site of the Seneca Indian town Ongniaahra—whence the name Niagara. A few miles to the east lies the Four Mile Creek State Park Campground. Whirlpool State Park is located at the Lower Rapids 3 miles (5 km) north of the falls; and Devil’s Hole State Park at the Lower Gorge overlooks the end of the Lower Rapids. Buckhorn Island State Park is a wildlife sanctuary at the north end of Grand Island, south of the falls. Big Sixmile Creek Boat Basin is on the west side of the island, and Beaver Island State Park is a recreational area at its southern tip. Evangola State Park, near Farnham on the south shore of Lake Erie, has a broad sandy beach. Overlooking the river near Lewiston is the Earl W. Brydges Artpark (1974), dedicated to the performing arts. The recreation region is largely overseen by the Niagara Frontier State Parks and Recreation Commission (created in 1885 as the State Reservation at Niagara).
Robert Moses State Parkway, formerly Niagara Parkway, links the Grand Island parks with Niagara Falls, Fort Niagara, and Lake Ontario to the north. The Grand Island West River Parkway forms a scenic route around the island and, together with Interstate 190, provides a connection with the New York State Thruway, Robert Moses State Parkway, Beaver Island and Buckhorn Island state parks, and Buffalo to the south.
