Owambo, also called Ovamboland,  geographic region, northern Namibia. Owambo is bordered by the Kaokoland (Kaokoveld) region on the west and by the Kavango region on the east. The border with Angola lies to the north. Most of semiarid Owambo is an extremely flat plain covered by white sands. It is crossed by a series of low-gradient, often parallel, south-oriented dry watercourses (oshanas), collectively called the Cuvelai, which occasionally feed the Etosha Pan (a huge salt pan) to the south of Owambo with rainwater. The water supplied by the oshanas and the man-made feeder canals of Owambo has been augmented by a project sponsored by the South African government to connect the main irrigation canals from the Calueque Dam (on the Kunene River in southern Angola) to Owambo and to develop the hydroelectric potential of the complex above the Ruacana Falls (at the Namibia and Angola border, 40 miles [64 km] downriver from the Calueque Dam). Owambo is generally grass-covered, and dispersed clusters of baobab, palm, and wild fig trees are commonplace in the area of greater rainfall in the north.
According to tradition, the people known as the Owambo (Ovambo; or, in Angola, Ambo), for whom the region is named, migrated to their present location from central Africa. Consisting of seven different tribes, they comprise about half of Namibia’s population. They live mostly alongside the oshanas; grow corn (maize), millet, pumpkins, and melons; and raise goats and dairy cattle.
Finnish Lutheran missionaries arrived at Owambo in 1870, and Anglican and Roman Catholic missionaries entered the area later. The Finns, in particular, have continued to supply the Owambo with hospitals and churches. Owambo became a part of the German Empire in 1884. Upon the defeat of the Germans in World War I, Owambo, together with the rest of South West Africa, became a mandated territory administered by South Africa. Fighting between the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) and South African forces persisted until 1990, when Namibia became independent.
The main road through the region links it with Angola and the copper- and lead-mining centre of Tsumeb to the southeast. The region’s population is concentrated in the central north along the Angolan border. Oshakati, Ondangwa, Oshikango, and Ombalantu are the principal settlements.
