Quercy,   historic and cultural region encompassing most of the southwestern French départements of Lot and Tarn-et-Garonne and coextensive with the former district of Quercy. The district was organized in Gallo-Roman times as a civitas of the Cadurci, a Celtic people whose name is reflected in that of Quercy. It was occupied by the Visigoths in the 5th century and by the Franks in the 6th century. By the Anglo-French Treaty of Paris (1259), the English king received some ill-defined rights in the area, which led to disputes, first diplomatic, then military, between England and France. The French ceded Quercy to England by the Treaty of Brétigny (1360), but the English were finally expelled in 1443 during the last phase of the Hundred Years’ War. The district was later included in the French gouvernement of Guyenne. In the 16th-century Wars of Religion, Quercy was savagely contested between Roman Catholics and Huguenots; in the 1620s Montauban, one of Quercy’s chief towns, became a major centre of Huguenot resistance.
The region comprises a dry limestone plateau not much used for agriculture but well forested with the oaks (genus Quercus) that give their name to the region. The traditional farmstead has two stories linked by an outside stairway. There is often a porch at the top of the stairway. Living quarters are on the ground floor, known as the cave; provisions and tobacco are stored above. Dovecotes built between 1750 and 1850 are scattered throughout the countryside. Pigeons were raised for their droppings, which were used to fertilize farmland. Wills made provision for the division of the manure among heirs. Stone walls built by shepherds fragment the countryside in Lot.
Quercy is predominantly Roman Catholic, though there is a substantial Protestant enclave in Montauban. Truffles are unearthed in Lot around Lalbenque, Sauzet, Limogne-en-Quercy, and Cahors. Vineyards around Cahors produce a rich red wine that should be aged for 2 to 3 years in a cask and for 10 years in a bottle. Souillac, Saint-Céré, and Sousceyrac also produce fine wines. Occitan continues to be spoken by much of the population.
