Randstad,  industrial and metropolitan conurbation occupying an area of peat and clay lowlands, west-central Netherlands. The Randstad (“Ring City,” “Rim City,” “City on the Edge”) consists of major Dutch industrial cities extending in a crescent (open to the southeast) from Utrecht in the east to Dordrecht in the south and including Hilversum, Amsterdam, Haarlem, Leiden, The Hague, and Rotterdam.
By ad 1300 there were settlements at Utrecht, Delft, Leiden, Amsterdam, Gouda, and Haarlem, and dikes had been built along the Zuiderzee, Haring River, Hollandsh Canal, and the rivers of Nieuwe Maas (Meuse) and Nieuwe Merwede. The area contained several lakes, many of which were dug by peat farmers who used the peat as fuel in their homes and for preserving herring. Industrialization grew during the 15th century, and the area that now constitutes the Randstad developed rapidly; excessive flooding of the lakes led to the prohibition of peat digging during the 16th century. Dordrecht, a major port, traded in wine and salt from France and herring from Norway. Tiles, linen, vegetables, and madder (a plant whose roots were used for dyeing) were exported. A large area of the shallow seas, including the Haarlemmermeer, that once existed between Amsterdam and Rotterdam was reclaimed by pumping between 1600 and 1900.
The cities of the modern Randstad manufacture motor vehicles, machinery, chemicals, electrical goods, and printed materials. Haarlem and Leiden are noted for their textile industries. Rotterdam Europoort is the world’s largest port in volume of goods handled. The Hague is the seat of the national government, and Amsterdam, nominally the national capital, is also a financial and cultural centre. In addition, the cities are marketing centres for the flowers, cereals, and livestock that are raised in the surrounding area. Forests are found near The Hague, Amersfoort, and Hilversum. Railway connections and highways extend throughout the Randstad, and airports are located near Amsterdam, Rotterdam, and Hilversum.
