Savoy, French Savoie, Italian Savoia,  historical and cultural region encompassing the Haute-Savoie and Savoie départements, Rhône-Alpes région, southeastern France. It is coextensive with the historic region of Savoy.
The early inhabitants of the area were the Allobroges, members of a Celtic tribe who fiercely resisted Roman penetration. They were finally conquered by the Romans in 121 bce, and their territory was later included in the province of Gallia Narbonensis. During the period of barbarian invasions, the area of Savoy was assigned to the Burgundians (437) and then passed to the Frankish kingdom of Burgundy (534). The name Savoy dates from this period and eventually came to apply specifically to the land between Lake Geneva on the north and the Isère River on the south.
After the breakdown of the Carolingian empire in the 9th century, Savoy formed part of a series of kingdoms covering middle Europe and came under the suzerainty of the German Holy Roman emperor in the mid-11th century. By this date a feudal lord, Humbert I (the Whitehanded), founder of the house of Savoy, actually controlled much of the area. Humbert and his successors during the Middle Ages built up a considerable state for themselves with Savoy as its base and extending east across the Alps into Piedmont.
In the early modern period, Savoy became an object of French expansion because of its strategic position commanding the roads into Italy. Although Savoy was occupied a number of times by French troops in the 16th and 17th centuries, the dukes of Savoy were able to recover it. At the same time, however, Savoy, which was predominately French in language, lost its hegemony among the Savoyard lands as the dukes came to favour their Italian territories, a shift reflected in the transfer of the capital from Chambéry to Turin in Piedmont (1563). Annexed by France in 1792 during the French Revolutionary Wars, Savoy was restored to its traditional rulers in 1815.
Savoy (along with Nice) became part of France permanently in 1860 as the price for the French emperor Napoleon III’s consent to the formation of a state covering north-central Italy under the rule of the house of Savoy.
Situated just south of Switzerland’s Lake Geneva, the region physiographically constitutes an almost purely Alpine mountain landscape. Much of the region’s limited farmland is devoted to cattle raising and dairying, and cereals, vines, and fruit (apples) are grown. Forests are an important resource, and cheesemaking and sawmilling are important industries. Traditional chalets in the northwest of Savoy are built of wood, while the chalets in the high Alps are largely built of stone. Farms tend to be highly fragmented. Savoy is overwhelmingly Roman Catholic; Protestantism has made few inroads.
Chambéry, Annecy, and Annemasse are important industrial and commercial centres of the region and, with their suburbs, are home to the majority of the region’s population. Industry extends along the Arve valley. In the mountainous areas, tourism is the principal economic activity, centred on long-established resorts such as Chamonix. More modern winter sports resorts include La Plagne and Les Ares.
The regional cuisine relies heavily on cheese, freshwater fish, crayfish, mushrooms, potatoes, and fruit. Cheeses are known as tommes and are packaged in tight balls with a tough rind. Gratins are prepared with potatoes, eggs, and bouillon. Saint-Jean-de-Port and Montmélian produce distinctive red wines; the Marc de Savoie is a fine gentian bitters. The patois of Savoy shows Provençal influence, and numerous words end in oz or az. The z is never pronounced.
