South Ossetia, Russian Yuzhnaya Osetiya,  autonomous republic in Georgia that declared independence in 2008. Only a few countries—most notably Russia, which maintains a military presence in South Ossetia—recognize its independence. South Ossetia occupies the southern slopes of the Greater Caucasus mountains. The region is populated largely (about two-thirds) by Ossetes, a Caucasian people speaking an eastern Iranian language. (Many Ossetes also live in the neighbouring republic of North Ossetia–Alania in Russia, which occupies the northern slopes of the Greater Caucasus.) Most of the remaining inhabitants of South Ossetia are Georgians. Its capital is Tskhinvali. Pop. (2014) 53,532; (2016 est.) 53,000.
South Ossetia is deeply intersected by rivers, which are harnessed for hydroelectric power. The vast majority of the region lies more than 3,300 feet (1,000 metres) above sea level, and only about one-tenth of its area is cultivated. Grain, fruit, and vines are grown, partly under irrigation. Sheep are raised on the higher slopes, and the considerable forest wealth is exploited. Continued separatist conflict with Georgia—from which South Ossetia has sought independence—has hampered South Ossetia’s economy, and smuggling across the border with Russia—with which South Ossetia more closely identifies—has become significant.
In the late 1980s a separatist movement emerged in South Ossetia that sought secession from Georgia and unification with North Ossetia–Alania. In 1989 Soviet troops were sent to maintain peace. Shortly after Georgia gained its independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, heavy fighting broke out between Ossetian and Georgian forces, forcing thousands to flee South Ossetia. In 1992 Russia helped broker a cease-fire—the terms of which called for peacekeeping forces from Georgia, Russia, North Ossetia–Alania, and South Ossetia—but the breakaway region’s status remained unresolved. In 1993 South Ossetia approved a constitution that established the region as a republic. Although not internationally recognized, it elected a president in 1996. Subsequent negotiations failed to end the conflict, and periodic fighting continued into the early 21st century.
Although South Ossetia emphasized its desire for independence in an unofficial referendum in late 2006, such status was unrecognized by the international community, and the territory remained legally part of Georgia. Hostilities between South Ossetia and Georgia—and, more broadly, between Georgia and Russia—escalated rapidly in August 2008, when Georgian troops engaged with local separatist fighters, as well as with Russian forces that had crossed the border there with the stated intent to defend Russian citizens and peacekeeping troops already in the region. In the days that followed, Russian forces took control of Tskhinvali, the South Ossetian capital, and fighting continued to spread to other parts of the country—including Abkhazia, a second separatist region, located along the Black Sea coast in northwestern Georgia. Georgia and Russia signed a French-brokered cease-fire that called for the withdrawal of Russian forces, but tensions continued. Russia’s subsequent recognition of the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia was condemned by Georgia and met with criticism from other members of the international community.
