Southwest,   region, southwestern United States, historically denoting several geographic areas in turn and changing over the years as the nation expanded. After the War of 1812, the Southwest generally meant Missouri, Arkansas, and Louisiana; after Texas was annexed, it, too, was included. In the wake of the war with Mexico, the Southwest embraced most, but not all, of the territory that was acquired under the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848), including land often considered part of the “West”—i.e., New Mexico, Arizona, and all or parts of Oklahoma, Colorado, Utah, and Nevada, as suited the convenience of the user of the term. It ordinarily excludes California.
The common denominator of the modern Southwest is aridity. The high, dry plains of Texas extend westward to the Pecos valley of New Mexico. Although the southern spurs of the Rocky Mountains beyond the Pecos River are cool and are dotted with evergreens, farther west are vast highly coloured sandstone deposits. Occasional mesas or buttes rise above the peneplain through which the Colorado River has cut such spectacular gorges as the Grand Canyon. Stretching westward from Arizona are the true deserts with their growth of cacti and gaunt, parallel chains of mountains almost devoid of vegetation.
Most crops can be grown in the Southwest only with irrigation, the water for which is taken mostly from the Colorado River and the Rio Grande. Prior to the Reclamation Act of 1902 and the subsequent building of Theodore Roosevelt Dam (completed 1911) near Phoenix, Ariz., Hoover Dam (1936) on the Colorado River, and the Glen Canyon Dam (1966) upriver from Hoover, the dryness of the land enforced a pastoral economy. During the period of Spanish ascendancy in the early 1800s, sheep ranches grew to great size. The Pueblo Indians even began to use wool instead of native cotton in their weaving. Although the importance of sheep ranching has declined in the 20th century, cattle raising has increased and is economically important in New Mexico, Arizona, Oklahoma, and Texas; the latter leads all other states in the raising of beef cattle as well as sheep. Long-staple cotton, alfalfa, citrus fruit, grain, and sorghum are the Southwest’s main crops.
Copper mining, particularly in Arizona, where open-pit operations account for about two-thirds of the nation’s total annual production, has been important since the 19th century. The discovery of petroleum and natural-gas deposits in the early 20th century in Oklahoma and Texas resulted in oases of prosperity from local oil booms. Along the Gulf Coast a flourishing industrial region developed around Houston and other Gulf of Mexico ports, largely based on petrochemical industries. Also, since World War II and particularly in Arizona and Texas, manufacturing has become important, notably in the electrical, communications, aeronautical, automobile-assembly, and aluminum industries. The growth of population and industry in the region also brought water shortages and, following the building of dams, disputes between states over the allocation of water resources, such as the diversion of water from the Colorado River.
Although the Southwest’s dry, crisp climate and scenic landscapes were a curse to agriculture, they have been a boon to businesses catering to tourists and health seekers. These visitors had a lively interest in the Indian and Spanish-American cultures, including the native architecture, Indian dances, Spanish fiestas, and rodeos. The Southwest has also become a popular retirement area.
