Tigray, also spelled Tegray, Tigrai, or Tigre,  historical region, northern Ethiopia. Its western part rises in high-plateau country where elevations generally range between 5,000 and 11,000 feet (1,500 and 3,300 metres). The region is drained by the Tekeze and Gash (Mareb) rivers. To the east lies the Denakil Plain, including the Kobar Sink (some 380 feet [116 metres] below sea level).
Tigray contains the core of the ancient Aksumite kingdom and the historic settlements of Aksum, the kingdom’s capital; Yeha, a ruined town of great antiquity; and Adwa, the site of a battle in 1896 in which the Italian invading force was defeated.
Although vegetation is sparse, most of Tigray’s population is engaged in agriculture (cereals, legumes, coffee, and cotton) and stock raising. Hides and skins are important exports. Salt and potash from desert deposits are also exported. The region, which has long been home to the Tigray people, also supports the Raya, Azebo, Afar, and Agau (Agaw, or Agew) peoples.
By controlling the Red Sea ports of Massawa (Mitsiwa) and Asseb, Tigray became the region through which trading caravans reached the seat of the empire to the south. After it lost the coast to the Ottoman Empire in the 16th century, the region lost status, and thereafter, with the brief exception of Yohannes IV (reigned 1872–89), its princes were dominated by the rulers of the Gonder and Shewa regions to the south. It was also under constant threat from Egyptian, Sudanese, British, and Italian armies trying to penetrate to the interior. After occupation by Italy (1935–41), it was governed by officials appointed from the national capital in Addis Ababa.
In 1975 the Tigray (Tigrayan) People’s Liberation Front began a protracted rebellion against the military government. The conflict aggravated a disastrous drought and famine between 1984 and 1985, which the government tried to ameliorate by forcibly relocating hundreds of thousands of peasants to well-watered regions in the south and west. An international outcry led to the suspension of that program, but by then it had led to the deaths of some 100,000 people, and hundreds of thousands more sought refuge from civil war and famine in Sudan and Djibouti. Tigray forces liberated the region in 1989 and supported the overthrow of the Ethiopian national government in 1991. Their victory resulted in the replacement of an Amhara-dominated government with one led by Tigray leaders, a source of continuing conflict throughout the 1990s. Another source of conflict was disagreement regarding the border demarcation between Ethiopia and neighbouring Eritrea, with both countries claiming areas in Tigray. Conflict over the issue persisted into the 21st century.
