Westphalia, German Westfalen,  historic region of northwestern Germany, comprising a large part of the present federal Land (state) of North Rhine–Westphalia.
The ancient Saxons were divided into three main groups: the Westphalians, the Angrians (German: Engern), and the Eastphalians (Ostfalen). The Westphalians, who had settled in the area of the Ems and Hunte rivers about 700 ce, spread south almost as far as Cologne and in 775 resisted the advance of the Franks under Charlemagne. For about three centuries, this region retained its separate identity in spite of the rise of the more powerful aggregated Saxon duchy. In the 12th century the old distinction between Westphalians and Angrians fell into disuse, and all Saxony west of the Weser River came to be called Westphalia.
The archbishops of Cologne received Westphalia as a duchy in 1180, but the duchy was in fact confined mainly to an area northeast of Cologne. Numerous other political entities grew up in the region of Westphalia, among them the bishoprics of Münster, Paderborn, Osnabrück, and Minden; the countships of Waldeck, Schaumburg, Lippe, Ravensberg, and Mark (with Limburg); the imperial city of Dortmund; and the abbey of Essen. In 1512 the Lower Rhine–Westphalian circle (Kreis) of the Holy Roman Empire was formed. From 1644 to 1648 the Westphalian towns of Münster and Osnabrück hosted the peace conferences that settled the Eighty Years’ War and the German phase of the Thirty Years’ War. The resulting Peace of Westphalia contributed to the foundation of the modern European nation-state system.
From the early 17th century, the Hohenzollern rulers of Brandenburg-Prussia gained territories in Westphalia and became predominant there in 1803, when they acquired Paderborn and most of Münster. At the same time, Hesse-Darmstadt acquired Cologne’s part of Westphalia. Osnabrück went to Hanover and the rest of Münster to Oldenburg.
In 1807 Napoleon assigned most of traditional Westphalia to the Grand Duchy of Berg. The Kingdom of Westphalia, which he created for his brother Jérôme, was made up largely of Prussian and Hanoverian possessions between the Weser and the Elbe rivers and the greater part of electoral Hesse; its capital was Kassel. The Congress of Vienna in 1814–15 restored most of old Westphalia to Prussia, which then established a province of Westphalia with its capital at Münster. Lippe and Waldeck remained under sovereign princes; Hanover and Oldenburg were awarded their former lands. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the Ruhr valley became very densely populated and the single most heavily industrialized area in the world.
In 1946 the province of Westphalia, together with Lippe, was incorporated in the Land of North Rhine–Westphalia. The north of the ancient Westphalia (most of it Prussian since 1866) went to the Land of Lower Saxony; and Waldeck (attached to Prussian Hesse since 1929) became part of the new Land of Hesse.
