Yauri,   historic kingdom and traditional emirate, Kebbi state, northwestern Nigeria. The kingdom was probably founded by the Reshe (Gungawa) people. The date of its founding is unknown, but by the mid-14th century it was considered one of the most important of the banza bakwai (the “seven unsanctioned states” of the Hausa-speaking peoples). A political power struggle took place between Yauri and Zaria (emirate), both Hausa-speaking groups, over the governmental control of the Seven Hausa States. Yauri lost the struggle and Zaria was then recognized as comprising the Seven True Hausa States. Yauri, however, became known as the “seven illegitimate states” of the Hausa peoples. The walls of its first capital, Bin Yauri (Birnin Yawari, Ireshe Bino, Ireshe)—traditionally said to date from the 10th century—have long been in ruins. Yauri’s 5th and 11th kings (Yauri and Jerebana II, respectively) are both credited with establishing Islām as the state religion.
Muhammadu Kanta, founder of the Kebbi kingdom to the north, conquered Yauri in the mid-16th century; and Yauri, although essentially independent after Kanta’s death (c. 1561), paid tribute to Kebbi until the mid-18th century. About 1810 King Albishir (Mohammadu dan Ayi), the Hausa ruler of Yauri, pledged allegiance to the emir of Gwandu, the Fulani empire’s overlord of the western emirates, and became the first emir of Yauri.
The expulsion in 1844 of Emir Jibrilu Gajere by the peoples of Yauri led to civil war. In 1850 Emir Suleimanu dan Addo moved the Yauri capital from Bin Yauri to the island of Ikum in the Niger River. Fears of conquest by Kontagora, the adjoining emirate to the south and east, led the Yauri rulers to retain the island capital until 1888, when agreement was reached with Kontagora’s emir, Ibrahim Nagwamatse, and the Yauri capital was moved to Yelwa (q.v.).
Since that time—through British rule (1901–60) and Nigerian independence (since 1960)—Yelwa has remained the traditional seat of the emirate and the chief trade centre. Crops are grown for export on the fertile Niger River flood plain. Most of the population of the emirate is composed of members of the Yauri, Dakarki (Dakarawa), Kamberi, Reshe, Dukawa, Hausa, and Fulani groups.
