Zaria, formerly Zazzau, or Zegzeg,  historic kingdom, traditional emirate, and local government council in Kaduna State, northern Nigeria, with its headquarters at Zaria (q.v.) city. The kingdom is traditionally said to date from the 11th century, when King Gunguma founded it as one of the original Hausa Bakwai (Seven True Hausa States). As the southernmost state of the seven, it had the function of capturing slaves for all Hausa Bakwai, especially for the northern markets of Kano and Katsina. Camel caravans from the Sahara travelled south to Zazzau to exchange salt for slaves, cloth, leather, and grain. Islām was introduced about 1456, and there were Muslim Hausa rulers in the early 16th century. Muḥammad I Askia, a warrior leader of the Songhai Empire, conquered Zazzau c. 1512; the results of that conquest were recorded by the traveller Leo Africanus.
Later in the century, Zazzau’s ruler Queen Amina enlarged her domain by numerous conquests, including those of the Nupe and the Jukun kingdoms; even the powerful states of Kano and Katsina were required to pay tribute. By the end of the century, however, Zazzau—renamed Zaria—came under the control of Kororofa (Kwararafa), the Jukun kingdom centred near Ibi to the southeast. Shortly after the decline of Kororofa, Zaria was forced to become a tributary state (c. 1734–1804) of the Bornu kingdom to the northeast.
In 1804 the Muslim Hausa ruler of Zaria pledged allegiance to Usman dan Fodio, the Fulani Muslim leader who was conducting the great jihād (“holy war”) in northern Nigeria. This resulted in a Fulani becoming ruler of Zaria in 1808. Zaria emirate was created in 1835, retaining some of its old vassal states (including Keffi, Nasarawa, Jemaa, and Lapai to the south); it was governed by a representative of the sultan at Sokoto (216 mi northwest of Zaria city), as well as the local emir.
Zaria’s fortunes declined in the late 19th century; the critical blow was the loss in 1899 of Birnin Gwari (a town and Hausa chiefdom 63 mi west of Zaria city) to Kontagora (an emirate to the southwest). In 1901 Zaria sought British protection against slave raids by Kontagora. After the murder in 1902 of Captain Moloney, the British resident at Keffi (154 mi south), by the Zaria magaji (“representative”), the British stripped the emirate of most of its vassal states.
Zaria remains, however, one of Nigeria’s largest (about 12,750 sq mi [33,000 sq km]) traditional emirates. A savanna area, it is one of the nation’s leading producers of cotton for export. Other significant cash crops include tobacco, peanuts (groundnuts), shea nuts, soybeans, sugarcane (which is processed locally into brown sugar), and ginger. Sorghum, millet, and cowpeas are the staple foods; cattle, chickens, goats, guinea fowl, and sheep are raised for meat. Tin mining has long been important in the south, at the western edge of the Jos Plateau. The population is an ethnic mix in which Muslim Hausa and Fulani people predominate.
