Ronald L. Akers,  (born Jan. 7, 1939, New Albany, Ind., U.S.), American criminologist widely known for his social learning theory of crime. After earning a Ph.D. in sociology from the University of Kentucky (1966), Akers taught at several universities before joining the faculty of the University of Florida (1980), where he served as professor of sociology and director of the Center for Studies in Criminology and Law.
Akers argued that criminal behaviour is the product of normal learning. The original version of this theory, developed with the American sociologist Robert L. Burgess and published as “A Differential Association-Reinforcement Theory of Criminal Behavior” (1966), drew upon earlier work by the American criminologist Edwin Sutherland and the American psychologist B.F. Skinner. On the basis of Sutherland’s differential theory of crime (according to which criminal acts are most likely to occur in social settings that cast crime in a favourable light) and Skinner’s theory of operant conditioning (according to which learning is a form of association created through reinforcements such as punishments and rewards), Akers argued that criminal behaviour is learned through both social and nonsocial reinforcements and that most learning of criminal behaviour occurs in social interactions with other people.
Later versions of Akers’s theory drew upon the social learning theory of the American psychologist Albert Bandura (which broadened operant conditioning to include learning that takes place through modeling) and ultimately examined the effects on individuals of behaviours seen on television and in motion pictures. Akers argued that, although criminal behaviour is acquired through social interaction and modeling, it is maintained over time through the actual consequences of criminal acts, both social and nonsocial. He further argued that social learning is the process that mediates the effects of social structural factors on criminal and deviant behaviour. Akers tested his theory in a variety of studies involving delinquency and drug, alcohol, and cigarette use. In 1988 he received the Edwin H. Sutherland Award from the American Society of Criminology for outstanding contributions to theory and research.
