Travis Hirschi,  (born April 15, 1935, Rockville, Utah, U.S.—died January 2, 2017, Tucson, Arizona), American criminologist known for his social-control perspective on juvenile delinquency and his self-control perspective on crime.
Hirschi received a Ph.D. in sociology from the University of California, Berkeley (1968), and taught at several universities before joining the faculty of the University of Arizona (1981). In Causes of Delinquency (1969)—a groundbreaking work that had a profound influence on criminology during the next three decades—Hirschi argued that delinquency can be explained by the absence of social bonds. According to Hirschi, social attachments (e.g., to parents, teachers, and peers), involvement in conventional activities, acceptance of social norms (such as the norm that criminal acts should be avoided), and recognition of the moral validity of law are most likely to prevent delinquency.
Hirschi’s collaboration with the American criminologist Michael R. Gottfredson resulted in A General Theory of Crime (1990), which defined crime as “acts of force or fraud undertaken in pursuit of self-interest.” Arguing that all crime can be explained as a combination of criminal opportunity and low self-control, Gottfredson and Hirschi hypothesized that a child’s level of self-control, which is heavily influenced by child-rearing practices, stabilizes by the time he reaches the age of eight. Thus, they identified parenting as the most decisive factor in determining the likelihood that a person will commit crimes. Children reared in settings of neglect or abuse, for example, will be more likely to commit criminal acts, while children raised in supervised homes, where punishment is a consequence of bad behaviour, will be more likely to withstand temptations toward criminal conduct. In addition to criminal and delinquent acts, low self-control is manifested in tendencies to be “impulsive, insensitive, physical, risk-oriented, shortsighted, and nonverbal.” Although Hirschi’s theories were criticized for being, among other things, tautological, paternalistic, and definitionally flawed, they were widely popular among American criminologists. 
Hirschi received a number of awards for his work, including the C. Wright Mills Award from the Society for the Study of Social Problems and the Edwin H. Sutherland Award from the American Society of Criminology.
