Charles Bachman, in full Charles William Bachman III,  (born December 11, 1924, Manhattan, Kansas, U.S.—died July 13, 2017, Lexington, Massachusetts), American computer scientist and winner of the 1973 A.M. Turing Award, the highest honour in computer science, for “his outstanding contributions to database technology.”
At the time of Bachman’s birth, his father was the head football coach at Kansas Agriculture College in Manhattan, and the family subsequently followed the father’s trajectory through head coaching jobs at the University of Florida in Gainseville and Michigan State College (now Michigan State University) in East Lansing. By January 1943, Bachman had enough credits to graduate with his high school class, so he began courses at Michigan State. By the end of the summer, having graduated with his high school class and finished the first year of course work at Michigan State, Bachman joined the U.S. Army and served in the Pacific theatre during World War II.
Following his discharge from the military in 1946, Bachman returned to Michigan State, where in 1948 he earned a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering. In 1950 Bachman earned a master’s degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Pennsylvania, where he also attended the Wharton School of Business. On graduation, he worked as an engineer on operations research problems for Dow Chemical Company in Midland, Michigan, where in 1957 he was chosen to be the first head of a new data-processing division. Though Bachman selected a digital computer from IBM for purchase and hired a team of computer programmers and data analysts, Dow backed out of the arrangement in 1960.
In 1961 Bachman joined the General Electric Company in New York City, where he developed one of the first database management systems. When Honeywell Inc. acquired General Electric’s computer business in 1970, Bachman went to work in Boston for Honeywell’s advanced research group. In 1981 Bachman moved on to nearby Cullinane Database Systems Inc., where he worked on database design before leaving in 1983 to found his own consulting firm, Bachman Information Systems, Inc. His firm went through several mergers and acquisitions before Bachman turned to freelance consultation. In 1996 Bachman retired to Tucson, Arizona.
Bachman held more than a dozen U.S. patents in database software and was elected a distinguished fellow of the British Computer Society in 1977. His other honours included a National Medal of Technology and Innovation (2014).
