computer simulation,  the use of a computer to represent the dynamic responses of one system by the behaviour of another system modeled after it. A simulation uses a mathematical description, or model, of a real system in the form of a computer program. This model is composed of equations that duplicate the functional relationships within the real system. When the program is run, the resulting mathematical dynamics form an analog of the behaviour of the real system, with the results presented in the form of data. A simulation can also take the form of a computer-graphics image that represents dynamic processes in an animated sequence.
Computer simulations are used to study the dynamic behaviour of objects or systems in response to conditions that cannot be easily or safely applied in real life. For example, a nuclear blast can be described by a mathematical model that incorporates such variables as heat, velocity, and radioactive emissions. Additional mathematical equations can then be used to adjust the model to changes in certain variables, such as the amount of fissionable material that produced the blast. Simulations are especially useful in enabling observers to measure and predict how the functioning of an entire system may be affected by altering individual components within that system.
The simpler simulations performed by personal computers consist mainly of business models and geometric models. The former includes spreadsheet, financial, and statistical software programs that are used in business analysis and planning. Geometric models are used for numerous applications that require simple mathematical modeling of objects, such as buildings, industrial parts, and the molecular structures of chemicals. More advanced simulations, such as those that emulate weather patterns or the behaviour of macroeconomic systems, are usually performed on powerful workstations or supercomputers. In engineering, computer models of newly designed structures undergo simulated tests to determine their responses to stress and other physical variables. Simulations of river systems can be manipulated to determine the potential effects of dams and irrigation networks before any actual construction has taken place. Other examples of computer simulations include estimating the competitive responses of companies in a particular market and reproducing the movement and flight of space vehicles.
