David Karp,  (born July 6, 1986, New York, New York, U.S.), American Web developer and entrepreneur who founded the blogging site Tumblr.
Karp grew up on Manhattan’s Upper West Side, the elder of two sons of a teacher and a composer. He became interested in technology and programming at a young age, teaching himself HTML at 11. When he was 15, he left the prestigious Bronx High School of Science and began homeschooling with his mother in order to pursue an internship opportunity with an animation company, Frederator Studios, that did much of its work online. Through connections at Frederator he soon secured a position doing Web developing for UrbanBaby, a message-board site on which parents could ask questions and discuss child rearing. Karp did much of his work remotely, and at age 17 he moved by himself to Japan for a brief period to become immersed in that country’s technology. He eventually returned to New York and became chief technology officer of UrbanBaby. When the site was sold to another company in 2006, he raised some capital to invest in his own consultancy, Davidville. He continued to build the business, hiring programmer Marco Arment to help.
While Davidville was experiencing some downtime, Karp urged Arment to assist him in building a blogging site he had envisioned. The site, Tumblr, was launched in private beta in 2006 and to the public in early 2007. It hosted “tumblelogs,” or short-form blogs, of text and various other types of media. Users could make specially formatted posts for photos, videos, audio clips, links, quotes, and chat logs with the click of a button. They had the choice of modifying their blog’s theme personally, applying one of a handful of default themes, or purchasing a premade theme—one of the site’s only avenues of income. The site also made money by partnering with companies to build effective Tumblr feeds for marketing. Tumblr blogs, like accounts on social media site Twitter, could be “followed” by users, with new posts by followed blogs showing up in a user’s “dashboard” stream. Unlike other blogs, Tumblr did not employ a prominent comment feature, in part because of Karp’s wish to discourage vandalism and mean-spiritedness. However, users had the option to “reblog” posts from other users and add comments for their own followers to see. Ease of use and a positive environment fostered by the use of terms such as fan mail instead of messaging and a heart button to show support for a given post contributed to the site’s popularity. Some five years after its public debut, Tumblr, with headquarters in New York City, hosted more than 70 million blogs and employed some 100 people.
In 2013 Yahoo!  purchased Tumblr for more than $1 billion, though Karp continued as CEO. The acquisition was largely seen as a disappointment, however. Tumblr failed to meet revenue expectations, and Yahoo! subsequently devalued the company to less than half its purchase price. In 2017 Tumblr became part of Oath, a subsidiary formed after the sale of Yahoo! to Verizon. Later that year Karp announced that he was resigning from Tumblr.
