Dennis M. Ritchie,  (born September 9, 1941, Bronxville, Eastchester, New York, U.S.—found dead October 2011, Berkeley Heights, New Jersey), American computer scientist and cowinner of the 1983 A.M. Turing Award, the highest honour in computer science. Ritchie and the American computer scientist Kenneth L. Thompson were cited jointly for “their development of generic soperating systems theory and specifically for the implementation of the UNIX operating system,” which they developed together at Bell Laboratories.
Ritchie earned a bachelor’s degree (1963) in physics and a doctorate (1968) in mathematics from Harvard University. In 1967 he joined Bell Labs, where he first worked on the Multics operating system (OS). Multics was a time-sharing system funded by the Advanced Research Projects Agency and jointly developed by researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Bell Labs, and General Electric Co. However, AT&T Corporation (then the parent company of Bell Labs) withdrew from the project and removed its GE computers in 1969.
Upon the removal of the GE machines, Ritchie joined Thompson in developing a more flexible operating system for Bell Lab’s obsolete Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) PDP-7 minicomputer. Within a few months they had created UNIX, a new OS not completely tied to any particular computer hardware, as earlier systems had been.
In conjunction with the development of UNIX, Ritchie contributed somewhat to Thompson’s creation of the B programming language in 1970. As they moved their operating system to a newer PDP-11 minicomputer in 1971, the shortcomings of B became apparent, and Ritchie extended the language over the next year to create the C programming language. C and its family of languages, including C++ and Java, remain among the most widely used computer programming languages. In 1973 Ritchie and Thompson rewrote UNIX in C.
Ritchie was named a fellow by Bell Labs in 1983 and was elected to the U.S. National Academy of Engineering in 1988. In 1990 he was appointed head of the System Software Research Department at Bell Labs, where he led the development of the Plan 9 (1995) and Inferno (1996) operating systems. In 1998 Ritchie and Thompson were awarded the U.S. National Medal of Technology for their development of UNIX.
Among Ritchie’s publications are the Unix Programmer’s Manual (1971) and, with Brian W. Kernighan, The C Programming Language (1978).
