E-book, in full electronic book,  digital file containing a body of text and images suitable for distributing electronically and displaying on-screen in a manner similar to a printed book. E-books can be created by converting a printer’s source files to formats optimized for easy downloading and on-screen reading, or they can be drawn from a database or a set of text files that were not created solely for print.
The industry for buying and selling e-books first emerged as a mainstream business in the late 1990s, when companies like Peanut Press began selling book content for reading on personal digital assistants (PDAs), handheld devices that were the predecessors of today’s smartphones and tablet computers. However, in the aftermath of the dot-com crash of 2000–2002, e-books did not find wide acceptance by the publishing industry, and investment in e-reading devices and e-book technologies subsided. The industry’s resurgence may have begun when the Sony Corporation released an e-reading device in 2006 and Amazon.com released the Kindle in 2007, after which sales of e-books in the United States grew rapidly.
E-books are usually distributed on the Internet as downloadable files that can be read offline, as live Web pages that must be read online, or as Web pages that are cached by a Web browser for reading offline.
The source of the catalog or metadata (which is data about the data) for a file may be entirely distinct from the source of the file itself. In other words, customers might find, read about, and buy e-books on a retailer’s Web site, but, when they purchase the e-books, they will download the files directly from the publisher’s or distributor’s servers, which may be on the other side of the world. (The same applies to e-books in a public or institutional library). This distinction is hidden from the customer, but for businesses it is very significant. It allows for e-book files to be stored and managed in only one place (or very few places), even though customers may find them listed for sale or loan in any number of places. Without this distinction, all e-book distribution would occur within closed, proprietary systems, where e-book buyers or library patrons would have to get their books directly from a small number of owners of e-book files.
Closed, proprietary systems exist where a particular company (or consortium of companies) holds the e-book files and controls all the places a customer or library patron can access them. These systems are kept closed by a proprietary form of digital rights management (DRM): a file-encryption and access-control system that locks e-books both to a customer’s identity and to specific software controlled by the company. Examples are Amazon Kindle and Apple iBooks.
In open systems, e-book files may exist in only one place, but anyone can access and download the files (whether for purchase or free download), because their metadata are freely available and can be freely shared. Examples are catalogs created in the Open Publication Distribution System (OPDS) and incorporated into e-reading applications. The nonprofit Project Gutenberg is an example of an open distribution system. A single distribution system may incorporate both closed, proprietary elements and open elements.
Arguments for and against DRM are highly contentious. From an ethical perspective, its use is fiercely condemned by those who believe it restricts consumers’ rights and criminalizes reasonable copying and sharing. Its proponents, on the other hand, argue that DRM is a necessary tool for protecting intellectual property from casual piracy. From a business perspective, its use can be criticized for creating a clumsy user experience, while it can be defended as a tool for securing clear market share.
E-books are read on any computing device with the software to display their given file format. While Amazon’s mobi, open PDF, and EPUB formats have become de facto standards, the use of proprietary DRM systems means that not all PDF-, EPUB-, and mobi-capable software can open these files.
With the necessary software installed, e-book-reading devices include personal computers, handheld tablet computers and game consoles, dedicated e-readers, mobile phones (especially powerful smartphones), and consoles attached to televisions or other screens. Rapid changes and advances in screen technology, processing power, the miniaturization of computing components, and wireless Internet connectivity are constantly changing the nature and range of e-reading devices.
