Evan Williams, byname Ev,  (born March 31, 1972, near Clarks, Nebraska, U.S.), American computer programmer who, with Jack Dorsey and Biz Stone, founded Twitter, an online microblogging service.
Williams grew up on a farm but had aspirations of starting his own business, and he left the University of Nebraska at Lincoln without graduating. In the mid-1990s he briefly ran a company that he and his father set up to provide instructional material about the World Wide Web. He then worked as a Web developer for several California-based computer companies before cofounding (1999) Pyra Labs to make project-management software. While he was with Pyra Labs, Williams developed—with Stone—a software tool for publishing personal commentary on the Web. The software, which he called Blogger, formed the basis of the wave of Web logs, or blogs, that soon swelled over the Internet. The new company that Williams had formed, Blogger.com, was bought in 2003 by Google.
Williams left Google in 2004 and became a cofounder of Odeo, a podcasting company. Stone joined Odeo in 2005. The following year the men were approached by Dorsey, a software engineer, with the idea of using text messaging and instant messaging (based on the principles of dispatch software) as a way of keeping in touch with friends. Together they developed a prototype of what would become the Twitter platform. Twitter was launched in 2006, and the trio formed a new parent company, Obvious, that acquired Odeo and then spun off Twitter, Inc., as a separate entity in 2007. Over the next several years, the service became a highly popular means of communication, adopted and endorsed by celebrities, news outlets, and corporations.
Williams was initially chairman of the board of Twitter, but he moved to the role of CEO in late 2008; however, he continued to be a board member. In 2010 he stepped down as CEO to concentrate on product strategy, and in 2019 he gave up his seat on the board.
During this time Williams was involved in other ventures, notably Medium, which he founded in 2012. He described the publishing platform as a “place for ideas and stories,” many of which were submitted by users.
