Human-machine interface, also called user interface or human-computer interface,  means by which humans and computers communicate with each other. The human-machine interface includes the hardware and software that is used to translate user (i.e., human) input into commands and to present results to the user.
Usability of the human-machine interface is the degree to which the design makes using the system effective, efficient, and satisfying. The general idea has been to build interfaces that are based on an understanding and appreciation of human physical, mental, and behavioral capabilities.
In the classic human-machine model, the human and the machine are treated as information-processing devices. Similar to humans, computers are able to sense information encoded as inputs; compare, choose, and formulate appropriate responses; and then communicate those responses as outputs. In that model, the outputs from one component of the system feed into the inputs of the other. For example, the output from the human, such as moving a computer mouse to communicate intentions, forms the input to the machine. Because humans have traditionally interacted with the external world through their physical bodies, most computer input mechanisms require performing some form of motor activity, be it moving a mouse, pushing buttons, or speaking.
The design of input devices and techniques to accommodate limits of the human user and even to exploit those limits has been investigated most extensively in the field of human factors and ergonomics. Common computer input devices include pointing devices, such as the mouse, trackball, joystick, and specialized three-dimensional trackers, as well as various keyboards and keypads. Human perceptual and cognitive abilities have been used to inform the development of computers that can sense input in the form of speech or vision or that rely on touch-based gesture recognition and handwriting recognition. Some computers can implicitly infer such things as emotion or cognitive load from video streams of a user’s face or from physiological signals such as heart rate. Given the wide assortment of inputs available, the actual choice of device and application can often be based on the task, users, or environments in which they are to be used.
Driven largely by the needs of people with physical disabilities, researchers have begun to leverage brain-sensing technologies to build cognitive neural prostheses or brain-computer interfaces (BCIs), in which users manipulate their brain activity instead of using motor movements to control computers. For example, paralyzed patients can control a cursor, type text, or move a wheelchair simply by imagining the movement of different parts of their bodies or by thinking about different tasks.
Regardless of the actual method, successful input typically requires adequate and appropriate system feedback to guide actions, confirm actuation, and present results. That feedback, or output, is presented through a form that is perceived by the human. The most common form of output has been visual output through computer displays, and the subfield of information visualization has focused on exploiting principles of human perception and cognition to design imagery that best conveys ideas. In addition to visual output, designers have also explored the use of auditory, tactile or touch, and even olfactory (smell) and gustation (taste) interfaces to take advantage of other human senses. One example of compelling tactile output is game console controllers that vibrate when hit by an opponent. Similarly, many global positioning system (GPS) units have auditory interfaces in addition to the traditionally visual map, because drivers cannot divert their vision from the task at hand to attend to visual GPS information.
The evolution of the human-machine interface can be divided into several historical phases, marked by the dominant interface of the time. In the 1950s the prevalent model was batch processing, in which users specified all details of a task (typically on punch cards), executed them (by feeding the cards to the machine), and received results an hour or more later, when the processing was fully completed. Batch processing was tedious and error-prone. The batch interface was followed by developments in command-line interfaces, which allowed users to interactively issue commands that the system immediately executed and produced results for. Command-line interfaces, although an improvement, did not take full advantage of human perceptual, cognitive, and learning abilities. Those abilities were leveraged with the development of graphical user interfaces (GUIs) in the mid-1960s and early ’70s. In modern GUIs, users engage in rich communication with the computer by using various input devices. For example, in the WIMP (window, icon, menus, pointer) model or the desktop metaphor, the user manipulates virtual objects on-screen as if they were physical objects (e.g., files and folders on a desk or a trash can on the floor). Advances in computer technologies and insight into human psychology fueled the later development of post-WIMP interfaces, including organic user interfaces, which were based on flexible displays that enabled new means of interaction, and “graspable” user interfaces, which allowed a user to perform a virtual function with a physical handle.
