J.C.R. Licklider, in full Joseph Carl Robnett Licklider,  (born March 11, 1915, St. Louis, Missouri, U.S.—died June 26, 1990, Arlington, Massachusetts), American computer scientist who helped lay the groundwork for computer networking and ARPANET, the predecessor of the Internet.
Licklider studied psychology, mathematics, and physics at Washington University in St. Louis, where he received a bachelor’s degree in 1937 and a master’s degree in psychology in 1938. He received a doctorate in psychology from the University of Rochester (New York) in 1942.
Licklider lectured at Harvard University before joining the faculty at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1950. He became interested in computers on a project in which he studied how people would interact with a proposed computerized air defense system. He left MIT in 1957 to join the acoustic consulting firm of Bolt Beranek and Newman where he could pursue his interest in computers. In his 1960 paper “Man-Computer Symbiosis,” one of the most important in the history of computing, Licklider posited the then radical belief that a marriage of the human mind with the computer would eventually result in better decision making.
Licklider joined the U.S. Defense Department’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) in 1962 as the director of the Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO). His tenure signaled the demilitarization of ARPA; it was Licklider who changed the name of his office from Command and Control Research to IPTO. “Lick,” as he insisted on being called, brought to the project an emphasis on interactive computing and the prevalent utopian conviction that humans teamed with computers could create a better world. As a result, ARPA was the birthplace not only of time-sharing systems like Project MAC, computer networks like ARPANET and later the Internet, but also of computer graphics, parallel processing, computer flight simulation, and other key achievements.
Licklider joined IBM as a consultant from 1964 to 1967. He returned to MIT as a professor of electrical engineering and later computer science, and he became a professor emeritus in 1985.
