James H. Wilkinson,  (born Sept. 27, 1919, Strood, Kent, Eng.—died Oct. 5, 1986, Teddington, Middlesex), English mathematician and winner of the 1970 A.M. Turing Award, the highest honour in computer science. Wilkinson is recognized as one of the greatest pioneers in numerical analysis, particularly numerical linear algebra.
At age 16 Wilkinson won a mathematics scholarship to attend the University of Cambridge, where he earned honours in the mathematics curriculum. Before he could continue as a graduate student, World War II intervened, and in 1940 Wilkinson joined the Mathematics Laboratory at Cambridge, where he worked as a researcher on armaments for the British military—in particular, for the Division of Theoretical Armaments of the Ministry of Supply. In 1943 Wilkinson transferred to Fort Halstead, where he continued his work in ballistics, especially in finding approximate solutions to partial differential equations and systems of equations, using techniques from numerical analysis. In 1945 Wilkinson married a coworker, Heather Nora Ware, and their union produced one son and one daughter.
After the war, Wilkinson permanently joined the National Physical Laboratory in Teddington, where he worked at first, in part, under the loose direction of the computer pioneer Alan M. Turing. Wilkinson spent part of his time continuing armaments research and part of his time designing and building, with many collaborators, Pilot ACE (Automatic Computing Engine) according to Turing’s basic idea. Pilot ACE became operational in 1950, two years after Turing had left the project.
In addition to working on the Pilot ACE, DEUCE, and the full-scale ACE computers, Wilkinson was a principal investigator of problems associated with supersonic flows and wrote many widely used software programs, principally in the computer language Fortran, for finding numerical solutions to problems.
Throughout the war and its immediate aftermath, Wilkinson was unable to publish because of security constraints. Beginning in the late 1950s, Wilkinson published more than 100 papers and two classic books, Rounding Errors in Algebraic Processes (1963) and Algebraic Eigenvalue Problem (1965). In 1969 Wilkinson became the first numerical analyst to be elected to the fellowship of the Royal Society. His other honours include a John von Neumann Medal (1970) and a Chauvenet Prize (1987). In 1979 the James H. Wilkinson Prize in Numerical Analysis and Scientific Computing was established by the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM).
