Jay Wright Forrester,  (born July 14, 1918, near Anselmo, Nebraska, U.S.—died November 16, 2016, Concord, Massachusetts), American electrical engineer and management expert who invented the random-access magnetic core memory, the information-storage device employed in most digital computers. He also led the development of an early general purpose computer and was regarded as the founder of the field of systems dynamics.
Forrester was educated in electrical engineering at the University of Nebraska (B.S., 1939) and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT; M.S., 1945), where he did research in servomechanism theory and feedback-control systems. Such study aided the U.S. military during World War II. After the war he led the Digital Computer Division of MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory and embarked on the development of Whirlwind I, a complete real-time computing system designed for the U.S. Navy. During the course of this work, he realized that the slow and unreliable information-storage systems of early digital computers hindered their further development. In 1949 Forrester devised  a memory system that stored information in three dimensions; in his invention a magnetic cell was employed for both storage and switching. The technology remained the preferred method of memory storage into the 1970s.
During the 1950s Forrester, together with his Lincoln Laboratory colleague George Valley, came up with the plan for the U.S. Air Force’s Semi-Automatic Ground Environment (SAGE) air defense computer system, which was developed from the Whirlwind prototype in cooperation with International Business Machines Corporation (IBM), Burroughs Corporation (later merged into the Unisys Corporation), Western Electric Company, Inc., and other subcontractors. SAGE included 23 Direction Centers in the United States and 1 in Canada, with each of these radar and missile installations being controlled by its own computer, though all the computers were in continual contact with each other for data exchange and analysis. Partially operational by 1958 and fully operational in 1963, SAGE was the brains behind the American air defense system into the 1980s.
In 1956 Forrester left digital computing and joined MIT’s Sloan School of Management. During this time he began experimenting with the application of computers to management problems. While working on a project for General Electric, he devised the technique of computer simulation in which real-world relationships, such as the flow of materials in a factory, are represented as a series of interconnected mathematical equations that can be fed to the computer. He is thus often credited as being the father of systems dynamics, essentially the application of techniques used in systems engineering to nonengineering problems. Forrester wrote several books on the subject, including Industrial Dynamics (1961), Principles of Systems (1968), Urban Dynamics (1969), and World Dynamics (1971). His Collected Papers appeared in 1975.
Forrester was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame in 1979. Three years later he was honoured by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) as a Computer Pioneer Charter Recipient. He was awarded the U.S. National Medal of Technology and Innovation in 1989, the year that he retired.
