Kindle,  portable wireless electronic reading device produced by the American e-commerce company Amazon.com.
The Kindle was first released by Amazon.com in 2007 as a new way to read books, magazines, newspapers, and other written material. The Kindle uses a display technology called electronic paper, which produces a sharp screen image that resembles text printed on paper. Roughly the size and weight of a trade paperback book, with a 6-inch (15.2-cm) monochromatic screen, the original Kindle could store more than 200 electronic books, or e-books, and could be loaded with new material from Amazon.com through a free wireless connection, though only in the United States. The Kindle was also equipped with a limited World Wide Web browser that let American users access the Internet.
The Kindle was not the first electronic book reader; other companies, including the Japanese Sony Corporation, have produced and marketed their own readers. What made the Kindle different was having the marketing power of Amazon.com to distribute titles. A vast selection of electronic books, as well as many newspapers, magazines, and blogs, are available for the Kindle. The device’s wireless capability enables users to buy and read material anytime. The introduction of the Kindle was met with some skepticism, with doubts raised over who would pay the relatively high cost for the unit—priced at $399 for its initial release—even though titles for the Kindle generally cost less than printed works. Nevertheless, Amazon.com sold out its entire inventory of the devices as soon as the product went on sale, requiring numerous customers to wait for months on back orders. In 2009 Amazon.com released the Kindle 2, a slimmer reader with more storage capacity, a crisper display, better battery life, a small joysticklike controller, and the ability to convert text to speech. The Authors Guild, a trade group that represents about 9,000 authors, almost immediately succeeded in having the Kindle 2’s text-to-speech feature disabled for many e-books on the grounds that it was cannibalizing sales of audiobooks.
In May 2009 Amazon.com introduced a larger reader, the Kindle DX, with a 9.7-inch (24.6-cm) screen. The Kindle DX, which had an introductory price of $489, also included more storage (four gigabytes) and native support for Adobe Systems Incorporated’s PDF file format. The latter feature is especially important for replicating newspapers and textbooks, which typically contain graphic elements related to the text. In July 2010 Amazon.com announced that it would cut the price of its entry-level Kindle, which offered a smaller, lighter case than its predecessors, with improved battery life and a faster page-refresh rate. Debuting the following month was a WiFi-equipped model listed at $139, while a 3G version, which accessed AT&T’s mobile broadband network, sold for $189.
New trade or mass-market e-books were typically priced at $9.99,  but a number of titles—including many literary classics—were available as free downloads. In May 2011 Amazon.com announced that Kindle e-books were outselling all printed books.
