Lawrence Roberts, in full Lawrence Gilman Roberts,  (born December 21, 1937, Westport, Connecticut, U.S.—died December 26, 2018, Redwood City, California), American computer scientist who supervised the construction of the ARPANET, a computer network that was a precursor to the Internet.
Roberts received bachelor’s (1959), master’s (1960), and doctoral (1963) degrees in electrical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge. He then worked at MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory in Lexington, Massachusetts, where he studied communications networks. In February 1965 Roberts received a contract from the  Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), which later became the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), to develop an experimental computer network. In October of that year, Roberts succeeded in connecting a computer at Lincoln Laboratory to a mainframe computer at the System Development Corporation in Santa Monica, California.
About that time, ARPA, which was funding computer research at several American universities, felt that research would be more efficient if the various institutions could share computer resources over an ARPA-funded network, ARPANET. In 1966 Roberts was asked several times to become director of the ARPANET. He refused but was eventually persuaded to lead the project. At an ARPANET meeting in Ann Arbor, Michigan, in April 1967, Roberts presented the technical specifications for the network. However, after the meeting, computer scientist Wesley Clark persuaded Roberts that the actual networking should be handled by smaller computers called interface message processors (IMPs) rather than the large mainframes that would be the nodes of ARPANET. Roberts modified the ARPANET plan to incorporate Clark’s suggestion. On October 29, 1969, American computer scientist Leonard Kleinrock and his student Charley Kline sent the first message over ARPANET from an IMP and computer at the University of California, Los Angeles, to an IMP and computer at Stanford Research Institute (later SRI International) in Menlo Park, California. By the end of 1969, the originally planned four-node ARPANET was complete.
In 1969 Roberts became director of the Information Processing Techniques Office at ARPA. In 1971 he wrote one of the first e-mail programs, RD, which for the first time allowed users to save, delete, and organize their messages. In 1973 he founded Telenet, the first computer networking company to use packet switching. The company also developed X.25, which became one of the most popular networking protocols. Telenet was sold to GTE Corporation in 1979, and Roberts left the company in 1980.
In 1983 Roberts became chairman and chief executive officer of NetExpress, a company that produced networking equipment using the asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) protocol. In 1993 he became president of ATM Systems. However, ATM was eventually supplanted by networking devices using Internet Protocol (IP), and he left ATM Systems in 1998.
In 1999 Roberts founded Caspian Networks, which developed routers that worked not on individual packets but on the overall type of a message to prioritize it accordingly. He left Caspian Networks in 2004 and that same year founded Anagran Inc., which also developed IP routers. He received the Charles Stark Draper Prize from the National Academy of Engineering in 2001.
