Leonard Kleinrock,  (born June 13, 1934, New York City), American computer scientist who developed the mathematical theory behind packet switching and who sent the first message between two computers on a network that was a precursor of the Internet.
Kleinrock received a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from the City College of New York in 1957. He earned a master’s degree (1959) and a doctorate (1963) in electrical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in Cambridge. MIT had many computers, and Kleinrock realized that they would eventually have to interact with each other in a network. He felt that the mathematical descriptions of existing communication networks, such as telephone exchanges in which a single node connected only to another node, would be inadequate for describing future computer networks, which would have many nodes. For his doctoral thesis, Kleinrock extended the mathematical discipline of queuing theory to such networks. Describing how data would flow through a network was an extremely complex problem, but Kleinrock knowingly made the simplifying and inaccurate assumption that the time when data arrived at a node and the time the node spent processing the data were independent of each other. Nevertheless, Kleinrock was able to predict how computer networks would perform, and his work provided a mathematical description of packet switching, in which each data stream is broken into discrete, easily conveyed packets. Packet switching was independently invented by American electrical engineer Paul Baran and British computer scientist Donald Davies and formed the basis for communication across the Internet.
Kleinrock became a professor of engineering (and then later computer science) at the University of California, Los Angeles, in 1963. The government agency Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), which later became the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), was funding computer research at several American universities, and it was felt that research would be more efficient if the various institutions could share computer resources over an ARPA-funded network. Beginning in 1967, Kleinrock was involved in designing this network, ARPANET. In September 1969 Kleinrock’s group connected a packet-switching computer, the Interface Message Processor (IMP), to a SDS Sigma 7 computer, which became the first node on ARPANET, which was originally planned to have four nodes. On October 29, 1969, Kleinrock and his student Charley Kline sent the first message over ARPANET to an IMP and computer at Stanford Research Institute (now SRI International) in Menlo Park, California. The message was going to be the word login; however, the connection crashed after the letter o, so the first ARPANET message was lo. By the end of 1969, ARPANET was complete.
Kleinrock chaired a National Research Council committee that produced a report, Toward a National Research Network (1988), that called for a single high-speed network to connect the existing fragmentary computer networks. U.S. Sen. (and future vice president) Al Gore championed the report, and in 1991 the High Performance Computing Act (also known as the Gore bill) was passed. Federal funding was made available for high-speed networks, dramatically upgrading the country’s computing infrastructure.
In 1998 Kleinrock and one of his students, Joel Short, cofounded Nomadix, Inc., which manufactured devices that enable Internet access in public places such as hospitals, airports, and hotels. Nomadix was bought by the Japanese company DOCOMO interTouch in 2008. Kleinrock and computer scientist Yu Cao in 2007 founded Platformation Technologies, LLC (later Platformation, Inc.), which allows grocery shoppers to compare prices between local supermarkets online.
Kleinrock received many honours for his work, including the National Academy of Engineering’s Charles Stark Draper Prize (2001) and the National Medal of Science (2007).
