Satya Nadella, in full Satya Narayana Nadella,  (born August 19, 1967, Hyderabad, India), Indian-born business executive who was CEO of the computer software company Microsoft (2014– ).
Nadella grew up in the southern Indian city of Hyderabad and studied electrical engineering at Mangalore University (B.Sc., 1988). After moving to the United States, he completed (1990) a master’s degree in computer science at the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee and went to work at Sun Microsystems, Inc., as a member of its technology staff. He was lured away from Sun in 1992 to join Microsoft, where he initially worked on the development of Windows NT, a landmark operating system that was aimed primarily at business users. While working full-time at Microsoft, Nadella also earned (1997) a master’s degree in business administration from the University of Chicago.
Nadella rose steadily through the ranks of Microsoft management. By 1999 he had been named vice president of the Microsoft bCentral small-business service, and two years later he became corporate vice president of Microsoft Business Solutions. In 2007 he was elevated to senior vice president of research and development for the company’s online services division, and he later served (2011–13) as president of Microsoft’s server and tools business, which annually generated some $19 billion in revenue. Nadella was also executive vice president in charge of the company’s cloud computing platform, which provided the infrastructure for such Microsoft offerings as the online search engine Bing, the Xbox Live broadband gaming network, and the Office 365 subscription-based services.
On February 4, 2014, Nadella became CEO of Microsoft, the third person to hold the office in the company’s nearly 40-year history, after company cofounder Bill Gates and Steve Ballmer. One of Nadella’s first major tasks was overseeing the completion of Microsoft’s $7.2 billion acquisition of Nokia Corp.’s mobile-device business, a transaction that had been announced in 2013 despite the reservations of various Microsoft executives, one of whom reportedly was Nadella. Shortly after the deal closed in April 2014, he announced the largest layoff in Microsoft’s history; 18,000 positions were eliminated, the majority of which involved Nokia. In 2016 Nadella oversaw the acquisition of LinkedIn, a business-oriented social networking Web site.
Nadella cowrote (with Greg Shaw and Jill Tracie Nichols) Hit Refresh: The Quest to Rediscover Microsoft’s Soul and Imagine a Better Future for Everyone (2017), which included a discussion of his life as well as his thoughts on technology and leading.
