Smartwatch,  a small smartphonelike device worn on the wrist. Many smartwatches are connected to a smartphone that notifies the user of incoming calls, e-mail messages, and notifications from applications. Some smartwatches can even make telephone calls. Many smartwatches have colour displays, but some inexpensive models use a black-and-white “e-paper” display. The user can operate the smartwatch through a touch screen, physical buttons, or a combination of the two. Some smartwatches come with pedometers and heart-rate monitors to help users track their health. 
As computers shrank in size in the 20th century, electronic equipment became small enough to fit into a watch. One of the first calculator watches was the Calcron (1975), which had a nine-digit display. In the early 1980s, Seiko introduced several watches with computing capabilities. The Data-2000 (1983), so called because it could store two memos of up to 1,000 characters each, fit into a keyboard on which the user  entered information. The RC-1000 (1984) connected to a personal computer. The Receptor MessageWatch (1990) received pager messages via FM radio signals.
The 1990s saw a further melding of watches and computers. Users of the Datalink (1994), a collaboration between Timex and Microsoft, entered information on their personal computers, such as phone numbers, which were then transmitted to the watch wirelessly, using light pulses. Seiko’s Ruputer (1998) was a personal computer that fit into a watch. Data were entered through buttons or a joystick, and users could write their own software. Samsung’s SPH-WP10 (1999) was the first watch phone; its battery lasted for 90 minutes of calling time.
One of the earliest true smartwatches was the Microsoft SPOT (Smart Personal Object Technology), introduced in 2004. The SPOT received information such as weather, news, and stock updates through FM radio. It also received e-mail and instant messages, but users could not reply. With the rise of the smartphone, smartwatches such as the Sony Ericsson LiveView (2010), the Pebble (2013), and the Apple Watch (2015) emerged that received data from a phone. In 2014 Google developed Android Wear—a version of its mobile operating system, Android—specifically for wearable devices like smartwatches.
