An American in Paris,  composition by George Gershwin, subtitled “A Tone Poem for Orchestra.” It premiered at Carmegie Hall in New York City on Dec. 13, 1928, and it was the first of Gershwin’s purely orchestral works, with no role for piano but plenty of jazz harmonies and spirit. In 1951 (after Gershwin’s passing), it was given cinematic interpretation in the classic Gene Kelly film of the same name.
Gershwin himself called it a “rhapsodic ballet.” Certainly it is danceable, and the free-flowing nature of rhapsodies also seems appropriate to the piece. The term Gershwin apparently did not know at the time was “program music,” meaning an instrumental piece that has a story to tell or a scene to paint, though without supplement of voice, dance, or narration. The music itself serves to tell the tale. One particularly famous example of the genre is Paul Dukas’ The Sorcerer’s Apprentice from 1897; Gershwin’s piece is no less evocative than Dukas’.
Gershwin began the work in the summer of 1924. Having been asked by conductor Walter Damrosch to write a full concerto in follow-up to the success of Rhapsody in Blue, which had premiered that winter, Gershwin had decided that he would benefit from more advanced compositional training and so set off for Paris. There, he found that the greatest names of music—amongst them, Ravel and Stravinsky—were disinclined to tamper with the jazz star’s innate skills. However, he also found inspiration for what would be his most orchestrally advanced score to that time.
An American in Paris offers a kaleidoscope of musical impressions, opening with a light-hearted strolling melody soon interrupted by the honking of taxi horns. A busy street scene ensues, brassy interludes alternating with bubbly clarinets. Melancholy bluesy melodies, sometimes for woodwinds, sometimes for strings, most prominently for muted trumpet, occupy the central pages. A quick change of mood leads to sassier colouring and a new spotlight for trumpet. Firm dotted rhythms of alternating short and long notes transition to a rich restatement of earlier materials, now broader and more leisurely in manner. Short solos for the unusual pairing of violin and tuba set up the spirited conclusion derived from the opening strolling melody. Throughout, the composer displays how effectively this star of the jazz world had internalized the sound of the orchestra. He may have been turned down for advanced studies with the big names in the field, but he had kept his ears engaged and learned what he needed to know to make the most of orchestral colour.
An American in Paris premiered Thursday evening, December 13, 1928, at Carnegie Hall with the New York Philharmonic, newly united with the New York Symphony and under the leadership of conductor Walter Damrosch, formerly of the latter ensemble. Also on the program were the Magic Fire Music from Die Walküre of Richard Wagner (1813–83), the Symphony in D Minor from Belgian composer Cesar Franck (1822–90) and a short work by Franck’s countryman and protégée, Guillaume Lekue (1870–94).
Gershwin’s score was by far the liveliest of the lot. Moreover, the fact that Damrosch included it in the program alongside two established masterworks implies that he was confident of its excellence. Some listeners that evening would have come for the classics; one hopes that they were also impressed by the new work. As for the Gershwin fans who came to find out what the composer of I Got Rhythm was doing in Carnegie Hall, perhaps they came away thinking that this “classical stuff” was not half bad.
