Diana Krall,  (born November 16, 1964, Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada), Canadian jazz musician who achieved crossover success with her sultry, unforced contralto voice and her elegant piano playing.
As a child, Krall played classical piano, sang in a church choir, and learned to play and sing the Fats Waller songs in her father’s record collection. She began playing piano professionally at age 15 and later studied at the Berklee College of Music in Boston and privately with jazz pianist Jimmy Rowles. Performing in the United States and Canada, she developed a repertoire that included subtle, sophisticated songs and spare accompaniment—a cool jazz rhythm section featuring her own piano, occasionally augmented by discreet string-orchestra backgrounds.
Krall’s first album, Stepping Out, was released in 1993, and her breakthrough came three years later with All for You, a tribute to Nat King Cole that spent more than a year on the jazz best-seller lists. She gained a wider audience with When I Look in Your Eyes (1999), for which she also received her first Grammy Award. Later albums included The Look of Love (2001) and the concert recording Live in Paris (2002). The latter won a Grammy for best jazz vocal album. On The Girl in the Other Room (2004), Krall for the first time included some of her own compositions as well as songs written or cowritten by British singer-songwriter Elvis Costello, whom she had married in 2003.
Krall’s later albums included Christmas Songs (2005); From This Moment On (2006), a compilation of standards; Quiet Nights (2009), an experiment with bossa nova; Glad Rag Doll (2012), an exploration of lesser-known jazz tunes beloved by her father; and Wallflower (2015), a collection of light rock covers. She returned to the standards for Turn Up the Quiet (2017). On Love Is Here to Stay (2018) Krall and Tony Bennett sang songs by George Gershwin. The low-key This Dream of You (2020) was in part a tribute to her late longtime producer Tommy LiPuma.
Krall made occasional film and television appearances as well. She notably sang the Cole Porter song “Just One of Those Things” in De-Lovely (2004), about Porter’s life.
