Jimmy Dorsey , byname of James Francis Dorsey,  (born Feb. 29, 1904, Shenandoah, Pa., U.S.—died June 12, 1957, New York, N.Y.), American musician who—both independently and with his brother Tommy—led one of the most popular big bands of the swing era. He was also a highly talented saxophone and clarinet player.
Along with his brother, Dorsey received his first musical training from his father, who was a music teacher and marching band director.  He played both clarinet and alto saxophone and began playing in several bands with Tommy when they were both teenagers. In 1920 they formed their own combo, Dorsey’s Novelty Six. By 1922 the group, now known as Dorsey’s Wild Canaries, was well-known in the Baltimore, Md., area and was among the first jazz bands to broadcast on the radio. During this time Jimmy played—sometimes alone, sometimes with Tommy—in  jazz groups, in big bands, and even in pit bands for Broadway musicals. In 1927 the Dorsey Brothers Orchestra began recording with an ever-changing group of musicians. Their hits included such songs as  “Coquette” (1928) and “Let’s Do It” (1929), the latter featuring singer Bing Crosby. Their recordings from the late 1920s and early ’30s reveal their mastery of both the smooth popular styles that dominated their output and the more raucous Dixieland style appreciated by jazz fans.
By 1934 the Dorsey Brothers Orchestra had become a stable, full-time band, and the following year they recorded an impressive list of hit songs (including “I Believe in Miracles,” “Tiny Little Fingerprints,” and “Lullaby of Broadway”), many of them featuring Bob Crosby (Bing’s younger brother) on vocals. However, the band broke up in May 1935 after Tommy left the bandstand during a live performance because he and his brother disagreed over the tempo of a song.
Dorsey stayed with the remains of the Dorsey Brothers Orchestra, forming the Jimmy Dorsey Orchestra in late 1935. Within a few years he emerged as one of the top bandleaders of the day. The band’s most distinctive sound was established with their 1940 hit “The Breeze and I,” which initiated a series of Latin-tinged recordings arranged by Tutti Camarata. Jimmy’s other hits included “Change Partners,” “I Hear a Rhapsody,” “Amapola,” and “Tangerine.” Singers Bob Eberly and Helen O’Connell figured prominently in the band’s success, as did such noted sidemen as trumpeters Shorty Sherock and Ralph Muzillo, trombonist Bobby Byrne, tenor saxophonist Herbie Haymer, and drummer Ray McKinley. Throughout its existence, the Jimmy Dorsey Orchestra played mostly mainstream popular music, although such numbers as “Major & Minor Stomp,” “Mutiny in the Brass Section,” and “Waddlin’ at the Waldorf” revealed that the group had mastered the swing style. Dorsey’s band broke up in 1953, a casualty of changing popular taste in the postwar years.
In addition to being a very successful bandleader, Dorsey was a highly respected jazz musician, in demand as a soloist from his earliest professional years. He was one of the top reed players of the era, and latter-day saxophone greats, including Lester Young and Coleman Hawkins, readily acknowledged his influence.
In 1947 Jimmy and Tommy reunited to play themselves in the fictionalized autobiographical film The Fabulous Dorseys. Tommy then hired Jimmy to be a soloist and band member in his own band in 1953, after Jimmy’s band had broken up. For a few months the band called itself The Tommy Dorsey Orchestra, featuring Jimmy Dorsey, but then returned to its original name, the Dorsey Brothers Orchestra. From 1954 to 1956 the brothers successfully hosted the television program Stage Show (on which Elvis Presley made his TV debut). After Tommy’s death in 1956, Jimmy continued to lead the band until his own death in 1957.
