John Lewis, in full John Aaron Lewis,  (born May 3, 1920, La Grange, Illinois, U.S.—died March 29, 2001, New York, New York), American jazz pianist and composer-arranger who was an influential member of the Modern Jazz Quartet, one of the longest-lived and best-received groups in jazz history.
Reared in New Mexico by academically oriented parents, Lewis studied piano from childhood and, until 1942, anthropology and music at the University of New Mexico. He served in the U.S. Army (1942–45) and subsequently worked as a pianist with Dizzy Gillespie, arranging “Two Bass Hit,” “Emanon,” “Minor Walk,” and his own “Toccata for Trumpet and Orchestra” for Gillespie’s big band. His restrained piano style, which was influenced by classical music, made him a highly sought-after sideman, and he worked with Miles Davis (having arranged “Move,” “Budo,” and “Rouge” for Davis’s album Birth of the Cool), Charlie Parker, Lester Young, and Illinois Jacquet.
In 1952 Lewis became the leader of the Modern Jazz Quartet (known as the M.J.Q.), which featured vibraphonist Milt Jackson, bassist Percy Heath, and drummer Connie Kay. It was active throughout most of the 1950s and ’60s, disbanded in 1974, and resumed performing on a part-time basis in 1981, giving its last concert in the late 1990s. The M.J.Q.’s music was subtle and polite, quite close to Baroque chamber music, and often classed in the “cool jazz” category. Lewis also composed for nonjazz settings and wrote musical scores for cinema, ballet, and theatre. “Django” is the Lewis composition most frequently played by others. Among his solo recordings are Midnight in Paris (1988) and Evolution (1999), and he made several albums, including The Chess Game, Vol. 1–2, with his wife, Mirjana, a harpsichordist.
Lewis also was noted for promoting jazz among younger performers. After receiving a master’s degree from the Manhattan School of Music in 1953, he taught at several institutions and helped establish the Lenox School of Jazz in Massachusetts. In addition, he served as the musical director for the Monterey Jazz Festival in California (1958–82) and for the American Jazz Orchestra (1985–92).
