Stan Kenton, byname of Stanley Newcomb Kenton,  (born Feb. 19, 1912, Wichita, Kan., U.S.—died  Aug. 25, 1979, Los Angeles), American jazz bandleader, pianist, and composer who commissioned and promoted the works of many modern composer-arrangers and thrust formal education and big-band jazz together into what became the stage (or concert) band movement of the 1960s and ’70s, involving thousands of high school and college musicians.
Kenton began writing music in his teens, was a pianist and arranger for dance bands in the 1930s, and was influenced by Earl Hines as a pianist and by Claude Thornhill and Benny Carter as an arranger. Kenton formed his own band in 1940 and continued forming bands and touring almost until his death.
Much of Kenton’s music is more like nonswing 20th-century concert music than jazz or dance music, especially the serious works of Robert Graettinger (“City of Glass”), Johnny Richards (“Cuban Fire”), and Russ Garcia (“Adventures in Emotions”) and pieces by Bill Holman, Bill Russo, and others. Kenton also featured outstanding jazz improvisers, including saxophonists Lee Konitz and Art Pepper, trumpeter Conte Candoli, and trombonist Frank Rosolino, but the emphasis was less on improvisation than on elaborate arrangements, often employing instruments uncommon to earlier jazz such as bass saxophone, tuba, French horn, strings, and mellophonium (a trumpet–French horn hybrid commissioned by Kenton). He also showed a keen interest in Latin-American music and often used a Latin percussionist. The most typical band sound involved high, loud, block-voiced trumpet playing, with five- and six-note chords, and open-voiced trombone-section harmonies. Saxophone passages written in sixteenth notes were also a Kenton trademark, as was his use of the full range of loudness levels that could be extracted from a band.
Kenton was responsible for the “progressive jazz” label that some mistake for all modern jazz and some use to identify all Kenton-linked jazz. Some critics place his music in the “cool jazz” category and, being based in California, many of his players—including Shorty Rogers, Bill Perkins, and Shelly Manne—were identified with West Coast jazz, a subcategory of cool jazz.
From 1970 Kenton ran his own combination record company, publishing house, and promotional network, called Creative World. His best-known composition is “Artistry in Rhythm,” the band’s theme. Among his most popular recordings are “Intermission Riff,” “Eager Beaver,” and “Peanut Vendor.”
