The Andrews Sisters,  singing trio, one of the most popular American musical acts of the 1940s. The group’s renditions of swing tunes in close harmony sold millions of copies; the act was also hugely popular in live performance and in film. The sisters were LaVerne Sofia Andrews (b. July 6, 1911, Minneapolis, Minnesota, U.S.—d. May 8, 1967, Brentwood, California), Maxene Angelyn Andrews (b. January 3, 1916, Minneapolis—d. October 21, 1995, Boston, Massachusetts), and Patricia Marie (“Patty”) Andrews (b. February 16, 1918, Minneapolis—d. January 30, 2013, Los Angeles, California).
As teenagers, the Andrews Sisters formed a singing act and began performing in vaudeville reviews throughout the Midwest. Their singing was initially influenced by the Dixieland style of the Boswell Sisters of New Orleans, but they soon expanded their repertoire to include a wide range of current song types. Patty Andrews, a soprano, was lead singer for the trio, Maxene sang second soprano, and LaVerne took the lowest line.
The group sang with various bands and for several radio broadcasts while they were struggling during the mid-1930s to establish their reputation. A failed radio performance in 1937 turned out to be the sisters’ big break. Although they were fired soon after their first night on the program Saturday Night Swing Club, they were signed to a recording contract by a Decca Records executive who had heard the broadcast. During their first weeks with the label, the sisters made the rather idiosyncratic choice to record a jazz-influenced rendition of the Yiddish song “Bei mir bist du schon.” The recording was released after Christmas 1937; by New Year’s Eve it had become the most popular song on New York radio stations, and it went on to become the first million-selling record by a female singing group.
The sisters’ bold, brassy vocal style initially caused them to fail several auditions. But the women were determined to convey the effect of three trumpets. As Maxene Andrews recalled,
Critic William Ruhlmann observed that the Andrews’ 1941 hit “Boogie Woogie Bugle Boy” was
The Andrews Sisters’ fame peaked during World War II. Nicknamed “America’s Wartime Sweethearts,” they became great favourites of American troops overseas, performing in USO (United Service Organizations) shows. They also appeared in a number of films, supporting Abbott and Costello in Buck Privates, In the Navy, and Hold That Ghost (all 1941), and appearing in their own series of musical comedies, which included Private Buckaroo (1942), What’s Cookin’? (1942), and Swingtime Johnny (1943). The trio’s many hits from these years included “Hold Tight,” “Don’t Sit Under the Apple Tree,” “Rum and Coca-Cola,” “Beer Barrel Polka,” and “Ac-Cent-Tchu-Ate the Positive.” Their recorded performances were heard in the sound tracks of numerous movies, including Radio Days (1987), Jakob the Liar (1999), The Polar Express (2004), and The Chronicles of Narnia (2005).
Offstage, the sisters’ well-publicized feuds kept them in the gossip pages. As Patty Andrews said in 1985, “The Andrews Sisters really had only one big fight. It started in 1937 and it’s still going.” Though their fame declined in the postwar years, their act remained popular into the 1960s. Stricken with cancer, LaVerne retired from the act in 1966 and died the following year. Patty and Maxene continued for a while, with singer Joyce DeYoung rounding out their trio. Patty and Maxene reclaimed some success when they starred in the Broadway musical Over Here! which ran for 10 months in 1974–75. Following Maxene’s death in 1995, Patty continued to perform, sometimes as a featured vocalist with the Glenn Miller Orchestra. It was an appropriate coda to her career, as the Andrews Sisters and the Miller orchestra had embodied America’s musical tastes during the World War II years.
