Tony Bennett, original name Anthony Dominick Benedetto,  (born August 3, 1926, Astoria, Queens, New York, U.S.), American popular singer known for his smooth voice and interpretive abilities with songs in a variety of genres.
Bennett, the son of a grocer, spent his boyhood in Astoria, New York, studying singing and painting. At the behest of his vocal instructor, Bennett immersed himself in the music of instrumentalists, rather than that of vocalists, which provided him with a solid foundation in jazz. He served three years in the army during World War II and embarked on a singing career in 1949. Bennett’s break came the following year when Bob Hope heard him in a nightclub and invited him to share the stage during Hope’s engagement at New York’s Paramount Theatre. At the time, Bennett was working under the stage name of Joe Bari, which Hope thought was unmemorable. Reasoning that his given name of Anthony Benedetto was “too long to fit on the marquee,” Hope rechristened the young singer Tony Bennett.
During the Paramount engagement, Bennett’s rendition of “Boulevard of Broken Dreams” went over especially well with audiences and was instrumental in earning him a contract with Columbia Records. The song became Bennett’s first hit recording in 1951 and was followed by several records that topped the charts during the next few years: “Because of You,” “Cold, Cold Heart,” “Stranger in Paradise,” “Just in Time,” and “Rags to Riches,” which became one of Bennett’s signature tunes. Throughout the ’50s, Bennett released several highly regarded albums that paired him with jazz stars such as Count Basie, Stan Getz, Zoot Sims, Art Blakey, and Bobby Hackett. Although Bennett resisted being tagged a jazz singer, his work with jazz artists was always among his most praised.
Bennett returned to the top of the singles charts in 1962 with his biggest hit, “I Left My Heart in San Francisco,” the song with which he remains most associated. Other hit recordings during the 1960s included “I Wanna Be Around,” “The Good Life,” and “Who Can I Turn To.” His popularity declined during the late 1960s and early ’70s, and he left Columbia in 1972. Bennett recorded mostly for his own label, Improv, during the ’70s; while he had no chart successes, much of the material he recorded during this time—especially his collaborations with jazz artists such as Ruby Braff and Bill Evans—eventually came to be regarded among his finest work.
Bennett’s career lull ended once he re-signed with Columbia in 1986 and released The Art of Excellence, his most-heralded album in many years. From that point, Bennett’s son and personal manager, Danny Bennett, began an aggressive campaign to market his father to a wider audience, and the following decade proved to be the most commercially successful and critically praised period of Bennett’s career. His albums, nearly all of them Grammy Award winners or nominees, sold in the millions. Especially noteworthy were several albums Bennett made in tribute to other artists, such as Irving Berlin (Bennett/Berlin, 1987), Frank Sinatra (Perfectly Frank, 1992), Fred Astaire (Steppin’ Out, 1993), Billie Holiday (On Holiday, 1996), and Duke Ellington (Hot & Cool: Bennett Sings Ellington, 1999).
Bennett became a favourite with “Generation X” via his memorable appearance in 1993 on the MTV show Unplugged; the album of this performance, MTV Unplugged (1994), earned two Grammy Awards and remained at the top of the jazz charts for 35 weeks. Although there was something of a “camp” factor in Bennett’s popularity with the younger generation, he also earned their respect by remaining true to himself and through his undeniable and accessible artistry. He celebrated his 80th birthday with the star-studded Duets: An American Classic (2006). Bennett was joined by a wide range of collaborators on the project, from country musicians the Dixie Chicks (later The Chicks) to Colombian pop star Juanes to contemporary crooner Michael Bublé.
Some 60 years after he broke into the music business, Bennett scored his first number one album with Duets II (2011), which featured “Body and Soul,” a collaboration with Amy Winehouse. At age 85 he was the oldest living artist to date to top the Billboard charts. “Body and Soul” won a Grammy for best pop performance by a duo or group, and Duets II was awarded best traditional pop vocal album. Cheek to Cheek (2014) was an album of jazz standards from the Great American Songbook recorded with pop artist Lady Gaga, who had previously appeared on Duets II. That record also won a Grammy for best traditional pop vocal album as did The Silver Lining: The Songs of Jerome Kern, which he made with jazz pianist Bill Charlap in 2015. Tony Bennett Celebrates 90 (2016) is a recording of a star-studded event marking his 90th birthday. Love Is Here to Stay (2018), a tribute to George Gershwin, was recorded with jazz vocalist Diana Krall.
Bennett’s basic style changed little throughout the years, although many critics feel that his voice and interpretive skills improved as he aged. With an immediately recognizable voice, he mastered all genres, from intimate ballads and up-tempo swing numbers to contemporary pop. At the dawn of the 21st century, Bennett still toured and appeared frequently as a headliner at jazz festivals. He also garnered much praise for his talents as a painter; his work (which he always signed with his given name, Anthony Benedetto) was featured at several well-received exhibitions. His autobiography, The Good Life, was published in 1998.
In 2021 Bennett publicly revealed that he had been diagnosed with Alzheimer disease five years earlier.
