Bill Mauldin, byname of William Henry Mauldin,  (born October 29, 1921, Mountain Park, New Mexico, U.S.—died January 22, 2003, Newport Beach, California), American cartoonist who gained initial fame for his sardonic drawings of the life of the World War II combat soldier and who later became well known for editorial cartoons dealing with a wide range of political and social issues.
After studying cartooning at the Chicago Academy of Fine Arts, Mauldin returned to the Southwest, where he worked as a cartoonist before enlisting in the U.S. Army (September 1940). He was sent to Fort Sill, Oklahoma, for infantry training. In 1943 he shipped with his division to Sicily, where he joined the Mediterranean edition of the U.S. Army newspaper Stars and Stripes. He covered the fighting in Sicily, at Salerno (where he was wounded), and at other locations in Italy, France, and Germany. His cartoons of that period have appeared in several collections, the best known being Up Front (1945), which also contained a prose description of his experiences. He received a Pulitzer Prize in 1945 for a cartoon showing battle-weary troops quite the opposite of the description given in the caption: “Fresh American troops flushed with victory . . . .” Many of his cartoons featured Willie and Joe, a pair of disheveled enlisted men who managed to retain their humanity though caught between the horrors of war and an unrealistic and often fatuous army hierarchy.
After his discharge in June 1945, Mauldin drew cartoons expressing the soldier’s difficult transition back to civilian life. A new phase of his career began in 1958, when he joined the St. Louis Post-Dispatch as an editorial cartoonist. In 1959 he won a second Pulitzer Prize for his cartoon dealing with the suppression of civil liberties in the Soviet Union. In 1962 Mauldin joined the Chicago Sun-Times, where his cartoons dealt with national and international issues and were widely syndicated. His illustrations also appeared in numerous magazines, including Life and Sports Illustrated.
