Blepharitis,  common inflammation of the eyelids that is marked by red, scaly, crusting eyelids and a burning, itching, grainy feeling in the eye. The eye itself often has some redness. There are two forms of blepharitis: anterior, which affects the exterior edge of the eyelid, and posterior, which affects the inner part of the eyelid (the surface that touches the eye). Anterior blepharitis can result from either an infectious or a noninfectious process, while posterior blepharitis is caused by dysfunction of the meibomian glands, which are oil-secreting glands located along the lid margin behind the eyelashes.
Infectious blepharitis is more common in young people than in older individuals; the usual cause is colonization by Staphylococcus bacteria along the margins of the eyelids or, less commonly, an infection with herpesvirus that involves the eyelids. Severe cases can result in ulceration of the eyelid margin or the cornea. Noninfectious blepharitis is most commonly caused by seborrhea, a skin disorder arising from overactivity of the sebaceous glands, or by dysfunction of the meibomian glands. Seborrheic dermatitis, which produces scalp and eyebrow dandruff, can give rise to either anterior or posterior blepharitis. Symptoms include itching of the eye, a burning sensation in the eye, excessive tear production, photophobia, swollen and red eyelids, sticky eyelids, and crusting and loss of the eyelashes.
Blepharitis typically is chronic and difficult to treat. Addressing the underlying disorder is of primary importance. Antibiotic treatment may be needed in the case of bacterial infection. Regular cleansing of the eyelid margins with gentle soapy solutions and the use of warm compresses can relieve symptoms. Anti-inflammatory drugs and immunosuppressants are sometimes used.
Allergic blepharitis is often seen after exposure to ophthalmic medications, cosmetics, or substances in the environment. Along with the typical symptoms, there may be severe itching and thickening of the eyelid skin. Treatment involves removing the offending agent and using cool compresses and anti-allergy eyedrops.
