cardiovascular disease,  any of the diseases, whether congenital or acquired, of the heart and blood vessels. Among the most important are atherosclerosis, rheumatic heart disease, and vascular inflammation. Cardiovascular diseases are a major cause of health problems and death.
Life depends on the functioning of the heart; thus, the heart is involved in all death, but this does not account for its prominence in causing death. To some degree, as medical science advances, more people are saved from other illnesses only to die from one of the unsolved and uncontrolled disorders of the cardiovascular system. Some forms of cardiovascular diseases are becoming less frequent causes of death, and continued research and preventive measures may provide even greater benefits. However, changes in lifestyle and diet, including the adoption of more sedentary lifestyles and the consumption of fried foods and foods high in sugar, have resulted in increases in the incidence of otherwise preventable cardiovascular-related illness and death.
Heart disease as such was not recognized in non-technological cultures, but the beating heart and its relationship to death have always been appreciated. Sudden death, now usually attributed to heart disease, was recognized as early as the 5th century bce by the Greek physician Hippocrates and was noted to be more common in the obese. The role of disease in affecting the heart itself did not become apparent until the 17th century, when examination of the body after death became acceptable.
Gradually, the involvement of the heart valves, the blood vessels, and the heart muscle was observed and categorized in an orderly fashion. The circulation of the blood through the heart was described in 1628 by the British physician William Harvey. The recognition of the manifestations of heart failure came later, as did the ability to diagnose heart ailments by physical examination through the techniques of percussion (thumping), auscultation (listening) with the stethoscope, and other means. It was not until early in the 20th century that the determination of arterial blood pressure and the use of X-rays for diagnosis became widespread.
In 1912 James Bryan Herrick, a Chicago physician, first described what he called coronary thrombosis (he was describing symptoms actually caused by myocardial infarction). Angina pectoris had been recorded centuries earlier. Cardiovascular surgery in the modern sense began in the 1930s, and open-heart surgery began in the 1950s.
The exact incidence of heart disease in the world population is difficult to ascertain, because complete and adequate public health figures for either prevalence or related deaths are not available. Nonetheless, in the 21st century, in many parts of the world, cardiovascular disease was recognized as a leading cause of death. In the more technologically developed countries of the world—such as the United Kingdom and most continental European countries—arteriosclerotic heart disease (heart disease resulting from thickening and hardening of the artery walls) was one of the most common forms of cardiovascular disease. In the early 21st century in the United States, an estimated one-half of the adult population was affected by some form of cardiovascular disease; while heart disease and stroke accounted for a significant proportion of this disease burden, high blood pressure was the most common condition. In other areas of the world, such as the countries of Central Africa, other forms of heart disease, often nutritional in nature, were a common cause of death. In Asia and the islands of the Pacific, hypertensive cardiovascular disease, disease involving high blood pressure, constituted a major health hazard.
The heart’s complicated evolution during embryological development presents the opportunity for many different types of congenital defects to occur. Congenital heart disease is one of the important types of diseases affecting the cardiovascular system, with an incidence of about 8 per 1,000 live births. In most patients the causes appear to fit in the middle of a continuum from primarily genetic to primarily environmental.
Of the few cases that have a genetic nature, the defect may be the result of a single mutant gene, while in other cases it may be associated with a chromosomal abnormality, the most common of which is Down syndrome, in which about 50 percent of afflicted children have a congenital cardiac abnormality. In the even smaller number of cases of an obvious environmental cause, a variety of specific factors are evident. The occurrence of rubella (German measles) in a woman during the first three months of pregnancy is caused by a virus and is associated in the child with patent ductus arteriosus (nonclosure of the opening between the aorta and the pulmonary artery). Other viruses may be responsible for specific heart lesions, and a number of drugs, including antiepileptic agents, are associated with an increased incidence of congenital heart disease.
In most cases, congenital heart disease is probably caused by a variety of factors, and any genetic factor is usually unmasked only if it occurs together with the appropriate environmental hazard. The risk of a sibling of a child with congenital heart disease being similarly affected is between 2 and 4 percent. The precise recurrence can vary for individual congenital cardiovascular lesions.
Prenatal diagnosis of congenital cardiovascular abnormalities is still at an early stage. The most promising technique is ultrasonography, used for many years to examine the fetus in utero. The increasing sophistication of equipment has made it possible to examine the heart and the great vessels from 16 to 18 weeks of gestation onward and to determine whether defects are present. Amniocentesis (removal and examination of a small quantity of fluid from around the developing fetus) provides a method by which the fetal chromosomes can be examined for chromosomal abnormalities associated with congenital heart disease. In many children and adults the presence of congenital heart disease is detected for the first time when a cardiac murmur is heard. A congenital cardiovascular lesion is rarely signaled by a disturbance of the heart rate or the heart rhythm.
Congenital cardiac disturbances are varied and may involve almost all components of the heart and great arteries. Some may cause death at the time of birth, others may not have an effect until early adulthood, and some may be associated with an essentially normal life span. Nonetheless, about 40 percent of all untreated infants born with congenital heart disease die before the end of their first year.
Congenital heart defects can be classified into cyanotic and noncyanotic varieties. In the cyanotic varieties, a shunt bypasses the lungs and delivers venous (deoxygenated) blood from the right side of the heart into the arterial circulation. The infant’s nail beds and lips have a blue colour due to the excess deoxygenated blood in the system. Some infants with severe noncyanotic varieties of congenital heart disease may fail to thrive and may have breathing difficulties.
