Goitre,  enlargement of the thyroid gland, resulting in a prominent swelling in the front of the neck. The normal human thyroid gland weighs 10 to 20 grams (about 0.3 to 0.6 ounce), and some goitrous thyroid glands weigh as much as 1,000 grams (more than 2 pounds). The entire thyroid gland may be enlarged, or there may be one or more large thyroid nodules. The function of the thyroid gland may be decreased, normal, or increased. A very large goitre may cause sensations of choking and can cause difficulty in breathing and swallowing.
The most common type of goitre is endemic goitre, caused by iodine deficiency. Iodine is an essential nutrient that is required for the production of thyroid hormone. When iodine intake is low, thyroid hormone production is low, and in response the pituitary gland secretes greater quantities of the hormone thyrotropin (thyroid-stimulating hormone, TSH) in an attempt to restore thyroid hormone production to normal. This excess thyrotropin stimulates not only thyroid hormone production but also thyroid growth. Endemic goitre is more common among girls than boys and among women than men. It occurs most frequently in inland or mountainous regions where the natural iodine content of the water and soil is very low. It can be easily prevented by use of salt or food to which iodine has been added. In young people, increasing iodine intake results in regression of the goitre; however, the likelihood of regression diminishes with age. Surgical removal of the thyroid gland may be necessary if the goitre causes breathing or swallowing problems.
There are numerous other causes and types of goitre. One is caused by a defect in one of the steps in the synthesis of thyroid hormone. Like iodine deficiency, these defects result in increased thyrotropin secretion. More-common causes are one or multiple nodules in the thyroid (uninodular or multinodular goitre), infiltration of the thyroid by lymphocytes or other inflammatory cells (thyroiditis), or stimulation of thyroid growth (and function) by antibodies that activate the thyroid in the same way as does thyrotropin, as occurs in the disorder called Graves disease. (See also thyroid gland.)
