Graves disease, also called toxic diffuse goitre or exophthalmic goitre,  endocrine disorder that is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism (excess secretion of thyroid hormone) and thyrotoxicosis (effects of excess thyroid hormone action in tissue). In Graves disease the excessive secretion of thyroid hormone is accompanied by diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland (diffuse goitre). The thyroid gland may be slightly enlarged or several times its normal size. The increased thyroid hormone production results in the symptoms and signs of hyperthyroidism. Some patients also experience exophthalmos (protrusion of the eyes), with eyelid retraction, edema of tissues surrounding the eyes, double vision, and occasionally loss of vision, all of which are symptoms of a condition known as Graves ophthalmopathy.
Graves disease is an autoimmune disease (i.e., when the body reacts to its own tissues as though they were foreign substances). Patients with Graves disease produce antibodies that act on the thyroid to increase thyroid hormone production and thyroid size. These same, or closely related, antibodies may cause Graves ophthalmopathy. Graves disease occurs in women four to six times as often as in men. It most often affects young to middle-aged adults but can occur at all ages. The underlying cause of Graves disease is not known, but there is genetic susceptibility to the disease, and smoking is a risk factor, especially for Graves ophthalmopathy. Another characteristic of the disease is spontaneous remission of hyperthyroidism, which occurs in 30 to 40 percent of patients.
There is no treatment for Graves disease itself. Hyperthyroidism is treated with an antithyroid drug, radioactive iodine, or, rarely, surgical removal of the thyroid.
Graves ophthalmopathy occurs in approximately 25 percent of patients with Graves disease. It usually occurs as the patient is developing hyperthyroidism, but it can occur after hyperthyroidism is treated. There is no simple, effective treatment for the eye disease, and it may persist for years. Patients with severe inflammation of the tissues that surround the eye or with impairment of vision may be treated with a glucocorticoid or surgical decompression of the orbits.
Approximately 2 percent of patients with Graves disease have what is called localized myxedema. This is characterized by painless lumps composed of edematous subcutaneous tissue and thickening of the overlying skin on the lower legs (sometimes called pretibial myxedema) or, rarely, the arms or trunk. Nearly all patients with localized myxedema have had hyperthyroidism in the past and have severe ophthalmopathy. The only effective treatment is application of a glucocorticoid to the affected areas of skin.
