Hashimoto disease, also called Hashimoto thyroiditis, chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis, chronic autoimmune thyroiditis, or struma lymphomatosa,  a noninfectious form of inflammation of the thyroid gland (thyroiditis).
Hashimoto disease is an autoimmune disorder (i.e., the body reacts to its own tissues as though they were foreign substances). Its onset is insidious, with gradual enlargement of the thyroid gland (a condition called goitre) and a gradual decrease in thyroid hormone production. The usual findings are symmetrical rubbery enlargement of the thyroid gland, symptoms and signs of hypothyroidism, or both. The natural course of the disease often includes gradually increasing thyroid enlargement, as well as increasing thyroid deficiency. However, spontaneous improvement in hypothyroidism or goitre can occur. Pathologic examination of the thyroid reveals infiltration by white blood cells called lymphocytes and excess growth (hyperplasia) of thyroid tissue. The majority of patients are women, who are five to eight times more likely to develop this condition than men; it occurs more frequently in older women. There is a genetic predisposition to the disease, and a high iodine intake may contribute to its onset.
Patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis have antibodies against several components of thyroid tissue in their serum. Among them are antibodies against the enzyme thyroid peroxidase and the unique thyroid protein thyroglobulin. These antibodies are often measured as a diagnostic test for the disease, but they do not alter thyroid function or damage the thyroid. Some patients with the disease produce antibodies that block the action of thyrotropin (thyroid-stimulating hormone, TSH), the anterior pituitary hormone that maintains normal thyroid function. In most patients the thyroid is gradually destroyed, either by antibodies that damage the thyroid cells (cytotoxic antibodies) or, more likely, by lymphocytes that have been sensitized to migrate to the thyroid, where they interact with thyroid cells and produce substances (cytokines) that damage thyroid cells. The factors that initiate this process or the particular substances that cause the thyroid damage are not known.
There is no treatment for Hashimoto disease itself. Hypothyroidism is treated with thyroid hormone, usually thyroxine, which may also reduce the size of a goitre, if present.
