Thyroid tumour,  any of various benign tumours (adenomas) or malignant tumours (cancers) of the thyroid gland. Thyroid tumours are very common, and their frequency of occurrence increases with age. In the United States they are detected by physical examination in approximately 5 percent of the adult population and by ultrasound in approximately 40 percent of the adult population. In contrast, thyroid cancer is relatively rare; only about 0.5 percent of all cancer deaths occur from thyroid cancer. The peak incidence of thyroid cancer occurs at about 50 years of age, and women are affected about three times as often as men.
Most thyroid tumours are adenomas, which have a wide variation of cellular patterns. Most of the tumours have well-developed follicles; thus, they are collectively known as follicular adenomas. Most thyroid adenomas do not take up iodine or produce thyroid hormone; however, the main manifestation of a benign or malignant thyroid tumour is a painless mass in the neck.
The diagnosis of a nodule is confirmed by ultrasound. The only reliable way to distinguish between benign, and malignant nodules is by fine-needle aspiration (removal) of cells, the characteristics of which are examined under a microscope by a pathologist; however, sometimes this distinction can be made only by study of the entire nodule. Typically, 95 percent of nodules prove to be benign and 5 percent prove to be malignant. The benign nodules can be left alone; they enlarge only slightly, if at all, with time and can be removed surgically if they become bothersome to the patient. Malignant nodules, along with the entire thyroid gland, should be removed surgically to avoid potential metastasis (spread) to other sites of the body.
Most thyroid cancers are composed of mature-looking thyroid cells and grow very slowly. There are four types of thyroid cancer: papillary carcinoma, which accounts for about 90 percent of cases, and follicular carcinoma, anaplastic carcinoma, and medullary carcinoma, which together account for the remaining 10 percent of cases. Papillary and follicular carcinomas are very slow-growing tumours, and, while they can spread to lymph nodes in the neck, the lungs, or elsewhere, most patients are cured by a combination of surgery, radioactive iodine therapy, and thyroid hormone therapy. The only established risk factors for papillary carcinoma are external-beam radiation to the head and neck region and exposure to radioactive iodine in infants and children. In contrast to papillary and follicular carcinomas, anaplastic carcinomas are highly malignant and rapidly fatal. Medullary carcinomas are tumours of the parafollicular cells (C cells) of the thyroid gland and are somewhat more malignant than papillary or follicular carcinomas.
