Albert Robida,  (born May 14, 1848, Compiègne, France—died Oct. 11, 1926, Neuilly), early pioneer of science fiction and founding father of science fiction art.
Despite severe myopia, Robida as a child had a passion for drawing. He produced his first series of satiric cartoons in 1865 and two years later his parents, recognizing his creative talents, permitted him to move to Paris where, at age 19, he began his career as an illustrator and caricaturist for a variety of popular Parisian magazines, such as La Chronique illustrée and Le Polichinelle. Robida soon turned to chronicling the Franco-German War of 1870 and the ensuing civil strife of the Paris Commune; his diary and sketchbook from this period contains hundreds of detailed drawings. Robida traveled throughout Europe as a freelance artist-journalist-correspondent during the early years of the Third Republic before settling in 1876 in a Paris suburb to raise a family.
During his lifetime Robida was known primarily for the artwork he provided for luxury editions of literary works by François Rabelais, Charles Perrault, Honoré de Balzac, and others, as well as for many illustrated books on French urban architecture and history. Later generations came to see Robida primarily as a gifted science fiction novelist and artist. Beginning in 1879 Robida serialized Voyages très extraordinaires de Saturnin Farandoul, a fantasy-adventure spoof of Jules Verne’s Voyages extraordinaires (“Extraordinary Journeys”) series. In 1882 the collection was published in five books as Le Roi des singes (“King of the Monkeys”), Le Tour du monde en plus de 80 jours (“Round the World in More than 80 Days”), Les Quatre Reines (“The Four Queens”), À la recherche de l’éléphant blanc (“In Search of the White Elephant”), and S. Exc. M. le Gouverneur du Pole Nord (“His Excellency the Governor of the North Pole”). This collection was followed by a series of fanciful and lavishly illustrated science-fiction novels including Le Vingtième Siècle (1882; The Twentieth Century), La Vie électrique (1883; “The Electric Life”), La Guerre au vingtième siècle (1887; “War in the Twentieth Century”), L’Horloge des siècles (1902; “Clock of the Centuries”), and the unusually pessimistic L’Ingénieur Von Satanas (1919; “The Engineer Von Satanas”).
Robida’s novels are unique for their time. A host of futuristic technological extrapolations are juxtaposed onto a realistic (from a 19th-century perspective) representation of lifestyles, beliefs, and social institutions. Husbands and wives argue about their daughter’s dowry over the “telephonoscope,” traditional weekend outings to the country are done via the “pneumatic tube” or “aerocar,” and the bourgeois home is decorated with artworks of “photo-paintings” or “galvano-sculpture.” The effect is often very comical. But even when shown to be problematic or potentially dangerous (especially in its military applications), Robida’s high-tech gadgetry invariably serves to underscore the vagaries of human behaviour. Hence, although revered as a very important figure in the emergence of modern science fiction, Robida’s narrative approach—“let’s look at ourselves through foreign eyes”—also identifies him as a direct literary descendant of social satirists such as Voltaire and Montesquieu.
When Robida saw his technological daydreams turn into real-life nightmares during World War I, his attitude toward scientific progress changed dramatically. The final decade of his life was characterized by a growing antipathy to all things newfangled and technological.
