Daniel Lieberman, in full Daniel Eric Lieberman,  (born June 3, 1964), American paleoanthropologist best known for his part in developing and testing the endurance-running hypothesis and for his research into the biomechanics of barefoot running.
Lieberman was raised in Connecticut and Rhode Island by his parents, Philip and Marcia Lieberman. He received an A.B. in anthropology from Harvard University in 1986 and earned master’s degrees in biological anthropology from the University of Cambridge in 1987 and in anthropology from Harvard in 1990. Lieberman received a Ph.D. in anthropology from Harvard in 1993. After early appointments at Rutgers University and George Washington University, he returned to Harvard in 2001 to serve as professor of anthropology. His early research involved studies that explored the structure of the skull and dentition of early hominins; however, his interests quickly expanded to include the influence of biomechanical forces on the evolution of bones.
In 2004 Lieberman and American biologist Dennis M. Bramble investigated long-distance-running performance in humans and how it evolved. Building on early work by American biologist David Carrier, Lieberman and Bramble outlined the endurance-running hypothesis, which states that the ability of humans to run long distances is an adaptation that originated approximately two million years ago with the emergence of the genus Homo. They noted that several features that facilitate endurance running first appeared in H. habilis and H. erectus—including shortened toes and feet and lengthened legs, whose various structures both stored and released elastic energy. Those earliest members of Homo were also characterized by improved venous circulation and respiratory capacity for more-efficient thermoregulation (body-heat maintenance). In addition, they had a nuchal ligament in the neck to stabilize the head, and they had large gluteus muscles and other musculoskeletal features to help counterbalance and stabilize the body during a run.
In 2009 Lieberman and several colleagues became the first scientists to test the endurance-running hypothesis empirically by calculating the effects of toe length on running biomechanics. Their results suggested that reduced toe length relative to body mass in bipeds had increased the efficiency of locomotion and lowered the metabolic costs of running. They reported that long toes, a trait found in modern apes and members of the genus Australopithecus, had little effect on the energy expended in walking. However, if the toe length in modern humans was increased by just 20 percent, runners would likely have to expend twice as much energy as they do at present and would incur a greater risk of injury.
From the perspective of natural selection, Lieberman acknowledged that endurance running would not have helped early humans avoid faster predators over short distances, but it could have helped humans travel more easily between habitat patches in the African savannas of the Pliocene Epoch (5.3 million to 2.6 million years ago) or reach animal carcasses in time to scavenge meat left behind by lions and other large predators. In addition, he noted that endurance running may have been useful in tracking and chasing prey. He also noted that endurance running may have enabled humans to hunt by exhausting their prey, a tactic that would have allowed slower but persistent humans to capture quadrupedal mammals, which struggle to thermoregulate in hot weather and over long distances. Whether through scavenging or hunting, Lieberman contended, endurance running had made meat more accessible to humans; access to protein and fats found in animal flesh, in turn, had led to taller and narrower body forms, increased brain size, and reduced dentition.
Lieberman also carried out extensive research on the mechanical processes associated with barefoot running, an activity in which participants wear light thin-soled shoes or forgo shoes altogether. In a 2010 paper on his research, he reported that barefoot runners often strike the ground first with the ball of the foot or the flat of the foot. The collisional forces thus generated are much less than those from rear-foot (or heel) strikes, which are more typical of runners wearing modern padded shoes. He also suggested that the barefoot running pattern might reduce the incidence of impact-related injuries to the feet and lower limbs.
In 2011 Lieberman published the acclaimed The Evolution of the Human Head, a comprehensive review of the human skull, its tissues, and the role played by natural selection in its development. He was a member of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the American Anthropological Association.
