David Suzuki, in full David Takayoshi Suzuki,  (born March 24, 1936, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada), Canadian scientist, television personality, author, and environmental activist who was known for his ability to make scientific and environmental issues relatable to the public, especially through his television series The Nature of Things with David Suzuki (1979– ), and for his efforts in environmental conservation.
Suzuki, a third-generation Japanese Canadian, was among those thousands of Japanese and people of Japanese descent in Canada and the United States who, in the wake of the December 1941 attack launched by Japan on the U.S. naval base at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii, were sent to internment camps. Suzuki was five years old when his family was ordered to leave their home, and he spent four years living in a camp in the Slocan valley of British Columbia. After World War II ended, the Suzuki family settled in Ontario, where David embraced an early love of nature and collected specimens in a swamp near their home. He went on to study in the United States, earning a bachelor’s degree in biology (1958) at Amherst College in Massachusetts and a Ph.D. in zoology (1961) at the University of Chicago. After graduating, Suzuki took a research associateship at Tennessee’s Oak Ridge National Laboratory (1961–62) and later taught genetics at the University of Alberta (1962–63). He moved to the University of British Columbia in 1963 as an assistant professor of zoology, becoming a full professor in 1969 and professor emeritus in 2001.
Seeing an opportunity to communicate his scientific findings and concerns with the public, Suzuki began appearing on television in the 1960s, giving commentary and reviews. His first show, Suzuki on Science, aired on Canadian Broadcast Corporation (CBC) television from 1971 to 1972. He quickly became a media personality. In 1975 he began hosting both the CBC television program Science Magazine and CBC Radio’s Quirks and Quarks. In 1979 Science Magazine was merged with another CBC show called The Nature of Things, and the conglomeration became Suzuki’s own hour-long program, The Nature of Things with David Suzuki. He continued to host that program for more than three decades, in addition to other TV and radio appearances. He created and hosted various television specials, including the highly praised A Planet for the Taking (1985), The Secret of Life (1993), and The Brain (1994).
Suzuki was also a prolific writer. He published hundreds of articles and penned several regular newspaper columns. Over the course of his career, he published more than 50 books, most of them about genetics or ecological sciences, including the popular textbook An Introduction to Genetic Analysis (1976; with Anthony J.F. Griffiths). He also wrote several books for children and the autobiography David Suzuki (2006).
An outspoken advocate for the environment, in 1990 he cofounded the David Suzuki Foundation, its aim being to work toward environmental conservation by providing research and information for government, businesses, and individuals. Toward the end of the 20th century, Suzuki became one of the first major voices to call for action in the fight against global warming, and in the early 21st century he slowed down his touring and speaking efforts because of concerns about greenhouse gas emissions from frequent air and car travel.
Suzuki was the recipient of dozens of awards for his work, notably the United Nations Environment Programme Medal (1985), UNESCO’s Kalinga Prize for the Popularization of Science (1986), and the Right Livelihood Award (2009). He was made an officer of the Order of Canada in 1977 and a Companion of the Order of Canada in 2006.
