Homo floresiensis,  taxonomic name given to an extinct hominin (member of the human lineage) that is presumed to have lived on the Indonesian island of Flores as recently as 12,000 years ago). The origins of the species are not fully understood. Some evidence suggests that Homo floresiensis descended from modern humans (H. sapiens), and other evidence supports the notion that H. floresiensis descended from a different species within genus Homo.
Skeletal remains of an adult female and other individuals were found at the Liang Bua cave on Flores in 2004 by a team of Australian and Indonesian anthropologists. An initial analysis of the remains indicated that H. floresiensis stood only some 100 cm (40 inches) tall and had long arms and a skull with a cranial capacity of a mere 380 cc, comparable to that of a modern chimpanzee, yet the delicate skeletal bones, nonprojecting face, and reduced dentition placed them squarely within the human family. On the basis of these findings, the hominin’s discoverers classified it as a distinct species of genus Homo and theorized that it may have descended from H. erectus, a much older and larger hominin that may also be the ancestor of modern humans.
They further hypothesized that the diminutive size of H. floresiensis may have been caused by island dwarfing, or endemic dwarfing, a process whereby some creatures confined to isolated habitats such as islands are known to have become smaller over time. Such dwarfing has never been seen in the remains of other members of the human family, which show that stature and brain size have generally increased from the earliest hominins up to modern humans. Other scientists, who have examined the remains, contend that they belong to a member of Homo sapiens with features consistent with a modern human with Down syndrome.
Public curiosity about the new species abounded, and, in homage to a short-statured race in J.R.R. Tolkien’s novels, it was soon dubbed “hobbit-like.” However, the initial analysis of the find and the dwarfing hypothesis were immediately challenged by the scholarly community. Some subsequent examinations of the remains contradicted the original conclusions, suggesting instead that they represent a population of modern humans that was quite gracile (slender) but of normal height. In contrast, other investigations, which compared the specimen’s gait, foot size, and skull size with that of modern humans, suggested that the remains belong to a new species, perhaps one that descended from an ancestor more primitive than H. erectus.
Subsequent investigations into the remains of H. floresiensis cast doubt on whether the species descended from modern humans. Fossils attributed to H. floresiensis and the rocks that bore them have been dated to between 100,000 and 60,000 years ago, but modern humans did not arrive in Southeast Asia and Australia until 50,000 years ago—and not at Flores until about 11,000 years ago. Such a mismatch in time and place would seem to indicate that H. floresiensis descended from another species within Homo. Although the true origin of H. floresiensis remains a mystery, some scientists do acknowledge that modern humans could have driven H. floresiensis to extinction.
