Human Genome Project (HGP),  an international collaboration that successfully determined, stored, and rendered publicly available the sequences of almost all the genetic content of the chromosomes of the human organism, otherwise known as the human genome.
The Human Genome Project (HGP), which operated from 1990 to 2003, provided researchers with basic information about the sequences of the three billion chemical base pairs (i.e., adenine [A], thymine [T], guanine [G], and cytosine [C]) that make up human genomic DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid). The HGP was further intended to improve the technologies needed to interpret and analyze genomic sequences, to identify all the genes encoded in human DNA, and to address the ethical, legal, and social implications that might arise from defining the entire human genomic sequence.
Prior to the HGP, the base sequences of numerous human genes had been determined through contributions made by many individual scientists. However, the vast majority of the human genome remained unexplored, and researchers, having recognized the necessity and value of having at hand the basic information of the human genomic sequence, were beginning to search for ways to uncover this information more quickly. Because the HGP required billions of dollars that would inevitably be taken away from traditional biomedical research, many scientists, politicians, and ethicists became involved in vigorous debates over the merits, risks, and relative costs of sequencing the entire human genome in one concerted undertaking. Despite the controversy, the HGP was initiated in 1990 under the leadership of American geneticist Francis Collins, with support from the U.S. Department of Energy and the National Institutes of Health (NIH). The effort was soon joined by scientists from around the world. Moreover, a series of technical advances in the sequencing process itself and in the computer hardware and software used to track and analyze the resulting data enabled rapid progress of the project.
Technological advance, however, was only one of the forces driving the pace of discovery of the HGP. In 1998 a private-sector enterprise, Celera Genomics, headed by American biochemist and former NIH scientist J. Craig Venter, began to compete with and potentially undermine the publicly funded HGP. At the heart of the competition was the prospect of gaining control over potential patents on the genome sequence, which was considered a pharmaceutical treasure trove. Although the legal and financial reasons remain unclear, the rivalry between Celera and the NIH ended when they joined forces, thus speeding completion of the rough draft sequence of the human genome. The completion of the rough draft was announced in June 2000 by Collins and Venter. For the next three years, the rough draft sequence was refined, extended, and further analyzed, and in April 2003, coinciding with the 50th anniversary of the publication that described the double-helical structure of DNA, written by British biophysicist Francis Crick and American geneticist and biophysicist James D. Watson, the HGP was declared complete.
To appreciate the magnitude, challenge, and implications of the HGP, it is important first to consider the foundation of science upon which it was based—the fields of classical, molecular, and human genetics. Classical genetics is considered to have begun in the mid-1800s with the work of Austrian botanist, teacher, and Augustinian prelate Gregor Mendel, who defined the basic laws of genetics in his studies of the garden pea (Pisum sativum). Mendel succeeded in explaining that, for any given gene, offspring inherit from each parent one form, or allele, of a gene. In addition, the allele that an offspring inherits from a parent for one gene is independent of the allele inherited from that parent for another gene.
Mendel’s basic laws of genetics were expanded upon in the early 20th century when molecular geneticists began conducting research using model organisms such as Drosophila melanogaster (also called the vinegar fly or fruit fly) that provided a more comprehensive view of the complexities of genetic transmission. For example, molecular genetics studies demonstrated that two alleles can be codominant (characteristics of both alleles of a gene are expressed) and that not all traits are defined by single genes; in fact, many traits reflect the combined influences of numerous genes. The field of molecular genetics emerged from the realization that DNA and RNA (ribonucleic acid) constitute the genetic material in all living things. In physical terms, a gene is a discrete stretch of nucleotides within a DNA molecule, with each nucleotide containing an A, G, T, or C base unit. It is the specific sequence of these bases that encodes the information contained in the gene and that is ultimately translated into a final product, a molecule of protein or in some cases a molecule of RNA. The protein or RNA product may have a structural role or a regulatory role, or it may serve as an enzyme to promote the formation or metabolism of other molecules, including carbohydrates and lipids. All these molecules work in concert to maintain the processes required for life.
Studies in molecular genetics led to studies in human genetics and the consideration of the ways in which traits in humans are inherited. For example, most traits in humans and other species result from a combination of genetic and environmental influences. In addition, some genes, such as those encoded at neighbouring spots on a single chromosome, tend to be inherited together, rather than independently, whereas other genes, namely those encoded on the mitochondrial genome, are inherited only from the mother, and yet other genes, encoded on the Y chromosome, are passed only from fathers to sons. Using data from the HGP, scientists have estimated that the human genome contains anywhere from 20,000 to 25,000 genes.
