Huntington disease , also called Huntington chorea,  a relatively rare, and invariably fatal, hereditary neurological disease that is characterized by irregular and involuntary movements of the muscles and progressive loss of cognitive ability. The disease was first described by American physician George Huntington in 1872.
Symptoms of Huntington disease usually appear between ages 35 and 50 and worsen over time. They begin with occasional jerking or writhing movements, called choreiform movements, or what appear to be minor problems with coordination; these movements, which are absent during sleep, worsen over the next few years and progress to random, uncontrollable, and often violent twitchings and jerks. Symptoms of mental deterioration may appear including apathy, fatigue, irritability, restlessness, or moodiness; these symptoms may progress to memory loss, dementia, bipolar disorder, or schizophrenia.
A child of someone with Huntington disease has a 50 percent chance of inheriting the genetic mutation associated with the disease, and all individuals who inherit the mutation will eventually develop the disease. The genetic mutation that causes Huntington disease occurs in a gene known as HD (officially named huntingtin [Huntington disease]). This gene, which is located on human chromosome 4, encodes a protein called huntingtin, which is distributed in certain regions of the brain, as well as other tissues of the body. Mutated forms of the HD gene contain abnormally repeated segments of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) called CAG trinucleotide repeats. These repeated segments result in the synthesis of huntingtin proteins that contain long stretches of molecules of the amino acid glutamine. When these abnormal huntingtin proteins are cut into fragments during processing by cellular enzymes, molecules of glutamine project out from the ends of the protein fragments, causing the fragments to adhere to other proteins. The resulting clumps of proteins have the potential to cause neuron (nerve cell) dysfunction. The formation of abnormal huntingtin proteins leads to the degeneration and eventual death of neurons in the basal ganglia, a pair of nerve clusters deep within the brain that control movement.
The progression and severity of Huntington disease are associated with the length of the CAG trinucleotide repeat region in the HD gene. For example, the trinucleotide region in HD appears to expand during middle age, coinciding with the onset of symptoms, and may also expand from one generation to the next, causing a form of the disease known as anticipation, in which symptoms develop at an earlier age in the offspring of affected individuals.
While a genetic test is available for Huntington disease, no effective therapy or cure is available for the disorder, although choreiform movements may be partially and temporarily suppressed by phenothiazines or other antipsychotic medications.
