Hwang Woo-Suk,  (born December 15, 1953, Buyeo, South Korea), South Korean scientist whose revolutionary claims of having cloned human embryos from which he extracted stem cells were discredited as fabrications. In 2005 Hwang debuted the first cloned dog, Snuppy, an Afghan hound.
Hwang studied at the College of Veterinary Medicine at Seoul National University, receiving a bachelor’s degree (1977) in veterinary medicine and a master’s degree (1979)  and a doctorate (1982) in theriogenology, the study of animal reproduction. In 1984 he joined the faculty of Hokkaido University in Sapporo, Japan, as a visiting fellow, and from 1986 to 2006 he was a faculty member at Seoul National University.
Hwang earned a name for himself by developing methods for cloning cows and pigs. In 2002, having decided to begin work on human cloning, he partnered with Moon Shin-Yong, an obstetrician who had done extensive work with in vitro fertilization. In February 2004 Hwang and Moon announced that they had successfully cloned human embryos. They further claimed that one of the embryos had yielded stem cells—undifferentiated cells capable of developing into specific cell types that were believed to have possible applications in treating certain diseases, such as juvenile diabetes, Parkinson disease, and Alzheimer disease. Though Hwang and Moon voiced strong opposition to reproductive cloning and insisted that their research was conducted solely for therapeutic purposes, the announcement heightened public debate regarding bioethics.
Human cells had been cloned before, but the resulting fragile embryos died quickly. Hwang and Moon claimed that the success of their research was due to several factors, including the large number of eggs available to them and the extraction of material from the eggs using a squeezing technique, which supposedly helped to reduce damage.
Hwang published a paper in May 2005 purporting that his team had created 11 individual stem cell lines from cloned embryos. This discovery had significant implications for medicine, as it raised the possibility of treatments tailored to the individual patient, using the patient’s own stem cells. In August of that year he also premiered the first cloned dog.
However, in November 2005 Hwang admitted to using eggs donated by two of his own researchers—a practice that violated the principles of scientific ethics. Though Hwang maintained that the researchers had donated the eggs of their own volition, implications of coercion forced him to step down from his position as director of the World Stem Cell Hub, an organization devoted to exploring applications of stem cell technology in medicine. Despite this embarrassment, South Korean public support for him ran high, with hundreds of women volunteering to donate their eggs.
In December of that year, Roh Sung-Il, a colleague on Hwang’s project, came forward with information indicating that his human cloning discoveries had been fabricated. An academic review panel at Seoul National University concluded that Hwang, though he had at one point received falsified data from a junior member of his team, had himself been responsible for most of the unfounded assertions made public. The review determined that the only verifiable research that Hwang had conducted in the period of 2004–05 was that which resulted in the cloned dog. Skepticism in the wake of the scandal led to two independent reviews of the dog cloning project, but both ultimately concluded that the research was legitimate.
Hwang was fired from Seoul National University in March 2006, while six members of his team, including Moon, received varying levels of suspension. In 2009, following a three-year trial during which his privileged government-supported lifestyle was made public, Hwang was found guilty of embezzling research funds and illegally purchasing human eggs, for which he received a two-year suspended jail sentence. Hwang then briefly partnered with an American biotechnology firm that specialized in cloning dead pets. Following his evacuation from Libya in February 2011 amid increasing violence there, it emerged that he was in talks with the Libyan government about building a stem cell research centre near Tripoli. He announced in October 2011 that he and his colleagues at the South Korean Sooam Bioengineering Research Institute had cloned coyotes.
