J. Craig Venter, in full John Craig Venter,  (born Oct. 14, 1946, Salt Lake City, Utah, U.S.),  American geneticist, biochemist, and businessman who pioneered new techniques in genetics and genomics research and headed the private-sector enterprise, Celera Genomics, in the Human Genome Project (HGP).
Soon after Venter was born, his family moved to the San Francisco area, where swimming and surfing occupied his free time. After high school Venter joined the U.S. Naval Medical Corps and served in the Vietnam War. On returning to the U.S., he earned a B.A. in biochemistry (1972) and then a doctorate in physiology and pharmacology (1975) at the University of California, San Diego. In 1976 he joined the faculty of the State University of New York at Buffalo, where he was involved in neurochemistry research. In 1984 Venter moved to the National Institutes of Health (NIH), in Bethesda, Md., and began studying genes involved in signal transmission between neurons.
While at the NIH, Venter became frustrated with traditional methods of gene identification, which were slow and time-consuming. He developed an alternative technique using expressed sequence tags (ESTs), small segments of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) found in expressed genes that are used as “tags” to identify unknown genes in other organisms, cells, or tissues. Venter used ESTs to rapidly identify thousands of human genes. Although first received with skepticism, the approach later gained increased acceptance; in 1993 it was used to identify the gene responsible for a type of colon cancer. Venter’s attempts to patent the gene fragments that he identified, however, created a furor among those in the scientific community who believed that such information belonged in the public domain.
Venter left the NIH in 1992 and, with the backing of the for-profit company Human Genome Sciences, in Gaithersburg, Md., established a research arm, The Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR). At the institute a team headed by American microbiologist Claire Fraser, Venter’s first wife, sequenced the genome of the microorganism Mycoplasma genitalium.
In 1995, in collaboration with American molecular geneticist Hamilton Smith of Johns Hopkins University, in Baltimore, Md., Venter determined the genomic sequence of Haemophilus influenzae, a bacterium that causes earaches and meningitis in humans. The achievement marked the first time that the complete sequence of a free-living organism had been deciphered, and it was accomplished in less than a year.
In 1998 Venter founded Celera Genomics and began sequencing the human genome. Celera relied on whole genome “shotgun” sequencing, a rapid sequencing technique that Venter had developed while at TIGR. The shotgun technique is used to decode small sections of DNA (about 2,000–10,000 base pairs [bp] in length) of an organism’s genome. These sections are later assembled into a full-length genomic sequence. This is in contrast to older genome sequencing techniques, in which a physical map of an organism’s genome is generated by ordering of segments of chromosomes before sequencing begins; sequencing then entails the analysis of long, 150,000 bp sections of DNA. Celera began decoding the human genome at a faster rate than the government-run HGP. Venter’s work was viewed at first with skepticism by the NIH-funded HGP group, led by geneticist Francis Collins; nevertheless, at a ceremony held in Washington, D.C., in 2000, Venter, Collins, and U.S. Pres. Bill Clinton gathered to announce the completion of a rough draft sequence of the human genome. The announcement emphasized that the sequence had been generated through a concerted effort between Venter’s private company and Collins’s public research consortium. The HGP was completed in 2003.
In addition to the human genome, Venter contributed to the sequencing of the genomes of the rat, mouse, and fruit fly. In 2006 he founded the J. Craig Venter Research Institute (JCVI), a not-for-profit genomics research support organization. In 2007, researchers funded in part by the JCVI successfully sequenced the genome of the mosquito Aedes aegypti, which transmits the infectious agent of yellow fever to humans.
JCVI scientists were also fundamental in pioneering the field of synthetic biology. In this effort, Venter was again in collaboration with Smith, who headed the organization’s synthetic biology and bioenergy research group. In 2008 Venter, Smith, and their JCVI colleagues created a full-length synthetic genome identical to the naturally occurring genome of the bacterium Mycoplasma genitalium. Two years later, Venter and his team created a synthetic copy of the genome of another bacterium, M. mycoides, and demonstrated that the synthetic genome was functional by transplanting it into a cell of the species M. capricolum. The recipient cell not only survived the transplantation procedure but also assumed the phenotypic characteristics dictated by the M. mycoides genome.
While the synthetic research conducted by Venter and JCVI scientists was considered scientifically groundbreaking, it also raised significant concerns, particularly about the potential risks associated with the release of synthetic organisms into the environment. Nonetheless, Venter believed that synthetic organisms would ultimately prove beneficial, particularly as sources for alternative energy production.
