Java man,  extinct hominin (member of the human lineage) known from fossil remains found on the island of Java, Indonesia. A skullcap and femur (thighbone) discovered by the Dutch anatomist and geologist Eugène Dubois in the early 1890s were the first known fossils of the species Homo erectus.
Dubois traveled to Southeast Asia with the hope of finding an ancestor of modern man. After searching for fossils on the island of Sumatra, he moved to Java in 1890. With the help of two army sergeants and a number of convict labourers, he began work in August 1891 along the Solo River at Trinil. The skullcap appeared in October, and the femur was recovered later from the same pit. With the partial cranium as evidence for a small brain and the modern-looking femur as an indication of upright posture, Dubois was able to argue that he had found a “missing link,” a creature intermediate in its evolutionary position between apes and humans. Dubois originally classified his find as Pithecanthropus erectus.
For more than three decades, Dubois did not allow other scientists to examine the skullcap and femur. Although he finally yielded in 1923, his secretive behaviour surrounding the remains—combined with insinuations made in his letters written shortly before his death in 1940 that the remains may have belonged to a primitive creature that was possibly more apelike or gibbonlike than humanlike—caused some of his critics to claim that Java man was a hoax. However, after subsequent investigations of the remains by American biologist Ernst Mayr in 1944, Java man was classified as a member of H. erectus.
Java man was characterized by a cranial capacity averaging 900 cubic cm (smaller than those of later specimens of H. erectus), a skull flat in profile with little forehead, a crest along the top of the head for attachment of powerful jaw muscles, very thick skull bones, heavy browridges, and a massive jaw with no chin. The teeth are essentially human though with some apelike features, such as large, partly overlapping canines. Thighbones show that Java man walked fully erect, like modern man, and attained a height of about 170 cm (5 feet 8 inches). Other fossils were later found at Sangiran and Modjokerto. The Modjokerto infant (about five years old at death) was found in 1936 and has a skull with large browridges and a retreating forehead.
Java man predates Peking man (which was also placed in H. erectus by Mayr in 1944) and is usually considered somewhat more primitive. H. erectus is thought to have occupied Java from about one million to 500,000 years ago. However, radiometric dates obtained for volcanic minerals at Sangiran indicate that some Javan fossils may be substantially older, perhaps approaching 1.5 million to 1.8 million years in age.
