Neanderthal,  (Homo neanderthalensis, Homo sapiens neanderthalensis), also spelled Neandertal,  member of a group of archaic humans who emerged at least 200,000 years ago during the Pleistocene Epoch (about 2.6 million to 11,700 years ago) and were replaced or assimilated by early modern human populations (Homo sapiens) between 35,000 and perhaps 24,000 years ago. Neanderthals inhabited Eurasia from the Atlantic regions of Europe eastward to Central Asia, from as far north as present-day Belgium and as far south as the Mediterranean and southwest Asia. Similar archaic human populations lived at the same time in eastern Asia and in Africa. Because Neanderthals lived in a land of abundant limestone caves, which preserved bones well, and where there has been a long history of prehistoric research, they are better known than any other archaic human group. Consequently, they have become the archetypal “cavemen.” The name Neanderthal (or Neandertal) derives from the Neander Valley (German Neander Thal or Neander Tal) in Germany, where the fossils were first found.
Until the late 20th century, Neanderthals were regarded as genetically, morphologically, and behaviorally distinct from living humans. However, more recent discoveries about this well-preserved fossil Eurasian population have revealed an overlap between living and archaic humans. Neanderthals lived before and during the last ice age of the Pleistocene in some of the most unforgiving environments ever inhabited by humans. They developed a successful culture, with a complex stone tool technology, that was based on hunting, with some scavenging and local plant collection. Their survival during tens of thousands of years of the last glaciation is a remarkable testament to human adaptation.
The first human fossil assemblage described as Neanderthal was discovered in 1856 in the Feldhofer Cave of the Neander Valley, near Düsseldorf, Germany. The fossils, discovered by lime workers at a quarry, consisted of a robust cranial vault with a massive arched brow ridge, minus the facial skeleton, and several limb bones. The limb bones were robustly built, with large articular surfaces on the ends (that is, surfaces at joints that are typically covered with cartilage) and bone shafts that were bowed front to back. The remains of large extinct mammals and crude stone tools were discovered in the same context as the human fossils. Upon first examination, the fossils were deemed by anatomists as representing the oldest known human beings to inhabit Europe. Others disagreed and labeled the fossils H. neanderthalensis, a species distinct from H. sapiens. Some anatomists suggested that the bones were those of modern humans and that the unusual form was the result of pathology. This flurry of scientific debate coincided with the publication of On the Origin of Species (1859) by Charles Darwin, which provided a theoretical foundation upon which fossils could be viewed as a direct record of life over geologic time. When two fossil skeletons that resembled the original Feldhofer remains were discovered at Spy, Belgium, in 1886, the pathology explanation for the curious morphology of the bones was abandoned.
During the latter part of the 19th century and the early 20th century, additional fossils that resembled the Neanderthals from the Feldhofer and Spy caves were discovered, including those now in Belgium (Naulette), Croatia (Krapina), France (Le Moustier, La Quina, La Chapelle-aux-Saints and Pech de L’Azé), Italy (Guattari and Archi), Hungary (Subalyuk), Israel (Tabūn), the Czech Republic (Ochoz, Kůlna, and Sĭpka), the Crimea (Mezmaiskaya), Uzbekistan (Teshik-Tash), and Iraq (Shanidar). More recently, Neanderthals were discovered in the Netherlands (North Sea coast), Greece (Lakonis and Kalamakia), Syria (Dederiyeh), Spain (El Sidrón), and Russian Siberia (Okladnikov) and at additional sites in France (Saint Césaire, L’Hortus, and Roc de Marsal, near Les Eyzies-de-Tayac), Israel (Amud and Kebara), and Belgium (Scladina and Walou). Well over 200 individuals are represented, including over 70 juveniles. These sites range from nearly 200,000 years ago or earlier to 36,000 years before present, and some groups may have survived in the southern Iberian Peninsula until nearly 30,000–35,000 years ago or even possibly 28,000–24,000 years ago in Gibraltar. Most of the sites, however, are dated to approximately 120,000 to 35,000 years ago. The complete disappearance of the Neanderthals corresponds to, or precedes, the most recent glacial maximum—a time period of intense cold spells and frequent fluctuations in temperature beginning around 29,000 years ago or earlier—and the increasing presence and density in Eurasia of early modern human populations, and possibly their hunting dogs, beginning as early as 40,000 years ago.
