Point mutation,  change within a gene in which one base pair in the DNA sequence is altered. Point mutations are frequently the result of mistakes made during DNA replication, although modification of DNA, such as through exposure to X-rays or to ultraviolet radiation, also can induce point mutations.
There are two types of point mutations: transition mutations and transversion mutations. Transition mutations occur when a pyrimidine base (i.e., thymine [T] or cytosine [C]) substitutes for another pyrimidine base or when a purine base (i.e., adenine [A] or guanine [G]) substitutes for another purine base. In double-stranded DNA each of the bases pairs with a specific partner on the corresponding strand—A pairs with T and C pairs with G. Thus, an example of a transition mutation is a GC base pair that replaces a wild type (or naturally occurring) AT base pair. In contrast, transversion mutations occur when a purine base substitutes for a pyrimidine base, or vice versa; for example, when a TA or CG pair replaces the wild type AT pair.
At the level of translation, when RNA copied from DNA is converted into a string of amino acids during protein synthesis, point mutations often manifest as functional changes in the final protein product. Thus, there exist functional groupings for point mutations. These groupings are divided into silent mutations, missense mutations, and nonsense mutations.  Silent mutations result in a new codon (a triplet nucleotide sequence in RNA) that codes for the same amino acid as the wild type codon in that position. In some silent mutations the codon codes for a different amino acid that happens to have the same properties as the amino acid produced by the wild type codon. Missense mutations involve substitutions that result in functionally different amino acids; these can lead to alteration or loss of protein function. Nonsense mutations, which are a severe type of base substitution, result in a stop codon in a position where there was not one before, which causes the premature termination of protein synthesis and, more than likely, a complete loss of function in the finished protein.
Some scientists recognize another type of mutation, called a frameshift mutation, as a type of point mutation. Frameshift mutations can lead to drastic loss of function and occur through the addition or deletion of one or more DNA bases. In a protein-coding gene the sequence of codons starting with AUG (where U is the RNA base uracil, which replaces T during transcription) and ending with a termination codon is called the reading frame. If a nucleotide pair is added to or subtracted from this sequence, the reading frame from that point will be shifted by one nucleotide pair, and all of the codons downstream will be altered. The result will be a protein whose first section (before the mutational site) is that of the wild type amino acid sequence, followed by a tail of functionally meaningless amino acids.
