Quorum sensing,  mechanism by which bacteria regulate gene expression in accordance with population density through the use of signal molecules. Quorum sensing allows bacteria populations to communicate and coordinate group behaviour and commonly is used by pathogens (disease-causing organisms) in disease and infection processes. Bacterial activity involving quorum sensing was first observed in the mid-1960s by Hungarian-born microbiologist Alexander Tomasz in his studies of the ability of Pneumococcus (later known as Streptococcus pneumoniae) to take up free DNA from its environment.
Standard quorum-sensing pathways consist of bacteria populations, signal molecules, and behavioral genes. The signal molecules, known as autoinducers, are secreted into the environment by bacteria and gradually increase in concentration as the bacteria population grows. After reaching a certain concentration threshold, the molecules become detectable to bacteria populations, which then activate corresponding response genes that regulate various behaviours, such as virulence, horizontal gene transfer, biofilm formation, and competence (the ability to take up DNA). Since many of these processes are effective only at certain population sizes, quorum sensing is a key behaviour-coordination mechanism in many microbes.
Although quorum sensing is common among bacteria, the precise sensing system and class of quorum-sensing compounds used may differ. In addition, the manner in which different types of bacteria apply quorum sensing varies greatly. For example, the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which can cause pneumonia and blood infections, uses quorum sensing to regulate disease mechanisms. By remaining relatively harmless until population sizes are sufficient, the bacteria are able to overwhelm host defenses with the activation of genes regulating biofilm formation and virulence. In other organisms, quorum sensing is used for symbiotic processes and cell growth; an example is the nitrogen-fixation mechanism of the bacterium Rhizobium leguminosarum.
The communication abilities offered by quorum sensing are highly useful for bacteria because they allow bacteria populations to acquire traits found in plants, animals, and other higher-level organisms. These abilities, including group communication and behaviour synchronization, allow bacteria populations to develop more quickly, gain access to more resources, and secure better chances of survival. Pathogens with quorum-sensing pathways may also infect host organisms more effectively, leading to deadlier diseases. As a result, to help kill or prevent infection by microbes that use quorum-sensing strategies, new ways of supplementing host defenses must be identified.
On the macroscopic scale, mechanisms similar to quorum sensing can be observed in organisms such as ants and bees. Quorum-sensing strategies may also be applied to robotics and computer technology in sensors, self-organizing networks, and robot swarms. These technologies may be used for various applications, including coordinating medical nanobots in treatments and organizing humanoid robots for manufacturing and other processes.
