Ribosome,  particle that is present in large numbers in all living cells and serves as the site of protein synthesis. Ribosomes occur both as free particles in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells and as particles attached to the membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum in eukaryotic cells. The small particles that came to be known as ribosomes were first described in 1955 by Romanian-born American cell biologist George E. Palade, who found them to be frequently associated with the endoplasmic reticulum in eukaryotic cells.
Ribosomes are remarkably abundant in cells. A single actively replicating eukaryotic cell, for example, may contain as many as 10 million ribosomes. In the bacterium Escherichia coli (a prokaryote), ribosomes may number as many as 15,000, constituting as much as one-quarter of the cell’s total mass. The size of the ribosomes within cells varies, depending on the cell type and on factors such as whether the cell is resting or replicating. The average ribosome of E. coli, the best-characterized example, measures about 200 angstroms (about 20 nm) in diameter.
Ribosomes are made up of ribosomal proteins and ribosomal RNA (rRNA). In prokaryotes, ribosomes are roughly 40 percent protein and 60 percent rRNA. In eukaryotes, ribosomes are about half protein and half rRNA. Ribosomes are usually made up of three or four rRNA molecules and anywhere from about 40 to 80 different ribosomal proteins.
Each ribosome is composed of two subunits, a larger one and a smaller one, each of which has a characteristic shape. The subunits typically are referred to in terms of their sedimentation rate, which is measured in Svedberg units (S), in a centrifugal field. The small and large subunits of eukaryotes are designated 40S and 60S, respectively, while prokaryotes contain a small 30S subunit and a large 50S subunit.
Ribosomes are the sites at which information carried in the genetic code is converted into protein molecules. Ribosomal molecules of messenger RNA (mRNA) determine the order of transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules that are bound to nucleotide triplets (codons). The order of tRNA molecules ultimately determines the amino acid sequence of a protein. Molecules of rRNA catalyze the peptidyl transferase reaction, which forms peptide bonds between the amino acids, linking them together to form proteins. The newly formed proteins detach themselves from the ribosome site and migrate to other parts of the cell for use.
