Torbjörn Oskar Caspersson,  (born Oct. 15, 1910, Motala, Swed.—died Dec. 7, 1997), Swedish cytologist and geneticist who initiated the use of the ultraviolet microscope to determine the nucleic acid content of cellular structures such as the nucleus and nucleolus.
In the early 1930s Caspersson attended the University of Stockholm, where he studied medicine and biophysics. During this time he worked with Swedish biochemist Einar Hammersten, conducting investigations into the molecular mass of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid). This research led to their discovery that DNA was a polymer, or macromolecule, made up of small, repeating units. After Caspersson received an M.D. in 1936, he took a position at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm. In the late 1930s American geneticist and biochemist Jack Schultz joined Caspersson’s laboratory, and together they studied nucleic acids. In these studies, Caspersson united principles of cell biology and biochemistry with techniques such as spectroscopy and ultraviolet microscopy. Following several years of cytogenetic research, Caspersson and Schultz concluded that RNA (ribonucleic acid) must play a role in protein synthesis. From 1944 to 1977 Caspersson served as medical director of the Nobel Institute for Medical Cell Research and of the Wallenberg Laboratory for Experimental Cell Research at Karolinska. In 1977 he became professor and head of the medical cell research and genetics department of the Faculty of Medicine of the Royal Karolinska Medical-Surgical Institute.
In Cell Growth and Cell Function (1950) Caspersson summarized much of his research by theorizing that RNA must be present for protein synthesis to occur. He was the first to perform cytochemical studies on the giant chromosomes found in insect larvae. He also investigated the role of the nucleolus in protein synthesis and examined the relationship between heterochromatin quantity (the amount of a chromosome with few or no genes) and the rate of growth of cancer cells.
Caspersson was awarded the Balzan Prize for Biology in 1979 for his novel use of ultraviolet microscopy and his discoveries concerning nucleic acids and protein synthesis.
