Translation,  the synthesis of protein from RNA. Hereditary information is contained in the nucleotide sequence of DNA in a code. The coded information from DNA is copied faithfully during transcription into a form of RNA known as messenger RNA (mRNA), which is then translated into chains of amino acids. Amino acid chains are folded into helices, zigzags, and other shapes to form proteins and are sometimes associated with other amino acid chains.
The specific amounts of amino acids in a protein and their sequence determine the protein’s unique properties; for example, muscle protein and hair protein contain the same 20 amino acids, but the sequences of these amino acids in the two proteins are quite different. If the nucleotide sequence of mRNA is thought of as a written message, it can be said that this message is read by the translation apparatus in “words” of three nucleotides, starting at one end of the mRNA and proceeding along the length of the molecule. These three-letter words are called codons. Each codon stands for a specific amino acid, so if the message in mRNA is 900 nucleotides long, which corresponds to 300 codons, it will be translated into a chain of 300 amino acids.
Translation takes place on ribosomes—complex particles in the cell that contain RNA and protein. In prokaryotes (organisms that lack a nucleus) the ribosomes are loaded onto the mRNA while transcription is still ongoing. The mRNA sequence is read three bases at a time from its 5’ end toward its 3’ end, and one amino acid is added to the growing chain from its respective transfer RNA (tRNA), until the complete protein chain is assembled. Translation stops when the ribosome encounters a termination codon, normally UAG, UAA, or UGA (where U, A, and G represent the RNA bases uracil, adenine, and guanine, respectively). Special release factors associate with the ribosome in response to these codons, and the newly synthesized protein, tRNAs, and mRNA all dissociate. The ribosome then becomes available to interact with another mRNA molecule.
Any one mRNA is translated by several ribosomes along its length, each one at a different stage of translation. In eukaryotes (organisms that possess a nucleus) ribosomes that produce proteins to be used in the same cell are not associated with membranes. However, proteins that must be exported to another location in the organism are synthesized on ribosomes located on the outside of flattened membranous chambers called the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). A completed amino acid chain is extruded into the inner cavity of the ER. Subsequently, the ER transports the proteins via small vesicles to another cytoplasmic organelle called the Golgi apparatus, which in turn buds off more vesicles that eventually fuse with the cell membrane. The protein is then released from the cell.
