Adoniram Judson,   (born Aug. 9, 1788, Malden, Mass., U.S.—died  April 12, 1850, at sea, Indian Ocean), American linguist and Baptist missionary in Myanmar (Burma), who translated the Bible into Burmese and wrote a now standard Burmese dictionary.
At Andover Theological Seminary, Massachusetts, Judson acquired a zeal for evangelism. In 1810 six seminary students, with a petition drafted by Judson, succeeded in getting the General Association of Massachusetts (Congregational) to establish the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions. The new board sent Judson to England to confer on affiliation with the London Missionary Society. He was delayed by the capture of his vessel by a French privateer, and growing international tensions on the eve of the War of 1812 prompted the American board to act independently.
In 1812 Judson and his wife, Ann Hasseltine (1789–1826), along with four other missionaries, set out for India. Anticipating a meeting with Baptists at Serampur, India, they made a study of Baptism while they were aboard ship and were won over to the Baptist point of view. They were baptized by immersion and left the U.S. board to join a new board formed in 1814; thus began what is now called the American Baptist Foreign Mission Society. When the British East India Company opposed them in India, the Judsons relocated to Rangoon in 1813; there Judson mastered the Burmese language and literature and learned Pāli, the Buddhist canonical language.
Adapting local customs to evangelism, Judson opened his first public preaching place in 1819. He soon founded a Myanmar church, established schools, and trained preachers. From his pioneering efforts there eventually arose a Baptist Christian community composed of Burman, Karen, and other peoples amounting to about 500,000. During the First Burmese War with Britain (1824–26), Judson was imprisoned by Myanmar forces and suffered extreme torture. His wife’s heroism during the period became a legend. She died soon after he was freed from prison. Judson continued to combine translation and literary work with evangelism, and in 1834 he completed the task of translating the Bible into Burmese. His Dictionary, which was first issued in 1826, came out in revised editions in 1849 (English-Burmese) and in 1852 (Burmese-English).
