Alexandre de Rhodes,  (born March 15, 1591, Avignon, Fr.—died  March 5, 1660, Isfahan, Persia), Jesuit missionary who was the first Frenchman to visit Vietnam.
De Rhodes was admitted to the Society of Jesus at Rome in 1612 and in 1619 went to Indochina to establish a mission. Allowed to proselytize, he later estimated that he had converted some 6,700 Vietnamese to the Roman Catholic faith. He was expelled from the country in 1630 because of the jealousy of power-seeking mandarins and a fear that Christian doctrine would undermine the Confucian-based authority of the sovereign. De Rhodes described his experiences in Vietnam in Sommaire des divers voyages et missions apostoliques du P.A. de Rhodes à la Chine et autres royaumes de l’Orient (1653; Rhodes of Viet Nam: The Travels and Missions of Father Alexander de Rhodes in China and Other Kingdoms of the Orient, 1966).
De Rhodes proceeded to Macau, a Portuguese island colony off the Chinese coast, where he spent 10 years as a professor of philosophy. He returned to southern Vietnam in 1640 and stayed until 1646, when he was condemned to death; his sentence, however, was commuted to permanent exile. On his return to Europe he stopped to preach in Java and was imprisoned by its ruler.
De Rhodes returned to Rome in 1649 and pleaded with the Vatican bureaucracy on behalf of the Vietnamese missionary effort. Portuguese supremacy was on the wane, and de Rhodes hoped to establish missions there, free of Portuguese political domination and controlled by the church without intermediaries. He further proposed that the Vietnamese be trained and ordained as priests; with a native clergy, he felt, the Vietnamese would be quickly won over to Christianity. De Rhodes also spoke to French businessmen and aristocrats, describing the wealth and resources of Indochina. His exaggerated accounts of silk, spices, and gold mines attracted enough investors to finance his return to Vietnam. But the Vatican sent him to a Persian mission before he could secure transportation to Vietnam, and he died in Persia in 1660. The Vatican itself sponsored a Vietnamese missionary program in 1658, based on de Rhodes’s ideas.
Alexandre de Rhodes is known for a Vietnamese–Latin–Portuguese dictionary; he perfected a romanized script, called Quoc-ngu, developed by the earlier missionaries Gaspar de Amaral and Antonio de Barbosa, and he added special marks to the roman letters, denoting tones, which in Vietnamese indicate the meaning of words. His script facilitated the communication of Christian doctrines to the Vietnamese and increased the literacy rate among the population.
