David Levy,  (born December 21, 1937, Rabat, Morocco), Israeli politician, who was a leader of Israel’s Sephardic Jews and who held numerous government offices.
After attending primary and secondary schools in Morocco, Levy emigrated to Israel with his family in 1957. When he was in his 20s, Levy decided that politics, particularly the Herut Party, was the means to attempt to improve the lot of Sephardic Jews, a group long considered a disenfranchised underclass. His first important party job was chairman of the Herut faction of the Histadrut, Israel’s influential labour organization. In 1969 Levy won a seat in Israel’s legislature, the Knesset. Following the stunning upset by Menachem Begin and the Likud bloc (which included Herut) in the 1977 elections, Levy was named minister of immigrant absorption (1977–79) and later minister of construction and housing (1979–90) in the new cabinet. He quickly distinguished himself by becoming a spokesman for the underclass, and he proved to be a savvy politician who could protect his own interests. He was blamed, however, for ruining Israel’s unblemished record of support for separate worship in Jerusalem’s Old City after it was learned that he secretly had financed a new Jewish settlement in the Christian quarter.
By the time Begin won reelection in 1981, Levy had established himself as an important Likud asset, and he was named deputy prime minister (1981–84). When Israel invaded Lebanon in 1982, he cautioned moderation and was the only cabinet member to warn Defense Minister Ariel Sharon against allowing Israel’s Lebanese Phalangist allies access to the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps, where hundreds were massacred. After Begin resigned in 1983, Levy held on to his cabinet post in Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir’s national-unity government. In 1995 Levy founded the Gesher (“Bridge”) party, with a secular Sephardic base, and in 1999 he was named minister of foreign affairs and deputy prime minister in Benjamin Netanyahu’s cabinet. He resigned both posts the following year over differences with Netanyahu but in 2002 served briefly as minister without portfolio in the government of Prime Minister Sharon. Levy remained in the Knesset until 2006, when he lost his seat in that year’s election.
