Hanson, Pauline Lee,  (born May 27, 1954, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia), Australian politician, known for her controversial views on race and immigration, who cofounded (1997) the One Nation party and served as its leader (1997–2002; 2014– ).
Hanson was the mother of four when her second marriage ended in the late 1980s. She settled in Ipswich, Queensland, and opened a fish-and-chips shop, which she sold in early 1997. She was elected to the Ipswich City Council in 1994 but was defeated the following year. Hanson joined the Liberal Party in 1995. Her strongly worded statements on race relations and immigration often attracted controversy, and she was forced out of the party in 1996. She ran successfully for Parliament as an independent in the March 1996 general election.
Hanson shocked the country in September 1996 with her maiden speech to Parliament, in which she blamed Aborigines and Asian immigrants and public policy regarding them for many of the country’s problems, particularly its high unemployment rate. She stated that Australia was in danger of being overrun by Asians—who, she said, took jobs needed by Australian citizens and made no effort to assimilate into Australian society—and called for a short-term halt to Asian immigration. She also demanded that foreign aid be abolished and that the money be used to create jobs in Australia. On the subject of Aborigines, she said, “I am fed up with being told, ‘This is our land.’ Well, where the hell do I go? I was born here, and so were my parents and children. I will work beside anyone and they will be my equal but I draw the line when told I must pay and continue paying for something that happened over 200 years ago.”
In April 1997 Hanson helped form a new political party, One Nation. Despite harsh attacks on her and her political opinions, she had developed a large following among some groups of Australians, and membership in and support for One Nation grew rapidly. In August 1997 the Australian Electoral Commission redrew federal electoral boundaries in Queensland in order to create another seat for the growing population. Hanson’s electorate, Oxley, was redistributed, which made it more difficult for her to be reelected: the newly drawn district contained a significant population of Asian immigrants. By September support for Hanson appeared to be declining. She lost her seat in Parliament later that year, and the One Nation party failed to gain any seats in the House of Representatives. The party fared better in the 1998 Queensland state elections, winning 11 seats. However, that represented a high point for One Nation as internal strife and the creation of splinter groups caused the party to slip from view.
Over the following years Hanson repeatedly attempted a political comeback but was unable to achieve her former success. In 2002 she was forced out of One Nation, and the following year she served several months in jail for electoral fraud; her conviction was later overturned. In 2007 she ran unsuccessfully for the federal Senate as the leader of Pauline’s United Australia Party. In the March 2009 Queensland state elections, Hanson again ran for a seat in the legislature as an independent but was defeated. After briefly living in the United Kingdom, she returned to Australian politics but was unsuccessful in her 2011 bid for a seat in the New South Wales legislature. She returned to One Nation in 2014 and was elected party leader. The party was renamed Pauline Hanson’s One Nation in July 2015. In the July 2016 federal elections, amid a national surge in popularity for minor parties, Hanson won one of Queensland’s seats in the Australian Senate.
