David Robinson, in full David Maurice Robinson, byname the Admiral,  (born Aug. 6, 1965, Key West, Fla., U.S.), American basketball player who won two National Basketball Association (NBA) titles with the San Antonio Spurs (1999, 2003).
Robinson played basketball at the U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Md., leading the academy team to the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) tournament in 1985, 1986, and 1987. Although Robinson proved himself one of the best collegiate players in the country, some observers considered it a gamble when the Spurs chose him with the first pick of the 1987 NBA draft, since he had to serve two years of active duty in the U.S. Navy after graduation—time when he would not play for the Spurs or play regularly against top-flight competition.
After serving his navy term as a civil-engineering officer, Robinson joined the Spurs in 1989. He quickly established himself as one of the best centres in the NBA—averaging 24.3 points, 12 rebounds, and 3.9 blocked shots per game during his rookie season—and won the NBA’s Rookie of the Year award. Additionally, he helped the Spurs win 35 more games than they had during the previous season—at the time the best one-year improvement in league history. The following season Robinson continued to play extremely well, making the All-NBA first team and the All-NBA defensive first team; the Spurs lost in the first round of the play-offs, however, and Robinson—a graceful player whose finesse near the basket ran counter to the traditional physicality of NBA centres—began to develop a reputation as a player who was “soft” and unable to win big games.
Robinson continued to garner individual accolades throughout his early career: he was named the NBA’s Defensive Player of the Year in 1992 and the Most Valuable Player in 1995, and he earned a place on the league’s official list of the 50 greatest players in NBA history (1996), but his teams routinely disappointed in the postseason. This changed during the 1998–99 season, when Robinson teamed with second-year power forward Tim Duncan to lead the Spurs to the franchise’s first NBA championship. The duo won another title in the 2002–03 season, after which Robinson retired. At the time of his retirement, he ranked among the top 25 players in NBA history in career points and rebounds and was fourth all-time in blocked shots.
In addition to his success in the NBA, Robinson was a member of two gold medal-winning U.S. men’s basketball teams, including the NBA superstar-filled “Dream Team” that dominated the 1992 Olympic Games in Barcelona (he won a second gold at the 1996 Games in Atlanta). In 2009 he was elected to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame.
