Dennis Rodman, in full Dennis Keith Rodman, byname the Worm,  (born May 13, 1961, Trenton, New Jersey, U.S.), American professional basketball player who was one of the most skilled rebounders, best defenders, and most outrageous characters in the history of the professional game. He was a key part of two National Basketball Association (NBA) championship teams with the Detroit Pistons (1989–90) and three with the Chicago Bulls (1996–98) and was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 2011.
Rodman, who was 5 feet 11 inches (1.75 metres) tall when he graduated from high school in Dallas and who tried and failed to make the school basketball team four times, shot up more than another 7 inches (18 cm) and earned a spot on the Cooke County Junior College team in Dallas in 1981. A scholarship to play at Southeastern Oklahoma State University followed. Proving himself to be a prodigious collegiate rebounder, he was drafted in 1986 by the Pistons and was pivotal to the success of Detroit’s “Bad Boys” championship teams.
In addition to being a tenacious defensive player (he was the NBA’s Defensive Player of the Year in 1989–90 and 1990–91 and was named seven times to the league’s All-Defensive team), Rodman became a ferocious rebounder. Although he was not an exceptional leaper, his timing, tenacity, and desire, combined with his ability to enrage opponents by holding, grabbing, and shoving, made Rodman one of the league’s top rebounders. He led the league in rebounds per game seven straight seasons (1991–92 to 1997–98), finishing with an astounding total of 11,954 in 14 seasons in the NBA.
Following his tenure with the Pistons, Rodman played briefly with the San Antonio Spurs (1993–95) before moving on to the Bulls. It was during this period that Rodman—having already established a reputation for on-court temper tantrums and erratic off-court behaviour—became known for outlandish antics that made him a national celebrity. In addition to repeatedly defying the authority of coaches and league officials, Rodman turned his body into a gallery of tattoos, piercings, and ever-shifting day-glo hair colour; he also engaged in a wild partying lifestyle, famously dating popular music diva Madonna. He was later briefly married to Baywatch television actress Carmen Electra (his second marriage), and at one point, clad in a bride’s gown, he staged a wedding with himself. At times, when Rodman’s mood swings made his behaviour seem uncontrollable, even his admirers suspected a breakdown was near. The image most fans preferred for Rodman was as a Bad Boy, living on the edge.
Bulls coach Phil Jackson and the team’s superstar Michael Jordan overlooked his behaviour, but Rodman always seemed to rise to the occasion on court, especially when a key rebound was needed. Unquestionably he played a vital role in the last three of the Bulls’ six NBA titles during the Jordan dynasty of the 1990s. Rodman’s contributions were much more marginal during his final stops in the NBA: 23 games with the Los Angeles Lakers during the 1998–99 season and 12 games with the Dallas Mavericks in 1999–2000. He continued to play in low-level professional leagues in North America and Europe over the five years following his final NBA contest.
Rodman tried his hand at acting in motion pictures and at professional wrestling but was not particularly successful in either of these fields. As time passed, Rodman, the author or coauthor of three works of autobiography—As Bad as I Wanna Be (1996), Walk on the Wild Side (1997), and I Should Be Dead by Now (2005)—found himself increasingly less in the limelight that he seemed to crave. He did appear in a number of reality television programs, and in 2013 he courted publicity by traveling with a documentary crew to North Korea, where he became the first American to meet the country’s new leader, Kim Jong-Un, when the two attended an exhibition basketball game featuring members of the Harlem Globetrotters. The trip—a brainchild of, and bankrolled by, an American media company—drew a negative response from the U.S. government, and public reactions ranged from amusement to criticism of Rodman as someone naïvely allowing himself to be used by Kim in a bid for international attention.
In the end, sociologists may have more to say about the life and times of Dennis Rodman than basketball buffs. Yet for all his charisma, controversy, bizarre behaviour, and off-court trips in and out of reality, two facts will stand out clearly amid the confusion surrounding Rodman’s NBA career. He was a great rebounder and an even more spectacular entertainer. When the final verdict on the Rodman enigma arrives, however, his strange, powerful personality will likely take precedence over mere statistics.
