Houston Rockets,  American professional basketball team based in Houston. The Rockets have won two National Basketball Association (NBA) championships (1994 and 1995) and four Western Conference titles.
The team was founded as the San Diego Rockets in 1967 and moved to Houston in 1971 after four losing seasons. The early Rockets teams were led by a pair of future Hall of Famers—Elvin Hayes, who had starred for the University of Houston, and diminutive Calvin Murphy—as well as by Rudy Tomjanovich, who would later coach the Rockets for 12 seasons. Houston traded for elite centre Moses Malone two games into the 1976–77 season, and that year the Rockets posted the first winning season in franchise history and advanced to the conference finals. The Rockets surpassed this feat during the 1980–81 season when—after finishing the regular season with an unimpressive record of 40 wins and 42 losses—Houston amassed three consecutive playoff series upsets en route to a berth in the NBA finals, where they lost to the Boston Celtics. Malone left the team in 1982, and the Rockets fell to the lower echelon of the NBA in his absence.
In 1984 the Rockets drafted Hakeem Olajuwon, another future Hall of Fame centre (and another University of Houston alumnus), who quickly became the face of the franchise. Olajuwon teamed with another towering post player, Ralph Sampson (both were over 7 feet [2.13 metres] tall), to lead the Rockets to another NBA finals appearance in 1986, in which they were again defeated by the Celtics. The Rockets continued to qualify for the postseason throughout the 1980s, but they failed to advance past the second round of the playoffs for the rest of the decade. Tomjanovich took over head coaching duties midway through the 1991–92 season, ushering in the most successful period in franchise history. Houston won back-to-back NBA titles in the 1993–94 and 1994–95 seasons behind inspired play from Olajuwon and key contributions from guard Sam Cassell, forward Robert Horry, and (for the 1994–95 season) forward Clyde Drexler (yet another former University of Houston star).
The team added Charles Barkley in 1996, but the presence of three of the NBA’s 50 greatest players of all time (Olajuwon, Drexler, and Barkley) was not enough to propel Houston past the Western Conference finals. Each one of the aging trio had left the team by 2001, and the Rockets of the early 21st century, led by superstars Tracy McGrady and 7-foot 6-inch (2.29-metre) Yao Ming from China, followed the trend of consistent regular-season respectability followed by playoff underachievement. McGrady was traded away in 2010; Yao retired in 2011, after having missed much of the previous two seasons with injuries; and the Rockets began a rebuilding process.
During its rebuilding, the team was notable for its reliance on advanced statistical analyses (similar to sabermetrics in baseball) in its player acquisitions. One result of the team’s idiosyncratic approach to development was the Rockets’ earning a playoff berth in 2012–13 with the youngest roster in the NBA, including the outstanding shooting guard James Harden. The team signed star centre Dwight Howard in the following off-season, and the Rockets bettered the previous season’s record and again advanced to the playoffs. In 2014–15 the team posted its best record (56–26) since the Olajuwon era and advanced to the Western Conference finals, where Houston lost to the Golden State Warriors. The team got off to a slow start the following season—which led to an early-season coaching change—but the new coaching regime could not fix the chemistry and effort issues that plagued the Rockets. Houston qualified for the playoffs as the eighth seed that year with a 41–41 record and was quickly knocked out of the playoffs in five games. That led to another off-season coaching change, and new headman Mike D’Antoni installed his high-efficiency and fast-paced offense with Harden as point guard. As a result, the Rockets set an NBA record with 1,181 three-point shots made in the 2016–17 season en route to a 55-win campaign and a second-round playoff loss.
The team added star point guard Chris Paul in the off-season, and he helped propel the Rockets to new heights in 2017–18, as the team set a new franchise record for regular-season victories (65) and broke its own league record for three-point shots made (1,256). Houston advanced to the conference finals, but an ill-timed injury to Paul in game five of that series opened the door for a seven-game series victory for the Warriors. Although the Rockets struggled early in 2018–19, they entered the playoffs as one of the hottest teams in the NBA. Despite this momentum, Houston was once again eliminated from the postseason by the Warriors, this time in the conference semifinals.
