Jerry Lucas, in full Jerry Ray Lucas, byname Luke,  (born March 30, 1940, Middletown, Ohio, U.S.), American basketball player who was one of the best rebounders in the sport’s history and who in 1996 was named one of the 50 greatest National Basketball Association (NBA) players of all time.
Lucas was a tall, intelligent youth with dexterous hands and 20/10 eyesight that made him a natural shooter. A 6-foot 8-inch (2.03-metre) forward, he led Middletown High School’s boys’ basketball team to 76 consecutive wins and two Ohio state high school championships. In 1959 Lucas enrolled at The Ohio State University. He had accepted an academic scholarship rather than an athletic one, so he would have the option of quitting the basketball team if he lost interest in playing. Lucas teamed with John Havlicek, Larry Siegfried, and Bob Knight on the formidable Ohio State teams of the early 1960s. The Buckeyes posted a total win-loss record of 78–6 during Lucas’s three years on the varsity basketball squad, appearing in three consecutive National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) championship games and winning the championship in 1960. Lucas led the NCAA in field goal percentage all three years and led in rebounding twice, and he was named national Player of the Year twice (1961 and 1962). During his college years Lucas also starred on the 1960 gold medal-winning U.S. Olympic basketball team.
After his senior season at Ohio State, Lucas was the focus of a bidding war between the NBA and the upstart American Basketball League (ABL). He was chosen by the Cincinnati Royals (now the Sacramento Kings) in the 1962 NBA draft but instead signed with the ABL’s Cleveland Pipers after the team offered him an incentive-laden contract that contained a series of stock options and promises of future graduate school funding. The Pipers then tried to use the leverage provided by the acquisition of the popular Lucas to force their way into the NBA, but legal difficulties stemming from the proposed move financially crippled the Pipers, who folded before Lucas played a game with the team. Lucas sat out of professional basketball for a year before joining the Cincinnati Royals for the 1963–64 season.
Lucas helped lead the team to the second best record in the NBA in his first year with the Royals and was named the league’s Rookie of the Year. He was named first team All-NBA in 1965, 1966, and 1968 and was an all-star in each of his six seasons in Cincinnati. Although his teammates included future Hall of Fame members Oscar Robertson and Jack Twyman as well as powerful centre Wayne Embry, Lucas and the Royals were cursed to play in the era of the Boston Celtics’ dominance of the league and never advanced past the divisional finals in the NBA play-offs.
Four games into the 1969–70 season, Lucas was traded to the San Francisco Warriors, whom he helped lead back to the play-offs in 1970–71, when Lucas was again named an all-star. At the end of the season, the Warriors traded Lucas to the New York Knicks. He was slated to serve as a reserve in New York, but a season-ending injury to  Willis Reed thrust the versatile Lucas into the starting lineup at centre, and he played a key role in the Knicks’ advance to the 1971–72 NBA finals, where they lost to the Los Angeles Lakers. When the Knicks defeated the Lakers in a finals rematch in 1972–73, Lucas became the first basketball player to win a championship at every major level of play: high school, college, Olympic, and professional.
After retiring from professional basketball in 1974, Lucas—whose prodigious memory had impressed teammates and media for decades—developed a system of memory education, and he wrote a number of books on the subject, including The Memory Book (1974; cowritten with Harry Lorayne) and Learning How to Learn (2001). He was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 1980.
