Phil Jackson, byname of Philip Douglas Jackson,  (born September 17, 1945, Deer Lodge, Montana, U.S.), American professional basketball player, coach, and executive. Employing an unorthodox New Age coaching style grounded in Eastern philosophy and Native American mysticism, he coached his teams to a record 11 National Basketball Association (NBA) championships.
Jackson spent most of his youth in Montana but attended high school in North Dakota. His parents, Pentecostal ministers, preached and practiced a strict religious lifestyle, so sports were Jackson’s outlet and eventually his ticket to the outside world. As a member of the University of North Dakota basketball team, he averaged 27.4 points per game as a senior and was named an All-American. Chosen by the NBA’s New York Knicks in the 1969 draft, the by-then long-haired ‘‘flower child’’ rode a bicycle to home games in Madison Square Garden, steeped himself in Zen Buddhism, and ingested some mood-altering substances—a countercultural lifestyle he later chronicled in his memoir Maverick (1975). As a professional, the 6-foot 8-inch (2-metre) Jackson was an awkward, stoop-shouldered forward plagued by chronic back pain and caught in the culture clash between cosmopolitan Manhattan and his spartan boyhood. Yet, playing beyond his physical limitations, he became a key role player on Knicks teams that won NBA championships in 1970 and 1973, sharing the court with future Hall of Famers Bill Bradley, Walt Frazier, Willis Reed, Dave DeBusschere, Earl Monroe, and Jerry Lucas. In the process Jackson also absorbed the principles of winning basketball from Knicks coach Red Holzman. He remained a member of the Knicks through the 1977–78 season and then finished out his career with two seasons as a New Jersey Net.
Jackson cut his coaching teeth with the Albany Patroons of the Continental Basketball Association, whom he led to a championship in 1985. In 1987 he became an assistant coach with the Chicago Bulls. When he replaced the fired Doug Collins as the Bulls’ head coach in 1989, Jackson wasted no time installing assistant coach Tex Winter’s triangle offense. He also employed some of the loose-reign management techniques he learned from Holzman with a team that featured the game’s finest player, Michael Jordan, and budding superstar Scottie Pippen, a pair who were as gifted defensively as they were with the ball in their hands and who Jackson let rove on defense to spread havoc and create turnovers. The results were unprecedented: six NBA championships (twin ‘‘three-peats,’’ (1991–93 and 1996–98). The 1995–96 Bulls amassed a spectacular regular season record of 72 wins and 10 losses, and Jackson won 200 games faster than any other coach to date.
After leaving the Bulls and taking a year away from basketball, Jackson returned to coach the Los Angeles Lakers, blessed with another pair of superstars, behemoth centre Shaquille O’Neal and wunderkind scoring machine Kobe Bryant, whom Jackson guided to three consecutive championships (2000–02). Jackson stepped away from the game again for a year in 2004 but returned as the Lakers’ coach in 2005. He guided the Lakers to another title during the 2008–09 NBA season to earn his 10th championship, surpassing Red Auerbach for the most titles as a head coach in league history. In 2009–10 Jackson won his fifth championship with the Lakers and 11th overall. He retired after the 2010–11 NBA season.
In 2014 he transitioned into basketball operations when he became the Knicks’ team president. In his front-office role, Jackson failed to match the success he had as a coach. His first three seasons in New York were marked by poor personnel decisions, high coaching turnover, and losing records on the court. In June 2017 Jackson and the Knicks mutually agreed to part ways.
In addition to leading group meditation sessions and burning sage to break losing streaks, Jackson frequently assigned books to be read by his players. He also wrote several books, including Sacred Hoops: Spiritual Lessons of a Hardwood Warrior (1995; with Hugh Delehanty), More than a Game (2001; with Charley Rosen), The Last Season: A Team in Search of Its Soul (2004; with Michael Arkush), and Eleven Rings: The Soul of Success (2013; with Delehanty). From Jackson’s hippie days to his status as the reigning genius among contemporary NBA coaches was a quantum leap, reflecting a sea change in American attitudes and customs. Yet Jackson bridged those cultural differences with spectacular success. He was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 2007 and was named one of the 10 greatest coaches of all time in 1996.
