Portland Trail Blazers,  American professional basketball team based in Portland, Oregon, that plays in the Western Conference of the National Basketball Association (NBA). The Trail Blazers have won one NBA championship (1977) and three conference titles (1977, 1990, and 1992).
The Trail Blazers joined the league as an expansion team in 1970. Their name is an allusion to the Lewis and Clark Expedition, which ended not far from present-day Portland. The Blazers—a nickname commonly used by fans and media—finished last in their division in each of their first four seasons and five of their first six seasons. One bright spot during those years was the play of forward-centre Sidney Wicks, who had been drafted by the team in 1971 and was named an all-star in each of his first four NBA seasons.
Portland underwent a stunning turnaround in 1976–77, which began with the franchise posting its first winning record (49–33) during the regular season. Unhindered by their lack of playoff experience, the Blazers—featuring a front line of Bill Walton and Maurice Lucas, along with guard Lionel Hollins, and guided by first-year head coach Jack Ramsay—beat the Chicago Bulls, Denver Nuggets, and Los Angeles Lakers in the postseason to advance to the NBA finals. There they faced the Philadelphia 76ers, who won the first two games of the series before Portland stormed back to win the final four games and capture the NBA title. The Trail Blazers returned to the playoffs in each of the next four seasons, but they lost in their opening postseason series on each occasion.
After missing the postseason in 1981–82, the Blazers returned to the playoffs in 1982–83, the first of 21 consecutive playoff berths for the franchise. In 1983 the Trail Blazers drafted guard Clyde Drexler, who would go on to play 12 seasons with the team and become the franchise’s all-time leading scorer and rebounder. With Drexler, the Blazers continued their playoff streak but advanced past the first round of the postseason just once in Drexler’s first six seasons in Portland. The Blazers gained a measure of ignominy at the 1984 NBA draft, where, with the second pick, they selected Sam Bowie (who would go on to play just four injury-riddled seasons with Portland) over future superstar Michael Jordan, who was chosen by the Bulls with the very next pick. In 1989–90 the Trail Blazers—led by Drexler, point guard Terry Porter, and forward Jerome Kersey—won their first three playoff series to capture the Western Conference title. In the NBA finals the team was defeated by the Detroit Pistons in five games. The Blazers were eliminated by the Lakers in the conference finals the following season after posting a franchise-best 63–19 record, and in 1991–92 Portland once again advanced to the NBA finals but lost the six-game series to the Chicago Bulls. The Blazers then returned to their earlier pattern of playoff disappointment, losing in the first round in six straight seasons from 1992–93 to 1997–98. Portland broke its streak in 1998–99, as the team advanced to the conference finals only to be swept by the San Antonio Spurs. The following season saw the Blazers again reach the conference finals, where they lost a close seven-game series to the Lakers that was notable for the Trail Blazers squandering a 15-point fourth quarter lead in the deciding contest—at the time the largest lead ever surrendered in the final period of a seventh game of a playoff series.
In the early 2000s the team acquired the pejorative nickname “Jail Blazers” for the large numbers of Portland players who had legal troubles. At about the same time, the Blazers’ playoff appearance streak came to an end, and the franchise entered into a rebuilding period that reached its nadir in a last-place divisional finish in 2005–06. Behind the play of All-Star guard Brandon Roy, the Trail Blazers returned to the postseason for three consecutive years beginning in 2008–09, but injuries forced Roy into early retirement in 2011, and the Blazers fell out of contention in 2011–12. The team quickly rebuilt and in 2013–14 added 21 wins to its total for the previous season and advanced to the playoffs. It lost a number of key free agents after the 2014–15 season and was widely predicted to be one of the worst teams in the NBA during the following campaign, but the team rallied around star guard Damian Lillard to extend its playoff streak to three seasons. In contrast, the Blazers failed to live up to preseason expectations in 2016–17, as the team qualified for the eighth seed of the Western Conference playoffs and was swept in the opening postseason round. The team’s inconsistent play continued in 2017–18 as the Blazers won a division title but were swept in the first round of the playoffs. Portland rebounded the following season, advancing to the conference finals for the first time in nearly two decades behind clutch playoff performances by Lillard and fellow star guard CJ McCollum.
