Steve Nash, in full Stephen John Nash,  (born February 7, 1974, Johannesburg, South Africa), South African-born Canadian basketball player who is considered to be one of the greatest point guards in National Basketball Association (NBA) history. For three seasons (2004–05 to 2006–07), Steve Nash was the most important—if not the best—player in the NBA. In 2004 he joined the Phoenix Suns as a free agent, brought in to helm the run-and-gun offense of head coach Mike D’Antoni. The partnership was inspired; Nash captured the NBA Most Valuable Player (MVP) award in 2005 and 2006, and he might have done so in 2007 if not for fears that he was getting too decorated.
Nash was raised in Victoria, British Columbia—not exactly a basketball hotbed—and was recruited by a single American college, Santa Clara University. Santa Clara was not known for its basketball prowess, but it did not take long for Nash to arrive on the national radar. In 1992–93, Nash’s first year with the program, Santa Clara upset the powerhouse University of Arizona in the National Collegiate Athletic Association championship tournament. By the time he graduated in 1996, he was regarded highly enough to be picked 15th overall in the NBA draft by the Suns.
Nash did not really get a chance to show his best play in Phoenix. The point guard position was taken by, in succession, Sam Cassell, Kevin Johnson, and Jason Kidd, all bigger names and more established players. When Nash was traded to the Dallas Mavericks in 1998, he began to develop upon his promise. In 2000–01 Nash exploded with star-calibre numbers (15.6 points and 7.3 assists per game), and, at the same time, teammate Dirk Nowitzki emerged as one of the league’s great scorers. They led the Mavericks to the playoffs that season and would do so again every subsequent year that Nash was in Dallas. The Mavericks, coached by the eccentric Don Nelson, were a high-scoring, versatile squad. While Nowitzki was the team’s go-to scorer, Nash was the engine that made it all go.
Nevertheless, owner Mark Cuban decided that Nash was over-the-hill at age 30 and refused to match a free-agent offer from Phoenix following the 2003–04 season. As it turned out, Cuban could not have been more wrong—and Nash could not have taken over as Phoenix’s star at a better time. Recent rule changes had greatly reduced the amount of contact a defender was allowed to make around the perimeter. Nash had an uncanny gift for driving into the key and discovering new, seemingly impossible, passing lanes, and the new rules made Nash’s approach more effective than ever before as he led the league in assists per game five times (including his career-high 11.6 assists per game in 2006–07) during the eight years of his second stint with the Suns.
The Suns advanced to the Western Conference finals in 2004–05. The team lost aggressive forward Amar’e Stoudemire to injury in the next preseason and yet, despite the absence of one of the league’s best young players, once again appeared in the conference finals in 2005–06. Nash himself was even better, averaging a personal-best 18.8 points per game. In 2006–07, with Stoudemire back, the Suns dominated the NBA for much of the season, finishing with the second best record in the league (61–21). However, giving Nash a third consecutive MVP would have put him in the same class as all-time greats Bill Russell, Wilt Chamberlain, and Larry Bird. The voters balked. He finished second in the MVP voting to Nowitzki. The Suns then had a disappointing postseason, losing in the conference semifinals.
The Suns acquired an aging and relatively immobile Shaquille O’Neal during the following season, a move that cramped Nash’s free-flowing style. Nevertheless, he was selected to his sixth All-Star Game and continued to excel individually even as the Suns went into decline. In 2012 he was traded to the Los Angeles Lakers, where he joined with fellow superstars Kobe Bryant and Dwight Howard in search of his elusive championship ring.
However, Nash broke his leg in the second game of the 2012–13 season. Although he still managed to play in 50 games, his effectiveness was limited, and his play was merely league-average. Despite the preseason hype, the injury-plagued and dysfunctional Lakers were eliminated in the first round of the playoffs that season. Complications from the broken leg limited Nash to just 15 games the following year as Los Angeles struggled through another disappointing campaign. In October 2014 the Lakers announced that Nash would miss the entire 2014–15 season because of recurring nerve damage in his back. He retired from professional basketball in March 2015 and soon thereafter became a part-time consultant for the Golden State Warriors. In 2020 Nash was hired to become the head coach of the Brooklyn Nets despite having no previous NBA coaching experience. In 2018 he was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame.
