Wayne Embry, in full Wayne Richard Embry, also called Goose or the Wall,  (born March 26, 1937, Springfield, Ohio, U.S.), American professional basketball player and the first African American to serve as the general manager of a professional sports franchise.
A  native of Ohio, Embry starred for the Miami (of Ohio) University basketball team (which retired his jersey) before becoming a member of the Cincinnati Royals (now the Sacramento Kings) of the National Basketball Association (NBA) in 1958. Nicknamed “the Wall,” Embry, at 6 feet 8 inches (2 metres) tall and 240 pounds (109 kg), was a massive presence at centre on Royals teams that featured Oscar Robertson and Jerry Lucas. Although a capable scorer, he is better remembered as a rebounder and defender who matched up with the great centres of his era, most notably Bill Russell and Wilt Chamberlain. After eight seasons with the Royals (1958–1966) he finished out his career with two seasons with the Boston Celtics and one more with the Milwaukee Bucks, who made him the team’s general manager in 1972.
In eight years as general manager, he helped build a Bucks team that made the play-offs four times. During this period Embry convinced Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, unhappy and withdrawn as a player in Milwaukee, that his superb skill would be recognized if he passed the test of time, a prediction that proved to be abundantly accurate. In 1985 Embry became the general manager and vice president of the Cleveland Cavaliers and worked with coach Lenny Wilkens to establish the Cavaliers as one of the winningest teams in the NBA in the late ’80s and early ’90s, though they repeatedly fell victim in the play-offs to the great Chicago Bulls teams led by Michael Jordan. From 1992 to 1994 Embry was the Cavaliers’ executive vice president, and in 1994 he became the team’s president and chief operating officer. He left the Cleveland organization in 2000 and became the senior basketball adviser of the Toronto Raptors in 2004. Embry was named executive of the year by The Sporting News in 1992 and received the same honour from Sports Illustrated in 1998.
In 1999 he was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. He was coauthor with Mary Schmitt Boyer of The Inside Game: Race, Power, and Politics in the NBA (2004). He  also served as member of the board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
