Irving Kristol, in full Irving William Kristol,  (born Jan. 20, 1920, Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.—died Sept. 18, 2009, Arlington, Va.), American essayist, editor, and publisher, best known as an intellectual founder and leader of the neoconservative movement in the United States. His articulation and defense of conservative ideals against the dominant liberalism of the 1960s influenced generations of intellectuals and policymakers and contributed to the resurgence of the Republican Party in the late 1960s and its electoral successes in the 1980s.
Kristol was the son of Jewish immigrants from Europe. He grew up in Brooklyn and attended Boys’ High School and the City College of New York (CCNY), where he graduated in 1940 with a B.A. degree in history. At CCNY he was an anti-Stalinist leftist and a member of the Trotskyist Young People’s Socialist League. At a Trotskyist gathering in the early 1940s he met Gertrude Himmelfarb, who would become a leading historian of the Victorian era, and the two were married in 1942. After serving in the U.S. Army (1944–46), he followed his wife to Cambridge, Eng., where she continued her graduate studies at the University of Cambridge and he began writing for Commentary, then a liberal anticommunist journal of opinion.
When the couple returned to the United States in 1947, Kristol was hired as Commentary’s managing editor, a post he held until 1952. That year the journal published his article “ ‘Civil Liberties’—1952: A Study in Confusion,” in which he criticized liberals for overreacting to Sen. Joseph R. McCarthy’s efforts to expose communist subversives in the U.S. government and in other walks of American life. “For there is one thing that the American people know about Senator McCarthy,” he wrote, “he, like them, is unequivocably anti-Communist. About the spokesmen for American liberalism, they feel they know no such thing. And with some justification.”
In part to escape the uproar caused by the article, Kristol went to London, where in 1953 he and the English poet Stephen Spender cofounded Encounter, a political and literary journal; Kristol served as coeditor until his return to New York City in 1958. (When it was publicly revealed in 1967 that Encounter had been secretly financed by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency [CIA], Kristol claimed not to have known of the agency’s involvement.) Kristol served as editor of another liberal anticommunist journal, The Reporter, from 1958 until 1960, when he became senior editor for social sciences and later executive vice president at Basic Books, Inc.
The journal with which Kristol is most closely identified, The Public Interest, was founded by Kristol and sociologist Daniel Bell (a classmate of Kristol’s at CCNY) in 1965; Kristol served as the journal’s coeditor and later as consulting editor until it ceased publication in 2005. Renowned (with Commentary) as one of the flagship publications of the neoconservative movement, The Public Interest initially displayed no distinct political orientation, presenting itself as a nonideological (indeed, anti-ideological) journal of domestic-policy analysis aimed at “a new class, a policy-making intellectual class” of government administrators and associated academics. By the late 1960s, however, the journal had begun to reflect its editors’ increasing skepticism of liberal projects of social reform (epitomized by Pres. Lyndon B. Johnson’s Great Society), frequently criticizing such efforts as unrealistic if not utopian and as inevitably more harmful than helpful to the groups they were designed to benefit.
In 1969 Kristol left Basic Books to become Henry R. Luce Professor of Urban Values at New York University (NYU). Although he had voted for the Democratic candidate, Hubert H. Humphrey, in the 1968 presidential election, Kristol soon gained the favourable attention of the Richard M. Nixon administration, and Kristol endorsed Nixon for reelection in 1972. In the mid-1970s he registered as a Republican. Kristol started yet another journal, The National Interest, devoted to foreign affairs, in 1985. He resigned his professorship at NYU in 1987 to become the John M. Olin Distinguished Fellow (1988–99) at the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative think tank; he was thereafter senior fellow and senior fellow emeritus. Under his influence the American Enterprise Institute became the centre of neoconservative scholarship in the country.
The political ideas that Kristol had developed by the early 1970s—disparagingly dubbed “neoconservatism” by the American socialist scholar Michael Harrington in 1973—came to define the movement that eventually adopted that name. Like more-traditional conservatives, Kristol was suspicious of government attempts to solve complex social problems through ambitious or hastily implemented reforms. Reform, he argued, should be undertaken “by moderate men using moderate means.” Yet he vigorously defended the New Deal measures that had created Social Security and other elements of the social safety net in the 1930s. Kristol placed great emphasis on the alleged moral consequences of the liberal impulse toward radical change, charging that secular liberalism and the “counterculture” movement of the 1960s, along with the “mindless” expansion of higher education, had led to a condition of alienation and moral degeneracy among American youth. But he also criticized what he saw as the moral failings of corporate managers who promoted greed as practically a new social gospel.
Through his own writings and those of his followers, particularly at the Wall Street Journal (where he published monthly articles for about 25 years starting in the early 1970s), Kristol popularized supply-side economics, according to which economic growth can be stimulated through lower taxes. The theory was adopted by Republican presidential candidate Ronald Reagan and was implemented by his administration in the early 1980s, and it eventually became the semiofficial economic philosophy of the Republican Party. The Reagan administration’s professed dedication to traditional American moral values in its economic and social policies—values such as self-reliance, individual initiative, devotion to family, and patriotism—also reflected Kristol’s influence. And Kristol’s insistence that the “central purpose” of U.S. foreign policy should be “a world order that has been shaped, to the largest degree possible, in accord with our national interests” inspired the aggressive anticommunism of the Reagan administration and the arguably unilateralist foreign policy of the George W. Bush administration.
In 1995 Kristol wrote, “I deem the neoconservative enterprise to have been a success, to have brought elements that were needed to enliven American conservatism and help reshape American politics.” Even some of his harshest critics were forced to agree. In 2002 Kristol was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by George W. Bush, who praised him as “an intellectual pioneer who advanced the conservative movement.”
