Jill Abramson, in full Jill Ellen Abramson,  (born March 19, 1954, New York City, New York, U.S.), American journalist who was the first female executive editor (2011–14) of The New York Times.
Abramson was raised in Manhattan, the daughter of a textile importer and his wife. She attended Harvard University, graduating in 1976 with a bachelor’s degree in history and literature. While a student, Abramson freelanced for Time magazine, and she reported on the 1976 presidential election for the publication following her graduation. After a stint on Virginia Democrat Henry Howell’s unsuccessful gubernatorial campaign, she turned to political ad writing. Abramson then worked briefly for the election unit of NBC News—for which she covered the 1980 presidential election—before becoming an investigative reporter at the newly created magazine The American Lawyer in 1981. In 1986 she accepted a position as editor in chief of Legal Times magazine, which had just been purchased by The American Lawyer owner Steven Brill. Abramson remained there until 1988, when she was hired as a reporter for the Washington bureau of The Wall Street Journal. She covered the White House for the Journal and later became deputy Washington bureau chief.
In 1997 Abramson moved to the Washington bureau of The New York Times, where she was enterprise editor. She was appointed Washington editor two years later, and in 2000 she became the Washington bureau chief for the paper. She weathered frequent contretemps with Howell Raines, then the paper’s executive editor, over her editorial philosophy and successfully evaded his attempt to reassign her to the Times book review. After Raines’s 2003 ouster in the wake of a plagiarism scandal at the Times, his replacement, Bill Keller, made Abramson managing editor of the paper, and in September of that year she returned to New York City. Her performance in Washington was scrutinized in 2005, when it emerged that reporter Judith Miller, who was at the time attached to the Washington bureau, had inaccurately reported on the presence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq during the lead-up to the 2003 declaration of war on that country. However, Abramson emerged largely unscathed from the controversy. In May 2010 she took a six-month sabbatical to oversee the digital operations of the Times, and in September 2011 she succeeded Keller as executive editor. Abramson was fired in May 2014. The paper cited concerns about her management style, though some observers suggested that her complaints about disparities between her compensation package and that of her male predecessor likely factored into the decision. She was replaced by managing editor Dean Baquet, who was the first African American to hold the post.
Abramson expanded several of her articles into books. Where They Are Now: The Story of the Women of Harvard Law, 1974 (1986; cowritten with Barbara Franklin) charts the first decade in the careers of 71 female Harvard Law alumni. Strange Justice: The Selling of Clarence Thomas (1994; cowritten with Jane Mayer) covers the controversial confirmation of Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas in 1991, focusing on Republican efforts to downplay allegations of sexual harassment against him. She experimented with lighter fare in The Puppy Diaries: Raising a Dog Named Scout (2011), a compilation of columns she had written for the Times about the first year of her life with a golden retriever. In 2019 Abramson published Merchants of Truth: The Business of News and the Fight for Facts, which attracted controversy over accusations of plagiarism.
Abramson taught in various capacities at Princeton (2000–01) and Yale (2007–11) universities. From 2014 she was a visiting professor at Harvard. Abramson was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2001.
