Sir Victor Gollancz,  (born April 9, 1893, London—died  Feb. 8, 1967, London), British publisher, writer, and humanitarian who championed such causes as socialism and pacifism while managing a highly successful publishing business.
Born to a family of orthodox Jews of Polish origin, Gollancz attended St. Paul’s School and New College, Oxford. During his student years he evolved a personal religious outlook that was strongly influenced by Christian ethics. He left Oxford without a degree after the outbreak of World War I and was commissioned an officer, in which capacity he oversaw officer training courses at Repton, a well-known public school (1916–18). From 1920 to 1928 he worked in the publishing house of Benn Brothers, and in the latter year he founded his own firm, Victor Gollancz, Ltd. He quickly set the pattern that was to mark his entire career as a publisher, issuing both best sellers and works supporting his favoured causes. Among his better known authors were Harold Laski, John Strachey, A.J. Cronin, Dorothy Sayers, and John Le Carré.
Gollancz supported or headed numerous committees and organizations dedicated to social welfare, pacifism, abolition of capital punishment, and related goals. Through the Left Book Club, which he founded in 1936, he mobilized intellectuals and the public in the fight against fascism, and after World War II he was a leader in organizing relief efforts in Europe, especially in Germany, through the Save Europe Now campaign. At home his private and public work was credited with helping to lay the groundwork for the postwar Labour government and the creation of the modern British welfare state.
Among his own books were Shall Our Children Live or Die? (1942), In Darkest Germany (1947), Our Threatened Values (1947), and three volumes of autobiography, including My Dear Timothy (1952). Gollancz also compiled several inspirational anthologies, including A Year of Grace (1950; also published as Man and God, 1951) and From Darkness to Light (1956). He was knighted in 1965.
