Alejandro Sanz, original name Alejandro Sánchez Pizarro,  (born December 18, 1968, Madrid, Spain), Spanish guitarist and singer-songwriter who soared to international stardom in the late 20th century and remained popular into the 21st century with his flamenco-influenced popular music.
Sanz was raised in Cádiz, a city in the Andalusia region of Spain. His father was a professional guitarist who had worked with the likes of Spanish stars Manolo Escobar and Lola Flores. Sanz took up guitar when he was seven years old and began composing songs a few years later. He left trade school at age 16 in order to pursue music as a career and recorded his first solo work, Los chulos son pa’ cuidarlos (“Pimps Are for Nurturing”), in 1989.
Veritable pop-star status came in 1991 with the release of Sanz’s first album, Viviendo deprisa (“Living Fast”), and continued with Si tú me miras (1993; “If You Look at Me”) and 3 (1995). His next album was the record-breaking Más (1997; “More”), which showcased a maturity in lyrical content and sensibility that appealed to a broader audience. Básico (“Basic”), which had previously been released in a limited edition and featured selected songs from his past albums, followed a year later. The eagerly anticipated El alma al aire (2000; “The Soul in the Air”) was tremendously successful; it won Latin Grammy Awards in 2001 for best album, best song, best male pop vocal album, and best record of the year. Sanz’s popularity in the world of Latin music was reaffirmed with the release of MTV Unplugged (2001), which again garnered multiple Latin Grammys.
Sanz ventured into new stylistic terrain on his later albums, collaborating with an array of international artists, including Colombian vocalists Shakira and Juanes, among others, on the Grammy-winning El tren de los momentos (2006; “The Train of Moments”). Although he consciously allowed his style to evolve, Sanz remained a specialist in flamenco-infused ballads and love songs, which he performed in a distinctive gravelly voice. Such songs made up the bulk of his eighth studio release, Paraíso Express (2009). It won the Grammy for best Latin pop album in 2011 and spawned the crossover hit “Looking for Paradise,” a duet with American rhythm-and-blues singer Alicia Keys.
Sanz returned to his earlier style for La música no se toca (2012; “The Music Is Not Played”), which topped the charts in Spain and Mexico. On Sirope (2015; “Syrup”), however, he incorporated an eclectic mix of styles, including funk, cumbia, soul, and reggae, and the recording won the Latin Grammy for best contemporary pop vocal album. #ElDisco (2019; “The Album”) featured melodic pop mixed with up-to-date rhythms and earned a Grammy Award for best Latin pop album.
