Amy Winehouse,  (born September 14, 1983, London, England—died July 23, 2011, London), British singer-songwriter who skyrocketed to fame as a result of the critically acclaimed multiple Grammy Award-winning album Back to Black (2006) but whose tempestuous love life, erratic behaviour, and substance-abuse problems stalled her recording career even as they made her a favourite subject of tabloid journalism.
Winehouse was born to a Jewish family and was raised primarily by her mother, a pharmacist, who divorced her father, a taxicab driver, when Winehouse was nine. Early on she demonstrated an interest in the arts, but she was reportedly expelled from Sylvia Young theatre school for wearing a forbidden nose ring. At the prestigious BRIT School, Winehouse showed ability as an actor as well as a singer, and by age 16 she was performing with jazz groups. On her critically acclaimed debut album, Frank (2003), she proved herself to be a shrewd, caustic lyricist, and her smoky, evocative vocals drew comparisons to jazz and rhythm-and-blues legends Sarah Vaughan, Dinah Washington, and Billie Holiday.
A series of tumultuous romances followed for Winehouse, none more fevered than her on-again, off-again relationship with Blake Fielder-Civil, about whom many of the heartbreak songs on her next album, Back to Black, were written. Her singing on that album, more in the vein of Motown and 1960s and ’70s soul, delighted critics. A very different-looking Winehouse had begun appearing in the tabloids as the new album took off in Britain and broke through in the United States, entering the American charts at number seven, the highest debut position ever for a British woman. Stick-thin and tattooed, Winehouse began piling her jet-black hair in an enormous beehive that, along with heavy Cleopatra-style eye makeup, became her trademark look. After marrying Fielder-Civil in May 2007, Winehouse began behaving increasingly erratically and canceling shows. Her very public slide into personal chaos—marked by dramatic anorexic weight loss, drunken performances, an arrest in Norway for marijuana possession, and the incarceration of Fielder-Civil after a bar fight—culminated in January 2008 in the posting on the Internet by the Sun newspaper of a video in which Winehouse appeared to be smoking crack cocaine.
In the wake of the video, Winehouse had difficulty obtaining a visa to appear at the 2008 Grammy Awards ceremony in Los Angeles, and a special satellite performance was arranged in London. At the event, Back to Black was honoured with five Grammy Awards, including two (best song and best recording) for the infectious “Rehab,” with its sultry “no, no, no” refusal to enter drug and alcohol treatment. In November 2008 she was named Best Selling Pop/Rock Female at the World Music Awards. However, her life seemed to continue to spin out of control. Although she had entered rehab, she had not remained long, and reports of substance abuse continued to follow her. In July 2009 she and Fielder-Civil divorced. Two years later Winehouse attempted a comeback tour, but it was canceled after the singer appeared to be intoxicated at the opening concert. She died from alcohol poisoning the following month. Her duet with Tony Bennett, “Body and Soul,” was released posthumously in 2011, and the song ultimately won a Grammy Award for best pop performance by a duo or group. It was followed later that year by Lioness: Hidden Treasures, a collection that included previously unreleased original songs, covers, and demos. The 2015 film Amy chronicled her career through the use of documentary footage and interviews with her colleagues and intimates. It won an Academy Award for best documentary.
