Béla Fleck, in full Béla Anton Leoš Fleck,  (born July 10, 1958, New York, New York, U.S.), American musician recognized as one of the most inventive and commercially successful banjo players of the late 20th and early 21st centuries.
Fleck became fascinated by bluegrass music during his youth in New York City. He began to play banjo when he was 15 years old, inspired by the music of guitarist-singer Lester Flatt and banjoist Earl Scruggs—the performers of the theme song of the then popular television series The Beverly Hillbillies. Throughout his student years at New York’s High School of Music and Art, he studied banjo privately, experimenting with new sounds, techniques, and genres—particularly jazz. After graduation he joined the Boston-based bluegrass band Tasty Licks and recorded two albums with the group. In 1979 Fleck made his solo recording debut with Crossing the Tracks. He then toured with the Kentucky-based band Spectrum before joining the progressive bluegrass group New Grass Revival (NGR), with which he performed and recorded throughout the 1980s. While with NGR he also produced a number of solo albums, including the highly acclaimed Drive (1988). Following the release of NGR’s final album, Friday Night in America (1989), Fleck recorded The Telluride Sessions (1989), a landmark bluegrass album, with the all-star acoustic group Strength in Numbers. By this time Fleck’s technical proficiency on the banjo and his adventurous musical experimentation had earned him an international following.
Meanwhile, in 1988, Fleck assembled the Flecktones, the group with which he would record most consistently for the next two decades. The original lineup of the band included harmonica and keyboard player Howard Levy, bassist Victor Wooten, and drummer Roy (“Futureman”) Wooten. Levy left the Flecktones in 1992, and the group performed as a trio for several years before it was joined by saxophonist Jeff Coffin in 1997. In all of its manifestations, the Flecktones blended elements of bluegrass, jazz, rock, rhythm and blues, and world music on albums such as Flight of the Cosmic Hippo (1991), Left of Cool (1998), and Little Worlds (2003). The original Flecktones reunited for the first time in almost two decades for Rocket Science (2011), a Grammy Award-winning collection that was equally playful and provocative.
Between Flecktones recordings, Fleck continued to enrich his musical palette. While collaborating with numerous musicians, such as bassist and cellist Edgar Meyer and Indian tabla virtuoso Zakir Hussain, he also ventured into classical music with the release of Perpetual Motion, a compilation of interpretations of works by Bach, Beethoven, Chopin, and others. In 2005 he made a pilgrimage to the birthplace of the banjo, sub-Saharan Africa, where he studied, recorded, and performed with an array of locally prominent traditional and popular musicians. The trip yielded the documentary Throw Down Your Heart (2008) and its companion album Throw Down Your Heart: Tales from the Acoustic Planet, Vol. 3 (2009). Recordings from a 2009 tour he undertook with Malian kora master Toumani Diabaté were later released as The Ripple Effect (2020).
Fleck joined clawhammer banjo player Abigail Washburn on Abigail Washburn and the Sparrow Quartet (2008), a bold experiment that fused American roots music and traditional Chinese folk songs. Fleck and Washburn were later married, and the two frequently performed and recorded together; their duet albums included Béla Fleck & Abigail Washburn (2014) and Echo in the Valley (2017). During this time, he continued to explore classical music, writing and recording a concerto with the Nashville Symphony and a chamber work with the Brooklyn Rider string quartet for The Imposter (2013). He also partnered with the Colorado Symphony on Juno Concerto (2017). Two (2015) is a duet album with pianist Chick Corea.
Throughout his career, Fleck garnered more than a dozen Grammy Awards in multiple categories—including pop, jazz, classical crossover, and world music—all a testament to his virtuosity and versatility as both a solo and a collaborative artist.
