Bobby Vinton, byname of Stanley Robert Vinton, Jr.,  (born April 16, 1935, Canonsburg, Pennsylvania, U.S.), American pop singer who found success in the 1960s and ’70s with a series of sentimental, orchestrally arranged hits that stood in opposition to the rock vanguard of the time.
Vinton grew up near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. As a youth, he learned to play several brass and woodwind instruments and occasionally performed with a local big band that his father, a mechanic at the Coca-Cola Co., led. While in high school, Vinton formed his own dance band, and he later studied musical composition at Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, graduating in 1956. After briefly serving in the U.S. Army, he led a band in the Pittsburgh area that toured and performed on television, and in 1960 a local disk jockey helped him land a contract with CBS subsidiary Epic Records. Initially, Vinton recorded two albums of mostly instrumental big-band music in the mold of Lawrence Welk, but they sold poorly. In an attempt to salvage his contract, he persuaded Epic to let him try his hand as a solo crooner.
The decision paid off, as “Roses Are Red (My Love),” a country-tinged ode to young romance, reached number one on the Billboard singles chart in 1962. Vinton, whose clean-cut boyish appearance made him a favourite of teenagers, subsequently topped the chart with the straightforward emotional ballads “Blue Velvet” (1963), “There! I’ve Said It Again” (1963), and “Mr. Lonely” (1964), the latter of which he cowrote. By the end of 1964, Vinton’s brand of orchestra-backed pop had established him as one of the top recording artists in the United States.
Although the rock bands associated with the British Invasion cut into Vinton’s popularity somewhat in the mid-1960s, he continued to record and scored a number of modest hits. He also dabbled in screen acting, his credits including the teen-oriented movie Surf Party (1964) as well as the John Wayne vehicles Big Jake (1971) and The Train Robbers (1973). In 1974, however, Epic dropped the increasingly out-of-fashion Vinton from its roster.
Signing with ABC Records, Vinton mounted a comeback with the wistful “My Melody of Love” (1974), which he adapted from a German tune. Sung partially in Polish as an homage to his ethnic heritage, it became his biggest hit in a decade and attracted a new audience, many of them Polish Americans, for whom he became known as “the Polish Prince.” He then parlayed his resurgent fame into a stint as host of The Bobby Vinton Show (1975–78), a syndicated television variety program produced in Canada.
Vinton’s recording career waned in the following decades, but he remained active on the concert circuit. In 1993 he opened the Bobby Vinton Blue Velvet Theatre in Branson, Missouri, where he performed regularly with the Glenn Miller Orchestra for nearly 10 years. (He sold the theatre in 2002.) An autobiography, The Polish Prince, was published in 1978.
