Carl Perkins,  (born April 9, 1932, Tiptonville, Tenn., U.S.—died Jan. 19, 1998, Jackson, Tenn.), American singer, songwriter, and guitarist whose song “Blue Suede Shoes” was a touchstone of the rockabilly musical movement of the 1950s. A “triple threat” performer—a strong singer, a prolific and imaginative songwriter, and an excellent and influential lead guitarist—Perkins rose from sharecropping poverty to international fame.
He was taught to play the guitar by an African-American neighbour with whom he picked cotton. Grounded in gospel music and influenced by bluegrass and Hank Williams, Perkins developed his style on the bar circuit in Jackson, Tennessee, playing from age 14 in a band that was rounded out by his brothers Clayton (on upright bass) and Jay (on acoustic rhythm guitar). After hearing Elvis Presley on the radio and being excited by the similarities between his music and their own beat-driven approach to country music, the Perkins brothers went to Memphis, Tennessee, to audition for Sun Records, the label for which Presley recorded. Perkins’s big break came in 1956 with “Blue Suede Shoes,” which he wrote after observing a dancer taking pains to preserve his new footwear. The song made the Top Five on the pop, country, and rhythm-and-blues charts, an unprecedented feat. En route to New York City to perform on national television, Carl and Jay were seriously injured in a car accident, temporarily halting the band’s momentum. In the meantime, Presley, by then recording for RCA, had a hit with his cover version of “Blue Suede Shoes.”
Perkins produced two moderate hits for Sun before leaving Sam Phillips’s label in 1958 to record for Columbia, where he managed only two minor chart entries; and Jay died that year of a malignant brain tumour. Dispirited by these events, Perkins fell victim to low morale and alcoholism. In 1964 and 1965, at the height of Beatlemania, he toured in Britain. George Harrison had been particularly influenced by his guitar playing, and the Beatles recorded several of his songs, including “Matchbox” (based on a blues standard) and “Honey Don’t,” raising Perkins’s profile and providing him with royalty earnings. From 1965 to 1976 he performed with Johnny Cash as part of Cash’s touring ensemble and on his television show. In their first year together the former Sun labelmates became born-again Christians and renounced their addictions. Cash also had a big hit with Perkins’s composition “Daddy Sang Bass.” Indeed, many other country acts found similar success with his songs. Subsequently, Perkins again played with a family band, this time with sons Greg (on bass) and Stan (on drums). Unquestionably one of rock music’s pioneers, Perkins was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1987.
