Carly Rae Jepsen,  (born November 21, 1985, Mission, British Columbia, Canada), Canadian singer, songwriter, and guitarist best known for the global pop phenomenon “Call Me Maybe,” which became the biggest-selling song in the world in 2012 and the best-selling domestic Canadian single in history.
A self-professed “musical-theatre nerd,” Jepsen starred in productions of Annie, The Wiz, and Grease as a schoolgirl. She received her first guitar at age 17 before attending the Canadian College of Performing Arts in Victoria, where she planned on becoming a music teacher until she caught the songwriting bug. She was working as a waitress, busking, and performing in local pubs when her high school drama teacher encouraged her to audition for the reality television show Canadian Idol. Jepsen finished that singing competition in third place, and a subsequent tour with other performers from the show helped lead to her signing a recording contract.
Jepsen released two singles, a cover of John Denver’s “Sunshine on My Shoulders” and her forthcoming album’s title track, before releasing her Tug of War album in September 2008. “Tug of War” was named Song of the Year at the 2010 Canadian Radio Music Awards. Jepsen was also nominated for New Artist of the Year and Songwriter of the Year at the Juno Awards.
She began recording material for her next record in 2011 and, unlike the more R&B, folk- and country-based pop material on her debut, the new songs went in a more upbeat, dance-pop direction. Most famously, a folk tune written by Jepsen and her guitarist, Tavish Crowe, while on tour served as the framework for the smash hit single “Call Me Maybe,” which was later rewritten and “pop-ified.” “Call Me Maybe” was released in Canada in September 2011 and began to steadily climb the Canadian singles chart that fall. In January 2012, after Canadian pop star Justin Bieber raved about it on Twitter and uploaded a video to YouTube of him lip-synching the song with then-girlfriend Selena Gomez, the song began to gain international attention. In early February, Jepsen signed a deal with Bieber’s manager, whose record company had global distribution through Interscope. Six songs for a prospective album had already been completed by then, and they were released on an EP titled Curiosity in February 2012.
“Call Me Maybe” soon went viral on YouTube and proceeded to top the charts in 37 countries. On June 21, 2012, the song was certified octuple-platinum for selling 640,000 copies in Canada, making it the best-selling domestic Canadian single in history. It went on to become the world’s top-selling song of 2012, with more than 12.5 million copies sold worldwide, and was later nominated for two Grammy Awards.
A 12-track dance-pop album titled Kiss, which included “Call Me Maybe” and the title cut from Curiosity, was released in September 2012. Kiss won 2013 Juno Awards for Album of the Year and Pop Album of the Year. It was certified gold in Canada, Brazil, Colombia, Indonesia, and Poland and reached platinum status in Japan and quadruple-platinum in the Philippines. Her follow-up album, E•MO•TION (2015), debuted at No. 8 on the Japanese and Canadian sales charts and at No. 16 in the US but was a commercial disappointment despite being a critical darling and ranking among the best albums of the year by a number of media outlets. She later released Dedicated (2019), her fourth studio album, and Dedicated Side B (2020), a collection of outtakes.
In February 2014 Jepsen made her Broadway debut at New York City’s Broadway Theatre, portraying the title role in the Tony Award-winning musical Rodgers + Hammerstein’s Cinderella. In January 2016 she played Frenchy in Grease Live, a live television presentation of the musical Grease.
The original version of this entry was published by The Canadian Encyclopedia.
