Cheb Mami, originally Mohamed Khélifati,  (born July 11, 1966, Saïda, Alg.), Algerian popular singer who was a major force in the introduction of raï music to Western audiences at the turn of the 21st century.
As a youth, Mohamed Khélifati took a job as a welder, apparently ready to follow in the occupational footsteps of his father. However, since childhood he had shown a penchant for music, and by age 12 he was singing in the streets and at weddings in his hometown of Saïda. After placing second in a radio talent contest in 1982 and being approached by local record producers, he released a number of cassettes under the name Cheb Mami (Arabic for “the young mourner”). By adopting the title Cheb, Mami projected himself as a young performer of raï, a type of progressive popular music that blends local Algerian traditions with various international popular genres, such as rock, jazz, and flamenco.
In 1985 Mami performed at a festival in the port city of Oran (the birthplace of raï) that had been organized by the “king of raï” himself, Khaled. This appearance brought Mami widespread recognition as the emergent “prince of raï.” However, the frank, often racy lyrics of the music coupled with undertones of political protest made the performance of raï not only controversial but indeed dangerous amid the growing volatility of the Algerian political scene during the 1980s. As a result, many raï artists left the country in fear for their lives. Mami moved to France, where he found an enthusiastic audience among the children of North African immigrants.
In the years following his move, Mami became a French club favourite before rising as an international star. Though his style was heavily infused with elements of reggae, funk, salsa, hip-hop, and North African rhythms, the distinct flavour of raï was never absent from his work. Mami’s first album, Prince of Raï, was released in 1989 and was followed by five more albums over the next decade. Throughout this period he strove to extend his fan base from Europe and North Africa to North America. A turning point came with his 1999 collaboration with British pop singer Sting on the single “Desert Rose.” The song was a hit in the United States, and in 2000 Mami performed with Sting at the Grammy Awards. In 2001 he performed at the Super Bowl, again with Sting, and embarked on a U.S. tour following the release of Dellali, his seventh album. Mami continued to collaborate with various artists—who represented a broad array of popular music traditions—on his later albums, including Du sud au nord (2004) and Layali (2006).
