Clifton Chenier,  (born June 25, 1925, Opelousas, La., U.S.—died Dec. 12, 1987, Lafayette, La.), American popular musician and pioneer in the development of zydeco music—a bluesy, southern Louisiana blend of French, African American, Native American, and Afro-Caribbean traditions. He was a master keyboard accordionist, a bold vocalist, and the unofficial (but virtually undisputed) “King of Zydeco.”
Chenier was born to a family of sharecroppers (tenant farmers) in south-central Louisiana and spent much of his youth working in the cotton fields. He received his first accordion as a gift from his father, who was an established accordionist in the local house-party (dance) and Saturday-dinner circuit. Chenier immediately recruited a washboard (frottoir) player—his brother Cleveland—to provide the lively, syncopated scraping that has remained a rhythmic hallmark of zydeco music. Inspired by recordings of earlier accordion virtuoso Amadie (or Amédé) Ardoin, as well as by the live performances of many local Cajun and Creole musicians, Chenier quickly became a formidable force in the zydeco tradition.
Chenier left his hometown of Opelousas in his early 20s for Lake Charles in southwestern Louisiana, where he worked for several years as a truck driver for the nearby petroleum companies. During his off-hours he played and listened to music, and his musical style increasingly gravitated toward rhythm and blues. The emblematic features of zydeco—such as the French-based Louisiana Creole language and the ever-popular waltz and two-step dance forms—were never fully excised from his performances, however. In the mid-1950s Chenier signed with Specialty Records, for which he produced mostly rhythm-and-blues recordings with a zydeco tint, notably the hit song “Ay-Tete-Fee” (sung in Louisiana Creole).  With his band, the Zodico Ramblers—which, aside from the keyboard accordion and washboard, featured drums, guitar, bass, piano, and saxophone—Chenier emerged as a star of rhythm and blues. His brilliance faded over the next decade, however, and his career remained inert for some years before it was revived and redirected by Arhoolie Records, a label specializing in recordings of regional music traditions. With Arhoolie’s support and encouragement, Chenier recalibrated his music back toward its zydeco roots and released a number of successful albums, including Louisiana Blues and Zydeco (1965), King of the Bayous (1970), and Bogalusa Boogie (1975).
Throughout the 1970s Chenier toured nationally and internationally as the King of Zydeco, donning a large gold-and-burgundy mock crown in many of his performances to acknowledge and amplify his popular status. By late in the decade, however, both he and his music had lost their lustre; he had developed a severe kidney infection related to diabetes and had to have a portion of his foot amputated.  Although Chenier experienced somewhat of a comeback in the early 1980s—when he expanded his band to include a trumpet—his illness continued to take its musical and physical toll, and he ultimately succumbed to it in 1987.
