Cyndi Lauper, byname of Cynthia Ann Stephanie Lauper,  (born June 22, 1953, Brooklyn, New York, U.S.), American singer, songwriter, and actress whose flamboyant style and catchy songs, most notably “Girls Just Want to Have Fun” (1983), helped make her a pop icon.
Lauper grew up in Queens, New York. An indifferent student, she eventually dropped out of high school, and for the next several years, she worked at a number of assorted jobs and sang popular songs in nightclubs. After she suffered an injury to her vocal chords in 1977, she began to study under a vocal coach. That same year she and fellow musician John Turi formed the rockabilly band Blue Angel, and for the first time, Lauper publicly performed songs that she had had a hand in writing. Critics praised Lauper’s piercing and multihued vocals, and the band won a recording contract and released an eponymous album in 1980 on the Polydor label. Commercial success eluded them, however, and in 1982 Blue Angel was dissolved.
Lauper’s distinctive voice and charmingly quirky persona helped her to quickly rebound, and in 1983 her first solo album, She’s So Unusual, was released on the CBS imprint Portrait Records. It included the effervescent single “Girls Just Want to Have Fun,” the popularity of which was enhanced by its supporting video, which became an MTV favourite. The chart-topping album spawned other hit singles, among them the ballad “Time After Time.” At the 1984 Grammy Awards, She’s So Unusual was a nominee for album of the year, and Lauper won the award for best new artist.
Although subsequent albums, including True Colors (1986) and Hat Full of Stars (1993), failed to ignite the charts, Lauper remained an enduring pop icon and appeared regularly on television variety programs and talk shows. She also took guest roles on television, notably on several episodes of the 1990s sitcom Mad About You—which garnered her an Emmy in 1991—and in episodes (2009–13) of the crime show Bones.
In 2013 Lauper wrote the score for the Broadway play Kinky Boots, which was based on a 2005 British movie of the same name. It tells the story of a man who inherits his father’s shoe factory as it is on the brink of going out of business but finds salvation for the business and a new worldview when he is approached by a drag queen cabaret performer in need of shoes. The play, which featured a book by Harvey Fierstein, was a huge success, and Lauper won a Tony Award for best original score, becoming the first solo woman to win the prize. The play won five other Tonys, including the award for best musical. Lauper, along with numerous other artists, subsequently wrote songs for the musical SpongeBob SquarePants, which premiered on Broadway in 2017; the score was nominated for a Tony. She also continued to record, and her later albums included Memphis Blues (2010) and Detour (2016). In 2015 Lauper was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame.
Lauper was a vocal advocate for the rights of gay, lesbian, and transgender people. In 2008 she cofounded the True Colors Fund, which supported those communities.
