De La Soul,  American rap group whose debut album, 3 Feet High and Rising (1989), was one of the most influential albums in hip-hop history. The members were Posdnuos (byname of Kelvin Mercer; b. August 17, 1969, New York, New York, U.S.), Trugoy the Dove (byname of David Jolicoeur; b. September 21, 1968, New York), and Pasemaster Mase (byname of Vincent Mason; b. March 24, 1970, New York).
De La Soul was formed in 1988 by three high-school friends in Amityville, New York. Impressed by the trio’s demo, “Plug Tunin’,” “Prince Paul” Houston of the rap group Stetsasonic helped them secure a contract with Tommy Boy Records and produced their landmark debut. Conceptual, densely layered, and replete with quirky interlude skits, 3 Feet High and Rising influenced not only De La Soul’s own self-constructed “family” of alternative rappers (ranging from A Tribe Called Quest to Queen Latifah) but also groups as disparate as Public Enemy (who were inspired by the collage-sampling technique of “Prince Paul”) and gangsta rap pioneers N.W.A. (who incorporated interlude skits). Moreover, prior to the emergence of De La Soul, the primary source for hip-hop samples was the music of James Brown; in the wake of 3 Feet High and Rising, George Clinton’s Parliament-Funkadelic catalog became the mother lode.
The group’s second—and arguably best—album, De La Soul Is Dead (1991), dealt with weighty issues such as incest, mortality, and the buckling pressure of prior success. Despite the alternative that they offered to the proliferation of increasingly nihilistic and hypermaterialistic hip-hop in the mid-1990s, De La Soul’s next releases, Buhloone Mindstate (1993) and Stakes Is High (1996), failed commercially. On the latter, De La Soul, having contributed so much to hip-hop’s development lyrically and musically, forsook their usual coded poetry to take an unabashed stand against the pervasiveness of shallow lyrics and unimaginative sounds they believed to be too characteristic of the hip-hop era they had helped usher into existence.
De La Soul returned in 2000 with Art Official Intelligence: Mosaic Thump, the first volume in the proposed Art Official Intelligence trilogy. The album featured guest appearances by Busta Rhymes, the Beastie Boys, and Redman, among others. The second album, AOI: Bionix (2001), won generally positive reviews, but the anticipated third release never materialized. Instead, the band offered a stand-alone album, The Grind Date (2004), which was notably free of skits and featured guest appearances by Ghostface Killah, Common, and Flavor Flav. In 2006 De La Soul and the virtual group Gorillaz shared the Grammy Award for best pop collaboration with vocals for the song “Feel Good Inc.” De La Soul subsequently issued several mixtapes before releasing the Kickstarter-funded And the Anonymous Nobody (2016), a solidly creative if low-key album featuring such guests as Damon Albarn, David Byrne, and Jill Scott.
