Dr. Dre, byname of André Romelle Young,  (born February 18, 1965, Los Angeles, California, U.S.), American rapper, hip-hop producer, and entrepreneur who helped popularize the gangsta rap subgenre.
Born to teenaged parents who aspired to singing careers, André Young took the stage name Dr. Dre in the early 1980s. He performed as a hip-hop deejay and as part of the group World Class Wreckin’ Cru at clubs and parties in Los Angeles’ south-central district. In 1986 he founded N.W.A (Niggaz Wit Attitudes) with fellow rappers Eazy-E and Ice Cube. The group’s second album, Straight Outta Compton (1988), was a breakthrough for the nascent gangsta rap movement, featuring explicit descriptions (and often glorifications) of street violence and drug dealing. While Dre appeared prominently as a rapper in N.W.A, his most-lauded role was as a producer, crafting ambitiously noisy, multilayered sonic collages to back the group’s inflammatory lyrics.
Dre left N.W.A in 1992 and cofounded Death Row Records with Marion (“Suge”) Knight. That year his solo debut, The Chronic, introduced the “G-funk” production style, characterized by plodding tempos, synthesizer washes, and copious musical sampling of 1970s funk records, especially those by Parliament-Funkadelic. The album also produced Dr. Dre’s first Grammy Award, for “Let Me Ride,” which was released as a single after the album’s release and took home best rap solo performance at the 1994 ceremony. The Chronic’s multiplatinum success helped make this sound dominant in mainstream hip-hop in the mid-1990s. In 1996 Dre left Death Row to form Aftermath Records. Three years later he released a second hit solo album, 2001 (1999), which produced the Grammy-winning single “Forgot About Dre,” among other hits.
By then his work as a producer for other artists—including rappers Snoop Dogg and Eminem, whose careers he was credited with having launched—had also earned him considerable respect. In fact, he took home the Grammy for producer of the year in 2000, largely because of his work on Eminem’s Grammy-winning album The Marshall Mathers LP. Dr. Dre would capture two more Grammys, both in 2009, for his later work with Eminem.
In the early years of the 21st century, Dr. Dre began working on a follow-up to 2001. After a lengthy gestation, however, the album (which was to have been titled Detox) was scrapped. Meanwhile, his production career continued to flourish through collaborations with performers such as Mary J. Blige, Jay-Z, and 50 Cent. The wait for a third Dr. Dre album finally came to an end in 2015 with the release of Compton; the album was reportedly inspired by the film Straight Outta Compton (2015), which told the story of N.W.A. In 2016 Dr. Dre was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of N.W.A.
Outside the recording studio, Dr. Dre found success as a businessman. In 2008 he and Jimmy Iovine, a music executive, formally established Beats Electronics, which sold headphones, earphones, and speakers, among other items. Six years later they launched Beats Music, a music-streaming service. The two companies were purchased by Apple for $3 billion in 2014.
Together, the pair also ventured into philanthropy. In 2013 Dr. Dre and Iovine gave $70 million to the University of Southern California for the creation of the Jimmy Iovine and Andre Young Academy for Arts, Technology and the Business of Innovation. The undergraduate program—seeking to foster skills in art and design, engineering and computer science, and business and venture management—began in 2014, and the academy’s first graduate program launched in August 2017.
