Eddie Palmieri, byname of Eduardo Palmieri,  (born December 15, 1936, New York, New York, U.S.), American pianist, composer, arranger, and bandleader who blended jazz piano with various Latin American popular music styles and was a pioneer in the development of salsa music.
Palmieri grew up in New York City in a Puerto Rican—or “Nuyorican”—household and was involved in music from the time he was a young child, inspired and encouraged by his elder brother Charlie, who was an accomplished jazz pianist, and by his uncle, who played in a Latin dance band. Eddie took up the piano at age eight and then switched to the timbales (a pair of shallow single-headed drums) at age 13 when he began playing in his uncle’s group. After just two years, however, he returned to the piano, the instrument that ultimately became the foundation of his musical career.
During the 1950s Palmieri played piano with a number of Latin dance ensembles, including Tito Rodriguez’s mambo orchestra, before forming his own group, La Perfecta, in 1961. Although La Perfecta resembled other Latin dance combos in many respects, it differed from them in several important ways. Perhaps most significant, it adapted the instrumentation of the popular charanga ensemble—which featured violins and flute as the main melodic instruments—by replacing the violins with a trombone section. The resultant “trombanga” sound, as Palmieri called it, was distinct not only from the sound of charanga but also from that of the many Latin ensembles that used a trumpet-driven front line. Adding to the sonic signature of La Perfecta was Palmieri’s uniquely percussive piano style. All these innovations helped drive the development of the similarly percussive, brash, and brassy salsa music that had emerged in New York City in the 1940s and ’50s and that peaked in popularity in the ’70s in conjunction with a surge in Hispanic cultural pride. Palmieri was in the vanguard of the movement.
After La Perfecta disbanded in 1968, Palmieri recorded the influential solo album Harlem River Drive (1971), which fused African American musical styles such as soul, funk, and rhythm and blues with the salsa rhythms of his own Hispanic heritage. In 1974 The Sun of Latin Music (1973) won the first Grammy Award given for best Latin recording; his Unfinished Masterpiece (1974) won the award the following year.
Palmieri continued to record prolifically and to maintain an active performance schedule throughout the late 20th and early 21st centuries. He won several more Grammy Awards, two of which were for collaborations—Masterpiece/Obra Maestra (2000), with salsa multi-instrumentalist and bandleader Tito Puente, and Simpático (2006), with trumpeter Brian Lynch. In addition, Palmieri won a lifetime achievement award from the Latin Recording Academy in 2013.
