Fairouz, also spelled Fayrouz, Fairuz, and Fayruz, byname of Nuhād al-Ḥaddād,  (born November 20, 1934? [see Researcher’s Note], Beirut, Lebanon), Lebanese singer and actress widely considered to be one of the most celebrated Arab singers of the 20th century. Fairouz’s husband was Assi Rahbani, who along with his brother Mansour Rahbani—known together as the Rahbani Brothers—wrote and composed the majority of the songs and plays that Fairouz performed from the mid-1950s until Assi suffered a debilitating stroke in 1973. Subsequently Fairouz began collaborating, separately, with her son and daughter Ziad and Rima Rahbani.
Fairouz was born Nuhad al-Haddad, the first of four children of Arab Christian parents in Beirut. Her singing talent was noticed by a local musician when she was a teenager, and she enrolled in a music conservatory in Beirut. She adopted her stage name, Fairouz, meaning “Turquoise,” after her first performances on Radio Lebanon in the 1940s. It was at the radio station that she met the Rahbani Brothers and began to collaborate with them. She married Assi Rahbani in 1954.
Fairouz and the Rahbani Brothers’ ascent to fame began with their songs performed on Radio Lebanon, the British Near East Radio, and Radio Damascus in the 1950s. It was for the latter, in fact, that Fairouz and the Rahbani Brothers recorded their first song, “ʿItāb” (“Blame”). Their renown in Lebanon was cemented when the family performed at the Baalbek International Festival in 1957, the first year that the internationally focused summer cultural festival included Lebanese folkloric acts. Known as “The Lebanese Nights,” the folkloric section became an institution at the festival, and Fairouz and the Rahbani Brothers were featured most years until the suspension of the festival with the start of the Lebanese Civil War in 1975. In the early years their performances took the form of a series of skits, sometimes performed in collaboration with other well-known artists. Eventually their act developed into full-length musical plays featuring Fairouz surrounded by a troupe that sang, danced the traditional dabkah, and acted out the Rahbani Brothers’ interpretations of Lebanese folklore. In the years when the group did not appear at Baalbek, it often performed elsewhere in Lebanon, such as at the inaugural Cedars Festival in the summer of 1964, or abroad. In all, they collaborated on 22 musical plays and three feature films, the latter helmed by the Egyptian directors Henri Barakat and Youssef Chahine.
Many of Fairouz’s most beloved songs came from plays such as Jisr al-Qamar (1962; The Moon’s Bridge), Bayyāʿ al-Khawātim (1964; The Ring Seller), Dawālīb al-Hawāʾ (1965; Windmills), and  Al-Maḥaṭṭah (1973; The Station) and movies such as Safar Barlak (1966; Exile). The 1967 play Hālah wa al-Malik (Hālah and the King) marked a transition away from the group’s typical rural folkloric subject matter and setting, with Fairouz playing an urban character for the first time. It was also the first time that her son Ziad was involved in one of her projects, stepping in at the age of 17 after Assi suffered a stroke. The plays and movies are characterized by their simple comic plots in which conflicts are solved by singing, romance, or a combination of the two. Fairouz’s short songs in the Lebanese dialect combined traditional and popular musical influences, setting them apart from the long repetitious songs in the Egyptian dialect that were the order of the day.
During the war and with her husband’s health declining, Fairouz began to collaborate more exclusively with her son, who in albums such as Maʿriftī Fīk (1987; “My Knowledge of You”) and Kīfak Inta (1991; “How Are You”) seemed intent on helping to free her from the iconic pedestal she had been put upon by various factions in the country, in no small part as a result of the chaste characters she embodied in her earlier songs and musical theatrical plays. Songs like “Kīfak Inta” scandalized her fans with its more colloquial style and content, thus reinventing her music for a new generation. Yet the “new” Fairouz did not completely stray from the “old” Fairouz; even the younger generation of listeners grew comfortable hearing her sing more mundane lyrics, such as in the 1999 song “Mish Kāyin Hayk Takūn” (“You Shouldn’t Be That Way”) from the album of the same name, in which she sings about olives, soap, and balconies. Neither Fairouz nor Ziad, however, were unaffected by the earlier works, as can be clearly seen in the tribute album they did for Assi Rahbani entitled Ilā ʿĀsī (1995; “To Assi”). In more recent years Fairouz also worked extensively with her daughter Rima Rahbani.
Fairouz long enjoyed wide appeal, even in Lebanon’s at times very divisive political climate. Although Christian (Greek Orthodox) and Lebanese, her songs were adopted by all sides in the Civil War (1975–90), be they Christian or Muslim, Lebanese, Palestinian, or Syrian. To avoid the appearance of taking sides, she did not perform in the country during the war, only abroad. Despite this, Fairouz remained in Lebanon, and her fame was bolstered by her decision not to leave during the war. With her ability to unite and her seeming impartiality, she came to represent Lebanon itself.
From almost the very beginning of her collaboration with the Rahbani Brothers, Fairouz’s fame spread beyond the borders of Lebanon as well. At about the same time they started broadcasting songs and short dramatic skits for Radio Lebanon, they were doing the same for Radio Damascus. Fairouz and the Rahbani Brothers appeared at the Damascus Festival more times than they appeared at the Baalbeck International Festival, and Fairouz is arguably as popular in Syria as she is in Lebanon. Her fame beyond the Levant can be tied, among other factors, to her artistic support for the Palestinian cause. In 1955 Fairouz and the Rahbanis were invited to Egypt by Egyptian State Radio and commissioned to write songs in support of the Palestinian cause. The result was Rājiʿūn (“We Shall Return,” 1955), a collection of somber and militaristic anthems. Though they would compose other songs relating to the Palestinian cause in the meantime, such as “Al-Quds al-ʿAtīqah” (“Old Jerusalem”), it was their work following the Six-Day War of 1967 that sealed their fame outside of the Levant and Palestine with songs like “Zahrat al-Madāʾin” (“Flower of the Cities”), written and performed just after the war in the summer of 1967.
Though she was largely absent from public life in Lebanon during the war in the 1970s and ’80s, her popularity never waned. In fact, when her husband died in 1986, factions in Beirut declared a cease-fire to allow the funeral to process from the Muslim side of the city to the burial site on the Christian side. In the 1990s, after the Civil War, she staged a comeback in Lebanon with a concert in Beirut and a new album that appealed to a new generation of listeners. Fairouz remained active well into the 21st century, performing at concerts and recording new studio albums, including Ayh Fī Amal (“Yes, There Is Hope”) in 2010 and Bibālī (“On My Mind”) in 2017. By 2018 Fairouz had sold more than 80 million albums worldwide.
