Folk rock,  hybrid musical style that emerged in the United States and Britain in the mid-1960s.
As the American folk music revival gathered momentum in the 1950s and ’60s, it was inevitable that a high-minded movement that prided itself on the purity of its acoustic instrumentation and its separation from the commercial pop mainstream would be overtaken and transformed by pop music’s rapidly evolving technology. Rock music also was transformed by its intersection with folk. Although rock previously had been perceived and created almost exclusively as entertainment, it now began to take on folk music’s self-conscious seriousness of intent. The catalytic figure in the fusion of folk and commercial rock was Bob Dylan, the movement’s scruffy young troubadour, who in one of several audacious career moves “went electric” during a July 25, 1965, performance at the Newport (Rhode Island) Folk Festival. (See BTW: Dylan goes electric—the event, the debate.)
Dylan’s dramatic gesture, one of the signal events in the history of popular music, certified a fusion that had already taken place. The hybrid had been presaged in the late 1950s by the huge popularity of commercial folk-pop made by left-leaning performers like Harry Belafonte and the college campus favourites the Kingston Trio, whose hit albums mixed traditional and contemporary material. The traditional material came from many different sources, among them spirituals, Appalachian mountain music, early blues, and English and Celtic ballads. A major influence on Dylan that was not strictly traditional was Harry Smith’s 1952 Anthology of American Folk Music, a collection of evocative 1920s and ’30s hillbilly, blues, Cajun, and gospel songs, released on the Folkways label.
Two years before Dylan’s notorious Newport appearance, which struck die-hard folk purists as a sellout, the folk-pop trio Peter, Paul and Mary had reached number two in the charts with a homogenized pop rendition of Dylan’s protest anthem “Blowin’ in the Wind.” Dylan’s move, which followed the release of his partly electric album Bringing It All Back Home (1965), accelerated the already growing onslaught of socially conscious folk-flavoured music done with a rock beat and electric guitars. The genre reached a peak of formal elegance in the music of the Byrds, a Los Angeles-based quintet (founded by former folk musician Roger McGuinn) whose sound was constructed around the jangling chime of 12-string electric guitars and Beatles-influenced vocal harmonies. Early in the summer of 1965 the Byrds scored a number one hit with Dylan’s song “Mr. Tambourine Man.” Their second number one hit, “Turn! Turn! Turn!,” which came at the end of that year, was based on Pete Seeger’s adaptation of verses from the book of Ecclesiastes.
As folk rock became the trend of the moment, however, its socially critical stance was quickly broadened and diluted, and the relationship between the music and its traditional sources became more tenuous, a matter more of “feeling” than of strict reverence for the past. From then, the music tended to fall into two stylistic camps. In the United States folk rock acts like the Mamas and the Papas, Buffalo Springfield, the Lovin’ Spoonful, Sonny and Cher, Simon and Garfunkel, and Janis Ian personified a generalized, often self-righteous youthful rebellion that in its more pointed songs was labeled “protest” music. The era’s quintessential—although far from best—folk rock anthem was Barry McGuire’s “Eve of Destruction,” a haranguing list of social injustices strung around a vague apocalyptic warning, which reached number one in September 1965. Simon and Garfunkel’s “The Sounds of Silence” (number one in January 1966) delivered a similarly ominous blanket warning in a softer, more poetic style.
In Britain folk rock tended to be more respectful of tradition; groups like Fairport Convention and Steeleye Span made records that combined centuries-old folk material with original, tradition-flavoured songs arranged for folk rock ensembles that often used old instruments to maintain a strong Celtic flavour. In the 1970s and early 1980s the English folk duo Richard and Linda Thompson recorded bleak, strikingly compelling social-realist ballads on albums such as I Want to See the Bright Lights Tonight (1974). In a more commercial vein, Scottish troubadour Donovan was a self-conscious answer to Dylan. His first hit, “Catch the Wind” (1965), was a softened and sweetened echo of Dylan’s “Blowin’ in the Wind.”
Folk rock quickly blurred into psychedelic rock and other more personal styles, although certain groups (especially Crosby, Stills and Nash, Jefferson Airplane, and 10,000 Maniacs) and singer-songwriters (Don McLean, Jackson Browne, Bruce Cockburn, Bruce Springsteen, and Tracy Chapman) continued to create socially conscious, issue-oriented pop music into the 1970s, ’80s, and ’90s.
