Frank Loesser, in full Frank Henry Loesser,  (born June 29, 1910, New York, N.Y., U.S.—died July 28, 1969, New York City), American composer, librettist, and lyricist, who achieved major success writing for Broadway musicals, culminating in the 1962 Pulitzer Prize-winning How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying.
Self-taught despite his piano-teacher father’s efforts to discourage his youthful interest in popular song, Loesser dropped out of the City College of New York and worked at various nonmusical jobs before becoming a music publisher’s staff lyricist in the late 1920s. Little of his work was published until “I Wish I Were Twins” (1934) was recorded by Fats Waller. In 1936 Loesser moved to Hollywood, where he became an accomplished lyricist, collaborating with Hoagy Carmichael on “Small Fry” and “Two Sleepy People” and with Joseph J. Lilley on “Jingle, Jangle, Jingle.” Other composers for whom he wrote lyrics include Burton Lane, Jule Styne, Arthur Schwartz, Frederick Hollander, and Jimmy McHugh.
Loesser’s first melody with lyrics was “Praise the Lord and Pass the Ammunition,” the first big hit song of World War II. During the war he wrote for soldier-produced shows at army camps and composed the official song of the infantry, “What Do You Do in the Infantry?” From 1947 Loesser enjoyed major successes on Broadway and in Hollywood, often with songs employing an urban postwar vernacular. His song “On a Slow Boat to China” was a leading hit of 1948. Where’s Charley? (1948), a musical comedy version of the farce Charley’s Aunt, and Guys and Dolls (1950), based on the stories of Damon Runyon, both received Tony Awards and were made into successful motion pictures (1952 and 1955, respectively). The Most Happy Fella (1956) contained elements of opera, but Loesser returned to his earlier formula in How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying.
In Hollywood Loesser’s composing work included the score for the film Hans Christian Andersen (1952), starring Danny Kaye. The song “Baby It’s Cold Outside” won a 1949 Academy Award.
