Gwen Stefani, in full Gwen Renée Stefani,  (born October 3, 1969, Fullerton, California, U.S.), American singer and songwriter who came to fame in the 1990s as the lead singer for the rock-ska band No Doubt before starting a solo career.
As teenagers in Orange county, California, Stefani and her brother Eric helped found No Doubt, which fused ska with new wave-style pop. The group’s breakthrough came with its third album, the chart-topping Tragic Kingdom (1995), which included the hit singles “Just a Girl,” “Spiderwebs,” and “Don’t Speak.” As the band’s popularity grew, the spotlight was very much on the stylish Stefani, who became almost instantly identifiable by her fire-engine red lips and platinum blonde hair and who branched out to collaborate on recordings with rapper Eve and techno artist Moby. No Doubt followed Tragic Kingdom with Return of Saturn (2000) and Rock Steady (2001), the latter of which featured the Grammy Award-winning songs “Hey Baby” and “Underneath It All.” In 2002 Stefani married Gavin Rossdale, the front man for the British alternative rock group Bush; the couple divorced in 2016.
When No Doubt went on hiatus, Stefani released her first solo album, Love.Angel.Music.Baby (2004). Alongside such collaborators as André 3000 (of OutKast), Dr. Dre, and production duo the Neptunes, Stefani mixed hip-hop attitude with 1980s-style dance-pop music reminiscent of some of her earliest influences, including Prince and Madonna. On the strength of several hit singles—including “Rich Girl,” “Hollaback Girl,” and “What You Waiting For?”—Love.Angel.Music.Baby became an international success. Music videos and live performances in support of the album introduced Stefani’s four-woman Asian dance posse, the Harajuku Girls, whose look was inspired by the outré fashion of Tokyo’s Harajuku district. Shortly after the album’s release, Stefani made her feature-film debut, portraying Jean Harlow in Martin Scorsese’s The Aviator (2004), which centred on the life of Howard Hughes. She also made occasional television guest appearances as herself. Increasingly seen as a trendsetter, Stefani also designed a clothing line.
Stefani released her second full-length album, The Sweet Escape, in 2006. She later reunited with her No Doubt bandmates for the 2012 album Push and Shove. Stefani’s third solo album, This Is What the Truth Feels Like, appeared in 2016, and from 2018 to 2020 she had a Las Vegas residency titled Just a Girl. During this time she also appeared as a coach on the singing competition show The Voice (2014–15, 2017, 2019–20). Country singer Blake Shelton was also a coach on the program, and the two began dating. They married in 2021.
