Jane Russell,  (born June 21, 1921, Bemidji, Minnesota, U.S.—died February 28, 2011, Santa Maria, California), American actress and singer who was known for her voluptuous figure and sexualized on-screen persona.
Russell’s family moved to California when she was young. Her mother, who had been an actress, encouraged Jane to explore interests in acting and music, and she studied briefly at Max Reinhardt’s theatrical workshop in Los Angeles and with acting coach Maria Ouspenskaya. Russell was working as a receptionist when she was discovered, landing her first role, in The Outlaw (1943). Producer and director Howard Hughes had been looking for a curvaceous leading lady to portray Rio McDonald—a young woman caught in a love triangle with gunfighters Billy the Kid and Doc Holliday—and after an extensive search he picked Russell for the sultry role. Hughes designed a special brassiere for Russell that would accentuate her assets, though the actress later claimed that she never wore it during filming. Mainly because of Russell’s provocative attire, the film faced censorship issues that kept it out of general release for several years. After a brief initial release in 1943, the movie was shelved until 1946. It was screened intermittently for the next several years amid protests and further censorship and legal battles, with an official rerelease in 1950.
During reshoots for and edits to The Outlaw, Hughes, who had signed Russell to a seven-year contract, kept her off the movie screen. She made only one other film during this time, the tear-jerking drama Young Widow (1946), while on loan to another studio. Despite her limited film appearances during the early 1940s, the controversy surrounding The Outlaw increased public curiosity about Russell. She also earned a degree of popularity as a pinup model during World War II.
Though her sex symbol image persisted throughout much of her career, Russell gained acclaim as a capable actress and singer. She teamed with Bob Hope in the box-office hit The Paleface (1948) and its sequel, Son of Paleface (1952). Both movies gave Russell an opportunity to show off her vocal skills; each garnered an Academy Award nomination for best song, with a win for “Buttons and Bows” from The Paleface. One of Russell’s best-known roles came when in 1953 she starred with Marilyn Monroe in the musical Gentlemen Prefer Blondes. She also starred in the sequel, Gentlemen Marry Brunettes (1955).
Away from the movie screen, Russell found success with her singing. In the 1940s she performed on bandleader Kay Kyser’s radio show, and she later embarked on a musical career that included both solo and group recordings as well as appearances on the nightclub circuit. In 1971 she made her Broadway debut, replacing Elaine Stritch in the musical Company.
In addition to her movie and music careers, Russell was known for her activism in adoption issues. She founded the World Adoption International Fund to aid American adoption of foreign-born children and was herself mother to three adopted children. Russell’s autobiography, Jane Russell: My Path & My Detours, was published in 1985.
