Jennifer Hudson, in full Jennifer Kate Hudson,  (born September 12, 1981, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.), American actress and singer who won an Academy Award for best supporting actress for her role in Dreamgirls (2006).
Hudson began singing at age seven in her Chicago church choir. As a teenager, she performed at wedding receptions and in local talent shows and musical theatre. After graduating (1999) from Chicago’s Dunbar Vocational Career Academy, Hudson attended Langston (Oklahoma) University. In 2001 she transferred to Kennedy-King College in Chicago to study music and appeared in a local musical production of Big River. Hudson then landed her first professional singing job on a Disney cruise ship as Calliope, the head Greek muse, in a 2003 production of Hercules: The Musical. Rather than renew her contract with Disney, Hudson decided to audition for American Idol, where she reached the final rounds before being eliminated in seventh place. After fulfilling her obligation to perform with the American Idol: Season Three tour during the summer of 2004, Hudson performed at charity events on Broadway and completed a concert tour throughout the Midwest.
During the summer of 2005, Hudson auditioned for Dreamgirls, a musical set in the Motown era that documented the rise and fall of a girl group. She beat out more than 780 competitors, including third-season American Idol winner Fantasia Barrino, to secure the role. Hudson’s powerful performance of the song “And I Am Telling You I’m Not Going” brought audiences to their feet in movie theatres across the country. Aside from her Academy Award, she received a Golden Globe Award, a Screen Actors Guild Award, the Sammy Davis Jr. Award for entertainer of the year, and a British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) Award.
In 2008 Hudson released her eponymous debut album and sang the national anthem at the Democratic National Convention at Barack Obama’s request. That year she also appeared in the film sequel to the hit HBO show Sex and the City and in The Secret Life of Bees, alongside Queen Latifah. Despite widespread career success, Hudson’s year took a tragic turn when her mother, brother, and nephew were found murdered in Chicago in October. She tearfully paid tribute to them in February 2009 when she accepted the Grammy Award for best rhythm and blues album. In May 2012 a jury returned a guilty verdict against the accused killer.
Hudson was acclaimed for the vocal work on her sophomore album, I Remember Me (2011), and on her 2014 follow-up, JHUD. She continued to act as well, appearing as a single mother in the film adaptation Black Nativity (2013), based on the stage musical by Langston Hughes; as a woman whose daughter is killed in a gang shooting in Spike Lee’s Chi-Raq (2015); and as Angela Wright, a woman who claimed to have been sexually harassed by U.S. Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, in the HBO TV film Confirmation (2016). In 2015 Hudson made her Broadway debut in a stage adaptation of Alice Walker’s The Color Purple and earned acclaim for her portrayal of blues singer Shug Avery; she garnered a Grammy Award for the resulting soundtrack album.
Hudson’s credits in 2016 included the animated family comedy Sing, in which she provided the voice of a sheep, and the live telecast of the musical Hairspray Live!, in which she portrayed Motormouth Maybelle. She performed (2017–18) as a coach on the television singing competition The Voice UK, and she was also a coach on the 13th season of the American edition of The Voice in 2017 and again on the 15th season in 2018. During this time she also appeared in the films All Rise (2018) and Cats (2019), the latter of which is an adaptation of Andrew Lloyd Webber’s blockbuster stage musical. In 2021 Hudson starred as legendary soul singer Aretha Franklin in the biopic Respect.
Hudson was a spokeswoman for the weight-loss guidance service Weight Watchers from 2010 to 2014. She claimed to have shed some 80 pounds by using the company’s plan. The book I Got This: How I Changed My Ways and Lost What Weighed Me Down (2012) documented her weight-loss struggle.
