Johnny Mathis, byname of John Royce Mathis,  (born September 30, 1935, Gilmer, Texas, U.S.), American pop singer who achieved wide and enduring popularity as an angelic-voiced crooner of romantic ballads. He was perhaps best known for his affecting rendition of the Erroll Garner composition “Misty” (1959).
Mathis grew up in a large working-class family in San Francisco. He developed an appreciation of music from his father, a former vaudeville performer, and, as a child, he sang regularly in church and at school events. From age 13 he also took vocal lessons, which provided him with a classical foundation for his burgeoning talent. Mathis meanwhile excelled at high-school sports and earned an athletic scholarship to San Francisco State College (now San Francisco State University). While in college he began singing at local jazz clubs, through which he attracted the attention of a Columbia Records representative. Although his skill at the high jump earned him an invitation to attend trials for the 1956 Olympic Games, Mathis decided instead to pursue a musical career with Columbia, and he left school without graduating.
Mathis’s first recording, Johnny Mathis: A New Sound in Popular Song (1956), was in a jazz vein, with arrangements by Gil Evans and others. It failed to make an impression with audiences, however, and Columbia executive and producer Mitch Miller subsequently rebranded Mathis as a pop balladeer. The switch proved beneficial, as the singer soon generated a string of hits, beginning with the lushly orchestrated “Wonderful! Wonderful!” (1956). The dreamily romantic tunes “It’s Not for Me to Say” (1957) and “Chances Are” (1957) further highlighted his smooth and precisely controlled tenor. Mathis found additional success with the albums Johnny’s Greatest Hits (1958)—believed to be the first-ever compilation of an artist’s previously released hit singles—and the holiday-themed Merry Christmas (1958), both of which sold steadily for years after their release. In the late 1950s he also recorded songs for several movies.
In 1964 Mathis founded his own management and production company, Rojon Productions. As the traditional pop standards and show tunes that dominated his early albums waned in popularity, he expanded his easy-listening repertoire with songs by such contemporary hit makers as the Beatles, Burt Bacharach, and Antônio Carlos Jobim. With the album I’m Coming Home (1973), Mathis also began to dabble in soul music. By then his most commercially successful days were behind him, although he scored a surprise number-one hit with “Too Much, Too Little, Too Late” (1978), a duet with rhythm-and-blues singer Deniece Williams. Additional duets with Williams followed, as well as with other performers, including Dionne Warwick and Gladys Knight.
Greatly admired for his professionalism, Mathis performed and recorded regularly into the 21st century, his later albums ranging from the Henry Mancini collaboration The Hollywood Musicals (1986) and the Duke Ellington tribute In a Sentimental Mood (1990) to Let It Be Me: Mathis in Nashville (2010), a collection of mellow country songs, and Johnny Mathis Sings the Great New American Songbook (2017), on which he covered popular hits of the 1990s and 2000s. Apart from several in the mid-1960s, all his albums (some 100) were released by Columbia. Among Mathis’s numerous honours was a Lifetime Achievement Award (2003) from the Recording Academy.
