Jonas Brothers,  American soft-rock band noted for its combination of optimism, catchy tunes, and cover-boy good looks. The members were Paul Kevin Jonas II (b. November 5, 1987, Teaneck, New Jersey, U.S.), Joseph (“Joe”) Adam Jonas (b. August 15, 1989, Casa Grande, Arizona), and Nicholas (“Nick”) Jerry Jonas (b. September 16, 1992, Dallas, Texas).
The three brothers were raised in a musical family and imbued with a strong sense of Christian values, notably by their father, an Assembly of God minister. Family sing-alongs in their New Jersey home set the stage for Nick’s precocious performances on Broadway beginning at the age of six. In 2004 he released a Christian-themed solo album. The pleasure of making music together prompted the brothers to form a band, with Kevin and Nick on guitar (with keyboard work mixed in) while Nick and Joe shared the lead vocal chores. Their first album, It’s About Time (2006), featured songs cowritten by Desmond Child and pop star Adam Schlesinger of the band Fountains of Wayne. Although it was given only a limited marketing push, the album sold 62,000 copies; still, the label dropped the band.
Early in 2007 the Jonas Brothers signed with Disney’s Hollywood Records, releasing a self-titled album that entered the charts at number five and, propelled by hits such as “S.O.S.,” went platinum. The brothers also began appearing regularly on the Disney Channel, most notably in a highly watched 2007 episode of the Miley Cyrus vehicle Hannah Montana. The Jonas Brothers then opened for Cyrus on her “Best of Both Worlds” tour. Their music videos became Disney Channel staples, and they starred in a reality program, Jonas Brothers: Living the Dream, but their real breakthrough followed their appearance in the Disney movie musical Camp Rock, in which Joe played the romantic lead. The brothers were the darlings of “tweenage” (preteen and young teenage) consumers, and in 2008 they became a pop-culture phenomenon with the release of A Little Bit Longer, which featured many songs written by Nick. The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart, and that year the brothers undertook their own tour, which was filmed for the documentary Jonas Brothers: The 3D Concert Experience (2009). In July 2008 they appeared on the cover of Rolling Stone magazine as rock critics began acknowledging that the brothers’ brand of romantic pop rock was more treat than treacle.
Less than a year after A Little Bit Longer, the group released the album Lines, Vines and Trying Times (2009), which offered a more mature sound. Nick then recorded a soul-influenced solo effort, Who I Am (2010), under the name Nick Jonas and the Administration. In 2009–10 the Jonas brothers starred in a new Disney series, JONAS (later JONAS L.A.). The half-hour show (in the vein of the Monkees’ eponymous television series) featured Kevin, Nick, and Joe as the fictional Lucas brothers, pop stars who are also high school students. They also appeared in Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam (2010).
The band subsequently went on hiatus, and the brothers focused on side projects. Nick took several acting roles, and Joe released the solo album Fastlife (2011). The reality show Married to Jonas, starring Kevin and his wife, Danielle, aired in 2012–13. In October the brothers performed a reunion concert, and they subsequently staged a world tour in 2012–13. A new single, “Pom Poms,” was released in April 2013, as the lead single from the planned fifth studio album, V. A tour was scheduled to start later that year, but it was canceled shortly before the first show, and in October 2013 the brothers announced that the band had broken up.
Each brother subsequently worked on various projects. In 2015 Joe formed DNCE, and the dance-rock band released an eponymous album the following year. Nick continued to pursue a solo career, releasing such albums as Last Year Was Complicated (2016), while Kevin was involved in several business ventures. The brothers’ personal lives also made news. In 2018 Nick married Indian actress Priyanka Chopra, and the following year Joe wed British actress Sophie Turner.
In 2019, more than five years after the Jonas Brothers broke up, the trio announced that they had reunited, and soon thereafter they released the single “Sucker.” The song debuted atop the Billboard Hot 100 chart, and the album Happiness Begins (2019) topped the albums chart. Its popularity was aided by the release of the biographical documentary Chasing Happiness (2019).
