Joni Sledge, in full Joan Elise Sledge,  (born September 13, 1956, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, U.S.—died March 10, 2017, Phoenix, Arizona), American singer who was a member, with her sisters Debbie, Kim, and Kathy, of the R&B group Sister Sledge, best known for its smash 1979 disco hit “We Are Family.”
Sledge’s parents were performers, and the sisters were taught to sing by their maternal grandmother, an opera singer. They performed in churches as children under the billing Mrs. Williams’ Grandchildren. They made their recording debut (as Sisters Sledge) in 1971, when they ranged in age from 16 to 12, with the single “Time Will Tell.” They had assumed the name Sister Sledge by the time that their next two songs, “Weatherman” (1972) and “Mama Never Told Me” (1973), were recorded. In 1974 Sister Sledge issued its debut album, Circle of Love, and the song “Love, Don’t You Go Through No Changes on Me” was its first hit. That album was particularly well received in Japan. The next release, Together (1977), yielded the minor success “Blockbuster Boy.”
The group’s career appeared to stall after that, however, until the producers Nile Rodgers and Bernard Edwards took Sister Sledge under their wings. Rodgers and Edwards wrote and produced the smash hit album We Are Family (1979). The first single from that album, “He’s the Greatest Dancer,” topped the Billboard R&B chart. The title song also achieved that feat and reached the number-two spot on the pop chart. “We Are Family” remained an R&B staple and was used as a theme song for Major League Baseball’s Pittsburgh Pirates during their 1979 championship run. It later became an anthem for both feminist and gay rights groups. Another single from the album, “Lost in Music,” was a British hit. Rodgers and Edwards also produced Love Somebody Today (1980), with its R&B hit “Got to Love Somebody.”
Sister Sledge had more hits in the early 1980s, including the title song of All American Girls (1981) and a 1982 cover of the Mary Wells song “My Guy.” Several songs on those and subsequent albums were written by Joni Sledge. In 1985 the Sister Sledge single “Frankie,” a minor R&B hit in the United States, was a number-one pop hit in the U.K. Kathy Sledge left the group in 1989, but Joni and her other sisters continued to tour and record as Sister Sledge.
