Justin Timberlake, in full Justin Randall Timberlake,  (born January 31, 1981, Memphis, Tennessee, U.S.), American singer and actor who achieved fame as a member of the hugely successful “boy band” *NSYNC before establishing a career as a solo performer.
Along with Britney Spears, Christina Aguilera, and future *NSYNC member J.C. Chasez, Timberlake launched his performing career in the late 1980s on the Disney Channel’s The New Mickey Mouse Club. In 1996 he and Chasez were recruited for the male pop vocal quintet *NSYNC. The group’s self-titled debut, released in 1998, did well commercially after a slow start, and their second effort, No Strings Attached (2000), became one of the fastest-selling albums in history, selling more than 14 million copies and featuring a string of hits, including the chart-topping “It’s Gonna Be Me.” Timberlake began his solo recording career in 2001 after the release of *NSYNC’s third album.
During his tenure with *NSYNC, Timberlake had cultivated his role as a songwriter, and his breakup with longtime love interest Spears provided the inspiration for a number of songs on his Grammy Award-winning (best pop vocal album) solo debut, Justified (2002), most notably “Cry Me a River” (best male pop vocal performance). In 2003 Timberlake was a guest performer on the Black Eyed Peas’ hit “Where Is the Love?” During the halftime performance of the 2004 Super Bowl, Timberlake was involved in a notorious “wardrobe malfunction” when by design he pulled off part of costar Janet Jackson’s top. His second solo release, the Prince-influenced FutureSex/LoveSounds (2006), featured production work by Timbaland and Rick Rubin and earned four Grammy Awards, including best dance recording for “SexyBack.” Timberlake was not always treated kindly by critics, but few would argue that his solo work, solidly in the vein of rhythm and blues (R&B) and blue-eyed soul, had not transcended his bubblegum dance-pop origins, and he sold millions of recordings in the process.
Having earned a reputation as an affable and versatile entertainer, Timberlake began to act in films. His first substantial roles were in the gritty dramas Alpha Dog (2006) and Black Snake Moan (2006). In 2010 he earned accolades for his portrayal of Internet entrepreneur Sean Parker, the cofounder of Napster and the founding president of Facebook, in The Social Network, a fictionalized account of Facebook’s origins. The same year, he provided the voice of Yogi Bear’s diminutive sidekick Boo Boo in Yogi Bear, a movie adaptation of the classic TV cartoon.
Timberlake subsequently starred in the racy romantic comedy Friends with Benefits (2011), the sci-fi thriller In Time (2011), and the online-gambling drama Runner Runner (2013). In addition, he took supporting roles in Bad Teacher (2011), Trouble with the Curve (2012), and Inside Llewyn Davis (2013). For the animated film Trolls (2016), he provided the voice of Branch, one of the title characters, and cowrote the Oscar-nominated song “Can’t Stop the Feeling!”; he reprised the role in Trolls World Tour (2020) and collaborated on several of the film’s songs. In Woody Allen’s Wonder Wheel (2017), Timberlake portrayed a lifeguard on Coney Island during the 1950s who wants to become a playwright. In Palmer (2021) he starred as an ex-convict who befriends a gender-nonconforming boy. Timberlake gained additional notice for his frequent appearances on the television sketch-comedy show Saturday Night Live.
As Timberlake’s focus remained on acting, his future in music became, for his fans, a subject of anxious speculation. In 2013, however, he mounted a comeback with The 20/20 Experience, a pair of luxuriant song suites that were recorded in collaboration with Timbaland and released six months apart. Boasting both contemporary electronic production and nods toward old-fashioned R&B, The 20/20 Experience found Timberlake sounding relaxed and romantic, particularly on singles such as “Mirrors.” The first volume sold nearly one million copies in the United States in its initial week of release, and each of the two albums (which were also sold as a single package) topped the Billboard album chart. The first album yielded two more Grammys, including best R&B song for “Pusher Love Girl.” In 2018 Timberlake returned to the Super Bowl halftime show in a performance that coincided with the release of the country-inflected Man of the Woods.
In addition to performing, Timberlake embarked on several business ventures. Notably, he took a minority stake in the advertising group Specific Media when it acquired the social networking site Myspace in 2011. Serving as a creative consultant for the company, he helped repurpose Myspace, which had conceded the majority of its former market to Facebook, as a community for musicians and their fans.
