Kaifi Azmi, original name Syed Athar Hussain Rizvi,  (born c. 1919, Mizwan, Azamgarh, United Provinces, British India [now Uttar Pradesh, India]—died May 10, 2002, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India), one of the most renowned Indian poets of the 20th century, who sought to inspire social change through his passionate Urdu-language verse. He was also a noted lyricist for some of Bollywood’s best-known films. His cinematic work, though not extensive, is regarded as timeless for its touching simplicity, eternal optimism, and lyrical grace.
Though Azmi belonged to a landed family, he was drawn, from an early age, to communism. His family wanted him to become a cleric, and he was enrolled in a seminary. However, he gave up formal education in the wake of the Quit India movement (in which Mohandas Gandhi urged the British to “quit [leave] India”) and joined the Communist Party of India.
Azmi moved to Bombay (now Mumbai) in 1943 to work as a trade unionist and write for the party’s Urdu papers, including Qaumi Jung (“People’s War”). He also published his first volume of poetry, Jhankar, that year. During this period he became closely associated with the Progressive Writers Association and the Indian Peoples’ Theatre Association, and he even acted in plays with other leftists such as the actor Balraj Sahni (1913–73).
Financial need led Azmi to write the lyrics for some of the songs in Shaheed Latif’s Buzdil (1951; “Coward”). He is best remembered for several classic songs he wrote subsequently, notably “Waqt ne kiya kya haseen sitam” (Kaagaj ke Phool, 1959), “Dhire dhire machal” (Anupama, 1966), “Chalte chalte yun hi koi” (Pakeezah, 1971), and “Koi ye kaise bataye” (Arth, 1982).
Azmi’s best-known writing for films is the critically acclaimed Garam Hawa (1974; “Scorching Winds”), directed by M.S. Satyu. That film, based on an unpublished story by Ismat Chughtai and starring Balraj Sahni in what is considered to be one of his best roles, won Azmi awards for best story (shared with Chughtai), best screenplay (shared with Shama Zaidi), and best dialogue. Azmi himself had a major role in Saeed Akhtar Mirza’s award-winning film Naseem (1995; “Morning Breeze”), a powerful tale of a Muslim family’s fears as they witness the communal frenzy in the days before the demolition in 1992 of Ayodhya’s Babri Masjid (built in the 16th century by the Mughal emperor Babur). His daughter Shabana Azmi was a leading actress of what is called the Indian New Wave, or Parallel Cinema (comprising art films that treat serious issues), at the end of the 20th and the beginning of the 21st century.
Among Azmi’s many awards were the Padma Shri (1974), one of India’s highest civilian honours, and the Sahitya Akademi Award (1975), from India’s national academy of letters, for his poetry anthology Awara Sajde. In April 2002, shortly before his death, he was awarded the Sahitya Akademi fellowship, India’s highest literary honour.
