K’Naan, byname of Keinan Abdi Warsame,  (born 1978, Mogadishu, Somalia), Somali-born Canadian hip-hop musician of the early 21st century whose brightly melodic songs and clever socially conscious lyrics demonstrated international appeal and made him an ambassador for the plight of his homeland.
K’Naan grew up in Mogadishu in an artistic family—his grandfather was a celebrated poet and his aunt a popular singer—and, as a child, he too displayed a gift for reciting verse. He became drawn to American hip-hop after his father, who was living in New York City, sent him records, and he later taught himself English in part by phonetically imitating the rap songs he admired. When civil war broke out in Somalia in 1991, he fled with his mother and two siblings, settling first in New York City, where he reconnected with his father, and then in a community of Somali immigrants in Toronto.
As a teenager, K’Naan began to write songs to help him process the turmoil he experienced in Mogadishu. After dropping out of school in 10th grade, he honed his performance skills at open-mic nights in Toronto and contributed poems to Somali Web sites. Eventually, he attracted a manager, who secured him an opportunity to participate in an event in Geneva in 2000 marking the 50th anniversary of the creation of the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. K’Naan’s impassioned spoken-word performance, which openly criticized the UN’s involvement in the Somali civil war, received a standing ovation. It also captured the attention of Senegalese singer Youssou N’Dour, who invited him to appear on the album Building Bridges (2001), a compilation of songs by musicians living in exile.
In 2005 K’Naan released The Dusty Foot Philosopher, a rap album that fused traditional African instrumentation to the familiar structures of American hip-hop. Among its standout tracks, “Soobax” (Somali: “Come Out”) was a direct challenge to the warlords of his native land, rapped and sung in a mix of English and Somali, and “What’s Hardcore?” was a withering commentary on the macho pretenses of some gangsta rappers. Critics lauded K’Naan’s lyrical playfulness and political engagement, and the album won a Juno Award in Canada for best rap recording.
After putting out a live recording, The Dusty Foot on the Road (2007), K’Naan expanded his audience with Troubadour (2009). The album, recorded in Jamaica at studios that once belonged to Bob Marley, was another globally inspired concoction, featuring elements of reggae and Ethiopian jazz beneath K’Naan’s ebullient rhymes. Though some critics felt that the record was unfocused because of a surfeit of prominent guest stars, many saw it as K’Naan’s most accessible work. In 2010 the determinedly optimistic track “Wavin’ Flag,” already a hit in Canada, was remade as a celebrity-studded charity single to benefit victims of the January earthquake in Haiti. Another version of the song, a remix by K’Naan, became the official anthem of Coca-Cola’s 2010 World Cup campaign. Amid such popularity, it was little surprise when in April he won two more Juno Awards, for artist of the year and songwriter of the year.
K’Naan returned in 2012 with the five-track More Beautiful Than Silence. Also that year he made his film debut, as a Sufi rap star in David Cronenberg’s thriller Cosmopolis. After 2012 K’Naan focused on collaborations. He contributed to The Hamilton Mixtape (2016), a collection of new versions of songs from the blockbuster musical Hamilton, and remained active in the Somali community in Canada.
