Kylie Minogue, in full Kylie Ann Minogue,  (born May 28, 1968, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia), Australian singer who in the late 1980s became a pop superstar in Australia and Europe and who continued to enjoy success into the 21st century.
Minogue, who had been acting since she was a child, first garnered fame in Australia and Great Britain for her role (1986–88) on the popular soap opera Neighbours. She subsequently left television for a singing career, making her recording debut in 1988 with the album Kylie—as part of the London hit factory Stock, Aitken & Waterman—and registering her first number one single, “I Should Be So Lucky.” Her cover of Little Eva’s “The Loco-Motion” introduced her to an American audience, although she would not return to the top 10 of the Billboard pop singles chart for another 14 years. With media savvy and a strong work ethic, the diminutive Minogue saw her career skyrocket in Europe. Her attractive appearance sparked further publicity, and she soon became a favourite of the tabloids.
After parting with Stock, Aitken & Waterman in the early 1990s, Minogue broadened her image, in part by cultivating an edgy look and recording with rock musicians such as Nick Cave. Such experimentation proved only sporadically successful, however, and she returned to traditional dance-pop on the album Light Years (2000), which boasted such hits as “Spinning Around.” Minogue continued in that vein the following year with Fever (2001). On the strength of its sultry single “Can’t Get You Out of My Head,” which went to number one in multiple countries (and to number seven in the United States), the album became an international blockbuster. The release of Body Language (2003) extended her renewed popularity, and in 2004 she won her first Grammy Award, for best dance recording, with the single “Come into My World.”
In 2005 Minogue announced that she had been diagnosed with breast cancer. She subsequently underwent surgery, and, after a recovery period of more than a year, she began touring again in late 2006. Her subsequent albums included X (2007) and Aphrodite (2010), on which disco and electro-pop remained prominent elements of her sound. Kiss Me Once (2014) featured songs written and produced by Pharrell Williams and Sia, among others, and Golden (2018) was flavoured with country music. Minogue returned to dance-pop for DISCO (2020), and with that release she became the first female artist to reach the top position on the British album chart in each of five consecutive decades.
Periodically throughout her musical career, Minogue continued to act. Notable film credits included Street Fighter (1994), Moulin Rouge! (2001), Holy Motors (2012), and San Andreas (2015). She was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 2008, and three years later she was inducted into the Australia Recording Industry Association (ARIA) Hall of Fame.
