Lucinda Williams,  (born January 26, 1953, Lake Charles, Louisiana, U.S.), American singer and songwriter who received critical acclaim for her label-defying music, which ranged from folk to country to rock.
Williams, whose father was the poet Miller Williams, began writing songs after borrowing a guitar at age 12. She later studied guitar and then voice, but she never learned to read music. Early musical influences included Joni Mitchell, Joan Baez, and especially Bob Dylan. Miller Williams introduced his daughter to some of his friends, among them the notable writers Allen Ginsberg, Flannery O’Connor, and James Dickey; this exposure strongly influenced her lyrics.
In 1979, having built a solid foundation of live performance, Williams recorded Ramblin’ on My Mind, an album of folk, country, and blues standards that was reissued in 1991 as Ramblin’. She recorded only original songs for her next effort, Happy Woman Blues (1980); neither album drew much attention. Williams began working with a series of record labels, none of them for long; major labels proved incompatible with her perfectionism, and several minor labels that she worked with went out of business.
Her big break came in 1988 with the release of Lucinda Williams. Widely hailed as a classic, it revealed her growing confidence as a songwriter. The emotional intensity of the songs was underscored by Williams’s rough-edged singing, which, though lacking in range, resonated with both vulnerability and power. Sweet Old World, a folk-infused collection that included songs of suicide and regret, came out in 1992. That same year, Mary Chapin Carpenter covered Williams’s “Passionate Kisses,” a single from her self-titled album. Carpenter’s version earned Williams a Grammy Award for country song of the year.
Williams’s legendary perfectionism was evident during the recording of her fifth album, Car Wheels on a Gravel Road. Her initial unhappiness with the work led to a number of delays, and it was not released until 1998. The album brought Williams her first real commercial success. Universally acclaimed, Car Wheels on a Gravel Road also won a Grammy for best contemporary folk album. In 2001 she released the understated Essence. It featured the song “Get Right with God,” which earned Williams a Grammy for best female rock vocal. World Without Tears (2003) was her first album to debut in the top 20 of Billboard’s Top 200 albums chart.
With the enthusiastic reception in 2007 of the hit album West, Williams seemed to have finally earned the high level of commercial success that many believed she deserved. It was followed by Little Honey (2008) and Blessed (2011), both of which also found acclaim. In 2014 Williams resolved her problems working with commercial record labels by founding her own label, Highway 20 Records, and that same year she released the double album Down Where the Spirit Meets the Bone. A second double album, The Ghosts of Highway 20, appeared in 2016. She reworked the songs of Sweet Old World to good effect for This Sweet Old World (2017). The unsparing Good Souls Better Angels (2020) focused on politics with righteous anger and was generally praised.
