Mary J. Blige , in full Mary Jane Blige,  (born January 11, 1971, Bronx, New York, U.S.), American singer-songwriter and actress who has been called the Queen of Hip-Hop Soul.
Blige’s childhood was divided between Savannah, Georgia, and a housing project in Yonkers, New York. Her early musical influences included singing in a Pentecostal church and listening to her mother’s collection of soul records. When a recording of the 17-year-old Blige singing Anita Baker’s “Caught Up in the Rapture” (made in a karaoke booth in a local shopping mall) came to the attention of Uptown Records in 1988, the rhythm-and-blues label put Blige, who had dropped out of high school, under contract. She sang backup for various artists until the 1992 release of her first solo album, What’s the 411?, produced primarily by rapper Sean (“Puffy”) Combs (Diddy). That album revealed the pain of Blige’s childhood while presenting a unique sound that mixed classic soul with hip-hop and urban contemporary rhythm and blues, redefining soul music and influencing a generation of artists.
Blige’s glamorous but street-tough image softened over time. However, her music remained personal, emotional, and spiritual. Among Blige’s host of hit singles were “Be Without You” (1994), “Not Gon’ Cry” (1996), and “Take Me As I Am” (2005). Her hit albums included Share My World (1997) and Growing Pains (2007), both of which reached number one on the Billboard charts, and No More Drama (2001), Blige’s fifth album, which presented an artist who is happy with the woman she has become. Her 2006 release, Reflections (2006), provided a retrospective of her work.
Blige’s 2008 tour with Jay-Z made her one of hip-hop’s top-grossing live acts, and the following year she won a Grammy Award for best contemporary rhythm and blues album—her ninth total career Grammy—for Growing Pains. Stronger with Each Tear (2009) was criticized for its overreliance on guest vocalists and Auto-Tune technology, but Blige rebounded in convincing fashion with My Life II…The Journey Continues (Act I) (2011), which played to her strengths, balancing soulful ballads with infectious dance tunes that recalled her earliest hits. An album of Christmas standards, A Mary Christmas, appeared in 2013. The following year she released the soundtrack for the comedy Think Like a Man Too and The London Sessions, the latter of which featured collaborations with several British producers and musicians, including Sam Smith, Naughty Boy, and the duo Disclosure. The critically acclaimed Strength of a Woman (2017) was inspired by Blige’s acrimonious breakup with her husband and manager, Kendu Isaacs.
Blige forayed into acting, making guest appearances on several television shows and taking supporting roles in such films as Rock of Ages (2012), Black Nativity (2013), and Mudbound (2017). For her work in the latter movie, a drama about racism in 1940s Mississippi, Blige earned an Academy Award nomination for best supporting actress. In addition, “Mighty River,” which she cowrote and sang for the film’s soundtrack, received an Oscar nod. She later lent her voice to the animated feature Sherlock Gnomes (2018) and Trolls World Tour (2020). Her other credits from 2020 included the horror thriller Body Cam, in which she played a police officer. During this time she also had recurring roles on such TV shows as Scream and The Umbrella Academy. In Power Book II: Ghost(2020– ), a spin-off of the popular crime drama Power, Blige played a drug “queenpin.”
