Missy Elliott, original name Melissa Arnette Elliott, byname Missy Misdemeanor,  (born July 1, 1971, Portsmouth, Virginia, U.S.), American rapper and music producer who made a mark on the male-dominated hip-hop world with her talents for writing, rapping, singing, and music production.
From an early age, Elliott demonstrated a knack for performance, and her big break came in 1991 when Jodeci band member DeVante Swing signed Elliott’s group, Sista, to his Swing Mob Records label. Lack of funds prevented the release of Sista’s debut album, however, and the group subsequently broke up. Elliott teamed up with childhood friend Timbaland to cowrite and coproduce songs for the American rhythm-and-blues artists Jodeci and Aaliyah. Elliott was only 25 years old when the head of the Elektra Entertainment Group offered her a deal that would enable her to write, produce, and record music under the umbrella of her own Gold Mind record label.
Elliott’s first album, Supa Dupa Fly (1997), went platinum and was nominated for a Grammy Award, and her follow-up, Da Real World (1999), spent almost a year on the Billboard rhythm-and-blues chart. Miss E…So Addictive (2001) featured the crossover dance track “Get Ur Freak On,” and the album won Elliott her first two Grammy Awards. She won a third Grammy for “Work It,” a single from her 2002 album Under Construction. Her fifth studio album, This Is Not a Test! (2003), included features by rappers Jay-Z and Nelly as well as an appearance by Mary J. Blige, but it did not produce hits as her others had. Her 2005 album, The Cookbook, contained the Grammy-winning single “Lose Control.” Elliott subsequently recorded several singles and appeared on other musicians’ tracks. In 2019 she released her first album in 14 years, the five-song EP Iconology.
In addition to her four Grammy wins, Elliott collected the Black Entertainment Television (BET) Award for best female hip-hop artist numerous times, and her music videos earned her accolades as well as a regular presence on MTV.
