Nine Inch Nails,  American alternative rock act known for dark and tortured industrial rock songs. Nine Inch Nails was essentially a stage name for singer and multi-instrumentalist Trent Reznor (b. Michael Trent Reznor, May 17, 1965, Mercer, Pennsylvania, U.S.).
Nine Inch Nails began in Cleveland in 1988 while Reznor was working at a recording studio. He wrote, arranged, performed, and produced the majority of the material, bringing in other musicians for live performances. The band quickly gained popularity with its debut release, Pretty Hate Machine (1989), which eventually sold more than three million copies in the United States and signaled a breakthrough into the American mainstream for industrial music. After a drawn-out legal battle with his recording company, TVT, Reznor set up his own label, Nothing Records, and released the EP Broken (1992), which earned a Grammy Award. Reznor signed glam shock rocker Marilyn Manson to the Nothing label, and the two fed on each other’s successes throughout the 1990s.
Reznor’s second full-length release, The Downward Spiral (1994), bowed at number two on the Billboard album chart. On the strength of such singles as “Closer” and “Hurt,” the album soon surpassed the band’s debut in sales. (An emotional acoustic version of “Hurt” later became a surprise hit for country legend Johnny Cash.) Nine Inch Nails appeared as a headliner at the 1994 Woodstock festival, and “Happiness in Slavery,” a single recorded at that performance, earned Reznor a second Grammy. In 1995 Nine Inch Nails opened for David Bowie on his North American tour, but a new album was slow to follow, and much of Reznor’s time was spent in the production studio with label mate Marilyn Manson.
The double album The Fragile appeared in 1999—hitting the top of the charts in its first week of release—but it faded quickly when no clear singles emerged. With Teeth (2005) also went to number one, and its industrial dance-floor anthems signaled a return to the sound of The Downward Spiral. Given the half-decade wait between previous Nine Inch Nails releases, a veritable flurry of activity followed. The concept album Year Zero (2007) was accompanied by an ambitious viral marketing campaign, and instrumental samples used in its creation were collected in Ghosts I–IV (2008). Having become dissatisfied with the traditional music-distribution model, Reznor released both Ghosts I–IV and the song-oriented The Slip (2008) as free digital downloads from the Nine Inch Nails Web site. He returned to a major record label, however, for Hesitation Marks (2013), on which he continued to build dynamic songs from tense textured grooves. Nine Inch Nails later dropped the EP Not the Actual Events (2016), praised as a return to form. It was followed by Add Violence (2017) and Bad Witch (2018). In 2020 the band released Ghosts VI: Locusts and Ghosts V: Together. That year Nine Inch Nails was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.
In addition to his work with Nine Inch Nails, Reznor pursued a number of side projects. During a hiatus that followed the band’s 2009 concert tour, he formed the electronic group How to Destroy Angels, the members of which included vocalist and multi-instrumentalist Mariqueen Maandig (whom Reznor married in 2009) and British musician Atticus Ross. That band released the album Welcome Oblivion in 2013, and three years later Reznor announced that Ross was a member of Nine Inch Nails.
In collaboration with Ross, Reznor also began to compose for motion pictures. Their music for The Social Network (2010) won the Academy Award for best original score, and their work on The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo (2011) was honoured with a Grammy. Their score for Gone Girl (2015) was also nominated for a Grammy. The pair later provided the music for the climate-change documentary Before the Flood and the thriller Patriots Day (both 2016) as well as for the 2017 Ken Burns documentary series The Vietnam War. For the animated film Soul (2020), Reznor and Ross collaborated with Jon Batiste on the score, which won an Oscar.
