Puffy AmiYumi,  Japanese popular music (commonly called J-pop) group that skyrocketed to stardom in Japan in the mid-1990s and later helped to establish J-pop in the Western world. The group’s two lead singers—Ami Onuki (b. September 18, 1973, Tokyo, Japan) and Yumi Yoshimura (b. January 30, 1975, Osaka, Japan)—captured their audiences through their well-blended voices, their intelligent lyrics and novel musical arrangements, and their vibrant, youthful stage presence.
Puffy AmiYumi was formed in 1995 when the Sony Corporation began a talent search for two appealing young women to form a pop duo that would be a hit with schoolgirls. Tokyo native Ami Onuki was selected after she submitted a demo tape in response to an advertisement. Yumi Yoshimura of Osaka was discovered by a talent agency. The two had a unique chemistry from the start, both personally and vocally. Both women credited Okuda Tamio, a respected Japanese singer-songwriter and producer, for mentoring them through the early stages of their joint career. In 1996 they released their first single, “Asia no junshin” (“True Asia”), which was a huge hit throughout Asia. The single was soon followed by their debut album, AmiYumi.
Their next five albums expanded their audience and the range of their music. They collaborated with other pop musicians to create a jangly sound that freely melded with other styles, including country, hard rock, and bossa nova. In their first five years, they sold more than 14 million CDs in Japan alone. Their albums Jet CD (1998) and Fever Fever (1999) were regarded as J-pop classics.
Puffy AmiYumi made its first venture into the North American market in 2001 with the album Spike. The band got airtime on college radio stations and appeared at popular alternative music venues in big cities. Five years and three albums later, the group was still tremendously popular in Asia and was picking up momentum in the United States. Puffy AmiYumi also saw its musical popularity translate into success on television and in fashion. The Pa-Pa-Pa-Pa-Puffy variety show appeared on Japanese television from 1997 to 2002; the animated series Hi Hi Puffy AmiYumi could be seen on American cable television from 2004 to 2006; and Hi Hi PUFFY Club aired on TV in 2006. In addition, Puffy AmiYumi contributed the theme music for the animated superhero series Teen Titans, and the music was remixed for Teen Titans Go!. The group also had a line of merchandise that included toys, shoes, and clothing.
In 2006 Puffy AmiYumi celebrated a decade of success by kicking off an international concert tour and releasing the album Splurge. With what seemed an ever-expanding fan base, the duo subsequently recorded more albums, including Hit & Fun (2007), Honeycreeper (2007), Puffy AmiYumi X Puffy (2009), Bring It! (2009), and Thank You (2011).
