Roberto Carlos, in full Roberto Carlos Braga,  (born April 19, 1941, Cachoeiro de Itapemirim, Espírito Santo state, Brazil), Brazilian singer-songwriter who was at the forefront of the 1960s rock-and-roll movement in Brazil and later became hugely popular as a performer of romantic ballads and boleros.
Carlos was born into a lower-middle-class family and displayed an early affinity for music, making his vocal debut on a local radio station at age nine. As a teenager he moved to the Rio de Janeiro area and formed a band inspired by the music of such American rock-and-roll progenitors as Elvis Presley and Bill Haley. The band, originally called the Snacks and later the Sputniks, performed on television and at various local celebrations. In 1959 Carlos embarked on a solo career as a bossa nova musician in the vein of the widely popular Brazilian singer João Gilberto. Carlos failed to attain similar commercial success, however, and after releasing his first full-length album, Louco por você (1961; “Crazy for You”), he returned to rock music.
Collaborating with his former bandmate Erasmo Carlos, Roberto recorded covers of American pop hits such as Bobby Darin’s “Splish Splash” as well as original songs cowritten with Erasmo. By 1964, when he released the album É proibido fumar (“No Smoking”), he had become recognized throughout Brazil as the leading exponent of a new musical style known as iê-iê-iê (“yeah-yeah-yeah”), which drew from the stylishly primitive upbeat sound of the Anglo-American rock of that era. Carlos was also, by correlation, the public face of the broader youth-oriented cultural movement known as Jovem Guarda (“Young Guard”), and in 1965 he began cohosting a musical variety TV program by that name. Carlos’s irrepressible popularity—bolstered by a top-selling album, Roberto Carlos canta para a juventude (1965; “Roberto Carlos Sings to the Youth”), and a string of hit songs that tapped into the rebellious zeitgeist—swiftly earned him the nickname “the King.”
Carlos frequently recorded Spanish-language versions of his songs, which became successful in neighbouring Argentina, and beginning in the late 1960s he sought to further expand his audience by adopting a more mature musical style. Still working with Erasmo Carlos, he cowrote and recorded a number of sentimental ballads—including the softly romantic “Detalhes” (1971; “Details”) and the lush “Proposta” (1973; “Proposal”)—that made him an international celebrity. By the late 1970s Carlos had become the best-selling Brazilian musician in history. Often praised for his sensual baritone voice, he won a Grammy Award in 1988 for best Latin pop performance, as well as several Latin Grammys in the early 21st century. By that time he had also sold a total of more than 100 million albums worldwide. Though Carlos slowed down in his later years, in 2009–10 he undertook a tour of North and South America commemorating his 50 years in the music industry.
