Ry Cooder, in full Ryland Peter Cooder,  (born March 15, 1947, Los Angeles, California, U.S.), American guitarist and singer whose influence far outweighed his limited commercial success.
Introduced to the guitar at age three, adept at the instrument by age eight, and a teenage habitué of the Los Angeles blues scene, Cooder formed the Rising Sons with Taj Mahal and played in Captain Beefheart’s Magic Band before setting off on one of the most interesting career journeys of his generation. Having worked occasionally as a session musician in the 1960s, contributing to albums by the Rolling Stones and Randy Newman, he commenced a series of albums under his own name in 1970 for Reprise that amounted to an exploration of American roots music, starting with country, gospel, and blues and moving through jazz and rhythm and blues to Tex-Mex and Hawaiian music. In an era of virtuoso instrumentalists and self-sufficient singer-songwriters, Cooder was preoccupied with subtleties of tone, texture, and feel and mostly recorded other people’s material. Rarely content simply to re-create a past recording, he restlessly searched for new rhythmic arrangements to showcase the emotion, wit, or pathos of each lyric.
His most noteworthy albums were Paradise and Lunch (1974) and Chicken Skin Music (1976), the latter of which helped to introduce the Texas accordion player Flaco Jiménez to an international audience. Despite performing live in support of each album, Cooder never reached beyond a cult audience, and in the 1980s he switched his attention to soundtracks. He composed scores for several Walter Hill films but made the greatest impact in Wim Wenders’s Paris, Texas (1984), the vast panoramas of which provided the perfect visual counterpoint to Cooder’s moody, reverberating slide guitar.
In 1992 he resumed his recording career via collaborations with musicians from other countries. A Meeting by the River with Indian guitarist V.M. Bhatt won a Grammy Award for best world music album of 1993 and was the recording debut of Cooder’s son Joachim as a percussionist. Two years later father and son took part in the Los Angeles recording sessions by Malian guitarist Ali Farka Touré, and the resultant album, Talking Timbuktu, became one of the best-selling world music albums of 1994 and won that year’s Grammy. By that point a substantial audience trusted Cooder’s judgment and skill, and they followed him in even greater numbers when he joined a group of veteran Cuban musicians convened by the British label World Circuit for a week in Havana recording The Buena Vista Social Club (1997).
That album and the subsequent Buena Vista-related releases Buenos Hermanos (2003) and Mambo Sinuendo (2003) earned Cooder a trio of Grammy Awards. He later joined with Irish folk band the Chieftains for San Patricio (2010), which chronicled the exploits of a group of Irish immigrants in the Mexican-American War.
Chávez Ravine (2005) marked Cooder’s first solo album (apart from soundtracks) in nearly two decades. The first part of a trilogy rooted in the cultural history of California, it was followed by the folk-fusion recording My Name Is Buddy (2007) and the colourful I, Flathead (2008), for which Cooder wrote an accompanying novella. His later solo works included Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down (2011) and Election Special (2012), both of which brought a populist sensibility toward topical political matters. Los Angeles Stories, a collection of Cooder’s short fiction, was published in 2011. Two years later he released his second live album, Live in San Francisco, which was recorded with the band Corridos Famosos. The Prodigal Son, a collection of blues and traditional gospel songs, appeared in 2018.
