Southern rock,  popular music style combining blues jams and boogie licks with lyrics declaring fierce regional pride. Its aggressive, unpretentious sound helped revitalize American rock in the 1970s.
Rock and roll had been an expression of popular culture in the American South since the days of Elvis Presley, but it was not until the rise of Phil Walden’s Capricorn Records in the early 1970s that Southernness itself was celebrated as a rock and roll virtue. Walden, who got his start managing Otis Redding, signed the Allman Brothers Band in 1969. Once the Allmans caught on, Walden capitalized on the notion of Southern rock by signing the Marshall Tucker Band, the Elvin Bishop Group, and others. Soon, as groups such as Lynyrd Skynyrd, the Charlie Daniels Band, the Outlaws, and Wet Willie joined the fray, fans began to rally around anthems such as Daniels’s “The South’s Gonna Do It.”
Despite their shared geography and cultural pride, Southern rockers had relatively little in common musically. Extended jamming was a hallmark of the Allman Brothers, whose attention to groove gave their instrumental extrapolations a coherence sorely lacking in the equally improvisatory psychedelic rock of the era. Moreover, the Allmans’ disciplined twin-guitar leads and double-drummer rhythm section added impact to the playing. By contrast, Lynyrd Skynyrd—which boasted a triple-lead guitar lineup—went for a gritty, blues-based sound that was closer in spirit to that of the Rolling Stones, while other guitar-heavy bands, such as .38 Special, Molly Hatchet, and the Outlaws, amplified and fetishized the boogie-guitar approach of bluesmen Elmore James and John Lee Hooker. The Marshall Tucker Band drew from western swing, Wet Willie borrowed from soul, and the Atlanta Rhythm Section leaned toward country. A few acts, such as Sea Level and the Dixie Dregs, even flirted with jazz-rock.
Although many of the bands continued on, the Southern rock movement ran out of steam by the early 1980s. Later in the decade, as alternative rock bands such as R.E.M. sprang out of college towns in Georgia and the Carolinas, an attempt was made to label them New Southern rockers, but, because the groups lacked any audible regionalism, the label never stuck.
