Surf music,  genre of popular music that arose in southern California in the early 1960s. As the sport of surfing became increasingly popular on the West Coast of the United States, Dick Dale and the Del-Tones provided the sound track, beginning with “Let’s Go Trippin’” in 1961. Dale, a surfer himself, developed a distinctive style of electric-guitar playing that fused Middle Eastern influences, staccato picking, and skillful exploitation of the reverb amplifier (which he helped Leo Fender develop) to create a pulsing, cascading sound that echoed the surfing experience, most notably on “Misirlou” (1962). He led a parade of mostly West Coast-based groups that gained local, then national, popularity with guitar-driven instrumental songs, among them the Chantays (“Pipeline”), the Ventures (“Walk—Don’t Run”), and the Surfaris (whose “Wipe Out” featured the most identifiable drum solo in rock history). Surfing culture also flourished on the beaches of Australia, giving rise not only to an Australian version of surf music but also to the stomp, a national youth dance craze. Australian surf musicians included “Little Pattie” Amphlett (“He’s My Blonde-Headed, Stompie Wompie, Real Gone Surfer Boy” [1963]), the Delltones (“Hangin’ Five” [1963]), the Denvermen (“Surfside” [1963]) and, most prominently, the Atlantics (“Bombora” [1963]).
As Jan and Dean, Jan Berry (b. April 3, 1941, Los Angeles, California, U.S.—d. March 26, 2004, Los Angeles) and Dean Torrence (b. March 10, 1941, Los Angeles) gave voice to surf music with distinctive falsetto harmonies, especially on “Surf City” (1963). It was the Beach Boys, however, led by Brian Wilson, whose complex vocal harmonies, skilled musicianship, inventive production, and evocative lyrics apotheosized surf music and culture with a remarkable string of hits such as “Surfin’ U.S.A.” (1963) and “California Girls” (1965). As the Beach Boys transcended surf music, the genre began to fade, but its influence could still be heard in the 1970s and ’80s in the sound of punk and new wave bands such as the Ramones and the Go-Go’s.
