Sutton Foster, in full Sutton Lenore Foster,  (born March 18, 1975, Statesboro, Georgia, U.S.), American actress and singer whose high-spirited charisma and brightly expressive voice brought her fame in Broadway musical theatre. She won Tony Awards for her lead roles in Thoroughly Modern Millie (2002) and Anything Goes (2011).
Foster grew up in Georgia, where her father worked for General Motors. She was an energetic child and began taking dance lessons at age four. Six years later she landed the starring role in a community theatre production of the musical Annie. In 1992, having moved with her family to suburban Detroit, she was cast in the ensemble of a national touring production of The Will Rogers Follies. Foster then studied theatre at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh for a year (1993–94) before resuming her stage career in a national tour of Grease; she later joined the show’s Broadway cast as a replacement. Small roles on Broadway in Annie, The Scarlet Pimpernel, and Les Misérables followed. Between those productions, Foster performed a lead part in What the World Needs Now: A Musical Fable, a showcase for the songs of Burt Bacharach and Hal David, during its world premiere run in San Diego in 1998.
Foster’s breakthrough came in 2000 when she was cast in Thoroughly Modern Millie, a new musical based on the 1967 film about an independent-minded woman in the 1920s. Mere weeks before the show officially opened in La Jolla, California, Foster was promoted from understudy to lead, and she continued in the role when the production relocated to Broadway in early 2002. Although the show earned mixed reviews, Foster’s ability to evince Millie’s gawky charm was often singled out for praise, and her performance was rewarded with the Tony Award for best actress in a musical.
Having demonstrated a talent for musical comedy and a particular flair for ingenue characters, Foster remained on Broadway, originating the roles of Jo in Little Women (2005), an adaptation of Louisa May Alcott’s novel, and the showgirl Janet Van De Graaff in The Drowsy Chaperone (2006), a spoof of early Broadway musicals. Both performances earned her Tony nominations. Foster then appeared in two new musicals that were based on films, portraying the ditzy lab assistant Inga in Young Frankenstein (2007) and the feisty Princess Fiona in Shrek the Musical (2008). For the latter role, she received her fourth Tony nomination.
After an Off-Broadway detour with the dark comedy Trust (2010), in which she played a dominatrix, Foster took on the part of brassy nightclub singer Reno Sweeney in the 2011 Broadway revival of Cole Porter’s musical Anything Goes, which earned her a second best-actress Tony Award. In the title role of the Broadway musical Violet (2014), Foster portrayed a struggling young woman who bears a horrible scar on her face from a childhood accident. The musical chronicles Violet’s journey from the Blue Ridge Mountains to Oklahoma, where she believes she will be healed. In 2016 Foster returned to Off-Broadway with a revival of the musical Sweet Charity, in which she starred as a taxi dancer who is unlucky in love.
Foster’s admirers often commended her pliant singing voice, which conveyed subtle emotions as effortlessly as it belted out showstoppers. In 2009 she released the album Wish, an intimate collection of show tunes and pop songs. She performed a one-woman cabaret act, which she documented on the recording An Evening with Sutton Foster: Live at the Café Carlyle (2011). In addition, Foster acted on television, notably in the witty drama Bunheads (2012–13), in which she starred as a small-town ballet teacher, and Younger (2015–21), a comedy about a 40-year-old divorcée who decides to pretend that she is 26.
