The Weeknd, byname of Abel Makkonen Tesfaye,  (born February 16, 1990, Toronto, Ontario, Canada), Canadian rhythm-and-blues singer and songwriter who was perhaps best known for his explicit songs about sex and drugs, many of which were autobiographical, and for his soaring falsetto and its singular tremolo.
Tesfaye’s mother and grandmother immigrated in the 1980s to Canada from Ethiopia, and his first language was Amharic. When he was in grade 11, he quit school and left home, devoting himself to unbridled partying. Tesfaye eventually landed a job at American Apparel and at the same time began writing songs about drug use, casual sex, and alienation. He crossed paths with musician and producer Jeremy Rose, and they started working together. Their collaboration yielded three atmospheric songs—“The Morning,” “Loft Music,” and “What You Need”—with lyrics that were partly sung and partly rapped. The songs, credited to The Weeknd, were uploaded as audio files to the video-sharing Web site YouTube in late 2010; their popularity grew exponentially after they were posted to the blog of Canadian rapper Drake.
With Drake as an admirer and backer, Tesfaye had greater access to recording opportunities, and by March 2011 he had put together a nine-song mixtape, House of Balloons, which he released as a free download. The album gained critical notice and was short-listed for Canada’s Polaris Music Prize. Tesfaye made his first public appearance as The Weeknd in a Toronto nightclub in July that year. He released two more free mixtapes in 2011, Thursday and Echoes of Silence. In addition, he contributed to the 2011 Drake release Take Care.
The Weeknd partnered with Republic Records in September 2012. Two months later he released Trilogy, made up of remastered versions of the songs on the three mixtapes; it became a best seller. However, The Weeknd’s first studio album, Kiss Land (2013), failed to penetrate beyond his fan base.
The Weeknd subsequently asked his record company for help in crafting songs. The outcome was a professional relationship with the hit-making Swedish producer Max Martin and a duet with pop star Ariana Grande, “Love Me Harder.” The song, released in 2014, reached the top 10. The Weeknd’s next three hit singles, “Earned It,” “The Hills,” and “Can’t Feel My Face,” were featured on Beauty Behind the Madness (2015). In 2016 The Weeknd won Canada’s Juno Award for artist of the year for the second consecutive year, as well as four other Junos, including album of the year. He also won Grammy Awards for best R&B performance for “Earned It,” and Beauty Behind the Madness took the award for best urban contemporary album. In addition, “Earned It,” which was included on the sound track of the film Fifty Shades of Grey (2015), was nominated for an Academy Award in 2016.
The Weeknd’s success continued with Starboy (2016), which featured collaborations with Kendrick Lamar and Daft Punk. It was a commercial hit and earned a Grammy for best urban contemporary album. His next release, My Dear Melancholy, (2018), recalled the moody, atmospheric sounds of his earlier music. The cinematic and introspective After Hours (2020) was critically praised and, like his previous release, debuted at the top of the charts. The Weeknd performed at the Super Bowl halftime show in 2021.
In 2019 The Weeknd made his feature-film debut, appearing as himself in the crime dramedy Uncut Gems, which starred Adam Sandler.
