Tony Martin, original name Alvin Morris, also known as Anthony Martin,  (born December 25, 1913, San Francisco, California, U.S.—died July 27, 2012, Los Angeles, California), American pop singer and movie actor whose handsome visage and smooth baritone voice made him one of the most celebrated all-around entertainers of his era.
Morris grew up in Oakland, California, and, as a child, sang regularly at his mother’s sewing club. He later took up the clarinet and the saxophone, and while in high school he formed a band called Al Morris and His Four Red Peppers. After dropping out of St. Mary’s College in Moraga, California, in 1932—his parents had wanted him to be a lawyer—Morris played reed instruments for dance bands around the Bay Area, including one led by Tom Gerun that also featured Woody Herman. With Gerun’s band Morris occasionally contributed vocals as well, and, while singing on a radio broadcast, he caught the attention of Hollywood studio mogul Louis B. Mayer. Although a screen test for MGM proved to be fruitless, he landed a contract with RKO Radio Pictures soon thereafter. About this time he also changed his name to Tony Martin. By 1936 Martin had moved to Twentieth Century-Fox, and that year he sang in such movies as Poor Little Rich Girl, starring Shirley Temple, and the musical Sing, Baby, Sing. The following year he married the latter film’s female lead, Alice Faye, although the two divorced in 1940.
A starring role opposite Rita Hayworth in the musical romance Music in My Heart (1940) further raised Martin’s profile, as did key supporting parts in the star-studded Ziegfeld Girl (1941) and the Marx Brothers comedy The Big Store (1941). After performing military service in Asia during World War II, Martin returned to the silver screen with prominent roles in the Jerome Kern biography Till the Clouds Roll By (1946) and the musical Casbah (1948; as the French gangster Pépé Le Moko). In 1948 he married the actress and dancer Cyd Charisse. Martin’s later films include the musical comedies Here Come the Girls (1953), in which he costarred with Bob Hope and Rosemary Clooney; Easy to Love (1953), with Esther Williams and Van Johnson; and Hit the Deck (1955).
Beginning in the late 1930s, Martin concurrently maintained a successful recording career, specializing in romantic ballads that highlighted his rich, pliable baritone. Among his most notable hits were “To Each His Own” (1946); “There’s No Tomorrow” (1949), which was based on the Italian melody “O sole mio” and in turn inspired Elvis Presley’s 1960 single “It’s Now or Never”; “La Vie en rose” (1950), a version of the French song popularized by Edith Piaf; and “I Get Ideas” (1951), a lyrically suggestive adaptation of an Argentine tango. In addition, he was one of the first to record (1939) the Cole Porter standard “Begin the Beguine.”
At the height of his fame, Martin made numerous appearances on radio and television, and in 1954–56 he hosted the TV variety program The Tony Martin Show. Later in his career he toured the cabaret circuit with Charisse, to whom he remained married until her death in 2008, and he continued to perform solo at nightclubs into his 90s. In 1976 Martin and Charisse produced a joint autobiography, The Two of Us (as told to Dick Kleiner).
