Trip-hop,  genre of atmospheric down-tempo music, influenced by movie sound tracks, 1970s funk, and cool jazz and usually created using samples.
Coined by the British dance magazine Mixmag but rejected by many of its purported practitioners, trip-hop originated in Bristol, Eng., a West Country port known for its leisurely pace of life (see Creative Centres map: Bristol overview 1990). Spawned from the town’s postpunk bohemia, Massive Attack—a multiracial collective of deejays, singers, and rappers including Daddy G. (byname of Grant Marshall; b. Dec. 18, 1959, Bristol, Eng.), 3-D (byname of Robert Del Naja; b. Jan. 21, 1965, Brighton, Eng.), and Mushroom (byname of Andrew Vowles; b. c. 1968)—created Blue Lines (1990), widely regarded as the first trip-hop album. Citing influences from Isaac Hayes’s orchestral soul and the Mahavishnu Orchestra’s jazz-rock (see also John McLaughlin) to the dub reggae of Studio One, Massive Attack talked of making music for “chilling out” at home rather than for dancing—hence the torrid tempos of trip-hop.
Trip-hop as a term really achieved currency in 1994–95 thanks to other Bristolians, former Massive Attack rapper Tricky (byname of Adrian Thaws; b. Jan. 27, 1968, Bristol) and Portishead, a group formed by Massive protégé Geoff Barrow (b. Dec. 9, 1971, Southmead, Eng). Featuring the forlorn vocals of Martina Topley-Bird alongside Tricky’s croaky, mumbled rhymes, Tricky’s debut album, Maxinquaye (1995), is a masterpiece of paranoid ambience. Songs such as “Aftermath” and “Ponderosa” drew inspiration from the slough of despondency into which Tricky slid with help from alcohol and marijuana, but they also serve as stark visions of mid-1990s Britain: politically deadlocked, culturally stagnant, and with  many young people using drugs to numb the pain of their blocked idealism. Portishead’s Dummy (1994) was similarly desolate-sounding thanks to the torch-singer persona of vocalist Beth Gibbons (b. Jan. 4, 1965, Keynsham, Eng.), but Barrow’s attractive film-score-influenced arrangements made the album a cult success and nearly ubiquitous as background music at trendy cafés and dinner parties. Portishead’s eponymous second album, released in 1997, covered much the same ground but lacked some of the cachet of its predecessor. Massive Attack remained active into the 2000s, though by the release of the group’s fourth album, 100th Window (2003), only 3-D remained from the original lineup.
Although globally popular, trip-hop has remained a largely British genre. Its leading labels (Ninja Tune, Jazz Fudge, and Mo’ Wax—whose founder, James Lavelle, cited Blue Lines as the inspiration for his pursuit of a career in music) are based in the United Kingdom, as are the genre’s top artists, some of whom first made their mark in trip-hop but moved on to other musical pursuits, including Funky Porcini, DJ Vadim, Wagon Christ (Luke Francis Vibert), DJ Food, and U.N.K.L.E. The notable exception is DJ Shadow (byname of Josh Davis; b. Jan. 1, 1973,  Hayward, Calif., U.S.), an American, who honed his version of trip-hop in northern California. A hip-hop fan disillusioned by rap’s commercialization, Shadow created emotionally evocative song suites such as “In/Flux” (1993), “Lost and Found” (1994), and “Midnight in the Perfect World” (1997), which, although artfully woven out of samples from movie sound tracks and vintage funk records, were essentially brand-new compositions. Shunning rappers and singers, Shadow preferred to use sound bites from spoken-word albums whenever his abstract music required emotional focus. The sleeve art of his 1996 debut, Endtroducing, depicts the teeming rack of a used vinyl (record) store. It is a celebration of hip-hop’s culture of ‘‘digging in the crates,” the hunter-gatherer approach to salvaging obscure samples from unlikely sources. Like Tricky and Massive Attack, Shadow proved that this is a valid modern aesthetic, which at its best can alchemize stale cheese into soulful gold. In 2006 he surprised trip-hop fans with his album The Outsider, on which he embraced “hyphy” (from hyper and fly), the mixture of old-school hip-hop beats and more-contemporary rapping styles that had emerged in the Oakland–San Franciso Bay Area.
