Usher, in full Usher Terry Raymond IV,  (born October 14, 1978, Dallas, Texas, U.S.), American musician whose smooth vocals and sensual ballads helped establish him as a rhythm-and-blues superstar in the late 1990s.
As a youngster in Chattanooga, Tennessee, Usher sang in church choirs but sought entry into the mainstream music industry by entering talent shows. At age 12 he moved with his mother and brother to Atlanta, and two years later he secured a recording contract with LaFace Records. The album Usher was released in 1994, with the 15-year-old singer moving beyond his choirboy background by proclaiming that “it’s only a sexual thing” on the slow-groove single “Can U Get wit It.” The album was not a commercial success, and Usher spent the next few years working on a follow-up, My Way (1997), which marked him as a major R&B star. His singles “You Make Me Wanna” and “Nice & Slow” became major R&B hits (the latter also topped Billboard’s all-genre singles chart), and the performer reached greater audiences through appearances on television shows (he had a recurring role on UPN’s Moesha series). In onstage performances, he showed prowess as a dancer that was as notable as his fluid singing voice.
Usher’s third studio album, 8701 (2001), further cemented his reputation as a smooth, seductive, and bankable artist. Music from 8701 gave Usher two number-one pop hits, “U Remind Me” and “U Got It Bad,” and his first two Grammy Awards.  On his fourth album, Confessions (2004),  he extended his range beyond ballads, collaborating most famously with Atlanta rappers Lil Jon and Ludacris on the boisterous radio-dominating single “Yeah!” Confessions eventually sold more than 10 million copies in the United States alone and earned Usher three Grammy Awards—for best contemporary R&B album, best R&B performance by a duo or group (for “My Boo,” a duet with Alicia Keys), and best rap/sung collaboration (for “Yeah!”).
Meanwhile, Usher continued to make appearances in various television shows, including the period drama American Dreams (2002) in the role of Marvin Gaye. In 2005 he starred as a disc jockey who protects a mobster’s daughter in the film In the Mix, though his acting, and the film as a whole, received unfavourable reviews. The following year he portrayed Billy Flynn in the long-running Broadway musical Chicago.
After a four-year break, Usher returned to recording with Here I Stand (2008), a soulful album that saw the brash lothario of 8701 and Confessions settle into the routine of family life. The follow-up album, Raymond v. Raymond (2010), continued to serve as a window into Usher’s private life, but it was a dark reflection of Here I Stand, as it traced the disintegration of his marriage. In 2011 Raymond v. Raymond won a Grammy for best contemporary R&B album, and the single “There Goes My Baby” won for best male R&B performance. Two years later Usher picked up another Grammy, for the artfully restrained single “Climax.” The song was among the highlights of Looking 4 Myself (2012), an expansive album that found him increasingly influenced by electronic dance music. Usher’s eighth studio album, Hard II Love, was released in 2016. “A” (2018) drew mixed reviews.
During this time Usher continued to act. He had recurring roles on various television series, and he appeared in such films as Hands of Stone (2016), in which he portrayed Sugar Ray Leonard, and Burden (2018), based on a true story.
In addition to performing, Usher became a part owner of the National Basketball Association’s Cleveland Cavaliers in 2005. In 2013–14 he served as a coach on the televised singing competition The Voice. His charity work included New Look Foundation, an organization he established to help educate youths from lower-class backgrounds about the business of entertainment management. The organization was also involved in the efforts to rebuild New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina (2005).
