Vera Lynn, in full Dame Vera Lynn, byname of Vera Margaret Welch,  (born March 20, 1917, East Ham, Essex [now in Greater London], England—died June 18, 2020, Ditchling, East Sussex), English singer whose sentimental material and wholesome stage persona endeared her to the public during World War II. Broadcasts of her songs of love and longing were particularly resonant with members of the military fighting abroad, which led to her nickname, “the Forces’ Sweetheart.” She remained popular into the 21st century.
Welch, who was born into a working-class family outside London, began singing at men’s clubs by age seven. At 11 she assumed her grandmother’s maiden name (Lynn) and joined Madame Harris’s Kracker Kabaret Kids, a singing troupe. After leaving school at age 14, Lynn was spotted by a booking agent who found work for her at parties and events. In 1935 she sang the refrain on several big band records and began performing on the radio with the Joe Loss Orchestra and then the Casani Club Band. She also recorded several songs with the Casani Club Band and released her first solo recording, “Up the Wooden Hill to Bedfordshire,” in 1936.
Lynn teamed with bandleader Benjamin (“Bert”) Ambrose in 1937 and performed on his radio program, Life from Mayfair, until 1940. In late 1939 she premiered what would become her trademark song—“We’ll Meet Again,” written earlier that year by two young composers—on the show. The wistful tune, as interpreted by Lynn in her characteristic low pitch, articulated the longings of families and lovers separated by the war and thus became a touchstone to many. Lynn was given her own BBC radio show, Sincerely Yours, Vera Lynn, in November 1941. The following year she recorded “The White Cliffs of Dover,” another song that for many came to epitomize the sentiment of the war years. In 1942 she appeared in the film We’ll Meet Again, in which she portrayed a character based on herself. In 1944 Lynn joined the Entertainment National Services Association (ENSA) and spent the spring and summer performing for troops stationed in Egypt, India, and Burma (Myanmar).
After the war, Lynn toured widely in Europe and continued to broadcast her radio program for several years. When Decca Records, which released most of her material, issued “Auf Wiederseh’n Sweetheart” in the United States in 1952, she became the first English artist to hit number one on the American record charts; “My Son, My Son” (1954) was among her later hits. After leaving Decca in 1960 for EMI, Lynn continued to tour abroad. She performed less frequently after developing emphysema toward the end of the decade, though compilations of her material still sold well. In 2009 she became the oldest living artist to have a number one album in England with We’ll Meet Again: The Very Best of Vera Lynn. Eight years later she became the oldest living artist to have an album in the top ten on the British charts with 100, which featured reorchestrations of her classic hits and was released in honour of her 100th birthday.
Lynn became an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 1969 and was created Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in 1975. She penned three memoirs: Vocal Refrain (1975), We’ll Meet Again (1989; with Robin Cross and Jenny de Gex), and Some Sunny Day (2009). Her philanthropic activities ranged from promoting veterans’ causes to establishing a fund for victims of cerebral palsy.
