cancer,  group of more than 100 distinct diseases characterized by the uncontrolled growth of abnormal cells in the body.
Though cancer has been known since antiquity, some of the most significant advances in scientists’ understanding of it have been made since the middle of the 20th century. Those advances led to major improvements in cancer treatment, mainly through the development of methods for timely and accurate diagnosis, selective surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapeutic drugs, and targeted therapies (agents designed against specific molecules involved in cancer).
Advances in treatment have succeeded in bringing about a decrease in cancer deaths, though mainly in developed countries. Indeed, cancer remains a major cause of sickness and death throughout the world. By 2018 the number of new cases diagnosed annually had risen to more than 18 million, more than half of them in less-developed countries, and the number of deaths from cancer in 2018 was 9.6 million worldwide. About 70 percent of cancer deaths were in low- and middle-income countries.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has estimated that the global cancer burden could be reduced by as much as 30 to 50 percent through prevention strategies, particularly through the avoidance of known risk factors. In addition, laboratory investigations aimed at understanding the causes and mechanisms of cancer have maintained optimism that the disease can be controlled. Through breakthroughs in cell biology, genetics, and biotechnology, researchers have gained a fundamental understanding of what occurs within cells to cause them to become cancerous. Those conceptual gains are steadily being converted into actual gains in the practice of cancer diagnosis and treatment, with notable progress toward personalized cancer medicine, in which therapy is tailored to individuals according to biological anomalies unique to their disease. Personalized cancer medicine is considered the most-promising area of progress yet for modern cancer therapy.
Tumours, or neoplasms (from Greek neo, “new,” and plasma, “formation”), are abnormal growths of cells arising from malfunctions in the regulatory mechanisms that oversee the cells’ growth and development. However, only some types of tumours threaten health and life. With few exceptions, that distinction underlies their division into two major categories: malignant or benign.
The most threatening tumours are those that invade and destroy healthy tissues in the body’s major organ systems by gaining access to the circulatory or lymphatic systems. The process of spread, accompanied by the seeding of tumour cells in distant areas, is known as metastasis. Tumours that grow and spread aggressively in this manner are designated malignant, or cancerous.
If a tumour remains localized to the area in which it originated and poses little risk to health, it is designated benign. Although benign tumours are indeed abnormal, they are far less dangerous than malignant tumours because they have not entirely escaped the growth controls that keep normal cells in check. They are not aggressive and do not invade surrounding tissues or spread to distant sites. In some cases they even function like the normal cells from which they arise. Nevertheless, though benign tumours are incapable of dissemination, they can expand and place pressure on organs, causing signs or symptoms of disease. In some cases benign tumours that compress vital structures can cause death—for instance, tumours that compress the brainstem, where the centres that control breathing are located. However, it is unusual for a benign tumour to cause death.
When the behaviour of a neoplasm is difficult to predict, it is designated as being of “undetermined malignant potential,” or “borderline.”
Malignant and benign are important distinctions, but they are broad categories that comprise many different forms of cancer. A more-detailed and useful way to classify and name the many kinds of tumours is by their site of origin (the cell or tissue from which a tumour arises) and by their microscopic appearance. That classification scheme, though not followed with rigid logic or consistency, allows tumours to be categorized by a characteristic clinical behaviour, such as prognosis, and by response to therapy. Tumour nomenclature based on site and tissue type thus provides a means of identifying tumours and determining the course of treatment.
Tumours may also be classified according to the genetic defects found in their cells, thanks to advances in the understanding of human genetic structure. Such classification schemes have facilitated decisions regarding course of treatment and the development of treatments that target specific genetic defects. The development of targeted agents has permitted the prescribing of more-effective and less-toxic therapies.
In the majority of cases, benign tumours are named by attaching the suffix -oma to the name of the tissue or cell from which the cancer arose. For example, a tumour that is composed of cells related to bone cells and has the structural and biochemical properties of bone substance (osteoid) is classified as an osteoma. That rule is followed with a few exceptions for tumours that arise from mesenchymal cells (the precursors of bone and muscle).
Benign tumours arising from epithelial cells (cells that form sheets that line the skin and internal organs) are classified in a number of ways and thus have a variety of names. Sometimes classification is based on the cell of origin, whereas in other cases it is based on the tumour’s microscopic architectural pattern or gross appearance. The term adenoma, for instance, designates a benign epithelial tumour that either arises in endocrine glands or forms a glandular structure. Tumours of the ovarian epithelium that contain large cysts are called cystadenomas.
When a tumour gives rise to a mass that projects into a lumen (a cavity or channel within a tubular organ), it is called a polyp. Most polyps are epithelial in origin. Strictly speaking, the term polyp refers only to benign growths; a malignant polyp is referred to as a polypoid cancer in order to avoid confusion.
Benign tumours built up of fingerlike projections from the skin or mucous membranes are called papillomas.
For the naming of malignant tumours, the rules for using prefixes and suffixes are similar to those used to designate benign neoplasms. The suffix -sarcoma indicates neoplasms that arise in mesenchymal tissues—for instance, in supportive or connective tissue such as muscle or bone. The suffix -carcinoma, on the other hand, indicates an epithelial origin. As with benign tumours, a prefix indicates the predominant cell type in the tumour. Thus, a liposarcoma arises from a precursor to a fat cell called a lipoblastic cell; a myosarcoma is derived from precursor muscle cells (myogenic cells); and squamous-cell carcinoma arises from the outer layers of mucous membranes or the skin (composed primarily of squamous, or scalelike, cells).
Just as adenoma designates a benign tumour of epithelial origin that takes on a glandlike structure, so adenocarcinoma designates a malignant epithelial tumour with a similar growth pattern. Usually the term is followed by the organ of origin—for instance, adenocarcinoma of the lung.
Malignant tumours of the blood-forming tissue are designated by the suffix -emia (Greek: “blood”). Thus, leukemia refers to a cancerous proliferation of white blood cells (leukocytes). Cancerous tumours that arise in lymphoid organs, such as the spleen, the thymus, or the lymph glands, are described as malignant lymphomas. The term lymphoma is often used without the qualifier malignant to denote cancerous lymphoid tumours; however, this usage can be confusing, since the suffix -oma, as mentioned above, more properly designates a benign neoplasm.
The suffix -oma is also used to designate other malignancies, such as seminoma, which is a malignant tumour that arises from the germ cells of the testis. In a similar manner, malignant tumours of melanocytes (the skin cells that produce the pigment melanin) should be called melanocarcinomas, but for historical reasons the term melanoma persists.
In some instances a neoplasm is named for the physician who first described it. For example, the malignant lymphoma called Hodgkin disease was described in 1832 by English physician Thomas Hodgkin. Burkitt lymphoma is named after British surgeon Denis Parsons Burkitt; Ewing sarcoma of bone was described by James Ewing; and nephroblastoma, a malignant tumour of the kidney in children, is commonly called Wilms tumour, for German surgeon Max Wilms.
The site of origin of a tumour, which is so important in its classification and naming (as explained above), also is an important determinant of the way a tumour will grow, how fast it will give rise to clinical symptoms, and how early it may be diagnosed. For example, a tumour of the skin located on the face is usually detected very early, whereas a sarcoma located in the deep soft tissues of the abdomen can grow to weigh 2 kg (5 pounds) before it causes much of a disturbance. The site of origin of a tumour also determines the signs and symptoms of disease that the individual will experience and influences possible therapeutic options.
The most-common tumour sites in females are the breast, the lung, and the colon. In men the most frequently affected sites are the prostate, the lung, and the colon. Each tumour site and type presents its own specific set of clinical manifestations. However, there are a number of common clinical presentations, or syndromes, caused by many different kinds of tumours.
