Carcinogen,  any of a number of agents that can cause cancer in humans. They can be divided into three major categories: chemical carcinogens (including those from biological sources), physical carcinogens, and oncogenic (cancer-causing) viruses.
Most carcinogens, singly or in combination, produce cancer by interacting with DNA in cells and thereby interfering with normal cellular function. This ultimately results in the formation of a tumour (an abnormal tissue growth) that has the ability to spread (metastasize) from its site of origin and invade and cause dysfunction of other tissues, culminating in organ failure and death. The two primary mechanisms by which carcinogens initiate the formation of such tumours is via alterations in DNA that encourage cell division and that prevent cells from being able to self-destruct when stimulated by normal triggers, such as DNA damage or cellular injury (a process known as apoptosis). There also exist carcinogens that induce cancer through nongenotoxic mechanisms, such as immunosuppression and induction of tissue-specific inflammation.
More than 400 chemical agents have been listed as carcinogenic, probably carcinogenic, or possibly carcinogenic by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), a branch of the World Health Organization that monitors cancer occurrence worldwide and performs epidemiological and laboratory investigations to understand the causes of cancer. Among the carcinogenic substances listed by IARC are a variety of chemical effluents from industry and environmental pollutants from automobiles, residences, and factories. One such example is acrylamide, which is considered a probable carcinogen in humans and is produced as a result of industrial processes and cooking certain foods at high temperatures. It can be released into the environment through its application in wastewater treatment and its use in grout and soil-stabilizer products. Other examples of chemical carcinogens include nitrosamines and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, which are found in tobacco smoke and are associated with the development of lung cancer.
Physical carcinogens include ultraviolet rays from sunlight and ionizing radiation from X-rays and from radioactive materials in industry and in the general environment. Repeated local injury (e.g., wounding) or recurring irritation (e.g., chronic inflammation) to a part of the body are other examples of potential physical carcinogens.
A number of viruses are suspected of causing cancer in animals, including humans, and are frequently referred to as oncogenic viruses. Examples include human papillomaviruses, the Epstein-Barr virus, and the hepatitis B virus, all of which have genomes made up of DNA. Human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I), which is a retrovirus (a type of RNA virus), is linked to tumour formation in humans.
Some—not all—cancers are heritable in the sense that a predisposition exists, awaiting a convergence of carcinogenic influences for cancer to manifest itself. The identification and timely elimination of carcinogens can reduce the incidence of cancer.
