Hammertoe, also called hammer toe,  deformity of the second, third, or fourth toe in which the toe is bent downward at the middle joint (the proximal interphalangeal [PIP] joint), such that the overall shape of the toe resembles a hammer. Most cases of hammertoe involve the second toe, and often only one or two toes are affected. In rare cases when all the toes are involved, a thorough neurological assessment is necessary to evaluate for underlying nerve or spinal cord problems.
Hammertoe occurs more frequently in women than in men. Children who continue to wear shoes that they have outgrown are also at risk. Poorly fitting shoes can cause deformities in the PIP joint as well as in the metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint (where the base of the toe attaches to the rest of the foot).
Hammertoe tends to be associated with hyperextension of the MTP joint as well as with having a second toe that is longer than the big toe. Initially, the affected toe maintains flexibility. Flexible deformities can be manipulated through therapy such that the affected joint is moved back into a neutral position. However, over time the tendons may tighten and can become permanently stiff. Fixed deformities do not allow repositioning and generally require surgery to be corrected.
Hammertoe tends to produce pain in specific areas of the foot. The skin on the dorsal surface of the PIP joint (the top of the middle toe joint) can become painful owing to the development of a hard corn. The corn results from chronic pressure that forces the toe to buckle and from chronic friction that irritates the skin. A painful callus can also develop at the end of the toe, just below the tip of the toenail or on the top of the toe. The ball of the foot may also be painful, and a painful callus may form on the sole of the foot from chronic stress caused by the partial or complete dislocation from the joint of the proximal phalanx (the toe bone that connects to the rest of the foot). In patients with decreased sensation in the feet, such as persons with diabetes mellitus or persons born with myelomeningocele (a type of spina bifida), there is a risk of ulceration (development of lesions) and infection at the pressure points involved in hammertoe.
The most-common cause of hammertoe is the long-term use of poorly fitting shoes. Shoes that narrow toward the toes, that have high heels, or that are too small are the common culprits. Shoes that narrow toward the toes cause crowding of the smaller toes and push them into a flexed (bent) position. The condition can be aggravated by the feet rubbing against a small toe box (the part of the shoe that accommodates the toes), which can also lead to the formation of corns and calluses. High-heeled shoes increase the pressure placed on the ball of the foot and the toes. They force the toes down against the narrow toe box and increase the bend in the toe. With long-term use, the toe muscles weaken and lose the ability to straighten the toe.
A combination of other factors can also increase the risk of hammertoe, including anatomical problems, bunions (hallux valgus), MTP joint instability, and previous toe trauma. A long second toe, for example, may be forced into a bent position by an improperly fitted shoe. Bunions form when the big toe is forced in the direction of the second toe. The resultant pressure placed on the second toe can cause abnormal positioning and bending of the second toe, particularly when compressed into shoes. Prior trauma to a toe, such as a sprain, strain, fracture, or dislocation, increases the risk of abnormal toe anatomy and positioning problems.
Medical conditions can also increase the risk of hammertoe. Studies have associated hammertoe with connective tissue disorders, neuromuscular disease, degenerative disk disease, inflammatory joint diseases, and diabetes. Rheumatoid arthritis causes hammertoe deformity by progressive destruction of the MTP joint, leading to joint instability. Diabetics with peripheral neuropathy are prone to hammertoe, because chronic nerve and muscle damage to the foot results in abnormal foot mechanics.
A variety of nonoperative treatment options exist for hammertoe. Padding, strapping, and taping are helpful for reducing the degree of deformity and for relieving pressure over painful joints. Foam or other padding is placed over the hammertoe or at the tip of the toe to prevent friction with shoes. Tube gauze (a sleeve of gauze that slips over the toe) and toe caps (material used to cover the toe) also may be used. Soft shoe insoles and arch pads may be used to help redistribute weight away from painful areas. Tape and toe slings may be used to position the MTP joint in a slight plantar flexion (as in pointing the toes), enabling the PIP joint to straighten. Stretching and strengthening of the toe muscles, such as through exercises in which the toes are used to lift small objects off the floor, can help correct muscle imbalance and joint instability.
Properly sized and low-heeled footwear help reduce pain and progressive deformity. Shoes also can be adjusted to accommodate the hammertoe. For example, the toe box can be stretched so that it bulges around the toe, reducing the risk of contact at the top of the shoe.
In instances when conservative treatments fail, pain is disabling, or the hammertoe is inflexible, surgery may be needed. There are a range of surgical options, and the choice is based on the type and severity of the deformity. Flexible deformities may be treated with flexor tenotomy (also known as tendon lengthening or tendon release) or flexor-to-extensor tendon transfer. Tendon transfer involves repositioning of the tendon to straighten the toe.
Rigid deformities are treated with arthroplasty of the PIP joint. Arthroplasty involves the removal of some bone and cartilage to remodel the joint and correct the deformity. The goal is to shorten the toe in order to relieve pressure, alleviate pain, and ultimately straighten the toe. In more-severe cases, additional procedures may be necessary, including reconstruction of the surrounding tendons and ligaments, arthrodesis (joint fusion), derotation arthroplasty (in which skin and bone are removed in order to straighten the toe), and metatarsal shortening osteotomy (in which a cut is made through the affected metatarsal bone to shorten the toe). In cases of concurrent MTP joint instability or abnormality, hammertoe surgery may also include correction of the MTP joint to prevent a recurrence of the hammertoe deformity.
