Prevalence,  in epidemiology, the proportion of a population with a disease or a particular condition at a specific point in time (point prevalence) or over a specified period of time (period prevalence). Prevalence is often confused with incidence, which is concerned only with the measure of new cases in a population over a given interval of time.
For prevalence, the numerator is the number of existing cases or conditions, and the denominator is the total population or group. For example, the prevalence of type 2 diabetes among children age 2 to 12 equals the number of children age 2 to 12 years with type 2 diabetes divided by the total number of children within that age range.
Prevalence is especially useful to health system planners and public health professionals. Knowledge of the disease burden in a population, whether global or local, is essential to securing the resources required to fund special services or health-promotion programs. For instance, the director of a nursing home must be able to measure the proportion of seniors with Alzheimer disease in order to plan the appropriate level of services for the residents. Legislators and public health professionals require population statistics in order to prioritize funding for health programs, such as those aimed at obesity reduction or smoking cessation. National- and state-level prevalence of behaviours and diseases is usually calculated using data collected systematically from the population through major health surveys, such as the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) in the United States.
Prevalence is related mathematically to incidence. When the incidence of disease is stable over time, such as in the absence of epidemics or changes in treatment effectiveness, prevalence (P) is the product of the incidence (I) and the average duration (D) of the disease or condition, or P = I × D. More complex mathematical relationships exist between incidence and prevalence when those assumptions cannot be met.
