Advanced persistent threat (APT),  attacks on a country’s information assets of national security or strategic economic importance  through either cyberespionage or cybersabotage. These attacks use technology that minimizes their visibility to computer network and individual computer intrusion detection systems. APTs are directed against specific industrial, economic, or governmental targets to acquire or to destroy knowledge of international military and economic importance. (Stuxnet, for example, would fall under this definition as an APT directed against Iran.) Once an APT has entered its target, the attack can last for months or years; that is, it is a “persistent” threat.  The motive behind the threat goes beyond mere political or financial gain. An APT is not hacktivism—that is, penetrating a Web site or network to make a political statement—nor is it strictly cybercrime, where the perpetrators steal information for profit alone. Rather, the aim is to gain strategic or tactical advantage in the international arena.
The term advanced persistent threat originated in the U.S. Department of Defense late in the first decade of the 21st century to describe cyberespionage efforts by China against American national security interests. Attacks in 2009 against the search engine company Google and in 2011 against RSA, the security division of the information technology company EMC Corporation, brought the concept into discussions within the commercial information security community. Some authorities in that community advocated expanding the concept to include any sophisticated hacking campaign conducted against a large organization. However, other authorities strictly defined an APT as an attack on national security interests, arguing that to define it otherwise would admit almost any cyberattack as an APT and thus limit the definition’s value in developing specific countermeasures.
Common targets of APTs include government agencies, defense contractors, and industries developing technologies of military or economic strategic importance, such as aerospace and computer companies. Specific items for data exfiltration (the stealing of knowledge) include e-mail archives, document stores, intellectual property containing trade secrets, and databases containing classified or proprietary information. Examples of targeted documents are product designs, supplier lists, research lab notes, and testing results.
Methods of attack include “spear phishing” and the distribution of “zero-day malware.” Spear phishing uses e-mails sent to selected employees within an organization. The e-mails appear to come from trusted or known sources. Either by clicking on links within the e-mail or by being persuaded by the e-mail’s seeming legitimacy to let their guard down, these employees let hostile programs enter their computers. Zero-day malware is hostile computer software, such as viruses or Trojan horses, that is not yet detectable by antivirus programs. Networks of already compromised computers, known as “botnets,” distribute these zero-day attacks. Neither of the methods is new, and they are not exclusive to APTs. Their use against national security assets, however, is indicative of an APT attack rather than conventional hacking.
APT attacks are by nature stealthy and may use software that is more sophisticated than common “off-the-shelf” hacking tools found on the Internet. Their footprint on a computer or network is relatively small, and APTs try to operate below the detection level of an intrusion-detection system. Discovering the APT, however, is still possible through close monitoring of traffic on a network. Identifying communications between the botnet master (the control point) and the implanted malware reveals the compromise. This need for command-and-control activity remains the Achilles’ heel of APTs.
