Air cavalry,  airmobile helicopter formations widely used by the U.S. Army during the Vietnam War (1954–75) to locate and assault enemy ground forces and transport U.S. troops into battle. The Vietnam War saw the first large-scale use of helicopters in a combat role.
At the time, U.S. helicopter forces were divided into separate assault helicopter and air cavalry formations. The units performed slightly different types of missions. Assault helicopter companies were mainly responsible for attacking enemy ground targets, but they also conducted aerial resupply of troops, medical evacuation, and fire support for troops in contact with the enemy.
Air cavalry missions typically consisted of making visual reconnaissance of enemy positions with several scout helicopters and helicopter gunships, then airlifting a platoon of infantry assigned to the air cavalry unit into battle against the enemy. Other air cavalry helicopters provided fire support to the assaulting platoon, much as assault helicopter companies provided support to ground units during combat assault operations. Air cavalry could also bring larger combat units into the battle if needed. In addition to such missions, air cavalry teams performed general reconnaissance missions and aerial assessment of bomb damage.
A typical air cavalry squadron consisted of three air cavalry troops (ACTs) and a headquarters troop. An ACT contained a platoon of six to eight troops carried in helicopters called “slicks” (Bell UH-1 Iroquois, or “Huey,” helicopters) and a platoon of eight or nine gunship helicopters known as Cobras (Bell AH-1 Cobra helicopters). Each ACT also had a scout platoon of eight or nine light observation helicopters, commonly called “loaches” (Hughes OH-6 Cayuse helicopters).
The first air cavalry unit to see duty in Vietnam was the 1st Air Cavalry Division, in 1965. A total of five air cavalry squadrons operated in Vietnam, including the well-known 1st Squadron/9th Cavalry of the 1st Air Cavalry Division. In addition, approximately 20 ACTs served as part of various infantry, cavalry, and mechanized units. The last air cavalry troop departed Vietnam in early 1973.
