Battle of Omdurman,  (September 2, 1898), decisive military engagement in which Anglo-Egyptian forces, under Maj. Gen. Herbert Kitchener (later Lord Kitchener), defeated the forces of the Mahdist leader ʿAbd Allāh and thereby won Sudanese territory that the Mahdists had dominated since 1881.
In 1821 the Sudan was made a dependency of Egypt, which was itself a province of the Ottoman Empire. In the wake of this conquest, it would be governed by the same multiracial Turkish-speaking ruling class that governed Egypt. In 1877 Ismāʿīl Pasha, the Ottoman viceroy of Egypt, appointed British Gen. Charles George Gordon governor-general of the Sudan. That same year Ismāʿīl also signed the Anglo-Egyptian Slave Trade Convention, which provided for the termination of the sale and purchase of enslaved people in the Sudan by 1880. In Egypt slavery had become an anachronism, but a large portion of the Sudanese economy was still based on it. Gordon promptly set out to fulfill the terms of the treaty, and he broke up slave markets and imprisoned traders. Gordon’s campaign triggered a crisis in the Sudan’s economy, and the Sudanese soon came to believe that the crusade, led by European Christians, violated the principles and traditions of Islam. By 1879 Gordon’s actions had triggered a harsh backlash throughout the country. It was against this backdrop that the Mahdist movement was born.
Muḥammad Aḥmad ibn ʿAbd Allāh was the son of a boatbuilder from Dongola, in northern Sudan, who claimed descent from the Prophet Muhammad. Deeply religious from his youth, he was educated by a Sufi order, but he later secluded himself on Ābā Island in the White Nile to practice religious asceticism. In 1880 Muḥammad Aḥmad traveled throughout the countryside, where he learned of the discontent that gripped a wide range of the Sudanese people. He also observed agents of the government behaving in a manner that he could not reconcile with his own interpretation of Islam. Upon his return to Ābā Island in March 1881, he told his followers that God had instructed him to purify Islam and to destroy all governments that defiled it. On June 29, 1881, he proclaimed himself al-Mahdī, the “Right-Guided One” who had been divinely appointed to restore traditional Islam. The Mahdiyyah movement was not, as Egyptian and European writers of the time termed it, a revolt of dervishes against orthodox Sunni Islam. The Mahdī was no dervish and expressly forbade the use of the term by any of his followers.
The Mahdī’s immediate enemy was the Egyptian government, which in his view had lapsed into unbelief. The governor-general of Sudan at the time, Mohammed Rauf Pasha, underestimated the strength of the growing Mahdist movement. After massacring a small government force sent to arrest him, the Mahdī and his followers retired to the Nuba Mountains, where in December 1881 and May 1882 they annihilated two Egyptian military columns sent against them. In 1882–83 they won a series of spectacular victories over Egyptian garrisons and the expeditions that had been sent for their relief. The Mahdī and his followers, the anṣār (“helpers,” a Qurʾānic term referring to one group of Muhammad’s early followers), captured money, jewels, and, most significantly, military supplies—including state-of-the-art Krupp artillery and Remington rifles. El Obeid (now Al-Ubayyiḍ), the provincial capital of Kordofan, and Bāra, a chief town of that province, fell after being besieged by the Mahdī’s army.
By 1884 the Mahdist army was closing on Khartoum, the seat of the Egyptian government in Sudan. Gordon was ordered back to the Sudan to supervise an evacuation of Egyptians from Khartoum. Rather than abandon the city, however, he chose to form a defensive line in the hopes of breaking the back of the Mahdiyyah movement before it could advance into Egypt. Gordon’s requests for reinforcements were denied by the government of Prime Minister William Gladstone, and on March 13, 1884, the Mahdī’s forces laid siege to Khartoum. In July 1884 Gladstone finally dispatched a relief column under Gen. Garnet Wolseley, but it would arrive too late. On January 26, 1885, a force of some 50,000 Mahdists stormed the city. Khartoum fell, and Gordon was killed along with the city’s 7,000 remaining defenders. Four days later the Mahdī solemnly led the Friday prayers in the city mosque. Over the next few months, the surviving Egyptian garrisons in the Sudan were evacuated or forced to surrender. Except for small pockets of resistance, Anglo-Egyptian power had been all but extinguished in the Sudan.
On June 22, 1885, the Mahdī died at Omdurman, which he had made his capital, and the control of the Mahdist state fell to his khalīfah, ʿAbd Allāh. ʿAbd Allāh believed that he could best harness the loyalty of the disparate groups that had supported the Mahdī by maintaining the expansionist momentum that had characterized the Mahdiyyah movement thus far. He crushed opposition to his rule by the Mahdī’s kinsmen in 1886 and again in 1891. To overawe potential resistance in the Nile valley, he compelled Baqqārah warriors from the west to move to Omdurman. Two revolts, in the Nuba Mountains in 1885–86 and in Darfur in 1888–89, were suppressed. In 1887 the Mahdists invaded Ethiopia and sacked the old capital of Gonder. In March 1889 Ethiopian Emperor Yohannes IV carried out a reprisal mission into the Sudan, but he was shot and killed by Mahdist forces at the Battle of Metema.
For all his successes against internal challengers and regional enemies, however, the khalīfah struggled against well-supplied European-backed armies. British occupation authorities in Cairo had long feared a possible Mahdist campaign against Egypt, but, when it finally came, it amounted to little. ʿAbd Allāh ordered Emir ʿAbd al-Raḥmān al-Nujūmī and some 6,000 men into Egypt, but the Mahdist force was destroyed at Tūshkī in August 1889 by an Egyptian army commanded by Sir Francis Grenfell. In February 1891 another Anglo-Egyptian force recaptured Tokar on the Red Sea coast, forcing Osman Digna, the local Mahdist leader, to flee into the mountains. In 1894 Italian troops occupied Kassala, and, on the upper Nile, Mahdist forces were expelled from Rejaf by the Belgians in 1897. It was about this time that the reconquest of the Sudan by Anglo-Egyptian forces was begun in earnest. After the Italians were crushed by an Ethiopian army at the Battle of Adwa (March 1, 1896), their position at Kassala became untenable, due to a growing Mahdist presence in the area.
On March 14, 1896, Sir Horatio Herbert Kitchener was tasked with relieving the pressure on the Kassala garrison. Kitchener led an Anglo-Egyptian force consisting of 16 infantry battalions, 10 cavalry squadrons, and 8 artillery companies, as well as more than a dozen gunboats to support river operations. Kitchener quickly occupied Akasha, and Osman Digna, who had been leading the operation against Kassala, immediately shifted his focus to the new threat. As Kitchener advanced into the Sudan, he constructed his own line of supply as he went, and by June 1896 Akasha was connected to Egypt by rail and telegraph. Although cholera wracked the Anglo-Egyptian army, Kitchener steadily expanded his sphere of control. On September 23, 1896, the Mahdists were routed so completely at Dongola that the victory returned a sizable portion of northern Sudan to Egyptian control. Kitchener continued his advance along the right bank of the Nile in 1897; in July a British column stormed Abū Ḩamad, and Berber was occupied in September. By November 1897 the railway line connecting Wādī Ḥalfāʾ and Abū Ḩamad had been completed, and, in the closing days of the year, Anglo-Egyptian troops officially relieved the Italian garrison at Kassala.
The 1898 campaign season in the Sudan began with the dispatch of a British brigade from Cairo to the fighting front and a concentration of Anglo-Egyptian forces south of Abū Ḩamad. ʿAbd Allāh recognized the obvious threat, but disagreement among his generals delayed his response, and Kitchener was afforded much-needed time to reinforce his position. In February 1898 a Mahdist army of more than 12,000 men, under the command of Emir Mahmud Ahmad, moved north along the right bank of the Nile before striking across the desert and advancing up the Atbara River. Mahmud had hoped to turn the Anglo-Egyptian left flank at Berber, but Kitchener was also on the move, following the right bank of the Atbara south from Berber. On March 20 Mahmud reached Hillat an Nikheila, and there he constructed a formidable zeriba, or fortified stockade. A series of skirmishes ensued, and Kitchener learned from captured Mahdist soldiers that Mahmud’s army was low on provisions and suffering from rampant desertions. Feeling that time was on his side, Kitchener paused his offensive and dispatched a gunboat flotilla up the Nile to seize the Mahdist stronghold at Shendi.
On April 4 Kitchener pressed south to Ad Dabburah, and from there he carried out a final reconnaissance of Mahmud’s position. An overnight march on April 7 put Kitchener within striking distance of Mahmud’s zeriba, and, on the morning of April 8, after an hour-long artillery barrage, the Anglo-Egyptian army shattered the Mahdist defenses at the Battle of Atbara. Some 3,000 Mahdist soldiers were killed, and hundreds, including Mahmud, were captured. The Anglo-Egyptian forces suffered 80 killed and some 470 wounded. Having neutralized the last sizable Mahdist army between himself and Omdurman, Kitchener now began making preparations for a final assault on ʿAbd Allāh’s capital.
At the end of July 1898, additional reinforcements were dispatched from Cairo to Kitchener’s forward base near the sixth cataract, opposite Shendi on the west bank of the Nile. There, on August 24, a combined Anglo-Egyptian force of 26,000 men was assembled. It was composed of a British division of two brigades, an Egyptian division of four brigades, seven artillery batteries, 20 machine guns, and a mounted contingent that included the British 21st Lancers. This army was supported by a detachment of Royal Engineers and a fleet of 10 gunboats and 5 transport steamers. The Mahdist defenders of Omdurman numbered some 40,000; this army was primarily infantry, but it did possess a small cavalry force.
While a force of Arab irregulars—friendly to the Anglo-Egyptian forces and under British command—proceeded southward to clear the Nile’s east bank of all opposition as far as the Blue Nile, the Anglo-Egyptian army under Kitchener marched along the west bank unopposed. On September 1, British gunboats shelled the Mahdist forts on both sides of the Nile and breached the wall of Omdurman, and Kitchener established a zeriba at Egeiga, 4 miles (6.4 km) north of Omdurman on the west bank. On the morning of September 2, Mahdist forces launched a frontal attack on Kitchener’s camp and suffered tremendous casualties from rapid-fire artillery, machine guns, and massed rifle fire. Fierce fighting developed on the Anglo-Egyptian right when a large Mahdist force discovered Kitchener’s reserves, which had been positioned outside the zeriba. An Egyptian cavalry unit, Kitchener’s camel corps, and his horse artillery were forced into a hasty retreat when they were almost overwhelmed by Mahdist infantry. The slow-moving camel corps managed to withdraw to the zeriba, while the cavalry units led their Mahdist pursuers away from the main engagement and into the range of the Nile gunboats. Having dealt with the immediate threat, Kitchener then marched on Omdurman, and ʿAbd Allāh redeployed his still sizable forces.
Kitchener repulsed successive assaults on his right flank and rear, inflicting heavy losses, while the 21st Lancers ranged ahead of the main body of the Anglo-Egyptian army. Seeing what appeared to be several hundred Mahdist troops in a gully, the British cavalry charged, only to realize too late that there were perhaps 2,000 Mahdist infantry lying in wait. Lieut. Winston Churchill, who was attached to the 21st Lancers as a junior officer and war correspondent, described the scene:
The Lancers managed to fight their way out of the ambush but at a heavy cost, losing one-fifth of their number killed or wounded. This encounter did little to check the Anglo-Egyptian advance, however, and the Mahdist army was now in full retreat. Kitchener marched into Omdurman, grateful at having achieved his victory in the open field, thus avoiding potentially costly street fighting. The captured standard of the khalīfah’s Black Flag division was sent back to Queen Victoria in London, and dozens of European prisoners of the khalīfah were liberated. On September 4, Kitchener and representatives of every regiment under his command crossed the Nile into Khartoum, where British and Egyptian flags were hoisted and a short ceremony was held in memory of Gordon near the location of his death. Meanwhile, ʿAbd Allāh and the remnants of his army fled to El Obeid in Kordofan.
The Mahdist total losses at Omdurman were about 10,000 killed, 10,000 wounded, and 5,000 taken prisoner. The Anglo-Egyptian army suffered about 500 casualties. The results of the battle were the practical extinction of Mahdism in the Sudan and the establishment of British dominance there. Although ʿAbd Allāh remained at large with a considerable army, Kitchener was in no position to offer pursuit, as he was almost immediately embroiled in a territorial dispute with France over an abandoned Egyptian fort at Fashoda (now Kodok, South Sudan), nearly 400 miles (640 km) south of Khartoum. At stake were French and British colonial ambitions in Africa, and the matter was finally settled when France abandoned its claims in what came to be seen as Britain’s sphere of influence. One significant outcome of the Fashoda incident was improved relations between the French and the British, and, ultimately, the conclusion of the Entente Cordiale in 1904.
Although many Egyptians and Sudanese bristled at the Condominium Agreement of January 1899, by which the Sudan became, in essence, a British protectorate, ʿAbd Allāh proved unable to turn this resentment into a broader resistance movement. The British spent the year following the Battle of Omdurman consolidating their hold on the Sudan and crushing what remained of the Mahdist movement. In November 1899 a column of some 3,700 men was dispatched to Kordofan under the command of Sir Reginald Wingate to engage ʿAbd Allāh and what remained of his army. On November 24, 1899, at the Battle of Umm Diwaykarat, the Anglo-Egyptian force engaged the Mahdist remnants, and ʿAbd Allāh died in the fighting.
