Battle of Bouvines,  (July 27, 1214), battle that gave a decisive victory to the French king Philip II Augustus over an international coalition of the Holy Roman emperor Otto IV, King John of England, and the French vassals-Ferdinand (Ferrand) of Portugal, count of Flanders, and Renaud (Raynald) of Dammartin, count of Boulogne. The victory enhanced the power and the prestige of the French monarchy in France and in the rest of Europe.
The leaders of the coalition had planned for King John to land with his forces in western France, to stir up revolts in Aquitaine and Anjou, and then to march on Paris, while the imperial forces and those of the counts of Flanders and Boulogne advanced on Paris from the north. The plan failed when John was defeated at La Roche-aux-Moines, near Angers, on July 2, 1214; Philip was then able to take the offensive in the north. A decisive battle was fought in the marshy plain between Bouvines (Bouvignies) and Tournai in Flanders.
The battle began with cavalry fighting on the French right wing. In the center, the imperial army—containing powerful infantry from the Low Countries—drove forward, but the central French cavalry, commanded by Philip, forced the imperial infantry back. The French triumphed on their left wing, and William Longsword—Earl of Salisbury—was taken prisoner. The French cavalry were also victorious on the right, and Count Ferdinand of Flanders was captured. Finally, in the center, the two blocks of mounted reserves met and France triumphed once more: the two wings closed in to cut off the retreat of the imperial army’s central parts. Renaud of Boulogne made a brave last stand but was eventually captured.  The furious contest ended in a clear French victory: Renaud and Ferdinand were taken prisoner, though Otto managed to escape.
As a result of the two battles, Philip Augustus was confirmed in possession of most of the former English lands in France, and King John was so badly weakened that he faced the growing opposition of his barons and was forced to sign the Magna Carta charter of rights the following year. Emperor Otto was deposed by Frederick II Hohenstaufen.
Losses: French, 1,000 of 15,000; Coalition, 1,000 dead and 9,000 captured of 25,000.
