Battle of Trasimene,  (June 217 bce), second major battle of the Second Punic War, in which the Carthaginian forces of Hannibal defeated the Roman army under Gaius Flaminius in central Italy. Many of the Roman troops, mainly infantry, were forced into Lake Trasimene (modern Lake Trasimeno), where they drowned or were massacred. The battle proved to Rome that Hannibal was a formidable enemy who was best avoided, a realization that inspired the Fabian strategy of nonengagement.
In early 217 bce Hannibal marched his army across the Apennines, following the Arno River. The Roman general Gaius Flaminius stationed his legions in Arretium (modern Arezzo) with the intention of stopping Hannibal’s advance. Flaminius was not a patrician but a populist of the plebeian class, and his ambitions were matched by his arrogance and his desire to sway public opinion in his favour. He was heavily disparaged—especially by the Roman historian Livy—for leaving Rome without observing the proper rituals of a new consul.
Hannibal altered his route into the heart of Etruria by going through the Arno marshes for four days and three nights. Some of his Celt allies became sick in the marshes, and Hannibal himself lost his right eye to an infection in the swamp. Once Hannibal’s army had recovered from its ordeal, it began to ravage the countryside in an effort to draw the Romans into battle. Had Flaminius been a more-assertive general, he likely could have destroyed Hannibal’s waterlogged army as it exited the swamp. Instead, Hannibal was able to set up an ambush at a place of his choosing. Rather than continuing directly south along the Val di Chiana toward the Tiber River valley and eventually Rome itself, Hannibal waited until he was sure the army of Flaminius had followed him from Arretium. Then, in view of Flaminius, Hannibal’s army turned abruptly east in the direction of Perusia (modern Perugia), along the narrow north shore of Lake Trasimene, under the hill town of Curtun (modern Cortona). Hannibal timed the maneuver so that Flaminius could see where he had gone just as darkness fell. The Romans camped outside the valley while Hannibal’s forces took up their carefully planned positions during the night.
In the morning an overeager Flaminius neglected to dispatch advance scouts, and the Romans marched under the hills, where masterful positioning and a heavy fog off Lake Trasimene had concealed elements of Hannibal’s army. Hannibal’s African and Iberian veterans were positioned in plain view at the east end of the valley, and his cavalry and Gallic troops were secreted in the heights above. Once the Roman advance troops had reached the main body of Hannibal’s forces and the Roman rear had cleared the mouth of the valley, the ambushers swept down from the hills. The Roman rear guard was massacred by Hannibal’s cavalry. Thousands of Romans were forced into the lake, where they drowned in heavy armour or were immobilized by mud and cut down by cavalry. The unexpected speed of the ambush and poor visibility from the fog prevented the Romans from organizing into proper battle formations, further reducing their combat effectiveness. Some 6,000 Romans in the vanguard managed to force their way east through Hannibal’s Africans and Iberians but were soon captured by the Carthaginian officer Maharbal. Roman co-consul Gnaeus Servilius Geminus sent a contingent of 4,000 men to reinforce Flaminius from Ariminum (modern Rimini), but Maharbal captured them en route, thus completing the Roman defeat.
Military historian Basil Liddell Hart called the Battle of Trasimene “the greatest ambush in history.” The Roman losses were at least 15,000 dead, including Flaminius himself, whose possibly decapitated body could not be identified and buried. An additional 15,000 Romans were taken prisoner, whereas Hannibal may have lost only 1,500 soldiers overall in the battle. Rome was left bewildered and traumatized, leading some historians to wonder why Hannibal did not then march on the capital. Hannibal no doubt knew the city was stoutly defended, however, and that his small and mobile army was well-suited for marauding but ill-equipped for a protracted siege.
