Battle of Carillon,  (July 8, 1758), one of the bloodiest conflicts of the French and Indian War (1754–63) and a major defeat for the British.  It was fought at Fort Carillon on the shores of the southern tip of Lake Champlain on the border of New York and Vermont. (The battle is also known as the Battle of Ticonderoga, for Fort Carillon was renamed Ticonderoga after the British retook it the following year.)
After losing several battles in 1757, and in retaliation in particular for the massacre of British colonists by France’s American Indian allies at Fort William Henry that year, the British went on the offensive in 1758 and sought to recapture strategical points held by the French. The British were nominally led by the elderly and inept Major General James Abercrombie, but the real leader of the troops was the savvy and energetic Brigadier General Lord George Howe. The French were led by Major General Louis-Joseph de Montcalm. British forces and their American allies totalled some 15,000–16,000 men, the French army comprised a mere 3,600.
Montcalm sent Captain Trépezet and 350 men to scout the British troops that had landed on northern end of Lake George, south of Fort Carillon, on July 6.  The French were entrenched at Fort Carillon, from which Montcalm had launched his successful battle for Fort William Henry the year before.  Now vastly outnumbered, Montcalm built a fortified line of defense, which included a nearly impenetrable thicket of brush and abatis (sharpened wooden stakes stuck in the ground, pointing at advancing troops) on the crest of a hill outside of the fort.  After receiving reports of the large size of the British forces, Montcalm ordered the return of Trépezet and his men.
While Howe and his British troops pressed northward, they ran into Trepezet and his retreating force on July 6.  A skirmish followed, in which the British successfully fought off the French, but Howe was killed in the process.  This was a devastating turn-of-events for the British, for it left command of the British forces in the hands of the incompetent Abercrombie, who then dawdled in indecisiveness. Finally ill-advised by scouts that the French defensive position at nearby Fort Carillon could easily be overrun without the use of artillery, Abercrombie issued a full frontal assault, leaving the majority of his artillery at the army’s landing site.
Instead of a coordinated attack on July 8, the British assault began piecemeal around 12:30 pm, and by 2:00 p.m. the first assault had failed.  The abatis hampered British efforts to reach the fort and allowed the French to rain devastating musket fire onto the advancing troops. Additional frontal attacks were ordered, and despite the heroic effort of the troops, the assaults were to no avail.  The carnage continued into the evening, until finally Abercrombie ordered a full retreat and a return to not just their landing site but to fortified area south of Lake George, making a follow-up siege of the fort with his still formidable army and artillery impossible.
The Battle of Carillon was a humiliating defeat for Britain.  Some 2,000 British troops had been killed or wounded, including some 350 American troops from New England.  French casualties totaled around 350, with additional 200 killed or wounded in the earlier skirmish on July 6.  In the wake of the defeat Ambercrombie was recalled to England and replaced by the more competent General Jeffrey Amherst, who successfully retook the fort the following year, renaming it Fort Ticonderoga.
The French naturally hailed the Battle of Carillon as a great victory, and its effect was significant: it helped the stave off the eventual fall of Canada.  The French victory banner, the flag of Carillon, later served as inspiration for the Québec provincial flag.
