Battle of Anzio,  (22 January–5 June 1944), World War II event on the coast of Italy, south of Rome. Intended as a daring outflanking move that would open up the way to the capture of Rome, the Anzio landings degenerated into World War II deadlock: the Allies unable to drive forward from their bridgehead and the Germans without the means to push the invaders back into the sea.
Having failed to break through the German Gustav Line, the Allies proposed to land an amphibious force on the (western) Italian coast behind German lines. A combined U.S.-British operation, under the command of Major General John Lucas’s U.S. VI Corps, it lacked the resources to be effective. The landings on 22 January did, however, achieve complete surprise and were virtually uncontested. Lucas then made the much-criticized decision not to exploit this opportunity; instead of pushing forward, he decided to consolidate his beachhead, leading Winston Churchill to famously quip, “I had hoped we were hurling a wildcat into the shore, but all we got was a stranded whale.”
Responding with their customary alacrity, the Germans soon had the Allied troops corralled within a tight perimeter. The geography favored the Germans, too; they held a ring of high ground above the Allied position and poured down a massive volume of artillery fire on the soldiers holding the marshy ground below. Both sides reinforced their positions, which further encouraged a tactical stalemate, conditions reminiscent of World War I.
Lucas was made a scapegoat and replaced by Major General Lucien Truscott, but he too could do little to break the deadlock. It was only the slow, relentless pressure applied on land and in the air throughout Italy that forced the Germans to give way. On 25 May, with the Germans in retreat, the men from the Anzio bridgehead met up with Allied troops fighting their way up from the south. On 5 June, the Allies marched into Rome unopposed.
Losses: Allied, 7,000 dead, 36,000 wounded, missing, or captured of 150,000 troops; German, 5,000 dead, 4,500 captured, 30,000 wounded or missing of I35,000 troops.
