Battle of Tannenberg,  (August 26–30, 1914), World War I battle fought at Tannenberg, East Prussia (now Stębark, Poland), that ended in a German victory over the Russians. The crushing defeat occurred barely a month into the conflict, but it became emblematic of the Russian Empire’s experience in World War I.
The opening encounters on the Eastern Front had been marked by rapid changes of fortune; the greater distances and the greater differences between the equipment of the armies ensured a fluidity which was lacking in the West. The Austrian command, emulating the German in violating the Clausewitzian principle of Schwerpunkt (“concentration”), detached part of its strength in an abortive attempt to crush Serbia. An Austrian plan to cut off Russia’s territory in the former Congress Kingdom of Poland was further crippled by the fact that the German claw of the pincers did not operate. The German claw was, indeed, being menaced by a Russian pair of pincers instead. To ease the pressure on France, the Russian commander in chief,  Grand Duke Nicholas (Nikolay Nikolayevich, a cousin of Emperor Nicholas II), had urged his First and Second armies to invade East Prussia before they had achieved full readiness. Because the Russians had more than a two-to-one superiority, a combined attack had every chance of destroying the Germans between the two armies.
The man who was, in large measure, responsible for the blundering execution of this plan was also responsible for the disastrous invasion’s being made, and being made before Russian forces were ready. This was Gen. Yakov Grigoryevich Zhilinsky, who as chief of the general staff until early 1914 had made the military convention with France whereby Russia pledged to put 800,000 men in the field by the 15th day of mobilization. This arrangement overwhelmed the cumbrous Russian war machine, which caused numerous cracks and local failures when it began moving. It also put a strain on the Russian headquarters staff, which consequently made decisions in a state of nervous flurry. Zhilinsky’s pledge to the French did not end with this promise, for the plan also envisaged an offensive against the Germans simultaneously with the main thrust against the Austrians.
Along the land frontier two Russian armies had been assembled, the First (or Vilna) Army (six and a half infantry divisions and five cavalry divisions) under Gen. Paul von Rennenkampf and the Second (or Warsaw) Army (10 infantry divisions and three cavalry divisions) under Gen. Alexander Samsonov. The two armies formed a group under the higher control of Zhilinsky. Zhilinsky’s plan was that Rennenkampf should advance against East Prussia from the east, drawing upon himself the German defending forces, and then, two days later, Samsonov was to cross the German province’s southern frontier and bestride the Germans’ rear, cutting them off from the Vistula.
The fault of this plan lay not in the conception but in the execution. Its potential value was well proved by the alarm—indeed, the dislocation of mind—caused in the German headquarters when the menace was disclosed. However, it suffered two natural handicaps, apart from faulty leadership and military unreadiness. The first was that the two armies were separated by the 50-mile (80-km) chain of the Masurian Lakes in southern East Prussia, which, in conjunction with the fortified Königsberg area (now Kaliningrad, Russia) on the west, narrowed Rennenkampf’s line of advance to a gap only about 40 miles (64 km) wide. Second, the Russians’ own invasion from the south was now to be handicapped by the fact that they had left the border country a desert, with poor railways and worse roads, as a barrier against a German invasion.
Rennenkampf crossed the eastern frontier of East Prussia on August 17 and threw back the bulk (seven infantry divisions and one cavalry division) of Gen. Max von Prittwitz’s Eighth Army at the Battle of Gumbinnen (now Gusev, Russia) on August 19–20. By this time Samsonov had reached the southern frontier of East Prussia to advance against Friedrich von Scholtz’s XX Corps. He had been so hurried on by Zhilinsky that his troops were tired and hungry, their transport incomplete, and the supply services in chaos. Samsonov’s appearance was reported to Prittwitz on August 20, and the Russian force was under, rather than over, estimated by the Germans. Prittwitz was unnerved by the news, though the XX Corps was not. That evening he called two of his staff, Gen. Paul Grünert and Lieut. Col. Max Hoffmann, into his office in the headquarters at Neidenburg (now Nidzica, Poland)—uncomfortably close to the southern frontier—where his chief of staff, Gen. Georg Friedrich Wilhelm, Graf (count) von Waldersee, was also present. Prittwitz, fearing that the Russians would advance on the German rear and cut off his line of retreat, anxiously reported, “the army will therefore break off the fight and retire behind the Vistula.” Both Grünert and Hoffmann protested, urging that the German counterthrust on the Gumbinnen front should first be driven home, that there was adequate time, and that, in any case, a precipitate retreat without fighting would give Samsonov, who was much nearer the Vistula than the Germans at Gumbinnen were, the chance to cut off the main German forces. Prittwitz, however, curtly told them that the decision rested with him and not with them. He then left the office, leaving them to continue the argument with Waldersee—and, eventually, to persuade him to take bolder measures.
It was decided that, to gain time and room, an attack should be launched against Samsonov’s left, or western, flank; for this purpose, three divisions should be railed back from the Gumbinnen area to reinforce the XX Corps, while the remainder of the force there, the I Reserve Corps and Gen. August von Mackensen’s XVII Corps, were to retreat westward by road. This disposition of forces would be the foundation of the Tannenberg maneuver. On returning to the office, Prittwitz agreed to their moves and spoke no more of retiring behind the Vistula. The next day he grew quite cheerful when word came that his forces had been disengaged safely from Rennenkampf’s front and that Samsonov had almost come to a standstill. On August 22, when the German Eighth Army headquarters had been moved north to Mühlhausen (Młynary), a bombshell was exploded by a telegram which announced that a special train was on its way with a new commander in chief for the Eighth Army, Paul von Hindenburg. Accompanying Hindenburg as his chief of staff was the hero of the Liège attack, Erich Ludendorff.
Not until later did the astonished staff discover the clue to this dramatic upset. While Prittwitz was out of the office during the discussion on August 20, he had telephoned not only Mackensen and the lines-of-communication authorities to tell them that he was going to retire behind the Vistula but also the Supreme Command—then at Koblenz on the Rhine—and had even told chief of the German General Staff Helmuth von Moltke that he could hold the Vistula line only if he received reinforcements. To crown his nerve-broken folly, he forgot to tell his staff officers of these conversations when he came back, so that they had had no grounds for communication with Moltke about the change of plan.
Developing a plan which, with the necessary movements, had been initiated by Hoffmann, Ludendorff concentrated some six divisions against Samsonov’s left wing. This force, inferior in strength to the Russians, could not have been decisive. However, Ludendorff, finding that Rennenkampf was still near Gumbinnen, took the calculated risk of withdrawing the rest of the German troops, except the cavalry screen, from that front and rushing them back against Samsonov’s right wing. This daring move was aided by the absence of communication between the two Russian commanders and by the ease with which the Germans deciphered Samsonov’s wireless orders to his corps. Under the converging blows Samsonov’s flanks would be crushed and his centre surrounded.
The calculated daring of the Tannenberg plan owed much to an earlier experience of Hoffmann’s. Alfred, Graf von Schlieffen, with discerning insight, had picked this impishly brilliant young captain to go as an observer with the Japanese forces in the Russo-Japanese War. There Hoffmann learned much about the Russian Army—not least that two generals, Rennenkampf and Samsonov, represented dueling factions within the upper levels of command. Thus, in Hoffmann’s judgment, Rennenkampf would be in no hurry to aid Samsonov by pressing on from Gumbinnen. He had also learned in Manchuria the incredible carelessness of Russian communication methods. This knowledge led him, in August 1914, to accept intercepted Russian wireless orders, sent out “in clear,” as authentic, whereas his seniors were distrustfully inclined to regard them as an artful deception.
Upon his arrival in East Prussia on August 23, Ludendorff was pleasantly surprised to find that the movements already in progress fitted in with his own half-formed plan, and he confirmed Hoffmann’s arrangements. Then, on August 25, intercepted wireless messages showed him the slowness of Rennenkampf’s movements. He began to think that he could use Mackensen’s XVII Corps as well, leaving only the cavalry to watch and occupy Rennenkampf. Thereby he might strike hard not at one but at both of Samsonov’s flanks and bring off a decisive double envelopment.
Samsonov, meantime, had been staggering forward, driven on by telegraphic lashes from Zhilinsky, who had jumped to the conclusion that the Germans were doing what Prittwitz had contemplated—retreating to the Vistula. In driving Samsonov on to cut them off, Zhilinsky not only neglected to hasten Rennenkampf but even diverted his energy by orders to invest Königsberg. Meanwhile, Samsonov’s army was spread out over a front of nearly 60 miles (almost 100 km), and his right, centre, and left were widely separated. If they had been linked by mobility, this width might have been an advantage, but with sluggish troops and bad roads it became a danger.
Scholtz’s XX Corps had been slowly giving way and wheeling back before the advance of the Russian centre (XIII and XV Corps), toward the Allenstein-Osterode (Olsztyn-Ostróda) line. Fearing the effect of a further retirement, Ludendorff ordered Gen. Hermann von François, with his I Corps (on the right of Scholtz’s XX), to attack on August 26 and to break through the Russian left wing (I Corps and two cavalry divisions) near Usdau (Uzdowo).
The real crisis of the battle, as a whole, came on August 27. That morning François, now amply supplied with shells, opened a fierce bombardment on the position of the Russian left wing near Usdau. The demoralized Russian troops broke in flight without waiting for the German infantry. François ordered the pursuit to be made toward Neidenburg, to get across the rear of the Russian centre, but a Russian counterattack against his outer flank caused him to wheel south toward Soldau (Działdowo). At daybreak on August 28, however, discovering that the beaten Russian left wing had retired precipitately from Soldau across the frontier, François once more turned his forces eastward to Neidenburg.
By the night of August 29, François’s troops held the road from Neidenburg to Willenberg (Wielbark), with a chain of entrenched posts between. This formed a barricade across the line of retreat of the Russians, who were now flowing back and becoming inextricably mixed in the forest maze which François had avoided. With its rear closed and its roads congested, the Russian centre (XIII, XV, and half XXIII corps) dissolved into a mob of hungry and exhausted men, who beat feebly against the ring of fire and then surrendered in the tens of thousands.
The crowning scene of the tragedy was enacted by Samsonov himself, who had moved up from Neidenburg on August 27 to control the battle, only to find himself caught up in the swirling eddies of the retreat. Unable to do anything, he turned and rode south again on August 28, only to get lost in the depths of the forest. In the early morning hours of August 30, he turned aside, and his absence was unnoticed by his staff until a solitary shot rang out. He had taken his own life rather than survive the disaster; his body was ultimately recovered by German troops.
The Russians lost 30,000 killed or wounded, while the Germans sustained a total of only 13,000 casualties. Some 92,000 Russian prisoners were taken, two and a half army corps annihilated, and the remaining half of Samsonov’s army severely shaken. The Russians also lost 400 artillery pieces and other vital war matériel. The Germans were certainly favoured by Russian mistakes—above all, by the folly in dispersing the fog of war by sending unciphered wireless messages. Yet if allowance is made for these flashes of light, due account should be taken of the difficulties of campaigning in this region. The German victory at Tannenberg remains a singular achievement, as its scale was unique in the history of the war. Ludendorff was not the designer of victory, and still less Hindenburg. To Hoffmann is due the chief credit of the design, even if Prittwitz and Ludendorff have some share for accepting it in turn. Nor was Ludendorff even the agent of victory, for François’s share was the most essential.
Still, Tannenberg was not a second Cannae, deliberately planned and carried through to conclusion. The aim from the outset had been to break the force of the Russian invasion, not to surround a Russian army. Indeed, the idea of the double envelopment was an afterthought, which became possible only when Rennenkampf continued to remain passive. The Germans were also unable to extend their tactical victory at Tannenberg to the strategic level.
After Tannenberg and the arrival of two fresh army corps from the Western Front, the Germans turned on the slowly advancing Rennenkampf, whose lack of energy was partly due to his losses at Gumbinnen and to his subsequent lack of information. Attacked on a line extending from east of Königsberg to the southern end of the chain of the Masurian Lakes (September 5–17), Rennenkampf was driven from East Prussia. As a result of these East Prussian battles, Russia had lost 250,000 men and, what could be afforded still less, much war matériel. The invasion of East Prussia had at least, by causing the dispatch of two corps from the west, helped to make possible the French comeback on the Marne.
