Battle of Pavia,  (Feb. 24, 1525), the decisive military engagement of the war in Italy between Francis I of France and the Habsburg emperor Charles V, in which the French army of 28,000 was virtually annihilated and Francis himself, commanding the French army, was left Francis a prisoner of his archenemy, Hapsburg Emperor Charles V. Francis was sent to Madrid, where, the following year, he concluded peace and surrendered French claims to Italy, exposing the land to Hapsburg domination.
In late 1524 Francis marched into Lombardy and occupied Milan. He then laid siege to the imperial-controlled city of Pavia. Emperor Charles sent an army under the Marchese di Pescara to relieve the siege. The imperial forces arrived outside Pavia and took up a position facing the French on the opposite side of a stream.
After three weeks of wary skirmishing, Pescara led a bold attack. He staged a night march several miles to the north and forded the stream. By daybreak a large part of his army was in place, threatening the open French left flank. Confused by fog that obscured the battlefield, the French commanders struggled to reorient their forces to meet this unexpected attack. Showing impeccable personal courage but limited judgment, King Francis led his armored cavalry in a medieval-style charge with couched lances. Unfortunately his horsemen rode in front of his cannon, making it impossible for the artillery to fire on the enemy. Francis’s Swiss mercenary pikemen showed no eagerness to fight, and forces under the Duke of Alençon failed to engage in the general confusion.
Spanish arquebusiers (soliders armed with an arquebus, the first firearms with triggers) took a heavy toll of the French, the veteran Duke of Tremoille falling with a ball through the heart. The imperial Landsknecht mercenaries, under Georg von Frundsberg, surrounded the renegade Black Band Landsknecht fighting for the French and annihilated them. Francis was carried off to captivity in Spain, where he was held for more than a year.
Losses: French, 8,000 of 20,000; Hapsburg, 1,000 of 23,000.
