Battle of Adrianople,  Adrianople also spelled Hadrianopolis, (Aug. 9, ad 378), battle fought at present Edirne, in European Turkey, resulting in the defeat of a Roman army commanded by the emperor Valens at the hands of the Germanic Visigoths led by Fritigern and augmented by Ostrogothic and other reinforcements. It was a major victory of barbarian horsemen over Roman infantry and marked the beginning of serious Germanic inroads into Roman territory.
The emphatic defeat of Emperor Valens by the Goths at Adrianople had revealed Roman vulnerability to "barbarian" attack. Fourth-century historian Ammianus Marcellinus wrote: "Never, since the Battle of Cannae, has there been such slaughter." Yet the Roman Empire in the east survived and fought back after this disaster.
Of Germanic origin, the Goths had settled territories to the north of the Black Sea. In the fourth century, they spilt westward in great numbers, dislodged by the emergence of the ferocious Huns from the Central Asian steppe. The Visigoths (Western Goths) were allowed into the Roman Empire as immigrants, to settle in frontier territories in Bulgaria and Thrace. The Ostrogoths (Eastern Goths) were denied permission to settle inside the empire, but crossed the frontier anyway. Relations with Roman officialdom soon deteriorated and the Goths rose in revolt.
Having taken control along the Danube, the Visigoths- led by Fritigern—and the Ostrogoths—commanded by Alatheus and Saphrax-headed toward Constantinople. Valens, Roman emperor in the east, led a large force out of the city to meet them. At Adrianople (now Edirne), they found Fritigern’s Visigoths camped atop a hill, their wagons ringing the summit in an impromptu fortress. Complacent Roman commanders launched the assault without waiting for the order; detachments came on piecemeal and the Roman forces milled around in confusion. In this disordered state they were charged by the Ostrogoth horsemen who, according to Ammianus, "descended from the mountain like a thunderbolt." The Goths annihilated Valens’s Roman army; by some accounts, the Romans lost upwards of 40,000 men. Valens, who had failed to await reinforcements from Gratian, his nephew and co-emperor, was killed on the battlefield.
Yet, despite this defeat, by 382, under Valens’s successor Theodosius, the Romans drove the Goths back to Thrace and achieved peace.
