Battle of Manila,  (4–5 February 1899), largest and first battle of the Philippine-American War, a war between the United States and Filipino revolutionaries from 1899 to 1902, an insurrection that may be seen as a continuation of the Philippine Revolution against Spanish rule. Filipino hopes that the U.S. defeat of their Spanish colonial masters in the Spanish-American War  of 1898 would bring independence to the Philippines were dashed when the United States annexed the islands for itself. The war began with a brief but bloody clash between Filipino independence fighters and U.S. troops in Manila.
After their naval victory over the Spanish in the Battle of Manila Bay in May 1898, U.S. troops occupied the Philippine capital, Manila. Relations between U.S. troops and native Filipinos deteriorated as it became clear that the Americans were there to stay. On 21 December 1898, the U.S. president, William McKinley, issued a Proclamation of Benevolent Assimilation taking over the islands. On 1 January 1899, Filipino leader Emilio Aguinaldo was declared president of an independent republic. A substantial Filipino rebel army dug into positions around Manila, which was occupied by U.S. troops. The Filipinos were short on equipment and lacked leadership, with no clear strategy or tactics.
As tensions rose, two U.S. sentries, who were on guard at Manila’s San Juan del Monte bridge on the evening of 4 February, fired shots at a Filipino crowd crossing the bridge. Within minutes, both sides were exchanging fire, and a group of Filipino rebels captured two U.S. artillery pieces. The next morning, at daybreak, U.S. general Arthur MacArthur gave the order to attack the Filipino trenches. U.S. troops captured a ridge to the north, overlooking the city, while troops to the south captured a village containing Filipino supplies. The population of the city failed to rise in support of the rebels. Filipino units continued to skirmish with U.S. soldiers on the city’s outskirts for several days until they were finally driven out. The battle for Manila was the prelude to a conflict that would last for three years.
Losses: U.S., 50–60 dead, 225 wounded of 19,000; Filipino, up to 2,000 dead or wounded of 15,000.
