Battle of Varna,  (November 10, 1444), Turkish victory over a Hungarian force, ending the European powers’ efforts to save Constantinople (now Istanbul) from Turkish conquest and enabling the Ottoman Empire to confirm and expand its control over the Balkans. The Christian retaliation against the advance of the Muslim Ottoman Turks had come to a disastrous end, opening the way to the Ottoman conquest of Constantinople.
Murad II had resumed the Ottoman expansion in Europe, interrupted for a period after the disastrous defeat at Ankara in 1402. Fearing that the Ottomans would advance farther into central and western Europe, Pope Eugene IV called for a crusade. János Hunyadi, serving W?adys?aw III, king of Poland and Hungary, at first inflicted some sharp setbacks on the Ottomans, before a truce was agreed. The Christians made an elaborate plan for a campaign in 1444, in breach of the truce, considered nonbinding by the Christians since it was agreed with an infidel. The Venetian and Papal fleets were to cut the Ottomans off from reinforcement from Anatolia. This would allow a Christian army to destroy their forces in Europe.
But the naval blockade never happened and by the time the crusader army reached Varna, it faced a numerically far superior Ottoman army. At first, the battle seemed to go well for the crusaders, as Hunyadi formed and held a strong defensive line. But as the Ottoman troops fell back in the face of a cavalry charge, King W?adys?aw rejected Hunyadi’s cautious advice and led the bulk of his forces against the Ottoman center in a rash attempt to capture the Sultan. The Sultan’s elite bodyguard repelled the attack and the king was killed, his head displayed on a pike. The crusaders eventually retreated after taking enormous losses.
Following the battle, Poland remained without a king for three years. Unhindered by further major interference from the central European powers, the Turks extended their control over the Greek rulers in the Peloponnese, who had cooperated with the crusaders. With now no threat from the west, the Ottoman Turks proceeded to conquer Constantinople in 1453 and to reabsorb Serbia by 1459.
Losses: Christian, heavy casualties of 20,000; Ottoman, minimal of 50,000.
