Battle of Monmouth,  also called Battle of Monmouth Court House, (June 28, 1778), indecisive engagement in the American Revolution, fought at Monmouth, New Jersey.
The British surrender at Saratoga brought the French into the war as American allies in February 1778. The new British commander, Lieutenant General Henry Clinton, received orders to follow a defensive strategy and consolidate forces in New York City. He abandoned Philadelphia and  marched his army north. After a 40-hour halt at Monmouth Court House, the army moved out, leaving a small covering force. In order to strike a vigorous blow at the retreating enemy, American general George Washington ordered Charles Lee, commanding the advance guard, to attack the British rear. When Lee attempted to surround the small force at the courthouse, he was surprised by the arrival of Lord Cornwallis’s rear guard, which Clinton had ordered back to resist the attackers. Rather than risk fighting a delaying action on difficult terrain, Lee ordered a retreat but was tardy giving Washington notice. When Washington arrived, he was therefore surprised and indignant to find his Continental forces retreating in much disorder.
Washington arrived about noon, ahead of his main army, in time to see Lee’s men fleeing the battlefield. Outraged, Washington rallied and re-formed the men to delay until his following units were in a battle line. There were attacks and counterattacks by both sides throughout the hot afternoon, with numerous casualties as American and British cannon swept the field in the largest artillery duel of the war. The American left held steady while the advanced right wing under Major General Nathanael Greene was pushed back. Greene re-formed his units as part of the main battle line and fought on. Benefiting from their winter training at Valley Forge, the Continentals repulsed the British regulars and made bayonet counterattacks. By late afternoon both sides were exhausted and fighting stopped. Clinton rested his men until midnight, then he slipped them away to the coast and evacuation by the Royal Navy. Washington did not follow.
Having about equal forces, both sides claimed to have won victory, but the British claim seems more valid since Clinton was able to complete his march without molestation. Washington presently marched to the Hudson River to join the Continental Army there, while Clinton’s forces returned to New York. The combatants thus resumed the positions held two years before.
One of the lasting legends of the Battle of Monmouth concerns "Molly Pitcher," the nickname given to Mary Ludwig Hays McCauly, who delivered water to her husband’s battery to cool the cannons and the soldiers.  According to lore, when her husband was wounded or collapsed, "Molly" took her husband’s place as a member of the gun crew for the remainder of the battle.
Losses: American, 109 dead, 161 wounded, 130 missing; British, 207 dead, 170 wounded.
