Battle of Tora Bora,  (December 3–17, 2001), a U.S.-led coalition attack on the cave complex of the White Mountains at Tora Bora, Afghanistan, on the country’s eastern border with Pakistan. One of the most important military engagements of the first phase of the Afghanistan War, it was believed that al-Qaida-leader Osama bin Laden, mastermind of the September 11 attacks, was hiding out in the caves. Bin Laden escaped during the assault. Allied forces suffered no deaths in the battle; some 200 of bin Laden’s defenders are believed to have been killed.
In October 2001, a U.S.-led coalition launched a military intervention in Afghanistan, backing the Afghan Northern Alliance against the Taliban government and its al-Qaida allies. The invasion was an operation in the “war on terror,” following the September 11 attacks on the United States, for which the Americans believed al-Qaida was responsible. Al-Qaida was known to operate from bases in Afghanistan and had close links with the Islamic fundamentalist Taliban, who refused to surrender bin Laden.
After the U.S.-led intervention, Taliban resistance quickly crumbled. Bin Laden led several hundred of his followers to a network of fortified caves in the mountains of the Tora Bora region outside Jalalabad, where he was determined to make a stand. The Americans were equally determined to hunt him down and launched massive B-52 air strikes on the area as Northern Alliance militiamen and special forces from the United States, Britain, and Germany were assembled for an assault.
Al-Qaida fighters, armed with rocket launchers and mortars, were in easily defendable terrain and were expected to fight to the finish. CIA and Special Forces operatives were landed in the area of the caves on Dec. 3, and Northern Alliance forces gained control of the area at the base of the mountains on Dec. 5. Fierce engagements and intense round-the-clock bombing ensued over the next week or so, when the area and the caves were finally secured, but bin Laden had escaped. Although reportedly reluctant to flee, he was apparently persuaded to do so by his followers and found sanctuary in Pakistan’s tribal territories on the border. The U.S.-led coalition had failed to deploy sufficient troops in time to close all escape routes. Bin Laden was finally discovered and killed during an attack on this compound in Pakistan on May 2, 2011.
