Battle of Tippecanoe,  (November 7, 1811), victory of a seasoned U.S. expeditionary force under Major General William Henry Harrison over Shawnee Indians led by Tecumseh’s brother Laulewasikau (Tenskwatawa), known as the Prophet. The battle took place at Prophetstown, the Indian capital on the Tippecanoe River and the site of the present town of Battle Ground, near Lafayette, Indiana. Harrison, who was on a mission to destroy the power of an intertribal defensive alliance being promoted by Tecumseh and his brother, repelled the Shawnee attack and burned the village. Discredited, Laulewasikau fled to Canada.
Defeat at Fallen Timbers and the subsequent treaties did not end American Indian resistance to U.S. expansion into the Ohio Valley. The U.S. victory broke Tecumseh’s power and ended the threat of an Indian confederation. Tecumseh took his followers to join the British in Canada.
Shawnee chief Tecumseh and his brother, "The Prophet," worked to build a confederation of tribes, from Michigan to Georgia, to resist settlers. Indian attacks in the Indiana Territory persisted despite conferences with Tecumseh and warnings by Governor William Henry Harrison.
During the summer of 1811, Harrison assembled a force of 950 territorial militia and regular infantry. In September, he marched north from Vincennes up the Wabash River toward Prophetstown, Tecumseh’s main village near the Tippecanoe River. Tecumseh was absent, but on 6 November, a delegation from The Prophet appeared and arranged a conference for the next day. Harrison camped his men on a small rise of ground near the village. Wary of a trick, he placed them into a rectangular defensive formation with orders to remain on full alert. Ammunition was distributed, sentries posted, and bayonets fixed.
At about 4:00 AM on 7 November, hundreds of Indians attacked the north end of the camp, then all sides. The battle lasted more than two hours with hand-to-hand fighting in the dark. Some warriors rushed in seeking to kill Harrison, but missed him. Three times the Indians charged. Harrison, fighting on horseback at the front lines, led his small reserve to repulse each attack. At dawn, as the Indians fell back to regroup, Harrison counterattacked with the regulars and militia. Taken by surprise, the Indians scattered, hotly pursued by the mounted troops. The village and crops were destroyed.
Although the two sides suffered near equal losses, the battle was widely regarded as a U.S. victory and helped establish Harrison’s national reputation. In the presidential election of 1840, he successfully used the slogan, "Tippecanoe and Tyler, too!"
Losses: U.S., 62 dead, 126 wounded; American Indian, some 150 killed or wounded.
