Battle of the Frontiers,  (4 August–6 September 1914), collective name for the first great clashes on the Western Front of World War I.  It encompasses the initial battles fought along the eastern frontier of France and in southern Belgium shortly after the beginning of the war that resulted in a series of stunning German victories and Allied retreats.  The advance continued until the First Battle of the Marne (6–12 September), when a successful French and British counteroffensive along the Marne River near Paris, aided by 600 Parisian taxis that carried additional French troops to the front, finally halted the massive German advance, thwarting German plans for a quick and total victory on the Western Front and setting the stage for the years of trench warfare to come. These collective clashes can been seen as the largest battle in human history up to that time, given the fact that a total of more than two million troops were involved.
The commanders of the German and French armies had believed that the opening encounters of World War I would decide its fate. Both sides attacked with ruthless intensity, but French tactical ineptitude—massed infantry attacks against artillery and machine guns—nearly brought disaster for France.
German strategy in 1914 dictated that its forces must inflict a swift knockout blow against France before turning east to take on Russia. Seven German armies were deployed, and, according to the Schlieffen Plan, the three larger armies would conduct a sweeping maneuver through Belgium and northern France to trap and then attack the French in the rear. The four smaller armies would act to hold the French attack along the Franco-German borders. The French strategy consisted of a direct advance into German-held Lorraine, with a subsidiary attack in Alsace.
On 4 August, advance elements of the German army crossed into Belgium, with little resistance expected from the Belgium army. However, the unprovoked invasion of a neutral country brought Britain into the war against Germany. Although the Belgians could not stop the German advance, they continued to fight. The arrival of the British Expeditionary Force in Belgium caused the Germans some consternation, although the delaying actions at Mons and Le Cateau did little to slow the German advance.
The French offensive in Lorraine and Alsace swiftly turned into disaster, as attack after attack was repulsed with terrible casualties. Within five days, the French had been thrown back to their start line, except for a small strip of German territory gained near Mülhausen. As the Germans pressed forward, the Allied armies were forced to retreat all along the frontier throughout the month of August.
By early September, the German army had moved so deep into northeastern France that Paris was preparing for a siege when the Allied success at the First Battle of the Marne finally halted the German advance.
Losses: Allied, more than 200,000 casualties of 1,500,000; German, unknown of 1,450,000.
