Battle of Belleau Wood,  (1–26 June 1918), Allied victory, and the first major engagement of the U.S. army in World War I, that greatly boosted morale amid the German’s Spring Offensive.  The struggle for Belleau Wood announced to the Germans that the U.S. armed forces had arrived on the Western Front in strength and were eager to fight. It was a tough baptism of fire for the Americans but persistence and resolution secured them their first important victory in France.  The bravery of the U.S. Army’s 2nd Division, comprising the 4th Marine Brigade (the "Fighting Fifth" and 6th Marine Regiments) was especially noteworthy.  In recognition of their service and sacrifice, the French renamed Belleau Wood the "Bois de la Brigade de Marine"—Wood of the Marine Brigade—and awarded the 4th Marine Brigade the coveted Croix de Guerre.
As the Germans tried to extend and develop their offensive against the French on the Marne River, they came up against the U.S. 2nd and 3rd Divisions at Château-Thierry and Belleau Wood. Having been checked at Château-Thierry, the Germans advanced through the nearby Belleau Wood and then encountered more of the 2nd Division and a brigade of U.S. Marines. Neighboring French troops began to fall back and urged the Americans to do likewise, eliciting the famous response from U.S. Marine Captain Lloyd W. Williams: "Retreat? Hell, we just got here!" The Americans dug in and with a fine display of marksmanship held the German attack on 4 June.
The Americans went over to the offensive and attacked the German positions in front of Belleau Wood on 6 June, suffering heavy losses in the process (the highest in U.S. Marine Corps history until the Battle of Tarawa in 1943). A subsequent attack gained the Americans a foothold on the edge of the wood, but progress was painfully slow, the enthusiasm of the Americans being met by equal determination from the defending Germans. The fighting was relentless, much of it at close quarters and involving bayonets, knives, and even fists. The Americans launched six attacks before the Germans were finally expelled from Belleau Wood on 26 June.
Subsequently, the adjacent villages of Vaux and Bouresche were also secured by the American forces as the Germans fell back to new positions.
Losses: American, 9,777 casualties (1,811 killed); German, 9,500 casualties, including 1,600 captured.
