Battle of Marengo,  (June 14, 1800), narrow victory for Napoleon Bonaparte in the War of the Second Coalition, fought on the Marengo Plain about 3 miles (5 km) southeast of Alessandria, in northern Italy, between Napoleon’s approximately 28,000 troops and some 31,000 Austrian troops under General Michael Friedrich von Melas; it resulted in the French occupation of Lombardy up to the Mincio River and secured Napoleon’s military and civilian authority in Paris.
Although Napoleon considered Marengo to be one of his finest victories, his overconfidence prior to the battle almost led to disaster. His ultimate success owed much to the determination of the French infantry and the decisive interventions of his subordinate commanders.
Following his return from Egypt in October 1799, Napoleon exploited the muddled state of French politics and effectively seized power in France, naming himself First Consul in December. Turning his attention to the strategic situation in Europe, he decided to lead an army over the Swiss Alps to attack the Austrians in northern Italy, while French forces under General Jean Victor Moreau marched into southern Germany.
Napoleon’s Army of the Reserve secretly crossed the St. Bernard Pass, reaching the Po valley on 24 May with 40,000 men but only six guns. One of the French aims of the campaign had been to relieve the French garrison besieged by the Austrians in Genoa, but the city fell to the Austrians on 4 June. Despite this, Napoleon’s daring move through the Alps had placed his army squarely across the Austrian lines of communication. As a result, the Austrian commander, General Michael von Melas, withdrew his forces from the Franco-Italian border to give battle to the French near the fortified town of Alessandria.
Napoleon believed that the Austrians were about to retreat and he detached several formations to prevent them evading his net. Thus, when the Austrians decamped from Alessandria and crossed the River Bormida, the French were caught by surprise. Initially, Napoleon thought the Austrians were conducting a diversionary action, but it soon became clear that this was a full-scale assault; urgent dispatches were sent to the now dispersed French divisions to march to Marengo.
The Austrians advanced in three columns, Melas in the center with Generals Ott and O’Reilly attacking on the flanks. Major General Claude Victor’s corps bore the brunt of the Austrian attack, but it fought a determined delaying action. Ultimately, Austrian numerical superiority forced the exhausted French to retreat to a new position at St.  Guiliano Vecchio. French counterattacks were repulsed repeatedly, and it seemed that the Austrians would be victorious. This was certainly Melas’s impression; he retired from the battlefield to have a minor wound dressed, handing over command to his chief of staff, General Anton Zach.
Unknown to the Austrians, French reinforcements were beginning to arrive on the battlefield and included the formations of Major Generals Louis Desaix and Jean Boudet. Desaix, one of Napoleon’s most trusted lieutenants, spearheaded the counterattack. Supported by French artillery and the heavy cavalry of General François Kellermann, the French closed in on the Austrians. Although Desaix was killed, sustained French pressure and the chance explosion of an Austrian ammunition wagon provided Kellermann with an opportunity; his cuirassiers charged into the Austrian flank, causing confusion that turned into dismay when General Joachim Murat’s light cavalry joined in the attack. The whole French line went over to the offensive, forcing the Austrians back into Alessandria with heavy losses. Bottled in by the French, Melas was obliged the next day to ask for an armistice, which led to the loss of Lombardy to France.
Losses: Austrian, some 7,500 dead and wounded and thousands more captured; French, some 6,000 dead or wounded.
