Battle of Appomattox Court House,  (April 9, 1865), one of the final battles of the American Civil War. After a weeklong flight westward from Richmond and Petersburg, Virginia, Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee briefly engaged Union Gen. Ulysses S. Grant before surrendering to the Union at Appomattox Court House. This signaled the beginning of the end of the protracted Civil War.
Grant and his Army of the Potomac began their siege of Richmond and Petersburg, Virginia, in June 1864. After weathering nearly 10 months of starvation and desertions, Lee resolved to abandon the cities altogether and regroup in North Carolina with Gen. Joseph E. Johnston. First, however, Lee hoped to reverse his fortunes and attacked Fort Stedman outside Petersburg on March 25, 1865. Lee’s failure at Fort Stedman and a spectacular defeat at Five Forks on April 1 forced Lee and his Army of Northern Virginia to evacuate Richmond and Petersburg on the night of April 2, 1865.
The Confederate march thereafter was long and brutal. With an army of 55,000 to 58,000 men, Lee’s primary focus was on resupplying his soldiers at Amelia Court House along the Richmond and Danville Railroad. Lee was thus surprised and disheartened at the absence of rations upon his arrival at Amelia Court House on April 4. Food and supplies were critical to further westward advancement and their timely arrival even more so. As such, the Army of Northern Virginia was forced to remain at Amelia Court House until April 5, buying time for Union troops to close in.
When Lee departed from Amelia Court House, he saw that Grant’s army was marching parallel to his movements west along the Appomattox River. Lee determined that he would be unable to proceed southwest and into North Carolina as planned. He decided to alter his strategy and march west with haste toward Farmville, Virginia, where he would receive rations from the South Side Railroad. Union cavalry destroyed a significant number of Confederate wagons at Paineville, Virginia, an action that made a swift arrival at Farmville more imperative than ever. Lee successfully blocked a Union attempt to prevent him from crossing the Appomattox River at High Bridge—but not without casualties. Thereafter, he ordered night marches to outpace Federal soldiers and compensate for the day lost at Amelia Court House. However, a sizable portion of his fatiguing troops were cut off from the rest of the army at Sailor’s Creek on April 6. That day Lee lost eight generals and some 8,000 men. His weakened army reached Farmville on April 7, but the Confederate troops were unable to eat much before Union troops entered their view.
Lee briefly moved northward to Cumberland Church before retreating to the west. While at Cumberland Church he received a letter from Grant demanding his surrender. Despite mounting desertions and dwindling supplies, Lee refused Grant’s terms.
On April 8 Lee’s Army of Northern Virginia paused its march a mile from the small village of Appomattox Court House. Lee intended to resupply there before heading to Lynchburg, Virginia, and then south to Danville, Virginia. Unanticipated was the arrival of Union cavalry coming from the south under Gen. Philip H. Sheridan’s command. That evening Union Brig. Gen. George Armstrong Custer successfully led some of the cavalry against the Confederate supply trains at the nearby Appomattox Station. Although shaken, Lee hoped to break through to Lynchburg the next day.
On the morning of April 9, Lee ordered his cavalry, under the command of Gen. John B. Gordon, to attack Sheridan’s cavalry, which had blocked the Richmond-Lynchburg Stage Road. Lee commanded an army of nearly 27,000 soldiers, which paled in comparison to Grant’s force of some 63,000 troops, but he still intended to force his way through Union lines. The Confederate cavalry initially held their own and even succeeded in driving the Union horsemen from their position atop a nearby ridge. However, Gordon saw thousands of Union troops quickly approaching and sent word to Lee that his position was hopeless unless the infantry supported them. Lee’s infantry, however, was engaged with Grant’s Army of the James, which had approached the Confederates from the west under cover of night. Faced with no route of escape to Lynchburg, Lee agreed to negotiate terms of surrender.
Grant agreed to let Lee choose the meeting place at which they would discuss terms, so his aide chose the home of Wilmer McLean, a retired Virginia militia officer. With McLean’s consent, Lee arrived at 1:00 pm. Grant is said to have arrived a half hour later. Under the terms of surrender, Grant would not charge any member of the Army of Northern Virginia with treason, instead placing them on parole after the confiscation of their weapons. Lee agreed to these terms and departed the McLean residence at 4:00 pm.
While Lee’s surrender at Appomattox Court House marked the end of the war in Virginia, it was not the end of the Civil War as a whole. Johnston’s Army of Tennessee was still being chased by Union Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman. Smaller Confederate armies continued to fight throughout the Deep South and west of the Mississippi River. The war would not be officially declared won for the Union until August 20, 1866.
