Battle of Santiago de Cuba,  (July 3, 1898), concluding naval engagement, near Santiago de Cuba, Cuba, of the Spanish-American War, which sealed the U.S. victory over the Spaniards.
On May 19, 1898, a month after the outbreak of hostilities between the two powers, a Spanish fleet under Admiral Pascual Cervera arrived in Santiago harbour on the southern coast of Cuba. The Spanish fleet was immediately blockaded in harbor by superior U.S. warships from the U.S. squadrons in the Atlantic, under Rear Admiral William T. Sampson and Commodore Winfield S. Schley.
As long as the Spanish stayed within the protection of mines and shore batteries they could not be attacked, but nor could they challenge the U.S. blockade squadron. By July, however, the progress of U.S. land forces in Cuba put Cervera’s ships at risk from the shore. The Spanish admiral decided to attempt a breakout.
On 3 July, four cruisers and two destroyers steamed out of Santiago de Cuba. By chance, the flagship of Admiral William Sampson, commanding the blockade squadron, was off station. As the Spanish warships steamed along the coast, Commodore Winfield Schley led the pursuit on board USS Brooklyn. Cervera’s flagship, Infanta Maria Theresa, gallantly engaged Brooklyn in a delaying action in order to give the other ships a chance to escape, but in vain.
Battered by Brooklyn’s guns, the Spanish flagship ran aground, as did the cruiser Vizcaya, set ablaze after losing an unequal hour-long duel with the battleship USS Texas. The crew of the cruiser Oquendo scuttled their ship, and the two Spanish destroyers were sunk. The only Spanish ship to break the blockade was the cruiser Cristobal Colón. Fleeing westward, this final survivor was chased for 50 miles (80 km) by the swift battleship USS Oregon before it was overhauled. Colón’s captain scuttled his ship in shallow water to avoid futile loss of life.
To support the operation by land, U.S. troops (including the Rough Riders, a volunteer cavalry regiment led by Theodore Roosevelt) disembarked east of the city and penetrated its outer defenses. Between July 1 and July 3 they took the fortified village of El Caney and completed their assault on San Juan Ridge by capturing its highest point, San Juan Hill. The siege of Santiago de Cuba then began on July 3, the same day as the naval battle.
Two weeks later (July 16), Spain surrendered Santiago de Cuba. The U.S. victory ended the war, suppressed all Spanish naval resistance in the New World, and enhanced the reputation of the U.S. Navy.
Losses: Spanish, 474 dead or wounded, 1,800 captured,  all 6 ships lost; U.S., 1 dead, 1 wounded, no ships lost of 8.
