Battle of Corregidor,  (16 February–2 March 1945), the successful recapture by U.S. troops during World War II of Corregidor Island at the entrance of Manila Bay (called the “Gibraltar of the East”) in the Philippines, which had been surrendered to the Japanese on 6 May 1942, marking the fall of the Philippines.
The U.S. liberation of the Philippine island of Luzon began on 9 January 1945. By 7 February, U.S. forces were closing in on Manila. A major goal was reopening Manila Bay, and the final step in doing this was to retake Corregidor, the rugged island fortress guarding the mouth of the bay.
Intelligence estimated that only 600 Japanese troops were on Corregidor’s 1,735 acres (7 sq km); in fact, there were 6,000. During their occupation, the Japanese had expanded the network of underground tunnels and bunkers. On 14 February, a U.S. amphibious and airborne assault to retake Corregidor began with an air and naval bombardment. Hidden Japanese artillery damaged several ships. Two days later, the first of 2,050 U.S. paratroopers landed on two tiny drop zones on the island’s higher west end (Topside). Initial Japanese resistance was light, but increased steadily. The low drop altitude caused a high number of injuries. Navy PT boats circled in the bay looking for men blown to sea by the high wind. The 3d Battalion, 34th Infantry landed by boat at the lower east end of the island. The infantrymen moved quickly to capture Malinta Hill and clear the lower end. By nightfall, Topside and Malinta Hill forces had linked up. A third battalion arrived by boat on 17 February. As clearing progressed, Japanese soldiers raced out of tunnels for hand-to-hand fighting. Others died detonating ammunition stored in tunnels under U.S. positions. Hundreds were killed in night “banzai” attacks (human wave charges in which the Japanese soldiers would cry, “Tennoheika Banzai!”—”Long live the emperor”). Americans fired 75mm howitzers point blank in order to eliminate entire bunkers. By 2 March, organized Japanese resistance was over, but individual stragglers continued to appear for weeks.
Losses: U.S., about 210 dead, 790 wounded, 5 missing; Japanese, some 5,950 dead, 20 captured, 30 escaped
