Battle of Poltava,  (8 July 1709), the decisive victory of Peter I the Great of Russia over Charles XII of Sweden in the Great Northern War. The battle ended Sweden’s status as a major power and marked the beginning of Russian supremacy in eastern Europe.
In spite of his previous success against the Russians, Charles XII had not been able to challenge Moscow. By winter 1708, facing icy Russian weather and low on supplies, Charles headed south to the Ukraine. He found it difficult to supply his army, and began his spring offensive having lost 5,000 to 8,000 men. However, he still had an army of 25,000, and decided to capture the Russian fortress of Poltava on the Vorskla River. Czar Peter mobilized his forces to defend Poltava.
On 27 June, during the first skirmishes, a stray Russian shot struck Charles in the foot. The wound became serious and for two days Charles’s life hung in the balance. Although he recovered, he was unable to lead his army in person. Command was transferred to Field Marshal Carl Gustav Rehnskiöld and General Adam Ludwig Lewenhaupt. Knowing the Swedish lacked cohesive leadership, Peter crossed the Vorskla and dug in his army of 40,000 near Poltava. He set up a T-shaped series of redoubts in the woods southwest of his position along the route the Swedish would have to take to attack. The positions would provide flanking fire against the advancing Swedes and help protect the main camp.
On 8 July, the Swedish took the initiative and attacked just before dawn. Lewenhaupt was in command of the infantry, which advanced toward the main Russian camp. His original orders did not take the redoubts into consideration and some officers stopped to capture them, costing the Swedish time and casualties. One infantry battalion of 2,600 had been attacking the redoubts one by one. This left them completely isolated and they were forced to surrender, costing the Swedish one-third of their infantry on the field. The rest of the Swedish infantry had reached the narrow plain in front of the Russian camp by 8:30 A.M. They paused for two hours, waiting for the remainder of their infantry. Eventually, Peter decided to march his infantry forces of 20,000 out of the camp and drew up in two lines, supported by sixty-eight guns.
After forty-five minutes’ artillery barrage, the two forces advanced toward each other. The superior Russian numbers meant that they outflanked both sides of the Swedish infantry, which also lacked any coherent cavalry support. Lewenhaupt was able to break through the first Russian line, but he could not sustain his momentum and the Russians pushed forward against the exhausted Swedish soldiers, who were soon forced back. When the 10,000-strong Russian cavalry joined the fray, the battle turned into a rout, and the Swedish army retreated in complete disarray.
The Swedish losses at Poltava in terms of casualties and prisoners numbered more than 10,000. Three days later, most of the remainder of the Swedish army surrendered to the Russians at Perevolochna. Essentially, the Swedish army had ceased to exist. Charles managed to flee southward to the Ottoman Empire, where he spent five years in exile. Poltava was a major turning point. Russia could now dominate the Polish and Baltic lands without any Swedish opposition, and Peter became the leading ruler in the region.
Losses: Swedish, at least 10,000 dead, wounded, or captured of 25,000; Russian, 4,500 dead or wounded of 40,000.
