Battle of Breitenfeld,  (Sept. 17, 1631), the first major Protestant victory of the Thirty Years’ War, in which the army of the Roman Catholic Habsburg emperor Ferdinand II and the Catholic League, under Johan Isaclaes, Graf von Tilly, was destroyed by the Swedish-Saxon army under King Gustav II Adolf of Sweden. The battle marked the emergence of Sweden as a great power and the triumph of the new Swedish flexible linear tactics over the old massive infantry formations that had long dominated European warfare.
This first Battle of Breitenfeld was the first major Catholic defeat of the Thirty Years’ War. The winning general, King Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden, showed exceptional skill as a commander. His victory boosted Protestant hopes, which had been dashed by the loss at the Battle of Magdeburg.
On 15 September Gustavus Adolphus’s army of 23,000 joined 16,000 soldiers from the Electorate of Saxony. Gustavus Adolphus was eager for a victory to convince other Protestant states to join him. Twenty-five miles  (40 km) away in Leipzig, the imperial commander, Count Tilly, had an army of 35,000. On 17 September the two armies met on a plain near the village of Breitenfeld.
Tilly’s army drew up with his infantry flanked by cavalry. Gustavus Adolphus formed up in a similar fashion, but kept his lines separate from the raw Saxon army, which occupied a position to the left of the Swedes. From noon to 2:00 PM there was an artillery exchange in which the Swedish guns outnumbered those of the Catholics by fifty-one to twenty-seven. The Swedish cavalry moved to outflank their enemy, who in response launched a charge, which was unable to make any headway after two hours of fighting. Meanwhile, imperial forces attacked the Saxon army, which quickly fled the field. The rapid advance unsettled the imperial lines and the Swedish were able to reorder, creating a new left flank. At 5:00 PM Gustavus Adolphus launched a counterattack through the center. His highly trained troops forced back the imperial army, whose resistance ceased at dusk when thousands, including Tilly, fled the field. Gustavus Adolphus was thence feted as the "Lion of the North," and was able to draw several Protestant states into a major alliance.
Losses: Catholic, 7,000 dead, 6,000 surrendered on the field (and 3,000 the next day at Leipzig) of 35,000;  Swedish, 2,100 of 23,000; Saxon, 3,000 of 16,000.
