Battles of the Isonzo,  (1915–17), 12 battles along the Isonzo River on the eastern sector of the Italian Front in World War I.
Although it is now located in Slovenia, the Isonzo River at the time ran roughly north-south just inside Austria along its border with Italy at the head of the Adriatic Sea. The river is flanked by rugged peaks, and the Austrians had fortified the mountains prior to Italy’s entry into the war on May 23, 1915, giving them quite a considerable advantage over the Italians. The Italian general Luigi Cadorna launched his first attack against the Austrians on June 23. For 14 days the Italian army attempted to cross the river and scale the heights beyond, but they were beaten back. Again during July 18–August 3, October 18–November 3, and November 10–December 2, the Italians attacked, but they penetrated only a few miles into the Austrian sector at the cost of heavy losses. From March 9 to 17, 1916, Cadorna tried again—and again failed. In the sixth battle, August 6–17, 1916, Gorizia was captured and a bridgehead was secured across the Isonzo, the first real victories. In the next three battles, September 14–17, October 10–12, and November 1–4, the Italians changed their tactics to short, intense attacks in order to limit their casualties, but they still could not penetrate the formidable natural barriers protected by Austrian artillery. In the 10th battle, May 12–June 8, 1917, Cadorna struck in two places with massed troops and a larger number of guns but gained only a few yards of ground.
During August 19–September 12 the Italians struck again, this time with a total of 51 divisions and 5,200 guns, and they slowly pushed forward, dislodging the Austrians as they advanced. The Germans feared that the Austrian front might collapse and sent reinforcements. On October 24 the Austrian-German forces took the offensive, beginning with a heavy bombardment. By afternoon the Italian army was in a rout. War-weary and demoralized territorial troops threw down their arms, the Austrians poured over the Isonzo, and Caporetto fell, though many Italian units continued to fight as they retreated toward the Piave River, where they held the line on November 7, after one of the worst defeats in Italian history.
