Battles of Panipat,  (1526, 1556, 1761), three military engagements, important in the history of northern India, fought at Panipat, a level plain suitable for cavalry movements, about 50 miles (80 km) north of Delhi.
An overwhelmingly outnumbered Mughal force prevailed at Panipat. This was due to the resourcefulness of its commander, Babur, demonstrated in his use of field fortifications and his instinctive sense of the value of the firepower of gunpowder. The victory enabled him to lay the foundations for the Indian Mughal Empire.
A descendant of Timur, Babur became a refugee at the age of twelve when the Uzbeks seized Samarkand in 1494. At age fifteen he was back with his own warband. He laid siege to his home city, but without success. Undaunted, he headed south into Afghanistan. Capturing Kabul in 1504, he made it his base for raids into Central Asia’s Transoxania region. Increasingly, however, he found himself tempted by the unimaginable wealth of India. In the years that followed, he mounted a series of incursions into the Punjab.
These territories had for three centuries belonged to a Muslim empire, the Delhi sultanate. Although its prestige had been badly damaged by Timur’s triumph of 1398, it remained a powerful presence in northern India. At this time, the sultanate was under the control of an Afghan elite. A capricious and divisive ruler, Sultan Ibrahim Lodi had alienated many of his nobles. It was indeed a local lord in Hindustan who, in 1523, invited Babur to undertake a full-scale invasion.
Although he clearly was attracted by the idea of invasion, Babur was in no hurry. His army numbered only 10,000 men, so he made sure that they were well equipped  and superbly trained before committing to his assault on Hindustan. He took the time to train them in the use of gunpowder weapons, while making sure their skills in traditional steppe warfare were not neglected. Only at the end of 1525 did he embark on his invasion.
His army swept aside the Afghan force that marched out to meet it, so Sultan Ibrahim himself led a second army into the field, taking up a position at Panipat, to the north of Delhi. On 12 April 1526, Babur found himself confronted with an enormous multitude: 100,000 men and 1,000 elephants. Unfazed, he set about constructing an impromptu fortress on the open plain, tying 700 carts together and fronting them with earthen ramparts as protection for his cannon and for his musketeers with their matchlocks. As the days passed and a hesitant Sultan Ibrahim stayed his attack, Babur was able to consolidate his position still further. He dug trenches and felled trees, constructing barriers to the left and right, while leaving gaps through which his cavalry could charge.
On 21 April, Ibrahim finally made his move. His troops surged forward, only to be brought up short by Babur’s fortifications. As they milled about in confusion, the Mughal cavalry came wheeling in from the wings: the sultan’s force was effectively surrounded. At this point, Babur’s gunners opened up their bombardment from behind their barrier, firing at point-blank range into this close-packed mass. Unable either to advance or retreat, the Afghan army was cut down cruelly.
Not only was Babur now the undisputed ruler of Hindustan, but also the road to Delhi and the domains of the sultanate lay wide open. On the basis of this victory, he was able to establish a glorious new ruling line. In honor of its founder’s Timurid origins—and of the Mongol antecedents of Timur himself—this was to be known as the Mughal, or Mogul, dynasty. This victory marked the beginning of the Mughal Empire in India.
Losses: Mughal, unknown; Afghan, 20,000–50,000.
The Mughal Empire’s expansion, stalled after the death of its founder Babur in 1530, began anew under Babur’s grandson, Akbar. Fighting on a field that had proved so propitious for his grandfather, the young Akbar won a vital victory over the powerful Hindu ruler, Hemu.
Babur’s son Humayun had encountered serious setbacks, even losing his kingdom after it was conquered by the Pashtun warlord Sher Shah Suri in 1540. Rebuilding his forces in exile, he eventually took back his realms fifteen years later, leaving his son and successor, Akbar, with a great empire.
To the east of Akbar’s realms, the Suri general Hemu had set himself up as a strongman ruler; calling himself a king, he built a powerbase in Bengal. Aged just thirteen, Akbar seemed singularly ill-equipped to cope with this threat. However, he had rare gifts—and the support of his guardian, the accomplished general Bairam Khan. Hemu had unstoppable momentum, it seemed—having already taken Agra and the strategic fortress of Tughlaqabad, in October 1556 he captured Delhi. Too late to save the city, Akbar’s army let it go and stopped on the plains to the north, at Panipat.
On 5 November 1556, the scene was set for the Second Battle of Panipat.  Repeated elephant charges failed to break the resolve of the outnumbered Mughal soldiers. An inspiring figure, Hemu led from the front, perched high up on an elephant, an important talisman for his troops. He was also a tempting target for the Mughal archers, and initially they showered him with shafts to no avail, so impregnable was the headto-foot armor he was wearing. Eventually, though, one arrow found its way in through an eye-slit and killed him. Seeing their leader fall, the Hindus broke and fled.
The third battle (Jan. 14, 1761) ended the Maratha attempt to succeed the Mughals as rulers of India and marked the virtual end of the Mughal empire. The Maratha army, under the Bhao Sahib, uncle of the peshwa (chief minister), was trapped and destroyed by the Afghan chief Aḥmad Shah Durrānī.
Following the decline of the Mughal Empire after the death of Emperor Aurangzeb, the Maratha Confederacy had expanded rapidly, threatening the Afghan Durrani Empire, ruled by Ahmad Shah Durrani. Ahmad declared a jihad and launched a campaign that captured large parts of the Punjab. The Marathas responded by raising a large army, under the command of Sadashivrao Bhau, and recaptured Delhi. Ahmad’s campaign was aimed at starving the Maratha army of its supplies. At the same time, he led an army of 40,000 into the south to trap the Maratha army in the Punjab.
Cut off and starving, Bhau decided to break Ahmad’s blockade, spawning the two armies to face off at Panipat. The former attempted to pulverize the latter’s army with a massive artillery bombardment and then utilize his superiority in numbers to break the Durrani blockade and move south in a defensive posture. However, he was undermined by rivalries within his ranks and the need to protect many civilians. Durrani launched a surprise attack before the artillery had inflicted serious damage and Bhau’s nephew was killed. The Maratha commander entered the battle to recover his nephew’s body, but his troops thought him dead and their morale plummeted. The smaller Durrani army took advantage and routed them. Bhau escaped, to die sometime later, but the Maratha army had been destroyed and the unity of the empire was broken.
This began 40 years of anarchy in northwestern India and cleared the way for later British supremacy.
Losses: Maratha, 40,000 casualties and 30,000 captured of 80,000; Durrani, 5,000 casualties of 40,000–75,000.
