Brusilov Offensive,  Brusilov Offensive, (4 June–10 August 1916), the largest Russian assault during World War I and one of the deadliest in history.  At last the Russians had a capable commander, General Aleksey Brusilov, and in this offensive he inflicted a defeat on Austro-Hungarian forces from which their empire never recovered. It came, however, at a heavy price in terms of casualties, and Russia lacked the resources to exploit or repeat this success.
Brusilov was no military genius but possessed common sense and a willingness to learn from past failures. He also had an army that had recovered astonishingly quickly from the Gorlice-Tarnow defeat, which was the Central Powers’ major victory on the Eastern Front in 1915. Its troops were rested and supply problems eased. Where many Russian generals felt an offensive would be futile, Brusilov insisted that—with surprise and adequate preparation—it could succeed. His troops were trained in full-size replicas of the positions they were to attack, artillery was sighted using air reconnaissance, and secrecy was strictly maintained.
The blow, when it fell on 4 June, appalled the Austrians who were unable to believe the Russians capable of such a massive and accurate assault. Russian shock troops led attacks that broke the Austrian lines on the first day. Soon the Austrians collapsed, and many Slav units, who had no love for their Hapsburg rulers, deserted en masse. So many Austrian guns were captured that Russian factories were converted to manufacture shells for them.
As Russian forces pushed into the Carpathian Mountains, it appeared Austria-Hungary would collapse, and the emperor was forced to beg for German help. Russian commanders in the north did not maintain the pressure on the Germans that Brusilov expected, so the Germans were able to send assistance that stabilized the front. However, the blow to Hapsburg prestige was irreversible, especially among the Slav minorities, and Germany was forced to divert critical forces from the Western Front to the East.
Losses: Russian, 500,000–1,000,000 dead, wounded, or captured; Central Powers, some 1.5 million casualties (Austrian, 1,000,000–1,500,000 dead, wounded, or captured; German, 350,000 casualties; Ottoman, 12,000 casualties.
