buccaneer,  English, French, or Dutch sea adventurer who haunted chiefly the Caribbean and the Pacific seaboard of South America, preying on Spanish settlements and shipping during the second half of the 17th century. In their own day, buccaneers were usually called privateers; the word buccaneer came into use after the publication, in 1684, of Bucaniers [sic] of America, the English translation of De Americaensche zee-rovers, by the Dutchman Alexander Esquemelin (or Exquemelin), whose work was a fecund source of tales of these men.
The term buccaneer comes from the French boucan, a grill for the smoking of viande boucanée, or dried meat, for use in ships at sea. The French called their adventurers flibustiers (from the Dutch vrijbuiter, “freebooter”), and the Dutch called theirs zeerovers (“sea robbers”); the Spaniards called them corsarios (“corsairs”). The earliest buccaneers were hunters in western Hispaniola (Haiti) in the early 17th century. They spread from there to the island of Tortuga, the French governors of which were liberal in issuing commissions for attacks on Spanish maritime trade. Jamaica, after its capture by the English in 1655, also afforded a base for their activities.
The early buccaneers were usually escaped servants, former soldiers, and logwood cutters from the Campeche coast (in present southern Mexico). They exercised a democratic discipline among themselves when they went off “on the account,” electing their captains, marooning mutineers, arranging for the equitable distribution of shares of plunder, and drawing up elaborate insurance schemes for injuries suffered. Because they attracted to their ranks such remarkable men as William Dampier, Lionel Wafer, and Basil Ringrose, who wrote racy accounts of their adventurous cruises, they had a greater influence on later generations than was justified by their exploits.
The historical importance of the buccaneers lies chiefly in the influence that they had on the founding of the abortive Scottish colony at Darién, on the Isthmus of Panama (1698), and on the foundation of the South Sea Company and also in the way in which they inspired later and more serious voyages of exploration in the Pacific by the publicity that their writings enjoyed. Their stories also influenced such important authors as Jonathan Swift, Daniel Defoe, and Robert Louis Stevenson. The chief bond between these Brethren of the Coast, as they styled themselves, was hostility toward the Spaniards, who then regarded the Caribbean and the South Pacific sea lanes as their monopoly.
The buccaneers were largely inspired by the example of 16th-century seamen such as Sir Francis Drake, but they are to be distinguished from genuine privateers because the commissions that they held were seldom valid. They are also to be distinguished from the outlawed pirates of the 18th century, although many of the buccaneers’ actions can be called piratical.
The earliest buccaneers went under assumed names, such as L’Olonnais (Jean-David Nau) or Rock Brasiliano, a Dutchman who had lived in Brazil. With the appearance of Sir Henry Morgan, an outstanding leader, they began to organize themselves into powerful bands that captured Portobelo in 1668 and Panama in 1671. As the Treaty of Madrid (1670) had only recently been signed to compose Anglo-Spanish differences in those parts, the news of his success at Panama was not officially welcome. Morgan was brought back to England under arrest, but, on the renewal of trouble with Spain, he was knighted and sent out as deputy governor of Jamaica. He and his superiors attempted to suppress buccaneering, a task impossible without adequate naval patrols. The last great buccaneering enterprise was the unsuccessful attack on Panama in about 1685 by a force of about 3,000 men led by Edward Davis, John Eaton, Charles Swan, and others. On the outbreak of the War of the Grand Alliance in 1689, these freebooters became legitimate privateers in the service of their respective nations, and buccaneering came to an end.
