carpet bombing,  devastating bombing attack that seeks to destroy every part of a wide area. Some military strategists characterize “carpet bombing” as an emotional term that does not describe any actual military strategy. However, Article 51 of Geneva Protocol I prohibits bombardment that treats a number of clearly separated and distinct military objectives located within a city as a single military target.
Carpet or saturation bombing has its roots in the scorched-earth warfare practiced by the ancient Romans and others. American Civil War general William Tecumseh Sherman of the Union Army is credited with changing modern warfare by extending the battlefield to the enemy’s infrastructure. Sherman reasoned that the most effective way to win the war was to destroy the enemy’s ability to wage war. Destroying railroads, tearing up communication lines, and burning factories, homes, and plantations not only crippled the South but also psychologically weakened the will of the Confederacy to wage war.
During World War II, both the Allies and the Nazis rained bombs on enemy cities, destroying military and industrial sites along with schools, churches, and homes. The United States used similar bombing strategies during the Korean War, incessantly pounding North Korean positions in the hopes of driving the Communists to negotiate.
With the advent of television, which allowed the media to report from both sides of the battle lines, carpet bombing became less accepted. The destruction inherent in such bombing may weaken the will of the enemy, but it also weakens the resolve of the nation prosecuting the battle. During the Vietnam War, President Richard Nixon ordered carpet bombing of North Vietnam as well as Cambodia, which was believed to be supplying the Viet Cong. As civilian casualties mounted and media accounts of the destruction surfaced, public support for the carpet bombing diminished. Several nations complained about the U.S. raids.
Critics of the Persian Gulf War alleged that bombing raids on Kuwait and Iraq constituted carpet bombing. Although the U.S. Air Force claimed great success for its precision munitions and surgical accuracy, subsequent reports to the Geneva Convention indicated that almost 250,000 bombs were dropped during the war, with less than 10 percent of them precision munitions. About half of those precision munitions were antitank bombs (10,000). Critics claimed that the bulk of the assault on Iraq used conventional dumb bombs and that the sheer volume of those raids constituted carpet bombing.
Similar criticism was leveled against the “Shock and Awe” campaign that opened the Iraq War in 2003. Military strategists note that massive bombing raids are effective, but usually they are a prelude to ground invasions, as was the case in both Gulf Wars.
