Cyberwar, also spelled cyber war, also called cyberwarfare or cyber warfare,  war conducted in and from computers and the networks connecting them, waged by states or their proxies against other states. Cyberwar is usually waged against government and military networks in order to disrupt, destroy, or deny their use. Cyberwar should not be confused with the terrorist use of cyberspace or with cyberespionage or cybercrime. Even though similar tactics are used in all four types of activities, it is a misinterpretation to define them all as cyberwar. Some states that have engaged in cyberwar may also have engaged in disruptive activities such as cyberespionage, but such activities in themselves do not constitute cyberwar.
Computers and the networks that connect them are collectively known as the domain of cyberspace. Western states depend on cyberspace for the everyday functioning of nearly all aspects of modern society, and developing states are becoming more reliant upon cyberspace every year. Everything modern society needs to function—from critical infrastructures and financial institutions to modes of commerce and tools for national security—depends to some extent upon cyberspace. Therefore, the threat of cyberwar and its purported effects are a source of great concern for governments and militaries around the world, and several serious cyberattacks have taken place that, while not necessarily meeting a strict definition of cyberwar, can serve as an illustration of what might be expected in a real cyberwar of the future.
One of the first references to the term cyberwar can be found in “Cyberwar Is Coming!,” a landmark article by John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt, two researchers for the RAND Corporation, published in 1993 in the journal Comparative Strategy.
The cyberspace domain is composed of three layers. The first is the physical layer, including hardware, cables, satellites, and other equipment. Without this physical layer, the other layers cannot function. The second is the syntactic layer, which includes the software providing the operating instructions for the physical equipment. The third is the semantic layer and involves human interaction with the information generated by computers and the way that information is perceived and interpreted by its user. All three layers are vulnerable to attack. Cyberwar attacks can be made against the physical infrastructure of cyberspace by using traditional weapons and combat methods. For example, computers can be physically destroyed, their networks can be interfered with or destroyed, and the human users of this physical infrastructure can be suborned, duped, or killed in order to gain physical access to a network or computer. Physical attacks usually occur during conventional conflicts, such as in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s (NATO’s) Operation Allied Force against Yugoslavia in 1999 and in the U.S.-led operation against Iraq in 2003, where communication networks, computer facilities, and telecommunications were damaged or destroyed.
Attacks can be made against the syntactic layer by using cyberweapons that destroy, interfere with, corrupt, monitor, or otherwise damage the software operating the computer systems. Such weapons include malware, malicious software such as viruses, trojans, spyware, and worms that can introduce corrupted code into existing software, causing a computer to perform actions or processes unintended by its operator. Other cyberweapons include distributed denial-of-service, or DDoS, attacks, in which attackers, using malware, hijack a large number of computers to create so-called botnets, groups of “zombie” computers that then attack other targeted computers, preventing their proper function. This method was used in cyberattacks against Estonia in April and May 2007 and against Georgia in August 2008. On both occasions it is alleged that Russian hackers, mostly civilians, conducted denial-of-service attacks against key government, financial, media, and commercial Web sites in both countries. These attacks temporarily denied access by the governments and citizens of those countries to key sources of information and to internal and external communications.
Finally, semantic cyberattacks, also known as social engineering, manipulate human users’ perceptions and interpretations of computer-generated data in order to obtain valuable information (such as passwords, financial details, and classified government information) from the users through fraudulent means. Social-engineering techniques include phishing—in which attackers send seemingly innocuous e-mails to targeted users, inviting them to divulge protected information for apparently legitimate purposes—and baiting, in which malware-infected software is left in a public place in the hope that a target user will find and install it, thus compromising the entire computer system. In August 2010, for example, fans of the Anglo-Indian movie star Katrina Kaif were lured into accessing a Web site that was supposed to have a revealing photograph of the actress. Once in the site, visitors were automatically forwarded to a well-known social-networking site and asked to enter their login and password. With this information revealed by users, the phishing expedition was successfully completed. An example of baiting involves an incident in 2008 in which a flash memory drive infected with malware was inserted into the USB port of a computer at a U.S. military base in the Middle East. From there the computer code spread through a number of military networks, preparing to transfer data to an unnamed foreign intelligence service, before it was detected. As these above examples suggest, semantic methods are used mostly to conduct espionage and criminal activity.
The term cyberwar is increasingly controversial. A number of experts in the fields of computer security and international politics question whether the term accurately characterizes the hostile activity occurring in cyberspace. Many suggest that the activities in question can be more accurately described as crime, espionage, or even terrorism but not necessarily as war, since the latter term has important political, legal, and military implications. For example, it is far from apparent that an act of espionage by one state against another via cyberspace equals an act of war—just as traditional methods of espionage have rarely, if ever, led to war. Allegations of Chinese cyberespionage bear this out. A number of countries, including India, Germany, and the United States, believe that they have been victims of Chinese cyberespionage efforts. Nevertheless, while these incidents have been a cause of tension between China and the other countries, they have not damaged overall diplomatic relations. Similarly, criminal acts perpetrated in and from cyberspace by individuals or groups are viewed as a matter for law enforcement rather than the military, though there is evidence to suggest that Russian organized-crime syndicates helped to facilitate the cyberattacks against Georgia in 2008 and that they were hired by either Hamas or Hezbollah to attack Israeli Web sites in January 2009. On the other hand, a cyberattack made by one state against another state, resulting in damage against critical infrastructures such as the electrical grid, air traffic control systems, or financial networks, might legitimately be considered an armed attack if attribution could be proved.
Some experts specializing in the laws of armed conflict question the notion that hostile cyberactivities can cause war (though they are more certain about the use of hostile cyberactivities during war). They argue that such activities and techniques do not constitute a new kind of warfare but simply are used as a prelude to, and in conjunction with, traditional methods of warfare. Indeed, in recent years cyberwar has assumed a prominent role in armed conflicts, ranging from the Israeli-Hezbollah conflict in Lebanon in 2006 to the Russian invasion of Georgia in 2008. In these cases cyberattacks were launched by all belligerents before the actual armed conflicts began, and cyberattacks continued long after the shooting stopped, yet it cannot be claimed that the cyberattacks launched before the start of actual hostilities caused the conflicts. Similarly, the cyberattacks against Estonia in 2007 were conducted in the context of a wider political crisis surrounding the removal of a Soviet war memorial from the city centre of Tallinn to its suburbs, causing controversy among ethnic Russians in Estonia and in Russia itself.
Such qualifications aside, it is widely believed that cyberwar not only will feature prominently in all future conflicts but will probably even constitute the opening phases of them. The role and prominence of cyberwar in conventional conflicts continues to escalate.
