Democratic Constitutional Rally (RCD), also called Democratic Constitutional Assembly, formerly (1964–88) Destourian Socialist Party and (1934–64) Neo-Destour, French Rassemblement Constitutionnel Démocratique, Parti Socialiste Destourien, and Néo-Destour,  Tunisian political party that led the movement for independence from France (1956) and ruled Tunisia until 2011.
The Neo-Destour was formed in 1934 by discontented young members of the more conservative Destour. After a bitter struggle with the parent organization, it became the predominant party under the leadership of Habib Bourguiba in 1937. It was harassed by French authorities throughout the 1940s and began an armed rebellion in 1953 that led to Tunisian independence in 1956.
A Neo-Destour government was then formed. In 1958 Bourguiba was appointed the first premier of Tunisia, and in 1959 he was overwhelmingly voted president. Internally, however, the Neo-Destour had begun to split in the early 1950s, one group supporting Bourguiba, the other aligning itself with Salah Ben Yusuf, who had led the party when Bourguiba was imprisoned by the French. Ben Yusuf was expelled from the party in 1955, established himself in Cairo, and initiated a six-year guerrilla campaign against the Neo-Destour, the French, and Bourguiba. He was found murdered on August 14, 1961, and his followers soon disappeared.
The party meanwhile consolidated its hold on all levels of Tunisian society and constituted itself (1963) as the sole political party. Independence having been achieved, the party needed to develop an ideology beyond the struggle against colonialism. In 1964 it officially adopted a collectivist form of socialism and renamed itself the Destourian Socialist Party (Parti Socialiste Destourien; PSD). However, the internal politics of the party, the economic failures of the socialist experiment, and resistance from national organizations affiliated to the party resulted in the abandonment of what had always been a rather muted ideological position. The chief advocate of socialism, Ahmed Ben Salah, was expelled from the party and established his own party in exile called the Popular Unity Movement (Mouvement de l’Unité Populaire).
The PSD subsequently became divided between the entrenched old guard, who wished to preserve party hegemony, and an emerging group of liberals, who wished to see more democracy both inside the party and in the political arena as a whole. In 1975 a group of liberals broke ranks and later organized their own then-illegal party, the Democratic Socialist Movement (Mouvement des Démocrates Socialistes), under Ahmad Mestiri. With the question of succession to Bourguiba unresolved and with party elites unwilling to relinquish any of their control over patronage or power, the PSD subsequently atrophied.
In 1987 Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali executed a constitutional coup by invoking an article that allowed for the replacement of the president on grounds of death, illness, or incapacitation. Ben Ali subsequently assumed leadership of the party and set about reviving and reforming it through a number of measures. The party’s political bureau was reduced in size, and many of the old-style Bourguibists were removed and replaced. A massive recruitment drive designed to attract younger participants drew large numbers of new party members. Meanwhile, reforms in the relationship between state and party subordinated the party to government and reduced the influence of the party hierarchy on the government itself. A nominally multiparty system was permitted in 1988, but the other political parties lacked financial or organizational capacity to mobilize serious opposition. Elections were contested but not competitive, allowing the party to retain a monopoly over political activity.
In 1988 the party was renamed the Democratic Constitutional Rally (Rassemblement Constitutionnel Démocratique; RCD), marking a break with the Neo-Destour Bourguibist past and movement toward a new commitment to democracy. Under Ben Ali the party became firmly tied to an economic reform program that subsequently transformed both the structure of the economy and its performance, although crony capitalism and corruption remained rampant through the end of Ben Ali’s rule. Despite the espoused ideal of commitment to a more liberal political arena, the RCD continued to be closely linked to the regime and was consequently rewarded with a dominant position in virtually every national matter.
In 2011 the RCD suddenly lost its position of dominance in Tunisia when a wave of popular protests forced Ben Ali from power. In the aftermath of Ben Ali’s departure, a number of RCD politicians took positions in the interim government, angering protesters who sought a clean break with the Ben Ali regime. Under pressure, a number of the senior officials, including the interim prime minister, Mohamed Ghannouchi, resigned from the RCD. However, protesters continued to demand that the RCD be banned in Tunisia. After a violent protest in the city of El-Kef in early February, Farhat Rajhi, the minister of the interior, officially suspended the party. On March 9 a Tunisian court dissolved the RCD, liquidating the party’s assets and barring it from entering candidates in future elections.
