 I have spent much of my life creating art for peace in the face of war. As an artist, filmmaker, and photojournalist, I have witnessed more than three decades of wars from the front line, in Nicaragua, Cambodia, the Philippines, Somalia, Western Sahara, Palestine, South Africa, Northern Ireland, Mozambique, Rwanda, East Timor, Congo, Iraq, and Afghanistan. I have also witnessed triumphs of the human spirit, in Pretoria, for example, when Nelson Mandela delivered his “Rainbow Nation” speech, ending apartheid, at his inauguration as South Africa’s first black president; in Cambodia when the Khmer Rouge lost power; in Northern Ireland when the Troubles ended; and I have seen the ancient bridge of Mostar restored in Bosnia.
During my many times on the front line, I have traveled inside military vehicles and wandered into many war rooms. This has enabled me to observe how artificial intelligence is being integrated into the military war machine. The defense industry is rapidly developing robotic killing machines with artificial intelligence to replace or supplement human police and armies, a troubling displacement of the human element that is mirrored in the civilian sector.
[Will humanity murder itself with its own technology? Lewis Lapham has an answer.]
As people are increasingly made redundant, they will increasingly feel useless and angry, emotions that are easily channeled into violence. This will lead to wars on a scale the world has never seen. People need opportunities to create, or there is the risk of them becoming destructive. Moreover, with larger populations having fewer paid jobs, my fear is that the wealthy few will want to share less and less with the billions who will live without.
Those in power have anticipated this, and their solution is the rapid development of militarized robots with artificial intelligence.
Just as industrial robots are replacing humans in the workplace, militarized robots will take over from law-and-order officers. Monitoring of all communications on phones and the Internet, as well as the ability to watch and track people using surveillance cameras and via the individuals’ own personal devices, will mean protest can be forcibly prevented before people take it to the streets. (People delight so much in their smartphones that these and similar new tech gadgets have become Trojan horses by which their defenses can be breached.) Mass protests of the future, when they do occur, will likely face robots and armed drones.
I was at the Occupy Wall Street protests in New York City and wondered how long poorly paid police officers would remain committed to doing the will of the bankers, brokers, and wealthy politicians against fellow workers. If I was thinking this, then the super-rich looking down from their office towers must have been thinking the same. The general fear of terrorist attacks has been a perfect excuse to take away our rights of personal privacy. It also is an excuse to use public funds to pay for more and more effective tools for surveillance and militarized robotic law enforcement.
Imagine a massive rally similar to a Black Lives Matter protest in the U.S. coming face to face with a buzzing swarm of militarized flying drones, not human police with batons and shields but flying guns operated from a control room that, when triggered, will have pinpoint accuracy.
At our Yellow House in Jalalabad, Afghanistan, we are already witnessing the future as unmanned drones fly over every 15 minutes, loaded with laser-guided bombs. Those controlling the drones are half a world away, watching on computer screens, untouched by grief as their missiles detonate inside communities of flesh and blood. In the next phase similar drones will be autonomous, with a license to kill at their own mechanical discretion. Human soldiers and police have always been trained to obey authority, but they do have a conscience and can refuse callous and unreasonable orders.
At Kibeho in Rwanda I saw innocent women and children hacked to death with machetes. It is hard to understand how a species that has produced creative geniuses like Mozart and Rembrandt can continue to develop weapons that are more and more effective, especially with the aid of artificial intelligence, at killing its own kind. Human freedom will be lost as everything we think and do is monitored, and every action against authority is crushed by robots. The news and other media are being used to manipulate us into ignoring the threat, but more warning signs are needed as we rush toward this ominous future.
[Toby Walsh has seen what the Kalashnikovs of the future are, and he’s deeply concerned.]
At our Yellow House in Jalalabad, we have proven that art and creativity can work better in places of war to bring about positive social change and happiness. Human creativity has built a great civilization, but to survive the future we need to move beyond war and the greed of the few who want to control the many.
There is still hope for a better future wherever good people strive for creative solutions. We can evolve beyond war, but if we keep killing and destroying with increased efficiency, exhausting in the process precious money that could have been channeled toward addressing social ills, we are little more than rogue apes.
This essay was originally published in 2018 in Encyclopædia Britannica Anniversary Edition: 250 Years of Excellence (1768–2018).
