Enemy combatant,  extraordinary legal status developed by the administration of Pres. George W. Bush (2001–09) that permitted U.S. military authorities to detain indefinitely and without charge individuals so designated and to deny them other rights and protections afforded under the international law of war, including rights guaranteed to prisoners of war by the Third Geneva Convention (1949). In the view of the Bush administration, enemy-combatant status was necessary and appropriate for terrorists and other irregular fighters engaged in hostile actions against the United States, because they operated outside the standards of acceptable conduct by armed forces during wartime. The term was first applied to members of al-Qaeda, the Islamic terrorist organization responsible for the 2001 September 11 attacks in the United States, and to irregular fighters for the Taliban government of Afghanistan, which harboured members of al-Qaeda, including its then leader, Osama bin Laden, before and after the attacks.
Following the September 11 attacks, the United States invaded Afghanistan and toppled its government, capturing many al-Qaeda members and Taliban fighters in the process. Many of those individuals were transferred to a specially constructed prison at the U.S. naval base at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba. At the Guantánamo Bay detention camp, as the facility came to be known, some prisoners were subjected to interrogation techniques amounting to torture, including waterboarding, beatings, and sleep deprivation. In a separate program run by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), dozens of suspected enemy combatants were abducted outside U.S. territory and held in secret prisons (so-called “black sites”) in foreign countries or transferred for interrogation to countries that routinely practiced torture.
The Bush administration initially argued that the Guantánamo detainees, as it preferred to call them, were not entitled to basic constitutional protections because the base was outside U.S. territory; it also asserted that the Geneva Convention was inapplicable to the detainees because of their status as enemy combatants. In Rasul v. Bush (2004), however, the U.S. Supreme Court held that the detainees did have the right to challenge their imprisonment through habeas corpus petition filed in U.S. courts on their behalf. Four years later, in Boumediene v. Bush, the court struck down a provision of the Military Commissions Act (2006) that had barred foreign nationals held as enemy combatants from challenging their imprisonment in federal courts.
In 2009 the administration of Pres. Barack Obama announced that the detainees at Guantánamo would no longer be designated as enemy combatants, though they would continue to be held indefinitely and without charge under other legal authority.
