Events of May 1968,  student revolt that began in a suburb of Paris and was soon joined by a general strike eventually involving some 10 million workers. During much of May 1968, Paris was engulfed in the worst rioting since the Popular Front era of the 1930s, and the rest of France was at a standstill. So serious was the revolt that in late May the French president, Charles de Gaulle, met secretly in Baden-Baden, West Germany, with General Jacques Massu, commander of the French occupation forces, to ensure Massu’s support in the event that his troops were needed to retake Paris from the revolutionaries.
In the decade preceding May 1968, the French student population had nearly trebled, from about 175,000 to more than 500,000. It was an era of international “youth culture,” yet French society remained autocratic, hierarchical, and tradition-bound, especially in the eyes of French youth. As the May revolt erupted, de Gaulle was on the verge of celebrating his 10th year in office. He had acceded to power in 1958 via extra-constitutional means, because of the Fourth Republic’s disintegration at the height of the Algerian War (1954–62). French youth generally assumed that they were living under a quasi-benign political dictatorship. The two main opposition parties, the Radicals and the Socialists, had essentially collapsed, which meant that progressive political change via conventional parliamentary channels was all but ruled out. It was, moreover, an era of impassioned “Third Worldism.” For that generation of students, neither the French Communist Party nor orthodox Marxism held many attractions. Instead, its idols were Che Guevara, Ho Chi Minh, and Mao Zedong. Images of carpet bombing, napalm attacks, and massacres of civilians by U.S. forces in Vietnam —a former French sphere of influence—dominated the nightly news. For all of the foregoing reasons, French universities were a powder keg.
In retrospect, the event that precipitated the May revolt seems fairly innocuous. In 1967, students at the Nanterre campus of the University of Paris had staged protests against restrictions on dormitory visits that prevented male and female students from sleeping with each other. In January 1968, at a ceremony dedicating a new swimming pool at the campus, the student leader Daniel Cohn-Bendit verbally attacked François Missoffe, France’s Minister of Youth and Sports, complaining that Missoffe had failed to address the students’ sexual frustrations. Missoffe then suggested that Cohn-Bendit cool his ardour by jumping into the pool, whereupon Cohn-Bendit replied that Missoffe’s remark was just what one would expect from a fascist regime. The exchange earned Cohn-Bendit a reputation as an antiauthoritarian provocateur, and he soon acquired an almost cultlike following among French youth.
In March an attack on the American Express office in central Paris resulted in the arrest of several students. At a protest at the Nanterre campus a few days later in support of the students, more students were arrested, including Cohn-Bendit himself, who, it was rumoured, was threatened with deportation (he was eventually expelled in late May). The March 22 Movement, which lobbied for the arrested students’ release, emerged in response.
In early May, fearing an escalation of the protests, the dean of Nanterre shut down the campus—in retrospect, a fateful decision. Since the students were barred from protesting at Nanterre, they decided to take their grievances to the Sorbonne, in the heart of Paris’s Latin Quarter. On May 3 the rector of the Sorbonne formally requested that the police clear the university’s courtyard, where some 300 students had assembled. The mass arrests that followed—undertaken with help from the CRS (Compagnies Républicaines de Securité), the national riot police—sparked violent resistance from bystanders, who began pelting the police with cobblestones removed from the streets and erecting barricades. The police responded with tear gas, clubbings, and more arrests. The rector of the Sorbonne closed the university, which further incited the students. The student leaders then proposed a major march and rally for May 10 to demand the reopening of the Sorbonne, the release of students who were still being held by the police, and an end to the intimidating police presence in the Latin Quarter. 
The Night of the Barricades—May 10–11, 1968—remains a fabled date in postwar French history. By then the number of student protesters in the city had reached nearly 40,000. After police blocked the marchers’ path toward the Right Bank and the national broadcasting authority ORTF (Office de Radiodiffusion Télévision Française), the students again began removing cobblestones and erecting barricades for protection—a scene that remains one of the May movement’s enduring images. At about 2:00 in the morning of May 11, the police attacked, firing tear gas and beating students and bystanders with truncheons. The bloody confrontation continued until dawn. By the time the dust had cleared, nearly 500 students had been arrested and hundreds of others had been hospitalized, including more than 250 police officers. The Latin Quarter lay in ruins, and public sympathy for the students, already considerable, increased. 
It was at this point that what had begun as a university-based protest movement for educational reform came to engulf the whole of France. The students’ own aspirations grew apace as the success of their movement seemed to open up new possibilities for radical change, including the dismantling of authoritarian political structures and the democratization of social and cultural institutions ranging from education to the news media and beyond. The next several days witnessed the largest wildcat general strike in French history, as millions of workers poured into the streets in support of the students as well as to set forth their own demands. During the course of the strike, scores of factories—including those of the French automaker Renault—were seized by workers.
The French state was badly shaken, yet it managed to weather the crisis. After his timorous flight to Baden-Baden, de Gaulle returned to Paris to deliver a dramatic May 30 radio address in which he raised the spectre of a communist takeover. In reality, however, the French Communist Party had long ago abandoned the dream of a revolutionary seizure of power, accepting instead a limited role in the French political order. Indeed, the communists initially opposed—and even derided—the student protesters. Three days before de Gaulle’s address, the communists negotiated the Grenelle Accords, under whose terms workers would receive substantial wage increases and better working conditions. The workers angrily rejected the agreements, however, and the strikes continued. In one of his trademark political masterstrokes, de Gaulle also used his address to announce that he would dissolve the National Assembly and call new elections for June 23, assuming correctly that the French people were ready for a return to stability. He also implicitly threatened to use the army to impose order if the forces of “intimidation” and “tyranny” did not back down. Meanwhile, hundreds of thousands of people throughout the country marched in counterdemonstrations in support of de Gaulle. Although strikes and student demonstrations continued into June, the student movement gradually lost momentum, and de Gaulle’s party won a resounding victory. Ten months later, however, a similar gambit by de Gaulle—a national referendum on regional reorganization and reform of the Senate—failed, and the general’s political career came to an abrupt and ignominious end. 
