Fatah, also spelled Fatḥ (Arabic: “Conquest” or “Opening”), inverted acronym of Ḥarakat al-Taḥrīr al-Waṭanī al-Filasṭīnī (“Palestine National Liberation Movement”),  political and military organization of Arab Palestinians, founded in the late 1950s by Yassir Arafat and Khalīl al-Wazīr (Abū Jihād) with the aim of wresting Palestine from Israeli control by waging low-intensity guerrilla warfare. In the late 1980s it began seeking a two-state solution through diplomatic avenues, and its leaders were prominent players in the Oslo peace process that established the Palestinian Authority.
Fatah obtained Syrian support and became based in Damascus. By 1963 Fatah had developed a commando-type organizational structure. In December 1964 it carried out its first military operation when it blew up an Israeli water-pump installation. By 1968 Fatah—then centred in Jordan—had emerged as a major Palestinian force and in March of that year was the primary target of an Israeli attack on the Jordanian village of Karameh in which 150 guerrillas and 29 Israelis were killed. The strong showing of Fatah at Karameh—especially after the Arab humiliation in the Six-Day War of 1967—boosted Fatah politically and psychologically. By the end of the 1960s it was the largest and best-funded of all the Palestinian organizations and had taken over effective control of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
Following the September 1970 civil war (known as Black September [Aylūl Aswad]) in Jordan, the Jordanian army forced the PLO and Fatah fighters out of Jordan and into Lebanon, and in July 1971 Jordanian authorities killed a respected Fatah leader, Abū ʿAlī ʿIyād. Later that year an extremist militant corps of Fatah emerged, calling itself Black September in homage to the events of 1970. In November the group assassinated Jordan’s Prime Minister Wasfi al-Tel. It drew international notoriety in September 1972 when some of its members murdered 11 Israeli athletes at the Summer Olympic Games in Munich, West Germany (see Munich massacre). Black September was thereafter involved in a number of acts of terrorism, primarily against Israel.
In 1982 Israel’s invasion of southern Lebanon, where Fatah had been headquartered, presented a further crisis. In an operation specifically intended to quiet Palestinian guerrilla activity along the Lebanese-Israeli border, the Israeli army ousted the PLO and Fatah from southern Lebanon; Tunis, Tunisia, became the next base of operations. Having suffered this serious setback as an organization, rival battling factions developed within Fatah during 1983, and a divisive leadership struggle developed. By the 1990s, however, Arafat had reclaimed his leadership of Fatah, which remained the largest constituent member of the PLO.
Amid the disappointment caused by Fatah’s defeat and division and against the backdrop of the popular uprising known as the first intifada (1987–93), the rival Hamas movement was founded to challenge the PLO in 1987. Competition with the newly founded organization for popular support led Fatah to undertake a strategy of pragmatism in the struggle for Palestinian self-determination. In 1988 the Fatah-led PLO declared independence as a government-in-exile, recognized the existence of the State of Israel, rejected terrorism, and embraced a two-state solution. It pursued negotiations with Israel, and in 1993 Israel and the PLO signed a peace agreement (the Oslo Accords). The following year the Palestinian Authority (PA) was established to govern the emerging Palestinian autonomous regions, and Gaza city became Fatah headquarters. Elections were held in PA-administered areas in 1996. Arafat won the presidency, and Fatah captured a majority of seats within the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC); Hamas did not participate in the elections. Arafat remained president of the PA until his death in 2004. Mahmoud Abbas, one of the original members of Fatah, succeeded him in leadership of the PLO and was elected PA president in 2005.
By then Fatah’s popularity was somewhat diminished, and it suffered from a reputation of inefficacy and corruption. In January 2006 elections were held for the PLC, and Fatah unexpectedly lost to Hamas, which won a majority of seats. Although the two groups eventually formed a tenuous coalition government, violence escalated between Hamas and Fatah forces in the Gaza Strip, leading Abbas to dissolve the Hamas-led government and declare a state of emergency in June 2007. Fatah thereafter exerted very little influence in the Gaza Strip, which was largely controlled by Hamas. However, Fatah—as the party leading the Palestinian governing body recognized by the international community—remained central to Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations.
After years of split control of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, respectively, Fatah and Hamas began making attempts at reconciliation in 2011. The first reconciliation agreement came in May of that year but was never implemented. Other agreements were reached in 2012, 2014, and 2017, all of which failed to be fully implemented. The 2014 agreement led to the formation of a unity government headed by Prime Minister Rami Hamdallah, who was not a member of either Fatah or Hamas. The 2017 agreement led to the PA’s taking over some government functions in the Gaza Strip, but the PA’s inability to fully take control led it to cut back on funding for the Strip and retreat from performing government functions. In January 2019, amid the collapse of the reconciliation process, concern over the future of PA leadership, and growing unrest in the West Bank over a new social security program, Fatah recommended that Abbas sack the government. Hamdallah resigned days later, officially ending the unity government.
Plans in 2021 to hold both parliamentary and presidential elections offered a rare opening for electoral competition and led to splinters within Fatah early in the year. Abbas continued at the helm of the central committee and core faction, but other prominent figures took the opportunity to seek change. Supporters of Mohammed Dahlan—a longtime rival of Abbas who enjoyed strong foreign backing but had been expelled from Fatah in 2011 on allegations of embezzlement—were poised to run on a separate electoral list in the parliamentary elections set for May. More formidable was a faction led by Nasser al-Qudwa, Arafat’s nephew, and backed by Marwan Barghouti, a popular political activist and parliamentarian imprisoned in Israel for his involvement in the second intifada (2000–05). In late April Abbas announced that the elections would be delayed indefinitely because of concerns that Israel would prevent voting in East Jerusalem—a reason cited in the cancellation of elections in the past.
