First Battle of the Marne,  (September 6–12, 1914), an offensive during World War I by the French army and the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) against the advancing Germans who had invaded Belgium and northeastern France and were within 30 miles (48 km) of Paris. The French threw back the massive German advance and thwarted German plans for a quick and total victory on the Western Front.
The British Expeditionary Force, after concentrating near Maubeuge, France, had moved up to Mons, Belgium, on August 22, ready to advance farther into Belgium as part of the offensive of the Allied left wing. On arrival, however, Field Marshal Sir John French learned that the French Fifth Army under Gen. Charles Lanrezac had been checked by a German attack on August 21 and deprived of the crossing of the Sambre. Although thus placed in an exposed forward position, French agreed to stand at Mons to cover Lanrezac’s left. The next day Lanrezac had word of the fall of Namur and of the presence of the German Third Army under Gen. Max von Hausen on his exposed right flank near Dinant, on the Meuse. In consequence, he gave orders for a general retreat that night.
The British, after resisting the attacks of six German divisions in the Battle of Mons, began on August 24 to fall back in conformity with their allies, from the Belgian frontier toward the Marne. This retreat was achieved not a moment too soon, as the rest of the German First Army under Gen. Alexander von Kluck was marching still farther westward to envelop the BEF’s open left flank.
French commander in chief Gen. Joseph-Jacques-Césaire Joffre at last recognized the folly of pressing ahead with Plan XVII, the planned French offensive into Alsace and Lorraine. Plan XVII had vastly underestimated the size of German invasion forces, and its execution would have dramatically enhanced the effectiveness of the German Schlieffen Plan. The Schlieffen Plan called for a massive flank attack on the French defenses, but Plan XVII would have carried the bulk of the French army beyond those defenses and left it open to envelopment. The German attack would have then fallen on the French left flank and rear, virtually assuring the destruction of the French army and the fall of Paris. Joffre formed a new plan out of the wreckage. He decided to swing back his centre and left, with Verdun as the pivot, while drawing troops from the right and forming a fresh Sixth Army on his left to enable the retiring armies to return to the offensive.
Joffre’s optimism might have been again misplaced but for German decisions. The first was Gen. Helmuth von Moltke’s action in detaching seven regular divisions to invest Maubeuge and Givet and watch Antwerp, instead of using Landwehr (reserve) and Ersatz (replacement) troops as earlier intended. Moltke further undermined the effectiveness of the Schlieffen Plan on August 25 when he decided to send four divisions to check the Russian advance in East Prussia (that advance would be shattered at the Battle of Tannenberg, weeks before the detached troops would arrive on the Eastern Front). All these forces were taken from the right wing. Further, the German command lost touch with the advancing armies, and movements at the front became disjointed.
The British stand at Le Cateau (August 26), interrupting the retreat from Mons, and Lanrezac’s riposte at Guise (August 29) were also factors in checking the German enveloping wing, and each had still greater indirect effects. Le Cateau apparently convinced Kluck that the British force could be wiped from the slate, and Guise led Gen. Karl von Bülow (Second Army) to call on the First Army for support, whereupon Kluck wheeled inward, intending to roll up the French left. Echoes of the decisive victory at Sedan rang loudly in the ears of German generals, and this led them to pluck the fruit before it was ripe. By prematurely wheeling his forces before Paris had been reached, Kluck exposed the German right to a counterenvelopment. One further factor must be mentioned, the most significant of all: the Germans had advanced so rapidly, outrunning their timetable, that their supplies had failed to keep pace.
The first, highly coloured reports from the army commands in the Battles of the Frontiers had given the German Supreme Command the impression of a decisive victory. However, the comparatively small number of prisoners raised doubts in Moltke’s mind and led him to a more sober estimate of the situation. The new pessimism of Moltke and the renewed optimism of his army commanders together produced a fresh change of plan, which contained the seeds of disaster. When, on August 26, the British left wing fell back southward badly mauled from Le Cateau, Kluck turned southwestward again. If the direction of Kluck’s advance was partly due to a misconception of the line of retreat taken by the British, it was also in accordance with his original role of executing a wide circling sweep. Moreover, it carried him into the Amiens-Péronne area, where the first elements of the newly formed French Sixth Army were just detraining after their “switch” from Alsace. This dislocated Joffre’s design for an early return to the offensive and compelled the Sixth Army to fall back hurriedly toward the shelter of the Paris defenses.
Kluck had hardly swung out to the southwest before he was induced to swing in again. For, in order to ease the pressure on the British, Joffre had ordered Lanrezac to halt and strike back against the pursuing Germans, and Bülow, shaken by the threat, called on Kluck for aid. Lanrezac’s attack, on August 29, was stopped before Bülow needed this aid, but he asked Kluck to wheel in nevertheless, in order to cut off Lanrezac’s retreat. Before acceding, Kluck deferred to Moltke. The request came at a moment when Moltke was becoming perturbed over the way the French were slipping away from his grasp. He was concerned in particular with a gap which had opened between his Second and Third armies as a result of the latter’s having already turned south, from southwest, to help the Fourth Army, its neighbour on the other flank. Moltke, therefore, approved Kluck’s change of direction—which meant the inevitable abandonment of the original wide sweep round the far side of Paris. Now the flank of the wheeling German line would pass the near side of Paris and across the face of the Paris defenses into the valley of the Marne.
The decision to abandon the original plan was definitely taken on September 4, and Moltke substituted a narrower envelopment of the French centre and right. The Fourth and Fifth armies were to press southeastward into Lorraine from the north while the Sixth and Seventh armies, striking southwestward in Lorraine, sought to break through the fortified barrier between Toul and Épinal, the “jaws” thus closing inward on either side of Verdun. Meanwhile, the First and Second armies were to turn outward and, facing west from the Marne valley, to hold off any countermove, which the French attempted from the neighbourhood of Paris. To the chagrin of the Germans, such an effort had begun before the new plan could take effect.
The opportunity for a move against the Germans was perceived not by Joffre, who had ordered a continuance of the retreat, but by Gen. Joseph-Simon Gallieni, the military governor of Paris. On September 3, when the German First Army was crossing the Marne east of Paris, Gallieni realized the meaning of Kluck’s wheel inward and directed Gen. Michel-Joseph Maunoury’s Sixth Army to be ready to strike at the exposed German right flank. The next day, with some difficulty, Gallieni won Joffre’s sanction. Once convinced, Joffre acted decisively. The whole left wing was ordered to turn about and return to a general offensive on September 6. At Gallieni’s urging, Maunoury was already off the mark on September 5, and as his pressure developed on the Germans’ sensitive flank, Kluck was constrained to draw off first one part and then the remaining part of his army to support his threatened flank guard. Thereby a 30-mile (48-km) gap was created between the German First Army (in the vicinity of Meaux) and the Second (east of Montmirail)—a gap covered only by a screen of cavalry.
Kluck was emboldened to take the risk because of the rapid retreat of the British opposite—or rather with their backs to—this gaping sector. Even on September 5, when the French on either flank were turning about, the British continued a further day’s march to the south. In this “disappearance” lay the unintentional cause of victory. On September 7 and 8, Maunoury’s forces were reinforced by about 3,000 infantrymen who were transported to the battle from Paris by some 600 taxis, the first automotive transport of troops in the history of war. While Paris was preparing for a siege, the Allies exploited the gap between the German First and Second armies. On September 8 Gen. Louis Franchet d’Esperey’s Fifth Army made a surprise night attack on the German Second Army and widened the gap. When the British retraced their steps, it was the report of their columns advancing into the gap which led Bülow to order the retreat of his Second Army on September 9. The temporary advantage which the German First Army had gained over Maunoury was thereby nullified, and it fell back the same day.
On September 10 the Germans began a general retreat that ended north of the Aisne River, where they dug in, and the trench warfare that was to typify the Western Front for the next three years began. The attempt at a partial envelopment, pivoting on Verdun, had already failed. The jaw formed by the German Sixth and Seventh armies merely broke its teeth on the defenses of the French eastern frontier. The attack by Crown Prince Rupert’s Sixth Army on the Grand-Couronné, covering Nancy, was a particularly expensive failure. It is difficult to see how the German command could have reasonably pinned its faith on achieving as an improvised expedient the very task which in cool calculation before the war had appeared so hopeless as to lead it to take the momentous decision to advance through Belgium as the only feasible alternative.
For the Germans, the result of the Battle of the Marne was a strategic but not a tactical defeat, and the German right wing was able to reknit and stand firmly on the line of the lower Aisne and the Chemin des Dames ridge, where trench warfare set in after assaults by the Allies in the latter half of September (First Battle of the Aisne). That the Allies were not able to draw greater advantage from their victory was partly due to the comparative weakness of Maunoury’s flank attack and partly due to the failure of the British and of the French Fifth Army under d’Espérey to drive rapidly through the gap between the German First and Second armies while it was open. Their direction of advance was across a region intersected by frequent rivers, and this handicap was intensified by a lack of initiative on the part of their chiefs. Greater results might have come if more effort had been made, as Gallieni urged, to strike at the rear flank of the Kluck’s First Army instead of the front and to direct reinforcements to the northwest of Paris for this purpose.
The Allies’ frontal pursuit of the Germans from the Marne was already checked on the Aisne before Joffre, on September 17, seeing that Maunoury’s attempts to overlap the German flank were ineffectual, decided to form a fresh army under Gen. Édouard de Castelnau for a maneuver around and behind the German flank. By then the German armies had recovered cohesion, and the German command was expecting and ready to meet such a maneuver, now the obvious course. The “Race to the Sea” had begun.
