Formation flying,  two or more aircraft traveling and maneuvering together in a disciplined, synchronized, predetermined manner. In a tight formation, such as is typically seen at an air show, aircraft may fly less than three feet (one metre) apart and must move in complete harmony, as if they are joined together.
Formation flying developed in World War I, when fighter aircraft escorted reconnaissance aircraft over enemy territory. Fighter squadrons soon discovered that fighting in pairs reduced their losses and increased their victories. By 1918 the smallest fighting unit was two aircraft flying in formation. German flight leaders, such as Oswald Boelcke, Max Immelmann, and Manfred von Richthofen (“the Red Baron”), strictly enforced rules of formation flying.
Between the World Wars and into World War II, military pilots continued to experiment with different formations, distances, and positions. In bad weather, close to an airport, or while performing in air shows, they flew closer together. When going cross-country, searching for the enemy, or in situations that might require sudden and sharp turns that increased the risk of collision, they separated farther apart in a formation known as “combat spread.” Whereas airplanes in close formations may be a metre or so apart, in a combat spread formation modern jet-engine fighters may be several hundred metres apart.
All navigation, radio transmissions, and tactical decisions are made by the flight leader, who is typically the most experienced pilot. The other pilots in a formation are known as wingmen, and it is their responsibility to follow the leader and to maintain a constant position relative to the lead aircraft. This is called “position keeping.” Any change in relative position between aircraft is considered movement by the wingmen.
In the case of a single wingman, his goal is to keep his distance from the leader constant by choosing two features on the lead aircraft and keeping them aligned in the same way from his viewpoint. Any change in the alignment of these two features indicates that his relative position to the leader has changed. In larger formations the other wingmen either hold position on the plane in front or alongside of them or look through that airplane at the lead aircraft and hold position on the leader.
Because flying close to another airplane can be extremely dangerous, discipline, practice, predictability, and strict rule-following are encouraged in both civilian and military environments. Flights are briefed so that all pilots know what to expect and so that, generally, no one except the leader needs to speak on the radio. Leaders use hand signals, head nods, aircraft movements, or radio calls to alert their wingmen of changes in flight attitude, formation positions, split-ups, rejoins, and radio frequencies.
The smallest unit of formation is called a section and consists of one leader and one wingman. Two sections flying together are called a division. The echelon, with all wingmen on one side and a bit behind the leader, is one popular formation. In line abreast, or wall formation, all the planes are equally far forward, in line with the leader. A formation with equal numbers of wingmen on either side of the leader is called a vic, or a vee. An aircraft flying directly under and behind the leader is “in trail,” or in the slot position. The diamond formation, with one airplane in the slot and one on each side of the leader, is a particularly popular display formation. Finger four, with four planes spaced like fingers on a hand, one on one side of the leader and two on the other side, is a popular combat formation.
Military pilots are taught to fly formation early in their training, and, except when there is a scarcity of aircraft for the mission, they always fly in groups of two or more for safety and efficiency. A section or division generally arrives in tight formation at a landing site, which enables all of the airplanes to land in a fraction of the time that it would take if they arrived separately.
The most advanced formation flying is formation aerobatics, such as that flown by the U.S. Navy Blue Angels, the U.S. Air Force Thunderbirds, and many civilian air-show teams. Formation aerobatics requires extensive training, practice, focus, and discipline. Rapid speed and high acceleration (“g-forces”) make staying in formation physically difficult and mentally demanding.
