French Revolutionary wars,  title given to the hostilities between France and one or more European powers between 1792 and 1799. It thus comprises the first seven years of the period of warfare that was continued through the Napoleonic Wars until Napoleon’s abdication in 1814, with a year of interruption under the peace of Amiens (1802–03). The end of 1799 may be conveniently taken as the dividing point between the Revolutionary and Napoleonic phases of the conflict, since in that year the consulate of Napoleon Bonaparte was established.
While warfare is generally undertaken for political reasons, the French Revolutionary wars were exceptional for the degree to which they were concerned with political considerations. They are associated above all with the appearance in France, and with the imposition by France on neighbouring states, of fundamental changes in the structure of the state and society. No other European wars have shown such intimacy with, or novelty in, political motives. The Napoleonic Wars, which grew out of those undertaken by the first French Republic, were characterized by the extent to which they retained and extended the political and social innovations of Revolutionary France. It will be seen that the political situation in Revolutionary France impelled the new government to make war on neighbouring states and that French Revolutionary doctrines as well as French expansionist policies encouraged these states to oppose France in the field. The course of the French military and foreign policy, furthermore, was greatly influenced by the continuation of an internal political and social revolution during hostilities, and in this too the continual interaction of political and military affairs presents a marked contrast with the Napoleonic Wars.
Nevertheless, it would be wrong to lose sight of more conventional considerations in the motives and conduct of the belligerent powers. The leaders of the French Revolution took over and expanded traditional objectives of French foreign policy. Conversely, although the restoration of the ancien régime in France and its preservation in the rest of Europe was among the motives of the attack by France’s enemies, so often and so greatly did they allow this objective to be obscured by the demands of their traditional interests that it must be considered as subsidiary to their fundamental objectives in making war. The British especially, being geographically insulated and having a more liberal constitution than their Continental allies, were concerned far less with combating Revolutionary ideology than with preventing French attempts to create a Continental hegemony. In contracting a series of alliances with the powers of the First Coalition in 1793, Great Britain indeed insisted that they abandon their demands for a royalist restoration (virtually, unconditional surrender), so that ultimate war aims were left uncertain. The British sought to uphold a balance of power in Europe that would enable them to affirm their control of the seas, to extend their colonial conquests, and to achieve predominance as a trading and manufacturing nation both beyond Europe and on the Continent.
The wars of the Revolution and of the First Empire were the culmination of an intermittent Franco-British conflict that had begun with the War of the Grand Alliance and the War of the Spanish Succession. At its close Great Britain had succeeded in preventing France’s predominance in Europe and asserted British supremacy overseas. Great Britain, with a population not much more than one-third that of France in 1789, depended for its strength on preponderance in commerce and manufactures. Thus it remained preoccupied with the sources and maintenance of wealth, which required that military efforts should be concentrated on naval and colonial affairs. This diminished still further Great Britain’s ability to mount substantial operations in Europe; for this the Continental allies, immediately threatened by invasion and not lacking in military manpower, had to serve. Great Britain, however, saw that if the French could impose peace on their own terms on Europe, they would be free to mobilize their resources against the British at sea and in the colonies and to close the European markets essential to British commerce. Therefore Great Britain, alone of all the coalition powers ranged against France, remained at war for virtually the entire duration of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, pursuing a strategy dominated by maritime, colonial, and economic motives. The divergences in interests and objectives between the British and their European allies explain some of the dissensions which arose in the allied camp and also the hostility that Great Britain was to encounter among the neutral powers. By blockading French-held ports and issuing licences to control trade with the enemy bloc, the British advanced their own interests to the detriment or at least the expense of the neutrals. Thus, broadly speaking, throughout the wars from 1792 to 1815, Great Britain devoted the profits from an increasingly advantageous position in world trade to furthering the struggle with France, while the French, since they could not match British maritime power, were obliged to master Europe if they were to turn the tables on Great Britain strategically and economically.
During the period 1793–99, however, it was by no means certain that France would have to wait until Europe had been pacified before defeating Great Britain. For the first few years of the war the existing strength of the French fleet, if it could gain enough support from other states’ navies, seriously threatened to overcome the British naval supremacy. For some time Great Britain’s preoccupation with colonial warfare proved costly, comparatively unsuccessful, and, eventually, detrimental to the outcome of the war in Europe, where British land forces might have tipped the balance. Only twice in the Revolutionary wars did small British expeditionary forces fight in Europe, and then only in Holland, in 1794 and 1799. By 1796 some 60,000 British troops had fallen in largely indecisive fighting in the West Indies. Arthur Wellesley, 1st duke of Wellington, would suffer fewer losses during his campaigns in the Iberian Peninsula (1808–14), which not only reconquered Spain and Portugal but also tied down a far larger number of French troops.
The British government was unique in its ability to undertake
an enormous debt in order to finance its own war effort and to subsidize
that of its allies. The great expansion of the British national
income, however, was at that time due more to unusually favourable
terms of trade in conventional goods produced by largely
traditional means than to the initiation of the Industrial Revolution—the distinguishing characteristics of which belong to the years after 1815. The wars put obstacles in
the way of industrial development and financial organization on
the Continent, however, and Britain’s lead in these fields seems to
have been lengthened still further by the time peace came.
Two factors contributed considerably to the outbreak and to the
course of the early years of the French Revolutionary wars: (1)
the weakness of France caused by the Revolution itself, which
from the meeting of the Estates-General in May 1789 continued with mounting intensity and throughout the first three campaigns (1792, 1793, and 1794); and (2) the second and third Partitions of Poland (1793 and 1795), which served to distract the Continental powers from their invasion of France.
The unprecedented successes of the French in the Revolutionary
wars were due to their advantages in numbers; to the fact that
France, even before the Revolution, was in many respects the most
developed nation on the Continent; and finally to the often contradictory
effects of Revolutionary ideals and methods. The first
French Republic could afford to be prodigiously wasteful of its resources
in making war. It could utilize the energies and wealth of
the entire population to a degree far beyond the limits of action
available to the neighbouring Continental governments of the ancien
régime. These novel developments, however, lay several years
ahead, when the Continental powers undertook to make war on
Revolutionary France. Indeed, in very large part the most striking
characteristics of French Revolutionary warfare, together with the
men and the domestic policies of the Jacobin Committee of Public Safety with whom it is associated, owed their appearance to the first successes of the invaders. This threat to the new regime inspired the Terror, its radical political reforms, and the massive mobilization of national resources.
For Great Britain the many complexities of the European scene
during the first three years of the French Revolution were problems
of secondary importance, since the influence of the chief rival
state on the Continent had been largely neutralized by internal dissension.
Inevitably, Great Britain was less concerned by developments
in eastern and central Europe, and less than a year before
the outbreak of war with France (February 1793) prime minister William Pitt, the Younger reduced the
strength of the home army from 17,000 to 13,000. When war
came, Pitt, with most of his countrymen, anticipated that it would
soon be over.
Throughout the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars, the British avoided recourse to a system of direct conscription for the army, and the pressing of men for the navy fell, or was intended to fall, on merchant seamen. The expedients adopted in recruiting land forces during the first years of the war were not particularly efficient. In order to free regular regiments, which were recruited wholly from volunteers, for service overseas, 30,000 militiamen were called up in 1794 for home defense. As it was permissible to pay a substitute to perform militia service, the recruitment of regular formations suffered in consequence.
