The military command structure of German forces in Europe in mid-1944 reflected the growing megalomania of the Führer and supreme commander of the armed forces, Adolf Hitler, as well as the rigidity of the Nazi state. All military operations in the western theatre were placed under the direction of the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (OKW; Armed Forces High Command); this body reported to Hitler separately from its rival, the Oberkommando des Heeres (OKH; Army High Command), which ran the war on the Eastern Front. Under the OKW, the defense of western Europe against a possible Allied invasion from Britain was entrusted to the Oberbefehlshaber West (OBW; Commander in Chief West), Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt. Yet even this veteran army commander had no direct authority over Navy Group West or the Third Air Fleet, which were crucial to the security of his theatre. Both of these forces reported to their own high commands, which in turn reported to Hitler. The same situation applied to the theatre armoured reserve, Panzer Group West: its commander was to deliberate in concert with the OBW, yet none of its well-armed, mobile divisions was to be moved without the explicit permission of the Führer. Finally, through Army Group B, Rundstedt directly controlled some 30 infantry divisions and air force field divisions, as well as several armoured units from Brittany to the Dutch-German border; yet even the commander of this group, Erwin Rommel, having been awarded the title of field marshal, was entitled to appeal personally to Hitler with pressing tactical concerns—a resource that this determined general was not loath to exploit.
The military disaster implicit in this inefficient structure was made even more likely by deep social cleavages in the German command. Many commanders in the west came from the Prussian nobility or from the pre-Nazi military elite. Between these professionals and the Nazi ideologues in Berlin there was little common purpose except defense of the fatherland. Indeed, some of the commanders were aware of plots against Hitler, and a few actively conspired to depose or even assassinate him in the hope that his removal would spare Germany from total destruction.
