Great Swamp Fight,  (19 December 1675), critical battle of King Philip’s War, in which Native Americans fought English settlers and their Indian allies in one of the bloodiest conflicts (per capita) in U.S. history. Sometimes called the "Great Swamp Massacre," it took place in the area of West Kingstown, Rhode Island.
Mutual animosity fueled by ongoing land disputes between English settlers and American Indians in the Massachusetts and Plymouth colonies erupted into open war in 1675. Chief Metacom (a.k.a., King Philip) organized Indian resistance to colonial authority.
The ill-trained militia of the Council of United Colonies made a poor showing as attacks continued through the summer and autumn of 1675. King Philip and his men eluded efforts to trap them in the coastal swamps and consistently defeated the militia companies. King Philip’s success as a rebel leader brought other tribes to join him.
In September, the Council of United Colonies declared war against King Philip. Each council member was levied to provide militia for a 1,000-man army. Efforts to make a truce failed, and Indian attacks grew in severity with more towns destroyed. King Philip’s base remained secret until December, when an Indian deserter guided Governor Josiah Winslow of Plymouth and his small army through a snow storm to a large Narragansett stronghold in the Great Swamp near West Kingston, Rhode Island.
On 20 December, Winslow’s force arrived at the fortified camp. Two companies attacked the Indians before the rest of the army was in position. They were driven back with heavy losses. Captain Benjamin Church led another coordinated assault that broke through the log palisade. Despite fierce resistance, the fort was finally taken and burned; many elder Indians and women and children were burned alive, which is why this incident has also been termed a massacre.  Philip and some Indians escaped through the swamp, but many of them died from exposure.
Losses: United Colonies, about 70 dead, 150 wounded; Indian, at least 150 (perhaps hundreds) dead, with an unknown number wounded and captured.
