Guerrilla, also spelled guerilla,  member of an irregular military force fighting small-scale, limited actions, in concert with an overall political-military strategy, against conventional military forces. Guerrilla tactics involve constantly shifting attack operations and include the use of sabotage and terrorism.
A brief treatment of guerrilla warfare follows. For full treatment, see guerrilla warfare.
The word guerrilla (the diminutive of Spanish guerra, “war”) was first used to describe the Spanish-Portuguese irregulars, or guerrilleros (also called partisans and insurgents), who helped the Duke of Wellington drive the French from the Iberian Peninsula during the campaigns of 1809–13. Traditionally, guerrilla warfare has been a weapon of protest against alleged wrongs imposed on a people by a foreign invader or ruling government. Guerrillas may operate independently or complement orthodox military operations.
The underlying strategy in guerrilla warfare is to harass the enemy until sufficient military strength is built up to defeat him in battle or until enough political and military pressure is applied to cause him to seek peace. The Chinese general Sun-tzu (c. 350 bc) laid down the essential rules of guerrilla tactics in The Art of War, advocating deception and surprise. In the Napoleonic era the Prussian officer and scholar Carl von Clausewitz argued that the erosion of the enemy’s will to fight was of prime importance and that partisan warfare could aid in destroying that will.
Most of the revolutionary wars fought since World War II have utilized, at least partially, the teachings of the Chinese Communist leader Mao Zedong. Though a devoted student of Marx and Lenin, Mao was guided by his own experience as a guerrilla leader trying to overthrow the Nationalist government of Chiang Kai-shek, which led him to conclude that the Communist revolution in China would come not from the urban proletariat but from the rural peasants.
A political goal is essential to guerrilla warfare, and revolutionary writings stress the guerrillas’ affiliation with the people who support them and provide them with sanctuary, supplies, and information. When guerrillas resort to terrorist tactics, however, the people’s loyalty may waver, and, if the defending forces reply in kind, the populace fears both sides and may cooperate with whatever side is currently in control.
Guerrilla warfare demands extraordinary leadership at all levels. Successful guerrilla leaders—among them T.E. Lawrence, Mao, Josip Broz Tito, Ho Chi Minh, and Fidel Castro, who generally came from civilian backgrounds—are able to attract, organize, and inspire their followers while instilling in them a military discipline.
It is essential in counterguerrilla warfare for a ruling government to acknowledge the political and socioeconomic conditions that gave rise to the guerrilla movement. Though a government’s first priority is to reestablish law and order, it must take civil as well as military action—including social and economic reform—in order to effectively suppress a guerrilla insurgency.
