Gun War,  (1880–81), Southern African war in which the Sotho (also Basuto or Basotho) people of Basutoland (present-day Lesotho) threw off the rule by the Cape Colony. It is one of the few examples in Southern African history of black Africans’ winning a conflict with colonial powers in the 19th century.
From the late 1810s, the Sotho peoples amalgamated into a defensive state under the leadership of Moshoeshoe, particularly after the Boer invasions (the Great Trek) of the mid-1830s. Using the Maloti Mountains as a defensive base, the Sotho were able to extend their rule into the plains of Transorangia to the west and defend their territory from both British and Boer attacks in the 1840s and ’50s. In the 1860s, however, Boer strength overwhelmed the Sotho. To prevent Basutoland’s direct incorporation into the Boer Orange Free State, the Sotho nation was annexed by the British in 1868. It remained a British protectorate until Moshoeshoe’s death in 1870, when power passed to his sons. The next year Basutoland was annexed—without its consent—to the Cape Colony, which was granted self-government shortly thereafter. Basutoland was then subjected to the rule of white magistrates from the Cape Colony, and, as in other areas where the Cape Colony or Natal ruled over black Africans, the Sotho people were forced off their land to work on white-owned farms or mines. The Cape Colony’s government intended to destroy the powers of the Sotho chiefs and revise their traditional laws, and attractive land in Basutoland was earmarked for white occupation. The former independent African mountain kingdom quickly lost much of its most productive land and its political autonomy.
In 1879 the chiefs of southern Basutoland attacked Cape Colony magistrates and took a stand on the issues of self-rule and sovereignty. In retaliation, troops from the Cape Colony were sent into Basutoland. The next year the Cape authorities doubled the already controversial hut tax on the Sotho and tried to enforce the 1879 Disarmament Act, ordering the Sotho to disarm and hand in their guns. These demands split the Sotho into rebels and collaborators, and this led to civil war between the Sotho chiefs, who were already in conflict over the paramountcy. In September 1880 a Cape Colony army attacked Sotho rebels led by Lerotholi and other chiefs. In October the rebels were able to inflict a sound defeat on Cape troops at Qalabani: while fighting from defensive positions in rugged mountainous country and using horses, the Sotho rebels ambushed a column of Cape soldiers, killing or wounding 39 of them.
Unwilling or unable to commit the large number of troops that would have been necessary to destroy the rebel armies, the Cape Colony made peace with the Sotho in April 1881. The Sotho were permitted to retain their arms, though they were to pay an annual tax on each gun. By 1882, however, the Sotho were refusing to register their firearms and thus evaded the tax. That year a Cape army under Gen. Charles Gordon was sent in, but it retired without achieving anything. The Cape Colony, faced with prospects of endless war, gave over responsibility for Basutoland directly to the British government in 1884. Basutoland became a British High Commission Territory, and the powers of the Sotho chiefs were left relatively intact. This change in status is why Basutoland was not included in the surrounding Union of South Africa when it was formed in 1910. Instead, the Sotho nation remained under British oversight until 1966, when it became the independent country of Lesotho.
