Hundred Years’ War,  intermittent struggle between England and France in the 14th–15th century over a series of disputes, including the question of the legitimate succession to the French crown. The struggle involved several generations of English and French claimants to the crown and actually occupied a period of more than 100 years. By convention the war is said to have started on May 24, 1337, with the confiscation of the English-held duchy of Guyenne by French King Philip VI. This confiscation, however, had been preceded by periodic fighting over the question of English fiefs in France going back to the 12th century.
In the first half of the 14th century, France was the richest, largest, and most populous kingdom of western Europe. It had, moreover, derived immense prestige from the fame and exploits of its monarchs, especially Louis IX, and it had grown powerful through the loyal service given by its administrators and officials. England was the best organized and most closely integrated western European state and the most likely to rival France, because the Holy Roman Empire was paralyzed by deep divisions. In these circumstances, serious conflict between the two countries was perhaps inevitable, but its extreme bitterness and long duration were more surprising. The length of the conflict can be explained, however, by the fact that a basic struggle for supremacy was exacerbated by complicated problems, such as that of English territorial possessions in France and disputed succession to the French throne; it was also prolonged by bitter litigation, commercial rivalry, and greed for plunder.
The complicated political relationship existing between France and England in the first half of the 14th century ultimately derived from the position of William the Conqueror, the first sovereign ruler of England who also held fiefs on the continent of Europe as a vassal of the French king. The natural alarm caused to the Capetian kings by their overmighty vassals, the dukes of Normandy, who were also kings of England, was greatly increased in the 1150s. Henry Plantagenet, already duke of Normandy (1150) and count of Anjou (1151), became not only duke of Aquitaine in 1152—by right of his wife, Eleanor of Aquitaine, recently divorced from Louis VII of France—but also king of England, as Henry II, in 1154.
A long conflict inevitably ensued, in which the French kings steadily reduced and weakened the Angevin empire. This struggle, which could well be termed the “First Hundred Years’ War,” was ended by the Treaty of Paris between Henry III of England and Louis IX of France, which was finally ratified in December 1259. By this treaty Henry III was to retain the duchy of Guyenne (a much-reduced vestige of Aquitaine with Gascony), doing homage for it to the French king, but had to resign his claim to Normandy, Anjou, Poitou, and most of the other lands of Henry II’s original empire, which the English had, in any case, already lost. In return, Louis pledged himself to hand over to the English in due course certain territory which protected the border of Guyenne: lower Saintonge, Agenais, and some lands in Quercy. This treaty stood a fair chance of being respected by two rulers such as Henry and Louis, who admired each other and were closely related (they had married sisters), but it posed many problems for the future. It had been agreed, for instance, that the lands in Saintonge, Agenais, and Quercy, which were held at the time of the treaty by Louis IX’s brother Alphonse, count of Poitiers and Toulouse, should go to the English at his death if he had no heir. When Alphonse died without issue in 1271, the new king of France, Philip III, tried to evade the agreement, and the question was not settled until Edward I of England received the lands in Agenais by the Treaty of Amiens (1279) and those in Saintonge by the Treaty of Paris (1286). Edward surrendered his treaty rights to the Quercy lands. By the Treaty of Amiens, moreover, Philip acknowledged the rights of Edward’s consort, Eleanor of Castile, to the countship of Ponthieu.
Meanwhile, the French kings’ suzerainty over Guyenne gave their officials an excuse for frequent intervention in the duchy’s affairs. The result was that French royal seneschals and their subordinates encouraged malcontents in the duchy to appeal against their duke to the French king and to the Parlement of Paris. Such appeals strained relations between the French and English courts on more than one occasion, and the homage which had to be done again wherever a new ruler ascended either throne was given only grudgingly.
The first serious crisis after the conclusion of the Treaty of Paris came in 1293, when ships from England and Bayonne were engaged in a series of skirmishes with a Norman fleet. Demanding compensation, Philip IV of France announced the confiscation of Guyenne (May 19, 1294). By 1296, as a result of the successful campaigns there of his brother Charles, count of Valois, and his cousin Robert II of Artois, Philip had become the effective master of almost the whole duchy. Edward I then allied himself in 1297 with Guy of Dampierre, count of Flanders, another rebellious vassal of France. A truce (October 1297), confirmed a year later through the arbitration of Pope Boniface VIII, ended this phase of hostilities.
Shortly after his succession to the English throne, Edward II did homage for his French lands to Philip IV in 1308. Edward was reluctant to repeat the ceremony on the accessions of Philip’s three sons Louis X (1314), Philip V (1316), and Charles IV (1322). Louis X died before Edward proffered homage, and Philip V did not receive it until 1320. Edward’s delay in paying homage to Charles IV, combined with the destruction (November 1323) by the Gascons of the newly built French fortress at Saint-Sardos in Agenais, led the French king to declare Guyenne forfeit (July 1324).
The duchy was overrun again (1324–25) by the forces of Charles of Valois. Even so, both sides had intermittently been seeking a solution to this troublesome problem. Edward II and Philip V had tried to solve it by the nomination of seneschals or governors for Guyenne who were acceptable to them both, and the appointment of the Genoese Antonio Pessagno and later of Amaury de Craon to this post proved successful for a time. A similar expedient was adopted by the appointment (1325) of Henri de Sully, who held the office of butler in the French royal household and was a friend of Edward II. In the same year, Edward renounced the duchy in favour of his son, the future Edward III. This solution, which avoided the awkwardness of requiring one king to do homage to another, was unfortunately of short duration, because the new duke of Guyenne returned almost immediately to England (September 1326) to dethrone his father (1327).
A fresh complication was introduced when Charles IV died on February 1, 1328, leaving no male heir. Since there existed at that time no definitive rule about the succession to the French crown in such circumstances, it was left to an assembly of magnates to decide who ought to be the new king. The two principal claimants were Edward III of England, who derived his claim through his mother, Isabella, sister of Charles IV, and Philip, count of Valois, son of Philip IV’s brother Charles.
The assembly decided in favour of the count of Valois, who became king as Philip VI. Edward III protested vigorously, threatening to defend his rights by every possible means. However, after his rival had defeated some Flemish rebels at the Battle of Cassel (August 1328), he withdrew his claim and did simple homage for Guyenne at Amiens in June 1329. Philip responded with a demand for a declaration of liege homage and was, moreover, determined not to restore certain lands for which Edward had asked. War nearly broke out, and Edward was ultimately obliged to renew his homage, in private, on the French king’s terms (March–April 1331).
Anglo-French relations remained cordial for more than two years, but, from 1334 onward, encouraged by Robert III of Artois (grandson of Philip IV’s cousin), who had quarreled with Philip and had taken refuge in England, Edward seems to have regretted his weakness. He sought to recover the Gascon lands lost to Charles IV and demanded an end of the alliance between France and Scotland. He intrigued against Philip in the Low Countries and in Germany, while Philip, for his part, organized a small expedition to help the Scots (1336) and formed an alliance with Castile (December 1336). Both parties were preparing for war. Philip declared Guyenne confiscated on May 24, 1337, and in October Edward declared that the kingdom of France was rightfully his and sent a formal challenge to his opponent.
Hostilities in the Hundred Years’ War began at sea, with battles between privateers. Edward III did not disembark on the Continent until 1338. He settled at Antwerp and made an alliance (1340) with Jacob van Artevelde, a citizen of Ghent who had become the leader of the Flemish towns. These cities, in their anxiety to ensure the continued supply of English wool for their textile industries, had rebelled against Louis I, count of Nevers, who supported Philip. Edward also won the support of several rulers in the Low Countries, such as his brother-in-law William II, count of Hainaut, and John III, duke of Brabant. He also made an alliance (1338) with the Holy Roman emperor Louis IV (“the Bavarian”). Edward besieged Cambrai in 1339, and, on October 22 of that year, a French and an English army came within a few miles of each other at Buironfosse, without, however, daring to join battle.
A similar encounter occurred near Bouvines in 1340, after an English army supported by Flemish militia failed to take Tournai. Meanwhile, at sea, Edward’s ships defeated the French fleet, which had been reinforced by Castilian and Genoese squadrons, in the Battle of Sluis on June 24, 1340. This made it possible for him to move troops and provisions to the Continent. After this victory, the Truce of Espléchin (September 25, 1340), brought about by the mediation of Philip VI’s sister, Margaret, countess of Hainaut, and of Pope Benedict XII, temporarily suspended hostilities.
The scene of operations shifted in 1341 to Brittany, where, after the death of Duke John III in April, the help of the French and English kings was invoked, respectively, by Charles of Blois and by John of Montfort, rival claimants for the succession. The troops of both kings invaded the duchy, and their armies were confronting each other near Vannes by December 1342 when the legates of the new pope, Clement VI, intervened and managed to negotiate the Truce of Malestroit (January 19, 1343).
At this stage neither king was anxious to press the conflict to a decisive battle; each hoped to achieve his purpose by other means. They embarked on an intensive war of propaganda. Edward tried to enlist French support for his claims by means of proclamations nailed on church doors, while Philip cleverly exploited to his own advantage all the traditions of the French kingship and lost no opportunity for stressing his claim to be the lawful successor of his Capetian ancestors. Edward’s efforts were partly successful in fomenting rebellions in western France (1343 and 1344). These, however, Philip crushed with severity. Edward resumed the offensive in 1345, this time in Gascony and Guyenne, since the murder of Jacob van Artevelde (July 1345) made it difficult for the English to use Flanders as a base for operations. Henry of Grosmont, 1st duke and 4th earl of Lancaster, defeated a superior French force under Bertrand de l’Isle-Jourdain at Auberoche (October 1345) and took La Réole. In 1346 Henry repelled at Aiguillon an army led by John, duke of Normandy, Philip’s eldest son.
While Henry was leading the campaign in the southwest, Edward III himself landed in the Cotentin (July 1346), penetrated into Normandy, took Caen, and marched on Paris. Without attempting to take the capital, he crossed the Seine River by the bridge at Poissy and set out toward Picardy and his fief of Ponthieu. Philip pursued him, catching up near Crécy in Ponthieu and immediately giving battle. The French army was crushed, and many of the highest nobility were slain (August 26, 1346).
Edward made no attempt to exploit his victory and marched straight to Calais, which he besieged from September 1346 to August 1347. Under the leadership of Jean de Vienne, the garrison there put up a stubborn defense but was finally forced to yield through shortage of provisions. This was followed by the celebrated episode of the surrender of the burghers of Calais who, at Edward’s order, gave themselves up, wearing only their shirts and with ropes round their necks. Their lives were saved by the intercession of Edward’s queen, Philippa of Hainaut.
During the siege of Calais, the Scots, led by King David II, invaded England. They were beaten, however, at Neville’s Cross (October 17, 1346), and David was captured. The English were also fortunate in Brittany, where in January 1347 Charles of Blois was defeated and captured near La Roche-Derrien.
In France the political situation became very confused after Crécy; there were changes in the king’s council, and John of Normandy lost influence for a while. The possibility that Philip would adopt Edward as his heir instead of John, as part of a peace plan devised by the papacy and St. Bridget of Sweden, came to nothing. During these years the incidence of the Black Death and the financial straits of both governments combined to bring the war to a standstill. The truce signed (September 1347) after the fall of Calais was twice renewed (1348 and 1349) during the last years of Philip VI’s reign and again (September 1351) after the accession of the duke of Normandy to the French crown as John II. John considered it his duty to bring about peace even at the cost of allowing the English king to enjoy free possession of his Continental fiefs without having to do homage for them. This suggestion so outraged public opinion in France, however, that John was unable to conclude peace on such terms at the conferences held at Guînes (July 1353 and March 1354). Edward III then refused to prolong the truce.
The political situation in France at this time was further complicated by the intervention of Charles II (“the Bad”), king of Navarre, who had married John II’s daughter Joan in 1352. As a grandson of Louis X on his mother’s side, Charles could maintain that his claim to the Capetian inheritance was better than Edward III’s and that he was accordingly entitled to profit from any concessions that John II might be willing to make. After a first dispute with his father-in-law had apparently been settled by the treaties of Mantes (1354) and Valognes (1355), Charles quarreled with him again, in collusion with the English. John II had him arrested (April 1356), but Charles II’s brother Philip then assumed leadership of the Navarrese faction and managed to retain possession of the extensive lands in Normandy, which John had ceded to Charles.
Hostilities between French and English broke out again in 1355. Edward the Black Prince, eldest son of Edward III, landed at Bordeaux in September and ravaged Languedoc as far as Narbonne. In October another English army marched into Artois and confronted John’s army at Amiens. No engagement took place, however.
The Black Prince left Bordeaux again in July 1356, marching north as far as the Loire River with English troops under Sir John Chandos and with Gascon troops under the captal de Buch, Jean III de Grailly. Edward’s force numbered rather less than 7,000 men, but he engaged in a pursuit of John II’s probably superior forces. To meet this threat, John left Normandy, where he had been engaged in reducing Navarrese strongholds. Initial contact between the enemy armies was made east of Poitiers on September 17, 1356, but a truce was declared for September 18, a Sunday. This enabled the English to secure themselves on the Maupertuis (Le Passage), near Nouaillé south of Poitiers, where thickets and marshes surrounded the confluence of the Miosson and Clain rivers. Forgetful of the lessons of Crécy, the French launched a series of assaults in which their knights, bogged down, became easy targets for the Black Prince’s archers. John II himself led the last French charge and was taken prisoner along with thousands of his knights (September 19, 1356). He was conveyed by slow stages to Bordeaux, where he was held until his transfer to England (April–May 1357).
While he was in Bordeaux, the French king concluded a two-year truce with his captors and began to discuss peace terms on a basis of abandoning Aquitaine in full sovereignty to Edward. Meanwhile, a difficult situation had arisen in Paris, where a group of reformers—among them Jean de Craon, Robert Le Coq, and Étienne Marcel, the provost of the merchants—had become members of the Estates-General and were not disposed to blindly endorse the decisions of their captive ruler. The members of the assembly seemed to prefer a continuance of war to dismemberment of the kingdom. Moreover, Charles the Bad was allowed to escape from imprisonment (November 1357).
The Estates hoped that Charles would quell the numerous companies of English and Navarrese soldiers who, left without employment since the truce of Bordeaux, were ravaging and pillaging the western districts of France. However, Charles preferred to treat with them. Though officially the hostilities between France and England were suspended, at this period the devastation became more serious than ever. Disorder and misery were much increased by the Jacquerie, a revolt of the peasants north of the Seine, which was brutally repressed by the nobility.
After the death of Étienne Marcel (July 31, 1358), the dauphin Charles (later Charles V), son of John II, was able to reenter Paris, from which he had been forced to withdraw some months earlier. King John, following up the peace talks begun at Bordeaux, concluded with Edward III the first Treaty of London (January 1358). This provided for the cession of the old duchy of Aquitaine to the English in full sovereignty and for the payment of 4,000,000 gold ecus as John’s ransom, while Edward, in return, would abandon his claim to the French crown. Delays in collecting and paying early installments of the ransom invalidated this treaty, and in March 1359 Edward imposed on his prisoner the harsher terms of the second Treaty of London. By the terms of this treaty, hostages were to be held until part of the ransom was paid, and additional territory, the old Angevin lands lying between the Loire and the English Channel, was to be ceded to the English.
The French Estates, however, refused to ratify this second treaty, and Edward III landed once more at Calais (October 1359) and marched across Artois and Champagne. He failed to take Reims and instead ravaged the district of Beauce. At Brétigny, near Chartres, peace talks were held with the dauphin, and an agreement was reached (May 8, 1360) on terms subsequently ratified by the Treaties of Calais (July–October 1360). By these treaties France ceded the whole of the old Aquitaine and also, in northern France, Calais and Guînes in full sovereignty to the English. The ransom was reduced to 3,000,000 gold ecus, for payment of which hostages were taken, but John was to be released after a first installment of 600,000 ecus had been received. The French king was to make a formal resignation of all sovereignty and jurisdiction over the ceded territories by November 30, 1361. Set free in October 1360, John went back to an exhausted and divided France, where a strenuous effort was still required against the rapacious military companies. In July 1362 Edward III transferred the principality of Aquitaine to his son Edward the Black Prince.
