January Insurrection,  (1863–64), Polish rebellion against Russian rule in Poland; the insurrection was unsuccessful and resulted in the imposition of tighter Russian control over Poland.
After Alexander II became emperor of Russia and king of Poland in 1855, the strict and repressive regime that had been imposed on Poland after the November Insurrection (1830–31) was substantially relaxed. Nevertheless, conspiratorial societies that opposed any form of Russian rule in Poland remained active and gained support, particularly among students and other groups of urban youth. When those groups sponsored patriotic demonstrations in the early 1860s, the moderate reformer Count Aleksander Wielopolski, who had become the virtual head of government in Poland, devised a plan to recruit all the radical youths into the Russian army. But those designated for conscription secretly fled from Warsaw (Jan. 14–15, 1863), sought refuge in the nearby woodlands, and on January 22 issued a manifesto calling for a national insurrection. Although they were greatly outnumbered, poorly equipped, and successful in only a few engagements, the rebels gained support among the artisan, worker, lower gentry, and official classes in the cities and stimulated peasant revolts against the large landlords in rural areas.
Establishing an underground government in Warsaw, the rebels waged a guerrilla war with small units of badly trained troops against the regular Russian army of 300,000 men. The insurrection spread beyond Poland into Lithuania and a section of Belorussia and attracted volunteers from the portions of Poland under Prussian and Austrian rule. The insurgents waged more than 1,200 battles and skirmishes. Although they managed to convince sympathetic foreign powers to send protests to Alexander, they still failed to obtain vitally needed military assistance from them. As moderates assumed dominance in the insurgent government (by July) and delayed the enactment of promised peasant reforms, they lost mass peasant support for the rebellion.
By the time Romuald Traugutt emerged to provide strong leadership for the revolutionary movement (mid-October), the rebellion had lost its dynamism. The Lithuanian insurrection had been brutally crushed by the “hangman of Vilnius,” Mikhail Nikolayevich Muravyov; the new viceroy in Poland, Teodor Berg, similarly imposed a harsh regime in Warsaw; and Russian efforts (begun in the summer of 1863) to win the peasants’ loyalty by granting reforms provided added incentive for the peasantry to abandon the rebels. Although the insurgent army survived the winter of 1863–64 in southern Poland, Traugutt and the other leaders of the rebellion who had not already fled the country were arrested in April 1864; their execution in August marked the end of the January Insurrection. Those who had participated in the insurrection then met with intensified Russification.
