Jasmine Revolution,  popular uprising in Tunisia that protested against corruption, poverty, and political repression and forced Pres. Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali to step down in January 2011. The success of the uprising, which came to be known in the media as the “Jasmine Revolution,” inspired a wave of similar protests throughout the Middle East and North Africa known as the Arab Spring.
Unrest began after Mohamed Bouazizi, a young Tunisian, set fire to himself outside a municipal office in the town of Sidi Bouzid in central Tunisia on December 17. Bouazizi, who had been supporting his family by selling fruit from a cart, was enraged when local officials repeatedly demanded bribes and confiscated his merchandise. After authorities refused to hear his complaint, he doused himself with gasoline and set himself alight. His plight, which came to symbolize the injustice and economic hardship afflicting many Tunisians under the Ben Ali regime, inspired street protests throughout the country against high unemployment, poverty, and political repression.
The Tunisian government’s response to the protests attracted international criticism when dozens of protesters were killed in clashes with police. Amid accusations of use of excessive force, Ben Ali dismissed the minister of the interior, Rafik Belhaj Kacem, and vowed to establish an investigative committee to examine the government’s response to the crisis. However, clashes between police and protesters continued and spread to the capital, where the government deployed troops to control the unrest. Because earlier attempts to quell the rioting had failed, on January 13 Ben Ali appeared on national television and made broader concessions to the opposition, promising not to seek another term as president when his term ended in 2014. He expressed regret over the deaths of protesters and vowed to order police to stop using live fire except in self-defense. Addressing some of the protesters’ grievances, he said he would reduce food prices and loosen restrictions on Internet use.
Ben Ali’s concessions did not satisfy the protesters, who continued to clash with security forces, resulting in several deaths. On January 14 a state of emergency was declared, and Tunisian state media reported that the government had been dissolved and that legislative elections would be held in the next six months. That announcement also failed to quell unrest, and Ben Ali stepped down as president, leaving the country. The prime minister, Mohamed Ghannouchi, assumed power. The following day Ghannouchi was replaced as interim president by Fouad Mebazaa, the former speaker of the lower house of the Tunisian parliament. Both were members of Ben Ali’s political party, the Democratic Constitutional Rally (French: Rassemblement Constitutionel Démocratique; RCD).
Disorder lingered in Tunisia in the days after Ben Ali’s departure. Protests continued, with many objecting to the participation of RCD politicians in the interim government. There were also sporadic outbreaks of violence that many Tunisians attributed to Ben Ali loyalists attempting to sow chaos in the country.
On January 17 Ghannouchi, once again acting as prime minister, announced the formation of a new unity government that incorporated several opposition figures in cabinet posts alongside several sitting ministers from the Ben Ali regime. Ghannouchi defended the presence of ministers from the previous regime in the new government, saying that the ministers had not participated in Ben Ali’s attempts to violently suppress protests. He also announced that the interim government would act quickly to preserve economic stability and to establish political freedom in Tunisia, releasing political prisoners and eliminating media censorship. The next day, however, the future of the interim government appeared to be in jeopardy when a number of the cabinet’s new ministers from opposition parties resigned in response to fresh street protests over the inclusion of ministers from the previous regime. Attempting to signal a break with the past, Mebazaa, Ghannouchi, and the interim government’s cabinet ministers who had served under Ben Ali all withdrew from the RCD. The interim government announced another set of reforms, lifting Ben Ali’s ban on opposition political parties and granting amnesty to all political prisoners. In February the government officially suspended all RCD activities.
The transition to a democratic government was long and arduous. In drafting a new constitution, tensions were especially pronounced between the secularists, who wanted to keep religion out of government matters, and Islamists, who sought constitutional guarantees for Islamic activity after decades of suppression. A constitution was finally promulgated in January 2014 that was hailed as a successful compromise by both Tunisians and international observers. In October–November 2019, Tunisia completed its first peaceful transfer of power from one democratically elected government to another when it inaugurated the second president and second parliament under the new constitution.
The apparent success of the popular uprising in ousting Ben Ali inspired similar movements in a number of other North African and Middle Eastern countries, destabilizing some of the region’s longest-standing regimes. In the weeks following the uprising in Tunisia, countries including Egypt (see Egyptian Uprising of 2011), Jordan, Algeria, Yemen (see Yemen Uprising of 2011–12), Iran, Bahrain, Syria (see Syrian Civil War), and Libya (see Libya Revolt of 2011) experienced significant mass demonstrations demanding political change.
