Kokoda Track Campaign, also called Kokoda Trail Campaign,  series of military operations fought between Australian and Japanese troops in New Guinea during World War II.
At its closest point to mainland Australia, New Guinea is less than 100 miles (160 km) away, and it became apparent in the early days of the Pacific War that the loss of the island would constitute a serious threat to Australian security. In 1906, administration of the southeastern portion of New Guinea had passed from Britain to Australia, and that area was renamed the Territory of Papua. After World War I, northeastern New Guinea—theretofore the German colonial territory of Kaiser Wilhelms Land—and the Bismarck Archipelago were made a League of Nations mandate to be administered by Australia. In December 1941, however, the largest Australian force in the region was the recently installed 1,400-man “Lark Force” garrison at Rabaul, on the island of New Britain.
Lark Force was tasked with defending the territorial capital of Rabaul—including its two airfields, its port, and its seaplane anchorage—with hopelessly obsolete equipment and virtually no possibility of either reinforcement or evacuation. The Rabaul defensive line stretched 15 miles (24 km), and it was anchored by a pair of six-inch coastal defense guns and just two three-inch antiaircraft guns. In the days after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor (December 7, 1941), the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) dispatched four Lockheed Hudson light bombers and 10 Wirraway fighters to Rabaul, but they would do little to blunt the attack to come. Japanese air raids on Rabaul began on January 4, 1942, and carrier-based aircraft struck the Australians in force on January 20. The Wirraway crews scrambled to defend their mates on the ground, but the faster, more maneuverable, and more heavily armed Japanese Zero fighters swept them from the skies in a matter of minutes. In the predawn hours of January 23, some 5,000 Japanese troops landed on New Britain, and organized resistance quickly collapsed. The Lark Force commander issued an “every man for himself” order to retreat and disperse. Some 400 men of Lark Force managed to escape to Australia after a desperate overland march across the length of New Britain, but the remainder were killed or captured. In February the Japanese massacred 160 Lark Force prisoners at Tol Plantation, on the southern coast of New Britain. Nearly 850 Lark Force prisoners of war were killed on July 1, 1942, when an American submarine sank the Montevideo Maru, the Japanese “hell ship” upon which they were being transported.
With their conquest of the Bismarck Archipelago complete, the Japanese next set their sights on Port Moresby, on the southern coast of New Guinea. Control of the port would expand the Japanese sphere of influence to the Coral Sea and disrupt the Allied line of communication between the United States and Australia. Deadly air raids on Darwin (February 19, 1942) and Broome (March 3, 1942) brought the war to mainland Australia, and it seemed as if an invasion of the Northern Territory were a very real possibility. The Japanese planned an amphibious assault on Port Moresby, but Allied cryptanalysts had cracked the Japanese naval code and a carrier group was dispatched to intercept the Japanese invasion fleet. In the resulting Battle of the Coral Sea (May 4–8, 1942), the Japanese won a tactical victory but lost so many aircraft that they were forced to abandon their invasion plan and return to Rabaul.
With the sea route to southern New Guinea closed, the Japanese planned to launch an overland campaign south across the Owen Stanley Range via a 60-mile (96-km) mountain trail known as the Kokoda Track. The trail ran from the village of Kokoda, on the northeastern slopes of the range, to a position known as Owers’ Corner (named for Australian Army surveyor Lt. Noel Owers), in the southwest. The narrow path cut through dense jungle with extremely steep ascents and descents; the total elevation change between the highest and lowest points on the track was nearly 6,000 feet (more than 1,800 metres).
On July 21, 1942, Japanese forces landed on the northern coast of New Guinea at Gona and Buna and began advancing towards Kokoda village. Over subsequent days, they were met with strong resistance by the 39th Australian Infantry Battalion and the Papuan Infantry Battalion (PIB). These two units were grouped together into an ad hoc command that became known as Maroubra Force. The Japanese were seasoned veterans and experienced night fighters, but Maroubra Force, despite being heavily outnumbered and outgunned, acquitted itself well. It carried out a fighting retreat to Deniki, 4 miles (6 km) south of Kokoda village, after the Japanese pushed it out of Kokoda on the morning of July 29. Possession of Kokoda gave the Japanese control of the only airfield between Port Moresby and the Japanese landing area.
On August 8 Maroubra Force launched a counterattack from Deniki and attempted to retake Kokoda but was unsuccessful. By this time, food and supplies were running dangerously low, and on August 14 the exhausted Australians and Papuans were pushed farther south along the Kokoda Track to Isurava. With Maroubra Force’s situation worsening, troops from the 7th Division of the Second Australian Imperial Force were dispatched to reinforce their comrades on August 23. Throughout September the Japanese advanced through Eora Creek, Templeton’s Crossing, Efogi, Mission Ridge, and finally Ioribaiwa Ridge, which they  took on September 16. The Allies were forced to pull back to Imita Ridge, but by this time the Japanese were nearly out of supplies and were suffering from hunger, sickness, and exhaustion. In addition, the Battle of Guadalcanal had become the focus of Japanese efforts in the southwestern Pacific. At their point of farthest advance, the Japanese were less than 35 miles (56 km) from Port Moresby. On September 24 the main body of Japanese withdrew. After more tenacious fighting along the Kokoda Track, the Australians and their New Guinean allies were able to defeat the Japanese and retake Kokoda village on November 2.
Despite suffering heavy casualties and engaging in prolonged combat in some of the most challenging terrain on Earth, Maroubra Force, including the reinforcing units from the 7th Division, displayed remarkable endurance, courage, and mateship. Approximately 625 Australians were killed and some 1,600 were wounded, while more than 4,000 were afflicted with disease. More than 150 New Guineans died as members of the PIB or as porters along the Kokoda Track. The Japanese are believed to have suffered more than 2,000 battle casualties and nearly 3,000 further casualties from disease or malnutrition. Because large sections of the trail were impassable to vehicles, New Guinean labourers were sometimes the only means of conveying supplies to the front and evacuating wounded soldiers to the rear. Australian troops dubbed the New Guineans “fuzzy wuzzy angels” in recognition of the fact that many of their sick or wounded comrades would have died without the New Guineans’ timely intervention.
