Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF),  Muslim separatist movement in the southern Philippines that has employed guerrilla tactics and violence in its campaign for the creation of an independent democratic, Islamic state.
Taking its name from the Muslim Moro peoples of Mindanao and other southern islands of the Philippines, the MNLF led an insurgency against the Philippine government that began in 1973, soon after President Ferdinand Marcos imposed martial law. The MNLF’s well-organized and sophisticated military force, known as the Bangsa Moro Army, had 30,000 fighters at the time of its greatest strength in the 1970s. In 1975 Marcos conceded that the Moros’ economic grievances, at least, were justified, particularly against Christian landowners; but government offers of regional autonomy were rejected by the MNLF, which continued to demand complete independence for the Moro islands. The MNLF boycotted elections in Mindanao, giving legislative control to the National Society Movement. The organization subsequently was weakened by a series of factional splits, including breaks in the 1970s that resulted in the formation of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) and the Bangsa Moro Liberation Organization.
Although martial law was lifted at the beginning of 1981, guerrilla activity continued. In February 1981 the MNLF attacked government forces, killing more than 120 troops on the island of Pata. In addition to violent attacks, the group also kidnapped Roman Catholic bishops, foreigners, and others and made ransom demands for their hostages.
In 1986 Marcos was forced from power by a popular revolution. The new president, Corazon Aquino, and the leader of the MNLF, Nur Misuari, quickly arranged for a cease-fire, and in January 1987 the MNLF agreed to drop its demand for an independent state in return for regional autonomy. However, the MILF refused to accept the agreement, and discussions between the government and opposition groups broke down. In 1988 the MNLF officially lifted its cease-fire. Despite the breakdown in the talks and the continued fighting, the government held referendums that led to the establishment of an autonomous region for Muslim Mindanao in 1990.
After several more years of skirmishes, Philippine President Fidel Ramos and Misuari concluded a peace accord in 1996. Later that year, Misuari was elected governor of the autonomous region. However, clashes between the MNLF and the government continued into the 21st century. During the last three decades of the 20th century, the fighting between Moro guerrilla groups and the government resulted in about 100,000 deaths.
