Naxalite,  general designation given to several Maoist-oriented and militant insurgent and separatist groups that have operated intermittently in India since the mid-1960s. More broadly, the term—often given as Naxalism or the Naxal movement—has been applied to the communist insurgency itself.
The name Naxalite is derived from the town of Naxalbari (Naksalbari) in far northern West Bengal state in northeastern India, which was the centre of a tribal peasant uprising against local landlords in 1967. Although the rebellion was suppressed, it became the focus of a number of communist-led separatist movements that sprung up in remote, often tribal areas in India—at first primarily in northeastern India but later more widely in other parts of the country. The rise of Naxalism corresponded to the growth of militant communism in India, particularly the creation of the Communist Party of India–Marxist-Leninist (CPI-ML) in 1969, and to the emergence of such rebel groups as the Maoist Communist Centre (MCC) and the Peoples’ War Group (PWG).
Naxalite groups generally have claimed to represent the poorest and most socially marginalized members of Indian society (notably tribal peoples and Dalits [formerly untouchables]) and to adhere to the Maoist doctrine of sustained peasant-led revolution. For decades they have waged guerrilla warfare against such targets as landlords, businesspeople, politicians, and security forces, and they have disrupted infrastructure by damaging transportation, communication, and power lines. In the process, they often have been able to establish bases of operation in remote forested areas. Naxalite groups have come to control large territories in many of the states of eastern India—notably Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa, and West Bengal—and their influence has spread even wider beyond those areas. Often Naxalite groups have taken over governing functions and provided social services within areas under their control, although they also have been accused of using harsh enforcement tactics.
National and state governments in India consistently have labeled Naxalite groups as terrorist organizations and declared them to be illegal. The original CPI-ML has not operated as a legal political party (though several offshoots of it have), and the more recent Communist Party of India-Maoist (formed in 2004 by the merger of the MCC and the PWG) has been outlawed. Police and security forces have responded to the Naxalites with various raids and military campaigns aimed at counteracting the guerrilla attacks and flushing the rebels out of their sanctuaries. Those operations have had mixed success, in part because authorities often have not provided adequate services in the territories where they have reestablished control. In addition, the fighting frequently has reverted to the government and Naxalite sides each retaliating against the other. Thousands of people have been killed during the decades of the insurgency, and tens of thousands have fled the fighting to become refugees.
