North-West Rebellion, also called North-West Resistance, Second Riel Rebellion, or Northwest Uprising,  violent insurgency in 1885 fought between the Canadian government and the Métis and their aboriginal allies, in regions of Canada later known as Saskatchewan and Alberta. The North-West Rebellion was triggered by rising concern and insecurity among the Métis about their land rights and survival following an influx of white settlers and a decline in bison—a major food source for the Métis and indigenous peoples in west-central Canada.
A series of battles left dozens of Métis and Cree warriors and Canadian soldiers wounded or dead. The Métis and their allies were eventually defeated by federal troops, though the Canadian government subsequently distributed land grants to the Métis. Of lasting significance was the conviction and hanging of rebel leader Louis Riel, which angered French Canadians and caused great distrust between Francophones and Anglophones across much of Canada.
By the late 1870s, tribes of Plains Indians—the Cree, the Blackfoot (the Blood, or Kainah, and Peigan bands), and the Saulteaux—were facing disaster. The great bison herds had disappeared, pushing people to near starvation, and much of the land claimed by the tribes had been signed away in treaties. Towns, farm fences, and railways appeared on the once wild and expansive prairies. In 1880, Cree chief Big Bear, and Crowfoot, leading chief of the Blackfoot, founded an aboriginal confederacy to try to solve their people’s grievances.
Meanwhile the Métis people—still feeling vulnerable after their Red River Rebellion (1869–70) in Manitoba—had grievances of their own. Their old life as fur traders and carriers for the Hudson’s Bay Company was disappearing, along with the bison, on which they too depended. They were also waiting for reassurance that titles to their river-lot homesteads and farms would be guaranteed.
Compounding problems, white settlers in Saskatchewan who had purchased land in the region, expecting that the Canadian Pacific Railway line would run northwest from Winnipeg to Edmonton, learned in 1882 that the railway would instead travel further south, through Regina and Calgary. Poor harvests in 1883 and 1884 added to their problems, along with an unsympathetic dominion government back east in Ottawa.
In the summer of 1884, the Métis of Saskatchewan brought Louis Riel, who had led the earlier Red River Rebellion, back to Canada from exile in the United States. Riel urged dissatisfied people in the region to unite and press their case on Canadian Prime Minister John A. Macdonald and his conservative government, which previously had failed to address their grievances. Later in 1884, Riel prepared a petition and urged Métis and non-Métis settlers alike to sign. The Canadian government, however, did not respond to the petition.
On March 8, 1885, Riel and the Métis passed a 10-point “Revolutionary Bill of Rights,” in which the Métis asserted rights of possession to their farms. They also made other demands, including: “That the Land Department of the Dominion Government be administered as far as practicable from Winnipeg, so that the settlers may not be compelled as heretofore to go to Ottawa for the settlement of questions in dispute between them and the land commissioner.” On March 18 and 19, with tensions building, an armed force of Métis formed a provisional government, seized the parish church at Batoche, and demanded the surrender of the nearby Hudson’s Bay Company post at Fort Carlton. Riel was named president of the rebel government, and famed Métis hunter and tactician Gabriel Dumont was installed as military commander.
