November Insurrection,  (1830–31), Polish rebellion that unsuccessfully tried to overthrow Russian rule in the Congress Kingdom of Poland as well as in the Polish provinces of western Russia and parts of Lithuania, Belorussia, (now Belarus), and  Ukraine.
When a revolution broke out in Paris (July 1830) and the Russian emperor Nicholas I indicated his intention of using the Polish Army to suppress it, a Polish secret society of infantry cadets staged an uprising in Warsaw (Nov. 29, 1830). Although the cadets and their civilian supporters failed to assassinate the Emperor’s brother Grand Duke Constantine (who was commander in chief of the armed forces in Poland) or to capture the barracks of the Russian cavalry, they did manage to seize weapons from the arsenal, arm the city’s civilian population, and gain control of the northern section of Warsaw.
The insurgents’ partial success was aided by the Grand Duke’s reluctance to take action against them and his eagerness to retreat to safety. But lacking definite plans, unity of purpose, and decisive leadership, the rebels lost control of the situation to moderate political figures, who restored order in the city and futilely hoped to negotiate with Nicholas for political concessions. Although the rebellion gained widespread support and its new leaders formally deposed Nicholas as king of Poland (Jan. 25, 1831), the conservative military commanders were unprepared when Nicholas’ army of 115,000 troops moved in (Feb. 5–6, 1831). The Polish Army of 40,000 offered strong resistance at several battles, but it was unable to stop the Russian advance toward Warsaw until February 25, when it fought a major but indecisive battle at Grochów.
The Russians then settled into winter camps, and uprisings sympathetic to the Poles broke out in Russian-controlled Lithuania, Belorussia, and Ukraine (spring 1831). Nevertheless, the Polish commanders hesitated to strike and then quickly retreated. Furthermore, the divided political leaders not only refused to pass reforms to win the support of the peasantry but also failed to gain the foreign aid that the generals were depending on.
As a consequence, the rebellion lost its impetus, particularly after a major Russian victory at Ostrołęka on May 26, 1831. The uprisings in the western Russian provinces were crushed, and people in the cities began losing confidence in the revolution’s leaders. When the Russians finally attacked Warsaw on September 6, the Polish Army withdrew to the north two days later. Leaving the territory of Congress Poland, which subsequently fell under stricter and more repressive Russian control, the Poles crossed the border into Prussia (October 5) and surrendered, thus ending the November Insurrection.
