Red River Rebellion,  uprising in 1869–70 in the Red River Colony against the Canadian government that was sparked by the transfer of the vast territory of Rupert’s Land from the Hudson’s Bay Company to the new country of Canada. Fearing that their culture and land rights would be compromised under Canadian control, the Métis (people of mixed First Nation [Native American] and European ancestry) mounted a rebellion and declared a provisional government to negotiate terms for entering Confederation. The uprising led to the creation of the province of Manitoba and the emergence of Métis leader Louis Riel—a hero to his people and many in Quebec but an outlaw in the eyes of the Canadian government.
The Red River Colony was founded in 1812 by Scottish settlers at the confluence of the Red River of the North and the Assiniboine River (on the location of modern-day downtown Winnipeg). After 1836 the colony was administered by the Hudson’s Bay Company (HBC) and populated mainly by Métis, most of whom were the descendants of French and English voyageurs and coureurs de bois (trappers) who had come west in the fur trade and settled down with Native American wives.
The Red River inhabitants were continually in conflict with the HBC, particularly over trading privileges. By the 1850s, the company’s rule was under attack from Britain, Canada, and the United States, and by the 1860s it had agreed to surrender its monopoly over Rupert’s Land and the North West, including the Red River settlement. During the lengthy negotiations to transfer sovereignty to Canada, Protestant settlers from the East moved into the colony, and their obtrusive, aggressive ways led the Roman Catholic Métis to fear for the preservation of their religion, land rights, and culture. Neither the British nor the Canadian government made any serious efforts to assuage these fears, negotiating the transfer of Rupert’s Land as if no population existed there.
Métis concerns were exacerbated by Canadian attempts to re-survey the settlement’s river-lot farms—typically long, narrow lots fronting the local rivers, which had been laid out according to the seigneurial system of New France, in contrast to the square lots preferred by the English. Many Métis did not have clear title to their land, and although the national government in Ottawa intended to respect Métis occupancy rights, no assurances were given that this would be the case. The Métis therefore feared the loss of their farms. The appointment of William McDougall—a well-known Canadian expansionist—as the territory’s first lieutenant governor also fuelled tensions and Métis fears of English Canadian domination.
In early November 1869, Riel emerged as a Métis spokesman and leader of a group of Red River militants who prevented McDougall and the incoming Canadian land-survey party from entering the colony. The francophone Riel gathered support from among both the French-speaking and the English-speaking Métis communities, aware that his people had to work with the more reticent, less organized anglophones to satisfy their grievances.
While local HBC officials remained neutral, Métis opposition caused the Canadian government to refuse to assume control of the territory on December 1, 1869, as had been agreed. This encouraged the rebels who had seized Upper Fort Garry—the main HBC trading post at the forks of the Red and Assiniboine—and who planned to hold it until the Canadian government agreed to negotiate.
Representatives of the rebel colonists were summoned to a convention, which in December proclaimed a provisional government, soon headed by Riel. In January Riel gained the support of most of the anglophone community in a second convention, which agreed to form a representative provisional government to discuss terms of entry into the Canadian Confederation.
Armed conflict persisted through the winter, and Riel seemed to be in control until he made the colossal blunder of permitting the court-martialling and execution of a prisoner, Thomas Scott, one of a group of English-speaking Ontario settlers who opposed the rebel government. Amid the turmoil, Scott and some fellow Ontarians had been captured and imprisoned at Upper Fort Garry. Scott’s subsequent death by firing squad, despite outside pleas to Riel not to carry out the execution, inflamed passions among Protestants in Ontario. Although the Canadian authorities were still willing to negotiate with Riel, they refused to grant an unconditional amnesty to him and the other rebel leaders.
The provisional government organized the territory of Assiniboia in March 1870 and enacted a law code in April. Although the Canadian government recognized the “rights” of the people of Red River in negotiations that took place in Ottawa that spring, the rebel victory was limited. On May12, a new, postage stamp-sized province called Manitoba was created by the Manitoba Act, its territory severely limited in contrast to the vast North West, which would soon be acquired by the Canadian government. Even within Manitoba, public lands were controlled by the federal government. Métis land titles were guaranteed and 607,000 hectares (1,500,000 acres) were reserved for the children of Métis families, but these arrangements were mismanaged by subsequent federal governments. The Métis nation did not flourish after 1870 in Manitoba, however, and Ottawa granted no amnesty for Riel and his lieutenants, who fled into exile just before the arrival of a column of British and Canadian troops in August 1870.
Although the insurrection had ostensibly won its major objectives—a distinct province with land and cultural rights guaranteed—the victory was hollow. Many Métis soon found themselves so disadvantaged in Manitoba that they moved farther west, where they would again attempt—more violently and tragically this time—to assert their nationality under Riel in the North-West Rebellion of 1885.
An earlier version of this entry was published by 
The Canadian Encyclopedia
.
