Russian Revolution, also called Russian Revolution of 1917,  two revolutions in 1917, the first of which, in February (March, New Style), overthrew the imperial government and the second of which, in October (November), placed the Bolsheviks in power.
Centuries of virtually unchecked Russian expansion in Asia ended with an embarrassing defeat in the Russo-Japanese War (1904–05). This military reverse shattered Russia’s dreams of establishing hegemony over the whole of Asia, but it also contributed to a wave of domestic unrest. The Revolution of 1905 compelled Nicholas II to issue the October Manifesto, which ostensibly transformed Russia from an unlimited autocracy into a constitutional monarchy. The tsar’s reactionary policies, including the occasional dissolution of the Duma, or Russian parliament, the chief fruit of the 1905 revolution, had spread dissatisfaction even to moderate elements of the nobility. The Russian Empire’s many ethnic minorities grew increasingly restive under Russian domination.
Despite some reforms that followed the Russo-Japanese War, the Russian army in 1914 was ill-equipped to fight a major war, and neither the political nor the military leadership was up to the standard required. Nevertheless the army fought bravely in World War I, and both soldiers and junior officers showed remarkable qualities. The Russian invasion of East Prussia in August 1914 was defeated by Paul von Hindenburg and Erich Ludendorff at Tannenberg, but it required the Germans to send reinforcements from the Western Front and so saved France from defeat and made possible the victory on the Marne. The campaigns of 1915 and 1916 on the Eastern Front brought terrible casualties to the Russian forces, which at times did not even have sufficient rifles. As late as July 1916, however, the Russian army was capable of making a successful offensive under Gen. Aleksey Brusilov in Volhynia and Bukovina.
The Russian people did not respond to the war with real enthusiasm. The government could not overcome its traditional distrust of any public initiative, even in the organization of medical supplies or munitions for the forces at the front. In the Fourth Duma a majority of the centre and moderate right formed a Progressive bloc and proposed the creation of a national coalition government “possessing the confidence of the country” and a program of reforms which could be carried out even in wartime. The emperor rejected the proposal and prorogued the Duma on September 3 (September 16, New Style), 1915. Eleven days earlier Nicholas had decided to assume personal command of the armies in the field. The result was that in Petrograd (as the capital had been renamed at the beginning of the war, in place of the German-sounding St. Petersburg) the empress Alexandra was in fact in control. She herself was under the influence of the self-styled “holy man” Grigori Rasputin, whose hold over her was because of his ability to arrest the bleeding of the hemophiliac tsarevich, Alexis. Thus to the massive casualties at the front, the retreat of the armies, and the growing economic hardships was added the knowledge, widespread in the capital and among the upper classes, that the government was in the hands of incompetents. Rumours of treason in high places were widely believed, though the historical evidence does not suggest that they were true. On the night of December 16–17 (December 29–30, New Style), 1916, Rasputin was murdered by a group of conservative nobles, but by then the system was beyond salvation. There was no hand at the helm, and the ship was drifting onto the rocks.
On February 23 (March 8, New Style), 1917, the revolution began, but it was neither organized nor immediately recognized as such by any of the existing parties or political groups. Strikes for higher wages at some of Petrograd’s factories had been occurring sporadically for some time, and on that day no fewer than 130,000 men were picketing. To this total must be added the considerable number of female workers who were celebrating International Women’s Day. The number of strikers and their sympathizers was large, and although several bakers’ shops were demolished by the mob, neither the leaders of the Duma on the one hand nor the imperial government and the police on the other gave the matter any particular attention. The only precaution taken by the authorities was to prevent the demonstrators from reaching the centre of the city. The next day the strikers were still more numerous and probably amounted to 30 percent of all workers in Petrograd. Some sections of the crowd succeeded in reaching the city centre, and their mood soon became threatening. On that day university students joined the movement, but the primary concern of protesters remained the food shortages that had plagued the capital. Only a few cries were raised denouncing the autocracy and the war.
The third day (February 25 [March 10, New Style]) would prove the turning point. The strike became general, and the strikers assumed an aggressive demeanour, raiding police stations in the factory districts and disarming the police. In this area of the city the police practically disappeared, and the political demonstration began to assume the character of an armed uprising. The Cossacks who had been patrolling the streets as the bulwark of the autocracy suddenly manifested neutrality and even friendliness to the strikers. Sergey Khabalov, the military governor of the capital, received a telegram from the tsar, then at the front, ordering him to suppress the strike. In another telegram Nicholas empowered Prime Minister Nikolai Golitsyn to prorogue the Duma. On February 26 (March 11, New Style), acting on the instructions he had received, Khabalov tried to disperse the demonstrators by force, employing the police as well as cadets from Imperial Guard regiments. The crowds in the centre of the city were temporarily scattered, and scores of demonstrators were shot down. This resort to force on the part of the authorities was not strong enough to crush the strikers and may well have intensified their revolutionary mood.
When the news came that several elite regiments of the Imperial Guard had revolted and joined the demonstrators, there was no longer any doubt that a revolution was underway. Khabalov tried to send a group of 1,000 handpicked troops under the command of Col. Alexander Kutepov, a well-respected officer who had just returned from the front, to arrest the mutinous soldiers. This proved to be the only serious attempt to counter the growing uprising in the capital, but it amounted to nothing. The fate of Kutepov’s force illustrated the transformed mentality of the soldiery. Whole regiments, marching with the avowed intention of obeying orders, no sooner came into contact with the demonstrators than they suddenly fraternized and shared their arms with them. The government then made no more efforts to deal directly with the situation in Petrograd but concentrated on holding out until such time as the troops from the front could arrive to crush the Petrograd garrison and the revolutionaries. Although ministers tried to entrench themselves first at the Winter Palace and then at the Admiralty, they could hold neither place. On the evening of February 27 (March 12, New Style) they went into hiding and were eventually arrested and imprisoned.
The victory of the revolution in the capital was seemingly complete, but the monarchy still survived and was in possession of sufficient forces to crush the uprising. Moreover, the revolutionaries were both intoxicated by victory and poorly organized; the dispatch of a small but disciplined body of troops could easily have reasserted the authority of the tsar. What remained an enigma, however, was the attitude toward the revolution held by the soldiers and officers at the front. Unable to read the mood of the army, Duma leaders hesitated to assert the power which the revolutionaries urged them to assume. Instead of resorting to bold measures, they made frantic efforts to induce the tsar to compromise with the revolution and to accept, at the 11th hour, their old demand for responsible government. Even after the Duma had allowed itself to be prorogued and the garrison had revolted, Mikhail Rodzianko, speaker of the Duma, attempted to salvage the old regime. He not only sent urgent telegrams to the tsar and the leading generals pointing out the necessity of saving the monarchy and the country by conceding the necessary reforms but even held consultations with the very ministers whom he had denounced as treasonable. The vision of the tsar was equally myopic. So blind was he to the facts of the situation that even at this hour he flatly rejected the appeals of the Duma and refused to believe that the strike had culminated in a revolution. When he and his advisers at last learned that the revolt of the Petrograd troops had endangered the existence of the monarchy, they immediately ordered a number of regiments from various parts of the front to proceed to the capital.
The loyalty and discipline of these troops had never been put to the test. The first detachments under Gen. Nikolai Ivanov were prevented from approaching Petrograd by railway workers. Additional regiments were never sent because, by that point, the revolution had developed such impetus and had gained such support at the front that any attempt to crush it by military force was recognized as hopeless. The army indeed could no longer be relied on, and it may plausibly be assumed that even if the troops had been dispatched, they would probably have mutinied and fraternized with the revolutionists.
While the members of the Duma were marking time and hesitating to take leadership of the revolution, representatives of the workers were taking immediate steps to organize revolutionary forces under the banner of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. Only late in the early morning of February 28 (March 13, New Style), after prolonged discussions and with considerable reluctance, did the members of the Duma Committee make up their minds to constitute a government. Three considerations were obviously instrumental in leading them to this decision: first, a clear consciousness of the elemental force of the revolution; second, the apprehension that the Petrograd Soviet might be tempted to assume power, and third, the hope that by constituting themselves the ruling authority they might be able to cope with the increasing anarchy and save the monarchy and even the dynasty. Georgy Yevgenyevich, Prince Lvov, would serve as prime minister in what would come to be known as the Provisional Government.
Meanwhile, the Petrograd Soviet was acting with haste and purpose. Founded late on the afternoon of February 27 (March 12, New Style), it had succeeded in opening its first plenary sitting the same evening with an attendance of approximately 250 members, consisting of Socialist deputies of the Duma, a number of prominent worker leaders representing the various shades of revolutionary opinion, and members of strike committees who had been active during the few previous days. This meeting of the Petrograd Soviet was chaotic and interrupted by delegates from revolting regiments who had come to offer greetings and proffer allegiance. Nevertheless, the soviet managed to appoint a strong executive committee, which immediately took over the business of securing food supplies and the strategic defense of Petrograd against any possible attack from the autocracy. It also came to the decision to change its constitution by including army deputies along with worker deputies. In this way the soviet made a palpable bid for real power.
From this very moment, enlisting as it did the support of workers and the Petrograd garrison, the Petrograd Soviet was the depository of real power, but its members made no overt or covert attempt to constitute a revolutionary government. When the Duma decided at last to assume the responsibility of forming the new government, the decision was unanimously welcomed by leaders of the soviet. The attitude which these aspiring politicians took up with regard to the question of government is so surprising as to constitute one of the most intriguing problems of the Russian Revolution. Why the Petrograd Soviet refused immediately to proclaim itself the Government of Revolutionary Russia can only be a matter of speculation. Speaking at the first All-Russian Conference of Soviets in late March (early April, New Style) 1917, Yuri Steklov, a prominent member of its executive committee, ascribed the refusal to the uncertainty about the attitude of the army which prevailed at that time: “We were still doubtful,” he said, “whether the revolutionary outbreak would succeed in establishing even a bourgeois regime. We were in the dark not only as to the feelings of the troops at the front but even as to that of the regiments stationed at Tsarskoye Selo…”
This explanation addresses some, but certainly not all, of the soviet’s reticence. An orderly government, representing a compromise between the insurgent masses and the bourgeois classes, promised to be the strongest bulwark against counterrevolution. The desire for the establishment of such a government must undoubtedly have constituted the main factor in the unopposed assumption of power by the Duma. Still, fear of the outbreak of a counterrevolution cannot be regarded as an adequate explanation of the willingness of the soviet’s leaders to delegate power to the Duma. On the contrary, fear of counterrevolution should have induced them to keep the power in their own hands. Their decision to step aside and leave the formation of a government to the bourgeoisie, the class determined to arrest the onrush of the revolution, would be unintelligible unless it is recalled that most of the soviet’s leaders were deeply convinced that the aim of the revolution was solely to establish a democratic regime. It was believed that any attempt to associate the movement with socialist experiments or the dictatorship of the proletariat would ruin it and so repeat the disastrous failure of 1905.
Among those on the soviet’s first executive committee were a few Bolsheviks (Russian: “One of the Majority”), members of the Russian Social-Democratic Workers’ Party who had supported Vladimir Lenin prior to the revolution of 1905. The Bolsheviks believed Lenin’s dictum that the Russian Revolution was to be the vanguard of a world socialist revolution. However, even they failed at the time to declare that the moment had come for establishing a socialist and proletarian government in Russia. So unprepared were they for taking action that when Lenin arrived in Petrograd three weeks later, he found that his most difficult task was to inspire his own party with the necessary enthusiasm for “deepening the revolution.” Whatever may have been the views held by the Bolsheviks at this time, they were in such an insignificant minority both in the Petrograd Soviet and outside that their views did not carry much weight. Moreover, their influence in the soviet, whatever it may have been, was counterbalanced by that of an equally insignificant minority on the right, which denied that the revolution had any aims other than the establishment of a democratic state and bourgeois liberties.
Members of the Duma, on the other hand, had few illusions about where the real political power was vested. They were not only willing to form a government with the consent of the soviet’s leaders, but insisted on the latter issuing an open proclamation of their support. The published program of the Provisional Government was indeed dictated by the soviet’s leaders and was accepted in full by the members of the Duma committee. The status of the government created as a result of this compromise was necessarily precarious in the extreme. Nominally invested with full powers and sovereign authority, the Provisional Government’s position was bound to be unstable because the basis of the compromise which established it was vague and uncertain. The revolutionary impetus of the masses and the constant changes in the constitution of the soviet and in the mentality of its leaders soon combined to render this basis even more untenable. Every day fresh groups joined the soviet and new leaders replaced old ones with the consequence that new adjustments constantly had to be made, and even relative stability became difficult to maintain.
While negotiations between the soviet and the Duma were still proceeding and before the Provisional Government formally took over the administration (March 1 [March 14, New Style]), the extremely delicate question of the position of the tsar and the Romanov dynasty needed to be settled. That Nicholas could no longer remain autocrat was a foregone conclusion, but conservative leaders of the Duma dreaded the idea of Russia becoming a republic and were determined to save the monarchy and perhaps even the dynasty. They accordingly dispatched Aleksandr Guchkov and Vasily Shulgin, two members of the Duma, to the tsar’s headquarters at Pskov with the mission of obtaining the tsar’s abdication in favour of the tsarevich Alexis and the appointment of the grand duke Michael as regent. A few days previously such an event would have been regarded as a fantastically successful triumph for the revolution. In those few days, however, the revolutionary movement had developed such an impetus that any attempt to save the dynasty was recognized as utterly impossible. The tsar therefore refused to risk the safety of his son and, abdicating both for himself and the tsarevich, proclaimed his brother Michael his successor.
When the terms of abdication became known on the following day, even this solution had to be promptly abandoned. The very same members of the Duma committee who had pinned their faith to the dynasty proceeded to the palace of the grand duke and strongly urged him to refuse the throne until the Constituent Assembly had drawn up a constitution. Michael declined the throne, and with that decision, three centuries of Romanov rule came to an end. A few days later the question of the dynasty came up again in a dramatic fashion, and the incident demonstrated both the strength of the soviet and its determination when necessary to use its power in defiance of the government. The tsar had requested the new ministers to arrange for the departure of himself and his family to Great Britain, a request which the leaders of the soviet learned of by mere accident. At once they decided to prevent this outcome, and they called on the government to put the tsar and his family under arrest. Even before their protest could be dealt with, they gave orders to railway operators to stop the imperial train and authorized one of their members, supported by a strong detachment of armed workers, to arrest the tsar. These steps proved unnecessary, however, for the new ministers themselves proceeded to arrest the royal family.
