Sea power,   means by which a nation extends its military power onto the seas. Measured in terms of a nation’s capacity to use the seas in defiance of rivals and competitors, it consists of such diverse elements as combat craft and weapons, auxiliary craft, commercial shipping, bases, and trained personnel. Aircraft used in the control of seaborne transportation function as an instrument of sea power even when they operate from a land base; aircraft operating from carriers represent the extension of sea power even when they are attacking targets deep inland. Except for the great increase in bombardment of shore or inland targets from the sea, the functions of sea power were the same in World War II as they were in the 16th century, when warships specifically designed for fighting (as distinguished from armed merchantmen) first appeared.
The capacity for sea power depends upon such factors as population, character of government, soundness of economy, number and quality of harbours and extent of coastline, and the number and location of a nation’s colonies and bases with respect to desired sea traffic.
The main purpose of sea power has always been to protect friendly shipping from enemy attack and to destroy or hinder the enemy’s shipping—both commercial and military. When one belligerent or the other has virtual control of surface shipping in portions of the seas, he is said to have command of the seas, with the ability both to defend his own sea communications and to deny communications to the enemy.
Sea power may also be exerted to apply military and economic pressure on an enemy by preventing the import of commodities necessary for prosecution of war. It may also prevent him from obtaining funds through the export of commodities to neutrals, and it may prevent neutrals from trading with the enemy. This use of sea power is known as blockade and has usually been exercised according to specific procedures prescribed by international law.
Naval forces have also been used to bombard land objectives from the sea. In the first half of the 20th century, this function of sea power grew enormously in importance. The development of the aircraft carrier added a new dimension to this bombardment capability, as did the missile-firing nuclear submarine. In the 1960s and ’70s, the nuclear submarine was the single most important instrument of sea power; it was scarcely distinguishable in function from strategic air power and land-based missiles in general nuclear warfare. The classic exposition of the role of sea power as the basis of national power and greatness was Alfred Thayer Mahan’s The Influence of Sea Power upon History, 1660–1783 (1890).
