Second Battle of Bull Run, also called Second Battle of Manassas or Second Manassas,  (August 29–30, 1862), in the American Civil War, the second of two engagements fought at a small stream named Bull Run, near Manassas in northern Virginia. (Civil War battles often had one name in the North, which was usually associated with a prominent nearby physical feature, and another in the South, usually derived from the town or city closest to the battlefield.) The Confederate victory drove the Union army from eastern Virginia and laid the groundwork for the Confederate invasion of Maryland.
Military operations in Virginia in the spring and summer of 1862, which included the Second Battle of Bull Run (Second Manassas), were a showcase of Confederate generalship. From Maj. Gen. Stonewall Jackson’s masterful performance in the Shenandoah Valley Campaign to Gen. Robert E. Lee’s triumph in the Seven Days’ Battles, Confederate forces consistently engaged much larger Union armies and emerged victorious. With the failure of Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan’s Peninsular Campaign, commanding Union Gen. Henry Halleck ordered McClellan’s Army of the Potomac to assist Maj. Gen. John Pope’s newly created Army of Virginia in central Virginia. Until the two Union armies could be combined for a renewed assault upon the Confederate capital of Richmond, it fell upon Pope to defend Washington, D.C., and to engage Confederate forces in the area.
The threat to Richmond having been neutralized, Lee swiftly shifted his focus to Pope, who had hoped to concentrate his command at Gordonsville, Virginia, a city that served as the terminus of the Virginia Central Railroad. This railroad was a vital lifeline to the Shenandoah Valley, the so-called breadbasket of the Confederacy. However, Jackson’s corps, freshly arrived from the Virginia Peninsula, occupied Gordonsville, and Pope fell back to Culpeper Court House, some 30 miles (48 km) to the north.
Jackson advanced on the gathering Federal army, and on August 9 he met Union Maj. Gen. Nathaniel Banks at Cedar Mountain (also called Cedar Run). Banks’s Federals, though greatly outnumbered, attacked with much vigour, and Jackson was forced to rally his men by personally riding into the heart of the fighting. The reinvigorated Confederates eventually drove the Union forces from the field, but Banks had come very near to success. Jackson retired across the Rapidan River, where Lee joined him (August 17) with Lieut. Gen. James Longstreet’s corps. On August 19 Pope fell back behind the Rappahannock River without engaging Jackson. There Halleck had commanded him to cover both Washington and Aquia Creek, an inlet near the mouth of the Potomac River where the Army of the Potomac was to join him. These orders were almost impossible to execute, as any serious change of position necessarily uncovered one of these lines.
The leading troops of the Army of the Potomac were now landed, and they set out to join Pope’s army, which faced Longstreet and Jackson along a 10-mile (16-km) stretch of the Rappahannock between Bealeton and Waterloo. On August 24 Lee ordered Jackson, screened by Maj. Gen. Jeb Stuart’s cavalry, to march around Pope’s right wing and descend on his rear through Thoroughfare Gap, a pass in the Bull Run Mountains west of Manassas. To divide one’s forces in the face of a numerically superior foe violated military convention, but Lee calculated that his risk would be far greater if the armies of McClellan and Pope were joined. Pope was at this moment about to take the offensive when a violent storm swelled the rivers and put an end to all movement.
Jackson began his march around the right of Pope’s army early on August 25. The column passed through Thoroughfare Gap on August 26, and it reached Bristoe Station, directly in Pope’s rear, that evening. Jackson’s “foot cavalry” had covered an astonishing 54 miles (87 km) in just two days. A Confederate detachment drove the Federal defenders from Manassas Junction; after thoroughly plundering the Union supply depot there, Jackson’s men set fire to the rail yard and the remaining Federal stores. When Pope became aware of Jackson’s departure, he arranged for an immediate attack on Longstreet, thinking that Jackson had withdrawn his force to the Shenandoah Valley. However, when the direction of Jackson’s march on Thoroughfare Gap became clear, Pope fell back in order to engage him.
On the evening of August 27, Union Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker’s division met Brig. Gen. Richard Ewell’s division of Jackson’s corps near Bristoe Station. A private with the 15th Alabama Infantry Regiment said of the ensuing encounter, “If I had held up an iron hat I could have caught it full of bullets in a short time.” The brief but brutal engagement left the Union attackers bloodied, and Ewell retired to Manassas. Pope now realized that he had Jackson’s entire corps in front of him at Manassas Junction. At once he took steps to concentrate all of his forces for a decisive strike against Jackson. When he arrived at Manassas on August 28, however, Pope found nothing but the charred ruins of his supplies.
Jackson had no intention of awaiting Pope at Manassas. Having made several feints to mislead Federal scouts, Jackson withdrew to a hidden position in the hills between Groveton and Sudley Springs, northwest of the 1861 battlefield. There he awaited the arrival of Lee and Longstreet, who, taking the same route as Jackson, arrived on August 28 at Thoroughfare Gap. There Longstreet engaged a hopelessly outnumbered Union division under Brig. Gen. James Ricketts, driving it back to Gainesville. That evening Jackson’s corps held a 2-mile (3.2-km) line from Sudley Springs to Groveton, with his right wing near Groveton opposing Union Brig. Gen. Rufus King’s division. Longstreet held Thoroughfare Gap, facing Ricketts at Gainesville. On Ricketts’s right was King near Groveton, and the Union line was continued by the remaining division of Maj. Gen. Irvin McDowell’s corps and by Maj. Gen. Franz Sigel’s corps to the Stone Bridge.
Pope was at Centreville, 7 miles (11 km) away, with three divisions; a fourth was northeast of Manassas Junction, and Maj. Gen. Fitz-John Porter’s corps was at Bristoe Station. Thus, while Ricketts continued to occupy Longstreet at Gainesville, Pope could concentrate a superior force against Jackson, who he now believed to be meditating a retreat to Thoroughfare Gap. However, a series of misunderstandings resulted in the withdrawal of Ricketts and King, so that no force now remained to oppose the union of Longstreet and Jackson. Meanwhile, Sigel and McDowell alone remained to face Jackson until such time as Pope could bring up the rest of his scattered forces.
Jackson was now prepared for battle, on the ground of his choosing. On the morning of August 29, the Confederates, posted behind a high railway embankment, repelled two sharp attacks made by Sigel. Pope arrived at noon with his divisions from Centreville, which, led by the general himself, Hooker, and Maj. Gen. Jesse Reno, made a third and desperate attack on Jackson’s line. Jackson repulsed it with difficulty, carried his counterstroke too far, and was in turn checked by Brig. Gen. Cuvier Grover’s brigade of Hooker’s division. Grover then made a fourth assault but was driven back with terrible loss. The last assault, delivered by two divisions under Maj. Gen. Phil Kearny and Brig. Gen. Isaac Stevens, drove the Confederate left out of its position; a Confederate counterattack, led by Brig. Gen. Jubal Early, dislodged the Union soldiers with a bayonet charge.
By noon of August 29 the lead elements of Longstreet’s corps had begun to deploy on Jackson’s right. Porter and McDowell, acting on various orders sent by Pope, approached the area and observed an enemy force of unknown strength. Porter had been ordered to attack Jackson’s right flank, but it was now clear that Pope was wholly ignorant of the arrival of Longstreet. To the north, the sound of Sigel’s guns indicated that he was closely engaged with Jackson. McDowell and Porter assessed the situation. The former marched off to join Sigel, while the latter remained to hold Longstreet in check. In this Porter succeeded, for Longstreet, though far superior in numbers, made no forward move, and his advance guard went into action alone. On the night of the 29th, Lee reunited the wings of his army on the field of battle. He had forced Pope back many miles from the Rappahannock, and, expecting that the Federals would retire to the line of Bull Run before giving battle, he now decided to wait for the last divisions of Longstreet’s corps, which were still approaching.
Pope, still optimistic that he held the upper hand, mistakenly believed that Jackson was retreating and ordered a “general pursuit” of the Confederates on August 30. There was some ground for his suppositions, because Jackson had retired a short distance and Longstreet’s advance guard also had fallen back. McDowell, who was in charge of the pursuit, soon recognized Pope’s error and attempted to secure his exposed flank by occupying the Bald and Henry House hills. An attack on Jackson’s right, which Pope had ordered Porter to make, was repulsed with great losses due to devastating enfilading artillery fire from Longstreet.
Shortly after 4:00 pm Lee ordered the entire Confederate army forward in a grand counterattack. Longstreet bore down on the Federal left with 28,000 men in one of the largest massed charges of the war, while Jackson pressed the right toward the Warrenton Turnpike. The left flank of the Union army was driven successively from every position it took up, and Longstreet captured Bald Hill. Jackson, though opposed by the greater part of Pope’s forces, advanced to Matthews Hill, and his artillery threatened the Stone Bridge. The Federals, driven back to the banks of Bull Run, were only saved by the spirited defense of Henry House Hill by the Pennsylvania Reserves Division of Brig. Gen. John Reynolds and the 2nd Division under Brig. Gen. George Sykes.
Pope withdrew under cover of night to Centreville. There he received fresh reinforcements, but Jackson was already marching around his new right. At Chantilly (September 1) Pope lost two of his ablest commanders when Kearny and Stevens were killed in action, and the whole Federal army fell back to Washington. Lee and his army were the masters of eastern Virginia, the Union army was in disarray, and the door was open for Lee’s planned invasion of Maryland.
The Union forces present on the field on August 29–30, 1862, numbered about 70,000, while the strength of Lee’s army on the same dates was about 55,000. Total casualties for the battle topped 22,000, with Union losses numbering 13,824. Confederates killed, wounded, or missing numbered 8,353 men, Longstreet’s massive charge on the second day having accounted for the bulk of that total. While the attack was successful in collapsing the Union left flank, Longstreet lost over 4,000 men in roughly four hours.
Pope’s army and those troops of the Army of the Potomac that had been involved in the catastrophe were driven, tired and disheartened, into the Washington lines. Once they were there, accusations and recriminations swirled about who should be held responsible for the debacle. Pope placed the blame squarely on Porter, for having failed to attack Jackson’s right flank on August 29. Porter responded that Pope’s orders had been both vague and impossible to execute. Less than two weeks after the battle, Pope was relieved of command. He would spend the remainder of the war on the Western frontier, fighting the Sioux. Porter was court-martialed, found guilty, “and for ever disqualified from holding any office of trust under the government of the United States.” He would spend most of the subsequent quarter century engaging in an ultimately successful quest to exonerate himself.
