Second Battle of Fort Wagner,  also known as the Second Assault on Morris Island or the Battle of Fort Wagner, Morris Island, (18 July 1863), unsuccessful Union assault during the American Civil War (1861–65) on Confederate-held Fort Wagner on Morris Island, South Carolina. An early assault on the fort on July 11 (the First Battle of Fort Wagner) had been just as unsuccessful. Despite the Union defeats, the second battle was especially noteworthy for the courageous performance of a regiment of black federal troops, the 54th Massachusetts Infantry, that transformed the image of the African American soldier, aided in the recruitment of additional African American soldiers, and helped to swing Northern opinion in favor of freeing slaves. Its heroic actions were depicted in the 1989 film Glory.
Despite President Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation of 1862, there was no great enthusiasm among Northern whites for the abolition of slavery and widespread skepticism about the ability of blacks to fulfill combat roles. The 54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry Regiment was one of the first Union military units made up of black soldiers under white officers. Its recruitment had been a high-profile event, and its commander, Colonel Robert Gould Shaw, hailed from a prominent Boston abolitionist family. The regiment’s assignment to lead the assault on Fort Wagner was thus seen as a crucial chance to prove that African Americans could fight for their own freedom.
The approach to Fort Wagner was a narrow strip of beach 180 feet (55 m) wide with the Atlantic to the east and a marsh to the west. Once on this beach, the Union troops had to cross a shallow moat surrounding the 750 foot- (685 m) wide fort, which was heavily fortified with mortars and other guns. The assault began at 7:45 PM, with a total of ten regiments engaged. The soldiers of the 54th fought their way on to the fort’s parapet and held out there for over an hour under heavy fire before the attack was called off at around 10:00 PM. The black regiment had taken more than 50 percent casualties, with Colonel Shaw among those killed. The soldiers were hailed for their valor, and the recruitment of African Americans into the Union army sharply increased as a result of the public recognition. Sgt. William H. Carney, for his bravery at Fort Wagner,  became the first African American to receive the Medal of Honor, the country’s highest military award.
Losses: Confederate, 174 dead, wounded, or captured of 1,800; Union, 1,515 dead, wounded, or captured of 5,000.
