Siege of Calais,  (4 September 1346–4 August 1347). After his magnificent victory at the Battle of Crécy, Edward III of England marched north and besieged Calais, the closest port to England and directly opposite Dover where the English Channel is narrowest. The siege lasted for almost a year and, although it was an English victory, both sides were exhausted. A truce was soon declared in the long-running Hundred Years’ War that was to hold for eight years.
After Edward landed in France in summer 1346, he sent his fleet home. He therefore needed a secure port from which he could receive fresh supplies and reinforcements. Calais was ideal. The city was surrounded by walls and a double moat and boasted a moated citadel. Its position on the English Channel meant that, once captured, the city could be supplied and defended by English ships easily. Edward’s army numbered around 34,000 men, but such a force was inadequate to penetrate the city’s defenses. The English also had twenty cannon, but these crude devices made no impression on the city’s walls, despite many attempts to breach them.
At first, stalemate reigned as the French failed to intercept the English lines of supply, and the English failed to stop French sailors bringing in new supplies. By February 1347 Edward managed to prevent supplies getting into Calais by sea and dug in for a long siege, starving the 8,000 citizens into surrender. Supplies of fresh water and food were reduced to almost nothing; citizens were reduced to eating vermin and excrement. The surrender was signaled on August 1, but to spare the city’s inhabitants, Edward insisted on the sacrifice of six of the city’s leaders.  As portrayed in Rodin’s famous sculpture, the six emaciated burghers (leaders), "with bare heads and feet, with ropes round their necks, and the keys of the town and castle in their hands," offered themselves to the English king so their fellow citizens might live.  Only when Edward’s pregnant queen pled for mercy on their behalf were the six burghers allowed to live.
The French surrender and English victory was a great boon to England during the Hundred Years’ War, and as an English colony the city proved an excellent military base of operations in France. Edward’s finances, however, were now in ruins, and the black death was killing large numbers of soldiers, spawning a hastily signed truce with the French.  The city was then populated with English settlers and merchants and would remain in English hands until 1588.
Losses: Unknown.
