Siege of Fort Ticonderoga,  (2–6 July 1777), engagement in the American Revolution. The summer after their success at Valcour Island, the British opened their renewed invasion plan with a three-pronged effort to split the northern American colonies. Accordingly, Major General John Burgoyne sailed with 9,100 British and German troops and Indians down Lake Champlain to seize the American-held Fort Ticonderoga (in New York), which Benedict Arnold and Ethan Allen’s Green Mountain Boys had famously captured on May 10, 1775, giving a boost (and much needed artillery, taken from the British) to the early American war effort. It henceforth became a symbol of American might.
Although it was a strong fortification and occupied a strategic position, Fort Ticonderoga was vulnerable to artillery attack from three nearby hills: Mount Hope, Sugar Loaf Hill, and Mount Independence. Each was fortified, but thinly manned. Proper defense was beyond the capability of the estimated 4,000 Americans under Major General Arthur St. Clair, whose plan was to hold out as long as possible, then use a pontoon bridge to cross the lake to Mt. Independence and withdraw a safe distance.
Burgoyne with his main body landed on the west lake shore near the fort on 30 June. His Hessians marched on the opposite shore toward Mt. Independence, threatening to cut off the American escape route. On 4 July St. Clair observed British artillery emplaced on Sugar Loaf, ruining the British hope for a sneak attack.  But St. Clair deemed his position impossible. As he framed the predicament, he could either "save his character and lose the army" by defending the increasingly vulnerable fort or "save the army and lose his character" by ordering a retreat.  He opted for the latter, and under cover of darkness on 5 July, he evacuated his sick and wounded by boat and then marched his men away, eventually crossing the lake.
With the British in hot pursuit of the fleeing Americans, small skirmishes occurred over the next two days (called the Battle of Hubbardton and the Battle of Fort Anne), but there were few casualties. By far the worst casualty was to St. Clair’s reputation and American pride. Congress and George Washington were outraged; they found it inconceivable that America’s most famous fortress could be abandoned by their defenders and overrun by the British without firing a shot, with no sustained siege, with no pitched battle. St. Clair was removed from his command and court martialed, along with his superior, General Philip Schuyler, in late 1778. Both men were exonerated from any wrongdoing, but their reputations had been permanently tarnished.
Losses: American, about 40 dead, 40 wounded, 234 captured; British and Hessian, 35 dead, 150 wounded.
