Siege of Acre,  (18 March–20 May 1799). Napoleon’s unsuccessful siege of the Ottoman-controlled, walled city of Acre (today Akko in northern Israel) was his first setback in the Egyptian campaign, one of his few defeats, and marked the end of his hopes of carving out an empire in the East. More to the point, British command of the Mediterranean Sea made the whole expedition to Egypt increasingly irrelevant.
Effectively marooned in Egypt through the loss of the French fleet at the Battle of the Nile (1798), Napoleon decided to continue his war with the Ottoman Turks and marched into Palestine. On 18 March, his forces encountered the walled city of Acre, whose 5,000-strong garrison was supported by two Royal Navy ships of the line under Admiral Sir William Sidney Smith. The British had captured a flotilla containing half of Napoleon’s siege guns, and the town’s fortifications were improved by Smith and Phélippeaux, a French émigré officer.
A series of French infantry assaults was repulsed, forcing Napoleon to instigate formal siege operations. To add to his difficulties, the Turks sent a large army to raise the siege. General Jean-Baptiste Kléber was ordered to repel this force, and, despite being heavily outnumbered, he inflicted a crushing defeat on the Turks at the Battle of Mount Tabor on 16 April.
By the end of April, the French had secured sufficient artillery to make a breach in Acre’s walls. Five desperate assaults were launched by the French from 1 to 10 May, and when the attackers had fought their way onto the walls, they discovered that the defenders had built a series of equally formidable internal fortifications. While Acre continued to be resupplied by sea, the demoralized French were suffering grievous shortages, with disease starting to take hold. Reluctantly, Napoleon accepted defeat and began the long retreat back to Egypt.
The hill, southeast of Acre, where Napoleon established his camp is still known as "Napoleon’s Hill." The site, along with a cemetery of Napoleon’s soldiers, is a popular tourist attraction.
Losses: French, 2,200 dead, 2,000 wounded or ill of 13,000; Ottoman Turkish, unknown.
