Siege of Toulon,  also known as the Fall of Toulon, (Aug. 28–Dec. 19, 1793), military engagement of the French Revolutionary Wars, in which the young artillery officer Napoleon Bonaparte won his first military reputation by forcing the withdrawal of the Anglo-Spanish fleet, which was occupying the southern French city of Toulon and its forts.
Amid a surge of anti-Republicanism in southern France during 1793, French royalist counterrevolutionaries handed over this major French naval base and arsenal to an Anglo-Spanish fleet under the command of Vice Admiral Lord Hood and Admiral Juan de Lángara on August 27-28. The British fleet also seized more than 70 French ships, almost half of the French Navy. Both the strategic importance of the naval base and the prestige of the Revolution demanded that the French recapture Toulon.
The Republican response was to surround the port, and a siege began on September 8. Although a series of French generals were nominally in command of the siege operation, the man responsible for its success was the previously unknown artillery officer Napoleon Bonaparte.
 Unfortunately, Napoleon had to deal with two incompetent superiors, until they were replaced by General Jacques Dugommier, who immediately saw merit in Napoleon. With the young officer in command, the Republicans seized the outer forts overlooking the port, before preparing for the main attack on the Little Gibraltar fort, which dominated Toulon’s two harbors.
After months of preparations, the revolutionary troops, under cover of intense bombardment, successfully assaulted the allied-held forts commanding the anchorage on the night of December 16.  During the attack Napoleon was bayoneted in the thigh by a British soldier.  The royalists were successfully ejected the next morning.
By late afternoon of December 18 the guns in the fort were turned inward to fire on the British fleet. Lord Hood immediately evacuated the inner harbour. After British and Spanish troops blew up the arsenal and burned 42 French ships that evening, they sailed from Toulon and took with them as many of the royalist citizens as they could carry. Some 15,000 Toulonnais thus managed to escape onboard the Allied ships, leaving behind them a city in chaos, as residents stampeded the waterfront in panic of the advancing Republican forces. When the latter took possession of the city on December 19, they took vicious revenge on the remaining royalists. A massacre ensued, during which some 600-700 royalists were shot or bayonetted to death.  Napoleon, for his efforts, was promoted to the rank of brigadier general.
Losses: French Royalists and Anglo, Spanish, and Italian Allies, 4,000 casualties of 16,000; French Republican, 2,000 casualties of 62,000.
