Siege of Rome,  (30 April–1 July 1849). The defense of the short-lived Roman Republic made Giuseppe Garibaldi a hero of Italian nationalists. The republic was overthrown by French forces, and the pope restored to power. However, defeat in Rome only strengthened the long-term cause of Italian unification.
In November 1848, revolution in the Papal States swept Pope Pius IX from power, and he called upon Catholic powers to restore his authority. The newly elected French president (soon to be self-appointed emperor), Louis-Napoleon (Napoleon III), decided to appease French Catholics and forestall an Austrian invasion, by intervening.
By April 1849, the first 10,000 French troops had landed and were marching on Rome, expecting to be hailed as liberators. The Roman garrison, commanded by the guerrilla leader Garibaldi, was a mixture of volunteers from across Italy, as well as papal troops who had joined the revolution; it numbered just 7,000, but the men were determined to fight. The French were shocked to come under cannon fire as they approached the city.  After Garibaldi defeated them at the San Pancrazio gate on April 30, the French retreated. An armistice allowed the French to assemble 30,000 troops equipped with artillery, and the siege of the city began in earnest on June 1. When hostilities were renewed, the Romans neglected to warn outlying positions, and the crucial position at Villa Pamphili was surprised and overwhelmed.
With the city covered by French guns, the issue was effectively decided. Futile but heroic counterattacks were launched, and a determined stand was made on the walls. When they fell, hastily constructed inner defenses were defended with great courage, further inspiring the Risorgimento.
A truce was negotiated on July 1, and a day after Garibaldi withdrew from the city with several thousand volunteers and took refuge in San Marino.  Despite the fall of Rome (the short-lived Roman Republic had only been declared on February 9) and the restoration of papal authority over the city, Italians had demonstrated how well they could fight for the ideal of Italy.
Losses: Unknown.
