Sino-French War,  conflict between China and France in 1883–85 over Vietnam, which disclosed the inadequacy of China’s modernization efforts and aroused nationalistic sentiment in southern China.
The French had already begun to encroach on Vietnam, China’s major protectorate in the south, and by 1880 France controlled the three southern provinces, known as Cochinchina. In the 1880s the French began to expand northward in Vietnam, stationing troops in Hanoi and Haiphong. The Chinese responded by building up their forces in the area and engaging the French in a series of limited battles.
In 1882 the great Chinese statesman Li Hongzhang negotiated an agreement with France in which the two countries agreed to make the area a joint protectorate. That agreement, however, was rejected by Paris, which dispatched additional troops to Tonkin (Tongking; northern Vietnam). Meanwhile, a war party emerged within the Qing government in China and began to pressure the court to take a harder line. But Chinese reinforcements were quickly defeated by the French (1883), and the wavering court attempted to seek a new settlement.
The subsequent Li–Fournier Convention called for the admittance of French trade through the Tonkin area, the withdrawal of Chinese troops from the area, and the recognition of French rights in Tonkin. In return, China was not required to pay any indemnity. Meanwhile, the war party again became dominant in China, and it refused to accept any loss of sovereignty over Vietnam. Hostilities were therefore resumed. Zhang Zhidong, one of the leading hawks, was appointed to take command of the land forces. He was successful against French forces that had attempted to advance north into southern China, but at sea the new Chinese fleet of 11 steamers was destroyed. The great Fuzhou (Foochow) shipyard, which China had built with French aid, was also demolished. A peace treaty was finally signed at Paris in 1885 in which China agreed to recognize the Li–Fournier agreement.
