Special operations warfare,  unconventional military actions against enemy vulnerabilities that are undertaken by specially designated, selected, trained, equipped, and supported units known as special forces or special operations forces (SOF). Special operations are often conducted in conjunction with conventional military operations as part of a sustained politico-military campaign. Some special operations are spectacular direct raids that capture wide publicity, but others are long-term indirect efforts that are never made known. No matter what form it takes, each special operation is an effort to resolve, as economically as possible, specific problems at the operational or strategic level that are difficult or impossible to address with conventional forces alone.
Special operations warfare is conducted by uniformed military forces. This distinction helps to differentiate special operations warfare from activities such as sabotage and subversion conducted by intelligence agencies or internal security and policing conducted by law-enforcement units employing special weapons and tactics. Sometimes the dividing line between special operations conducted by intelligence agencies and those conducted by military units is not clear, as in the case of intelligence gathering on the one hand and special reconnaissance activities on the other. Often the only difference between them is organizational, as special forces fall under military chains of command and its operators wear uniforms, whereas those from intelligence agencies do not. In addition, there are legal differences between the two activities: national laws authorizing overt and clandestine military actions may be entirely separate from laws authorizing covert actions by civilian intelligence agencies, and certainly there is a great difference around the world in the legal protections afforded to military as opposed to intelligence personnel. (Intelligence personnel have no legal standing internationally, whereas military personnel ostensibly receive some protection under the laws of war.)
Given its unorthodox nature, special operations warfare is directly related to other well-known forms of unconventional warfare such as terrorism, guerrilla warfare, and insurgency. Most often, however, special forces are trained to counter such forms of warfare, using superior tactics, equipment, supply, and mobility to defeat terrorists, guerrillas, and insurgents who adopt unconventional tactics out of necessity. Special forces seek to deprive irregular opponents of the few tactical advantages they possess by denying them mobility, sanctuary, surprise, and initiative. In other cases, though, special forces may actually conduct guerrilla warfare or insurgency against conventional state-based adversaries, for example, by harrying or harassing supplying lines, raising partisan forces, or distracting enemy forces from conventional operations by forcing them to deal with threats in areas thought to be pacified or secure.
Special operations also must be distinguished from operations conducted by “specialized” conventional military forces—for instance, airborne and amphibious units. Those forces are organized, equipped, and trained to perform one specific task (for instance, airborne assault, airfield seizure, or amphibious landing), and they would require significant time, retraining, and reequipping to conduct another task. Often such specialized units receive the moniker of corps d’elite, reflecting their unique purpose, traditions, and past achievements in combat. The most significant differences between special operations forces and specialized forces lie in two broad areas. First is the scale of their operations: special operations are relatively small-scale, being conducted by companies, platoons, teams, or squadrons, whereas specialized operations are mounted by large units such as regiments, brigades, or even divisions. The second area is orthodoxy: special operations feature improvised and often indirect approaches, whereas specialized military operations feature orthodox approaches in a relatively direct assault.
To sum up, special operations warfare differs from conventional warfare on the basis of three criteria: the economical way in which force is used; different considerations and calculations of political and operational risk; and the characteristics and qualities of the military forces that conduct them. The “special” qualities of special forces are a product of their organization, training, support, and, most important, selection. All these factors are discussed in detail below, and all allow for the creation of flexible forces that employ unorthodox approaches to solve difficult and risky problems.
