War of Attrition,  inconclusive war (1969–70) chiefly between Egypt and Israel. The conflict, launched by Egypt, was meant to wear down Israel by means of a long engagement and so provide Egypt with the opportunity to dislodge Israeli forces from the Sinai Peninsula, which Israel had seized from Egypt in the Six-Day (June) War of 1967.
Shortly after the end of the 1967 war, Egyptian Pres. Gamal Abdel Nasser made clear his intention to retake by force territory captured by Israel in the conflict. Egyptian losses in the war had been significant, but the support and material investment of the Soviet Union sped Egypt’s recovery. In autumn 1968 Nasser felt adequately prepared to launch limited attacks on Israeli forces in the Suez Canal zone. After an opening period of mutual hostilities, a de facto cease-fire materialized, and, in the subsequent lull, both Egypt and Israel built up their defenses.
In March 1969 Egypt put an end to the cease-fire and initiated renewed attacks against Israel, marking the beginning of the War of Attrition. Although the Egyptian-Israeli front was the main theatre of battle, to a lesser extent an eastern front—which included Jordanian, Syrian, Iraqi, and Palestinian forces—was also a factor in the hostilities. Using heavy artillery, new MiG aircraft, Soviet advisers, and an advanced Soviet-designed surface-to-air missile system, the Egyptians inflicted heavy losses on the Israelis. In mid-July, in light of increasing casualties, Golda Meir—who had become Israel’s prime minister following Levi Eshkol’s sudden death in February 1969—escalated Israeli attacks. By December Israeli forces had destroyed the entirety of the Egyptian air defense system, and from early January 1970 deep-penetration raids were launched against Egyptian targets in the Nile valley and delta. Sufficiently threatened by the Israeli escalation, on January 22, 1970, Nasser secretly traveled to Moscow to appeal directly to the Soviet Union for assistance. The Soviets were hesitant, but, faced with Nasser’s threat to resign and the spectre of his replacement by a pro-Western successor, they acquiesced—agreeing, then, to directly involve themselves in the conflict. Israeli raids were suspended after Soviet pilots began to fly combat patrols over parts of Egypt, and the battle shifted to the canal zone.
Fearing an eventual Israeli confrontation with the Soviet Union, U.S. Pres. Richard Nixon sent Secretary of State William Rogers to intervene with a complex cease-fire proposal, which was accepted by Egypt, Jordan, and Israel in August 1970. This plan specified limits on the deployment of missiles and revived a year-old diplomatic initiative (the Rogers Plan) that insisted on an exchange of territory for peace on all fronts. Negotiations were to be initiated after the cease-fire took effect. The Egyptians and the Soviets violated the agreement almost immediately, however, by moving their missiles closer to the canal. In spite of the cease-fire violation, Israel decided not to resume the conflict, and when Nasser died in September 1970, his successor, Anwar Sadat, did not renew the fighting.
At great economic and human expense, the War of Attrition left its underlying disputes unresolved. No territory was exchanged, and there was no obvious victor; observers differed as to whether either side had achieved a strategic success. For some, Egypt’s failure to make any territorial gains pointed to an Israeli victory; others suggested that the shift in psychological balance that resulted from the war was in Egyptian favour. The lack of resolution led to the renewal of hostilities only years later in the Arab-Israeli war of October 1973. The status of the Sinai Peninsula and the issue of permanent peace between Egypt and Israel were ultimately resolved by the 1979 peace treaty that followed the Camp David Accords.
