War of the Austrian Succession,  (1740–48), a conglomeration of related wars, two of which developed directly from the death of Charles VI, Holy Roman emperor and head of the Austrian branch of the house of Habsburg, on Oct. 20, 1740.
In the war for the Austrian succession itself, France unsuccessfully supported the dubious claims of Bavaria, Saxony, and Spain to parts of the Habsburg domain and supported the claim of Charles Albert, elector of Bavaria, to the imperial crown, all with the overall aim of crippling or destroying Austria, France’s long-standing continental enemy.
Another pair of wars were the First Silesian War (1740–42) and the Second Silesian War (1744–45), in which Frederick II the Great of Prussia, allied with France, wrested the province of Silesia from Austria and held on to it. A third series of wars centred on the continued conflict between France and Britain over colonial possessions in India and North America (see Jenkins’ Ear, War of; King George’s War).
What is known collectively as the War of the Austrian Succession began on Dec. 16, 1740, when Frederick II of Prussia invaded Silesia, one of the richest Habsburg provinces. His army defeated the Austrians at Mollwitz in April 1741 and overran Silesia. His victory enhanced the suspicion in Europe that the Habsburg dominions were incapable of defending themselves and thus ensured that the war would become general. Within a month France’s Charles-Louis-Auguste Fouquet, comte (later marshal and duc) de Belle-Isle, constructed an alliance with Bavaria and Spain and, later, with Saxony and Prussia against Austria. The Austrian ruler Maria Theresa (daughter of Charles VI) derived her main foreign support from Britain, which feared that, if the French achieved hegemony in Europe, the British commercial and colonial empire would be untenable. Thus, the War of the Austrian Succession was, in part, one phase of the struggle between France and Britain that lasted from 1689 to 1815.
The invasion of Austria and Bohemia by the French and Bavarian forces fell apart for lack of unity of purpose and military capability. Austria temporarily neutralized Prussia by allowing it to retain Silesia in July 1742, drove the French and Bavarians out of Bohemia (1742), and overran Bavaria. Austria’s allies—the British, Hanoverians, and Hessians—defeated the French at the Battle of Dettingen (June 27, 1743) in Bavaria. In September 1743 Savoy joined the Austrians, and the French withdrew toward their own borders. In January 1745 the emperor Charles VII (Charles Albert of Bavaria), who was also chief claimant to the Austrian succession, died. His son Maximilian III Joseph gave up these claims and pledged to support Francis Stephen at the imperial election in return for Austria’s restoration of its conquests to Bavaria. Frederick now feared the growing Austrian power, and he reentered the war. This Second Silesian War was concluded by the Treaty of Dresden in December 1745. It confirmed Prussian possession of Silesia.
The last major French success was Marshal Maurice de Saxe’s conquest of the Austrian Netherlands (1745–46), which followed his great victory at the Battle of Fontenoy on May 11, 1745. From 1746 to 1748 the war dragged on indecisively. The British had withdrawn their army to England to oppose the French-supported efforts of the young pretender, Charles Edward, to win the thrones of Scotland and England for the Stuarts. The financial burden finally pushed the powers to the conference table. The Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (see Aix-la-Chapelle, Treaty of) in October 1748 preserved the bulk of the Austrian inheritance for Maria Theresa. Prussia remained in possession of Silesia, however, and none of the colonial or other conflicts between France and Britain was resolved.
