War of the Spanish Succession,  (1701–14), conflict that arose out of the disputed succession to the throne of Spain following the death of the childless Charles II, the last of the Spanish Habsburgs. The war was primarily a struggle to determine whether the vast possessions of the Spanish Empire should pass to the House of Bourbon or to the House of Habsburg, both of which had dynastic claims, or whether they should be partitioned to preserve the balance of power in Europe. The ultimate outcome was the erosion French and Spanish power in favour of an ascendant Britain and its growing colonial empire.
Of the two daughters of Philip III of Spain (Charles II’s grandfather), the elder, Anne, married Louis XIII of France, and the younger, Maria Anna, married the future Habsburg emperor Ferdinand III. Two sons of these marriages, Louis XIV and the emperor Leopold I, respectively, married their Spanish cousins Marie-Thérèse and Margarita Teresa, the daughters of Philip IV and sisters of Charles II. Marie-Thérèse explicitly renounced her claim to the Spanish succession upon her marriage to the French king, as her aunt Anne had done on the occasion of her marriage to Louis XIII. Margarita Teresa, however, made no renunciation and, moreover, was named in Philip IV’s will as the next heir after his son Charles (Charles II of Spain).
Consequently, when Margarita’s daughter Maria Antonia, who in 1685 married the Bavarian elector Maximilian II Emanuel, gave birth in 1692 to a son, the electoral prince Joseph Ferdinand, this prince could be regarded as heir presumptive to Charles II. Leopold I, however, had persuaded Maria Antonia to bestow her right to her mother’s succession on him, and on the sons of his third marriage, with Eleonore of Palatinate-Neuburg. The validity of this bestowal, upon which the immediate Habsburg claims to the succession were based, was dubious. The Bourbon claim was similarly dubious, being based on a disregard for the acts of renunciation made by the French queens. The claim of the electoral prince Joseph Ferdinand, on the other hand, appeared superior to both.
In the precarious lifetime of Charles II, French influences at the Spanish court were heavily counterbalanced in the field of international politics by the attitude of the Maritime Powers—England and the United Provinces of the Netherlands. United after 1688 under the personal rule of William III, they were strongly opposed to the Bourbon claim, fearing not only the aggrandizement of French power but also the loss of their well-established trade with Spain and the West Indies. Louis XIV, becoming convinced that a Bourbon success would result in a general European coalition against him, and to avoid the Spanish possessions passing to a Habsburg, in October 1698 agreed with William III in a Partition Treaty (signed at The Hague) to recognize Joseph Ferdinand’s rights to Spain, the Spanish Netherlands, and the Indies. Milan was to go to the archduke Charles (later the emperor Charles VI), the emperor’s younger son (who would presumably be excluded from the imperial throne by his elder brother Joseph); and the rest of Spanish Italy, as well as the Basque province of Guipúzcoa, was to go to the dauphin Louis.
Spain was indignant at this partition treaty, and in November 1698 Charles II created a will naming Joseph Ferdinand heir to the whole inheritance. In February 1699 Joseph Ferdinand died. A second Partition Treaty (October 1699) between France and England, which was subscribed in March 1700 by the United Provinces, offered Spain, the Spanish Netherlands, and the Indies to the archduke Charles. The dauphin was to get all of Spanish Italy except Milan, instead of which he would have Lorraine. The emperor, whose approval of the First Partition Treaty had been sought in vain, now also declined to accede to the second, hoping to win the whole succession for the archduke Charles. To counter this new partition, Charles II in October 1700 made another will, leaving the Spanish dominions, which were to be undivided and to be kept separate from any other crown, to Philip, duc d’Anjou, the second son of the dauphin Louis; failing Philip, to his younger brother Charles, duc de Berry; and failing Charles, to the archduke Charles.
When Charles II died on November 1, 1700, Louis XIV was confronted with a dilemma, If he accepted the will, he was faced with the prospect of war with Leopold I, who might have the support of the Maritime Powers. If he refused the will and stood by the Second Partition Treaty, the inheritance (by the terms of the will) would pass to the Habsburgs, and France would have to fight for those possessions promised by the treaty. As war appeared inevitable in either case, Louis chose the former alternative, acknowledging Philip, duc d’Anjou, as Philip V of Spain. The war might have remained a struggle between the king of France and the emperor if Louis had not acted with haughty arrogance and provoked England and the United Provinces to enter the war. In December 1700 Louis solemnly acknowledged the rights of his grandson Philip to remain in the line of succession to the crown of France. On the death (September 1701) of the exiled James II of England, Louis recognized James’s son as King James III. During 1701 he also made it clear that French merchants would, in the future, enjoy exclusive rights to share in the slave trade to the Spanish colonies in America.
The War of the Spanish Succession possessed the complexity of any major war fought between two groups of allies whose interests and ambitions were sometimes in sharp conflict. It was fought on five fronts: the Low Countries, the Rhine, the Danube, northern Italy, and Spain—as well as at sea. It was a war of considerable movement, for it was conducted according to the strategic conception of the 18th century, which advocated maneuver and countermaneuver to contain an enemy, rather than the Napoleonic strategy of striking at the enemy’s main force regardless of losses. Armies of the 18th century, before the days of national conscription, were too difficult to replace for generals to be eager to risk heavy casualties if these could be avoided.
One very interesting fact that emerges in the study of the conflict is how often John Churchill, 1st duke of Marlborough, favoured a strategy that was much more forceful and “Napoleonic” than was usual in the early 18th century, and it is clear that his bold plans were sometimes too unorthodox for his imperial ally, Prince Eugene of Savoy. Other points of interest are the relative importance of the various allies in determining the outcome of the war, the number of times that military operations were interrupted by attempts at peace negotiations, and the extent to which the final outcome of the war was decided not by victories in the field but by political developments in the capitals of the combatants. It is a curious fact that the fate of Spain was decided principally by campaigns in the Low Countries or on the Danube, with very little regard to what was actually happening on the Iberian Peninsula.
The war may be said to have begun in March 1701 when French troops seized Spanish fortresses in the Spanish Netherlands. For the rest of that year, however, the war was essentially one between Louis XIV and the emperor Leopold I, and its principal theatre was northern Italy, where the French had taken control of the Spanish possessions in the valley of the Po. Prince Eugene assembled an imperial army in Tirol and marched south with great secrecy through the territory of neutral Venice along the east bank of the Adige River. Marshal Nicolas Catinat, commanding the French, failed to attack a numerically inferior imperial diversionary force that had drawn his attention from Eugene’s move on Verona (May 28). Catinat also declined to cross the Adige and engage Eugene’s main army, though this too was inferior in numbers to his own.
Eugene maintained the initiative and forced the French to retreat westward behind the Mincio River. He then succeeded in following them across this river (July 28), so that, to defend Milan, Catinat had to fall back still farther westward beyond the Oglio River (August 16). These humiliating maneuvers were reported to Louis XIV by Catinat’s enemies at the French court, and he was replaced by François de Neufville, duc de Villeroi. When the new commander tried to take the offensive, he was sharply defeated by Eugene’s forces at Chiari (September 1). The campaigning season ended with imperial forces in command of most of the duchy of Mantua. During the winter of 1701–02, Eugene executed a brilliant raid on Cremona, where he captured Villeroi, a success that led the dukes of Modena and Guastalla to declare their support for the emperor.
By 1702 the efforts of the diplomats had transformed the struggle into a general European war. France and Spain had the support of two reluctant allies, Portugal and Savoy, which feared to oppose the Bourbons, whose forces controlled Spain and the Spanish possessions in northern Italy. Two allies who were to be of more value to France were the Wittelsbach brothers, Maximilian II Emanuel, elector of Bavaria, and Joseph Clement, elector of Cologne. The emperor had the support of the United Provinces and England by the Treaty of The Hague (September 1701), as well as Frederick I of Prussia and a great many minor German princes.
The first year of the general struggle saw little decisive action. In Italy Eugene’s communications with Vienna were cut by Louis Joseph, duc de Vendôme, who had taken over Villeroi’s command; nevertheless, Eugene was able to maintain himself and to harass the French. At sea an English expedition under Adm. Sir George Rooke against Cádiz (August–September 1702) was a failure, but Rooke managed in October to destroy the Spanish silver fleet that had taken refuge in Vigo harbour.
In the Low Countries, the Maritime Powers were outnumbered by the French so that there was a serious threat to Holland. This had a deep effect on the Dutch deputies, who remained excessively cautious and timid throughout the war. The Franco-Spanish forces had two fortified lines, one running from Antwerp to Huy, on the Meuse River, the other from Antwerp along the Scheldt and Leie (Lys) rivers to Aire. In July Marlborough assembled an army near Nijmegen and attacked southwest toward Diest, driving back Louis-François, duc de Boufflers, toward his fortified lines. Marlborough outmaneuvered him and reached the lines first, but the Dutch refused to allow him to attack, being satisfied that Marlborough had forced Boufflers to abandon his threat to the United Provinces. The Maritime Powers did, however, succeed in capturing Kaiserswerth (June) and Rheinberg on the lower Rhine and thus improved their line of communications with the emperor.
The 1702 campaign on the Rhine opened uneventfully, but the end of the summer saw a development that was in the next year to become one of the most important operations of the war. An imperial army under the margrave Louis William I of Baden, which had been gathered round the Neckar River, crossed the Rhine north of Speyer (June 1702) and threatened Alsace. Catinat, now in charge of the German front, was uncertain whether to mass the French forces on the Lauter or the Ill River, and Louis William successfully besieged and captured Landau in September. It was at this point that the development took place that was to grow into the major campaign of 1703–04. Maximilian II Emanuel now openly declared for France and captured Ulm. This threat in his rear forced Louis William to retreat to the east side of the Rhine. Claude-Louis-Hector (later duc) de Villars, who had replaced Catinat, followed the retreating imperial army, crossed the Rhine at Hünningen, and defeated the imperial forces at Friedlingen (October 14, 1702).
In 1703 fortune began to favour the French, although in three theatres of war the imperial forces and the Maritime Powers managed to achieve minor successes. In the Mediterranean the English fleet was able to blockade the French fleet at Toulon, and this convinced the Portuguese government that England could provide effective protection against the Bourbons. In May 1703 Portugal, therefore, relinquished its uneasy alliance with France and joined the Maritime Powers. On the lower Rhine Marlborough invaded the electorate of Cologne and in May captured Bonn. By the end of the summer Marlborough had managed to push the French out of the country between the Meuse and the Rhine. In Italy Vendôme was justifiably suspicious of the loyalty of his ally Victor Amadeus II, the duke of Savoy, and demanded that he hand over Turin and Susa to the French and even disband his troops. This demand eventually pushed Victor Amadeus to abandon his uneasy alliance with France and join the emperor. This he did in October, but it was too late in the year to have any effect on military developments in Italy that season.
These minor successes for the emperor and his allies, however, were more than outweighed by the French and Bavarian threat to Vienna itself. In March Villars had crossed the Rhine at Kehl and, pushing through the Black Forest, had in May joined the elector of Bavaria near Ulm. The imperial forces under Louis of Baden had offered no resistance but had remained to the north in the lines of Stollhofen, on the Rhine, watched by a French force under the comte de Tallart. The situation facing the emperor was very grave, but the elector of Bavaria lacked Marlborough’s initiative. Instead of pushing down the Danube and striking directly at Vienna, the elector decided first to establish control of Tirol so as to safeguard his communications with Milan. This more cautious strategy might have been justified, for the elector was able to reach the Brenner Pass at the beginning of July, but Vendôme’s force, which he had hoped would be there to join him, did not manage to push north through Italy until some weeks later. By this time the elector had been forced to retreat toward Bavaria.
The possibility of seriously threatening Vienna, however, was still not out of the question. By now Louis of Baden and the imperial general Hermann Styrum had brought up their armies to cover any attack on Vienna, but they had failed to unite into a single force, and Villars was able to attack Styrum and defeat him at Hochstadt, near Blenheim (September 20). Villars was in favour of making a dash for Vienna, but the elector of Bavaria refused. There was a quarrel, and Villars, one of the most brilliant of the French commanders, was recalled. On the Rhine in September Tallart took Breisach and in November defeated the comte de Thüngen at Speyerbach and recaptured Landau. These minor French successes could not repair the damage done by the elector of Bavaria’s excessively cautious strategy on the Danube.
When the campaigning season opened in 1704, the serious effects of the elector of Bavaria’s delays were not yet apparent, and it looked as if the French and Bavarian threat to Vienna was as dangerous as ever. In April strong French forces crossed the Black Forest and, in May, joined the elector of Bavaria near Dillingen. Louis of Baden failed to stop the junction of these two armies, and, although Eugene himself had been moved to the Danube front to replace Styrum, it seemed impossible with the forces available that he would be able to stop the French and Bavarian armies from striking at Vienna. Another French force under Tallart was to the north, near Kehl, to protect the communications between France and the French army on the Danube. A third French force, under Villeroi, was in the Netherlands, holding Marlborough. It was at this point that Marlborough showed his genius for appreciating the strategy of the war as a whole and his consummate skill in moving troops with unexpected speed and complete secrecy.
Marlborough knew that he would never be able to gain the consent of the Dutch for a move to relieve Vienna from the French and Bavarian threat if this seemed to leave Holland unprotected. Therefore, he pretended that he was going to turn the Villeroi’s flank with a move up the Moselle. Marlborough crossed the Meuse to the Rhine and made his way up that river, reaching Mainz at the end of May. Tallart, from his position farther south, at once crossed to the left bank of the Rhine, fearing that Marlborough intended to attack Alsace, but Marlborough only made a feint of attempting to cross the Rhine at Mannheim. Instead, from Mainz he pushed southeast across the Main River, up the valley of the Neckar, across the watershed between the Neckar and the Danube, and by the middle of June joined forces with Louis of Baden just north of Ulm.
The imperial commanders had been able to discuss plans with Marlborough during his march, and it was decided that Eugene should move westward to contain Tallart at Stollhofen, while Marlborough and Louis of Baden were to attack the French on the Danube. Marlborough was able to take Donauworth (July 2), thus forcing the French and Bavarian troops, under the elector and the comte de Marsin, Villars’s successor, to retreat south up the Lech River. This enabled Marlborough to get between his enemies and Vienna. At this point the French forces were increased, for Villeroi, once he had realized that Marlborough had given him the slip, moved south from the Netherlands to join Tallart on the Rhine in Alsace. Tallart, therefore, was free to cross the Rhine at Kehl (July 6) and join the elector of Bavaria near Augsburg (August 6).
On his march Tallart made the serious mistake of wasting five days trying to capture Villingen. As a result, Eugene, who had marched from Stollhofen along the north bank of the Danube, was able to reach Hochstadt and join forces with Marlborough on the same day that Tallart joined the elector. Marlborough’s force was then large enough for him to detach Louis of Baden to besiege Ingolstadt, the one strong point on the Danube east of Donauworth held by the Bavarians, and which was a serious threat to communications with Vienna. The French and Bavarians, learning that Louis of Baden had gone, moved north to attack Eugene, crossing the Danube at Dillingen. Marlborough had remained south of the Danube to cover the siege of Ingolstadt but was not out of touch with Eugene and was able to move to his assistance. A forced march brought his army to the north of the Danube and into line with Eugene near the village of Blenheim. Marlborough and Eugene attacked the enemy at the Battle of Blenheim on August 13, 1704, and achieved a victory that shattered the reputation of the French army and compelled the French to withdraw to the west of the Rhine. By the end of 1704 the whole situation on the Danube front had been altered. Vienna was no longer in danger. The French invasion had been destroyed, and the elector of Bavaria was now a fugitive in France, the whole of his electorate falling into the hands of his enemies.
Developments in Spain and the Mediterranean during 1704 were also fairly encouraging for the emperor and his allies. The accession of Portugal to the side of the empire and Maritime Powers meant that it was now much easier to launch an invasion of Spain itself, and in February the archduke Charles was escorted to Portugal by an English squadron under Rooke to attempt the conquest of Spain. He achieved little on land, and Rooke, who had been ordered to sail from Lisbon into the Mediterranean and join the duke of Savoy in an attack on Toulon, found Savoy unable to spare troops for his enterprise. On his way back to England, Rooke managed to capture Gibraltar (August 4) and to defeat the French fleet at Vélez-Málaga (August 24), which gave England command of the Mediterranean for the rest of the war.
Marlborough had intended to launch an attack from the Rhine against France itself by way of Metz, but the Dutch failed to produce enough supplies, and the Rhenish electors did not provide sufficient transport. Moreover, the death of the emperor Leopold I in May 1705 had the effect of deflecting imperial forces to cover the election of the new emperor (Joseph I) at Frankfurt. Marlborough, therefore, transferred his attention to the Netherlands, where he succeeded in piercing the French lines at Tirlemont (July 18). Because of the excessive caution of his Dutch allies, Marlborough was not able to make full use of his success. In Italy Eugene pushed the French from the Oglio River as far west as the Adda River, thus relieving some of the pressure on Savoy, where Turin was under siege by the French.
In spite of French successes in Italy, where Vendôme in April 1706 drove the imperial army back into Tirol, Marlborough still had plans for joining forces with Eugene, expelling the French from northern Italy, and threatening Toulon. In the same month, however, Louis of Baden retreated eastward across the Rhine, and the Dutch rejected Marlborough’s ambitious scheme. Instead, England provided subsidies that enabled the emperor to buy 24,000 troops from German princes. In July Eugene attacked south down the left bank of the Adige, once more disregarding Venetian neutrality as he had in 1701. This time he struck south across the Po (July 18), then moved with astonishing speed westward up that river to join the duke of Savoy at Villastellone, south of Turin, and in September raised the siege of Turin. This victory decided the issue in northern Italy.
In the Netherlands, Villeroi, receiving information that Marlborough had not yet been reinforced by Prussian and Hanoverian forces, struck toward Liege but was heavily defeated by Marlborough at the Battle of Ramillies (May 23, 1706). Marlborough pursued the French with such vigour that they were unable to reform on the line of the Lys River and had to withdraw still farther to Courtrai. The result of this victory was that in less than two weeks Marlborough was in command of all Spain’s province of Brabant and most of its possessions in Flanders. Antwerp, Ghent, Bruges, and Oudenaarde all capitulated, and in July the fall of Ostend improved Marlborough’s line of communications with England. At the end of August, he captured Menen; in September, Dendermonde; and in October, Ath.
The victory in the Spanish Netherlands was overwhelming. Marlborough’s success directly aided Eugene’s 1706 campaign in Italy, because, after the Battle of Ramillies, Vendôme was recalled from Italy to replace the discredited Villeroi. Marlborough’s victory also had the effect of paralyzing the French forces on the Rhine, for troops were transferred from that quiet sector to reinforce the shattered French forces in the Netherlands. In Spain the imperial forces and their allies also achieved successes in 1705–06. A siege of Gibraltar by Bourbon forces was relieved in March 1705. Henri de Massue, earl of Galway, commander of the allied forces in Portugal, advanced from Portugal into Estremadura and compelled René de Froulay, comte de Tessé, to abandon Andalusia. The English admiral Sir Cloudesley Shovell took a squadron into the Mediterranean and enabled Charles Mordaunt, 3rd earl of Peterborough, to capture the fort of Montjuich near Barcelona in September and to take Barcelona in October 1705. This caused Catalonia and Valencia to declare for the archduke Charles. In 1706 Tesse besieged Barcelona, but he was compelled to withdraw in May when an English fleet forced the French ships supporting Tesse to retire to Toulon. In June imperial and English forces seized Madrid, though Galway was unable to maintain his hold on the capital and had to withdraw to Valencia.
So decisive were the reverses experienced by France and its allies in 1706 that in August Louis XIV made an approach to the Dutch for peace. He was prepared to cede Spain and Spanish America to the archduke Charles if Philip retained Milan, Naples, and Sicily. The Dutch were offered a strong “barrier” of fortresses in the Spanish Netherlands, but the English and imperial governments would not consider terms that envisaged the partition of the Spanish empire.
In Germany the emperor’s situation became critical because of developments in the Second Northern War, which was raging in the Baltic region. Charles XII of Sweden had established himself in Saxony in September 1706, and there was a serious danger that where the elector of Bavaria and French troops had failed in their attack on Vienna, Charles might succeed. The emperor was already short of troops because many minor German princes were reluctant to supply troops to him when they might be needed for their own defense. Charles XII was not prepared to collaborate with France to attack Vienna, and the crisis soon passed. Its effects were felt, however, on the Netherlands front, where the absence of German troops made it impossible for Marlborough to achieve anything of note against Vendôme.
On the Rhine the imperial forces were weakened by the death (January 1707) of Louis of Baden, whose successor in command, Margrave Charles Ernest of Brandenburg-Bayreuth, proved considerably less able. Villars managed to take the lines of Stollhofen in May and was able to raid the whole of Swabia until the margrave of Bayreuth was superseded by George, elector of Hanover (later George I, king of Great Britain). In September Villars withdrew in good order to the west of the Rhine after some of his troops had been diverted to the Provence front. In Spain the emperor and his allies experienced considerable reverses. Galway and the archduke Charles quarreled and separated, the archduke retiring to Catalonia. This left Galway with only 15,000 men, who were decisively defeated by a Franco-Spanish force commanded by James Fitzjames, duke of Berwick-upon-Tweed, at the Battle of Almansa (April 25, 1707). Aragon, Valencia, and Murcia were lost to the allies, and in Catalonia they were compelled to remain on the defensive.
In northern Italy the emperor decided that Eugene should launch an attack against Toulon. Unfortunately, Savoy delayed sending help, and some imperial troops under Wirich, Graf von Daun, were also diverted to capture Naples. After the defeat at Almansa, the help that Eugene expected from Spain was not forthcoming, and instead French troops returning victoriously were able to reinforce Tesse at Toulon. Eugene’s siege of Toulon (July–August) had finally to be broken off, and the only success achieved by Eugene’s thrust was the scuttling of the French fleet in the harbour.
In spite of the improvement in French fortunes during 1707, Louis XIV was still eager to end the war. The conflict in Italy came to a close with the Convention of Milan in March 1707. Louis XIV gave up his attempt to control northern Italy and withdrew all his troops from that theatre. In the winter of 1707–08, envoys from Louis and Philip V made a fresh overture to the Dutch, baited with offers of commercial advantages at the expense of Spain. Once again the negotiations were checked by the uncompromising attitude of England, where in December in the House of Lords the Whigs passed a resolution refusing to make a peace by which a member of the House of Bourbon should retain any of the Spanish possessions.
A three-pronged offensive against France planned early in the year proved impracticable, partly because Saxony and Prussia did not provide their promised contingents. Instead, Eugene began his march from Italy to join Marlborough in the Spanish Netherlands. At the beginning of July 1708, Vendôme had managed to recover Bruges and Ghent, thus asserting French control over most of the Spanish possessions in West Flanders. Although Eugene’s troops had not yet arrived, Marlborough moved to check Vendôme’s advance and defeated the French at the Battle of Oudenaarde (July 11, 1708). Marlborough then wanted to invade France itself and launch a simultaneous invasion of Normandy, but his plan was considered by Eugene to be too ambitious. The imperial forces and their allies, therefore, concentrated instead on besieging Lille, which finally fell on October 22. This forced the French to relinquish their hold on the Spanish possessions in West Flanders and to retire to France.
The weakness of France was clearly shown in the peace terms that Louis XIV was now prepared to consider. When the French envoys, Antoine Louis Rouille and Jean-Baptiste Colbert, marquis de Torcy, again approached the Dutch (March 1709) at The Hague. Although they initially demanded at least Naples and Sicily for Philip V, they finally made it clear that Louis XIV was prepared to relinquish the whole of the Spanish inheritance. Once again the English and Dutch proved implacable. They insisted that Louis XIV should obtain the surrender of the Spanish throne by Philip and that, if Philip refused, Louis should agree to use force to expel him. It now seems clear that English plenipotentiary Charles Townshend, the emperor, and the Dutch were chiefly responsible for these unrealistic terms and that Marlborough, though he did not exert his influence enough, had a sounder appreciation of what could be reasonably expected from France. As it was, on May 28 Louis XIV rejected the terms offered, and the war was resumed.
The French used the lull in hostilities to put yet another army into the field under Villars, and he took up a strongly defended position in the Netherlands. Marlborough wanted to attack along the French coast, supported by the English fleet, but this plan was again too unorthodox to win the approval of his allies. Instead the imperial and maritime forces besieged Tournai (July–September) and later moved against Mons. Villars advanced against his opponents and met them at Malplaquet, southwest of Mons. Marlborough was in favour of joining battle at once, but this was vetoed, and Villars gained two vital days in which to strengthen his position. When the Battle of Malplaquet was eventually fought on September 11, 1709, Marlborough achieved a victory, but it was at the cost of 22,000 casualties on his side compared with about 12,000 French. In October Mons fell, but the campaign had been disastrously costly to the Maritime Powers and the empire.
On other fronts the imperial forces achieved very little. The duke of Savoy failed to cooperate with Daun in a move against Dauphiné, and although an imperial army under Claudius Florimund, Graf von Mercy, crossed the Rhine near Basel, it was defeated at Huningue (August 26). In Spain Galway’s Portuguese troops had proved unreliable, and it was decided in 1708 to send them home and replace them with German troops from Italy, released by the imperial successes of 1706–07. Early in 1708, therefore, Galway returned to Portugal, but before the Germans under Guido, Graf von Starhemberg, had arrived in Spain, the Bourbons took Tortosa (July 1708), thus separating Catalonia from Valencia. In September 1708 the English captured the island of Minorca, but in Spain itself, even after the arrival of the German forces, the Bourbons were able to take Dénia (November 1708) and Alicante (April 1709). Although some French troops had been withdrawn from Spain because of the critical military situation in the Netherlands in the summer of 1709, Starhemberg achieved little during 1709, and Galway, who had invaded Estremadura from Portugal, was sharply defeated on the Caya River (May 17).
By this time the French were not the only belligerent party who had become weary of the conflict. The Dutch were less interested than ever in prosecuting the war. In October 1709 they had signed the First Barrier Treaty with England, which guaranteed the Dutch the right to garrison nine towns in the Spanish Netherlands and 10 more if these were recovered from the French. Even some English statesmen, including Townshend, Sidney Godolphin, earl of Godolphin, and Marlborough, were prepared to consider allowing Philip V to retain part of the Spanish possessions. The emperor, however, was vehemently opposed to any partition of the Spanish empire, and the duke of Savoy rejected any plan that would allow Sicily to pass to Philip, as he viewed any increase in Philip’s territories in the Mediterranean as a menace to himself. Philip, having achieved considerable successes in Spain and being assured of the enthusiastic support of many Spaniards, was as obstinately opposed to the idea of dividing the Spanish possessions as was the emperor. Peace negotiations (March–July 1710) were held at Geertruidenberg in the United Provinces between representatives of Louis XIV and the Dutch. Louis XIV went so far as to offer a subsidy to pay troops to drive Philip out of Spain, but the Maritime Powers insisted on his using French troops to do this. Marlborough might have been able to broker a deal, but by 1710 his own personal position had been undermined by political events in England, and he was not strong enough to overrule his allies. In July 1710 the peace negotiations broke down.
On the Spanish front in 1710, Starhemberg won some successes at Almenara in July and at Saragossa in August, and imperial troops were able to occupy Madrid for a second time in September. As in 1706, they were again forced to evacuate the capital, and on their retreat eastward they were defeated at Brihuega (December 8–9) and at Villaviciosa (December 10). By the end of 1710 Philip V was firmly established in Spain, and imperial forces were again confined to Catalonia.
More decisive for the outcome of the war than victories or defeats in any of the fields of battle were the political developments that were taking place in England. The Whig government’s conduct of the war had provoked much criticism, partly because it was thought that not enough use had been made of the victories of 1708, partly because Malplaquet had been regarded as so costly in casualties that it had been looked upon as a defeat rather than a victory, and partly because the First Barrier Treaty with the Dutch in 1709 was criticized as sacrificing English trade with the Netherlands and English friendship with the emperor. There was always a fear that if the Dutch controlled the Spanish Netherlands they might exclude British merchants, and the heavy taxation necessary to finance the war had grown increasingly unpopular. The Whigs who made up the ministry were divided among themselves. Marlborough’s wife Sarah lost her influence with Queen Anne, and Marlborough found that his personal standing at court had disappeared. During the summer of 1710 the Tory Charles Talbot, duke of Shrewsbury, was appointed lord chamberlain, and the Whigs Godolphin and Charles Spencer, 3rd earl of Sunderland, were removed from office. The Parliament that met in November 1710 was strongly Tory.
On April 17, 1711, Emperor Joseph I died without male issue. This event revolutionized the whole international situation, for the heir presumptive was Joseph’s brother, the archduke Charles, and no English or Dutch government would continue a war to put the Spanish empire under the control of the prince who would also be the ruler (as Charles VI) of the Holy Roman Empire and the hereditary possessions of the Habsburgs in Austria, Bohemia, and Hungary.
The death of Joseph I dramatically improved the prospects of the fifth round peace negotiations, which had begun at the end of 1710, when communications were established between the governments of France and England. In the Netherlands Marlborough achieved his final success against the French, breaking Villars’ defensive lines (July–August 1711), which extended from the coast to Valenciennes. On December 31, 1711, Marlborough was dismissed from his command.
Negotiations continued throughout 1711, and on January 29, 1712, peace discussions were opened formally at Utrecht, in the United Provinces, between representatives of France, England, and the United Provinces. There was at the beginning no representation from Portugal, Savoy, or the German princes; even more remarkable is the initial absence of representatives of the emperor or the king of Spain. The situation became complicated by the deaths of the dauphin Louis (April 1711), his eldest son Louis, duc de Bourgogne (February 1712), and the latter’s elder surviving son, Louis, duc de Bretagne (March 1712). This left the French claimant to the Spanish throne, Philip V, the eldest surviving brother of the duc de Bourgogne, next in succession to the French throne if his nephew Louis (later Louis XV), the sickly younger son of the duc de Bourgogne, should die. Through English pressure, Philip renounced his claims to the French throne in May, although the French legal experts considered that no renunciation, however formal, could cancel a hereditary claim based on divine right.
Both Louis XIV and the English Tory government were now determined to end the war. Louis was even prepared to make peace without Philip. Henry Saint John, 1st Viscount Bolingbroke, who was in charge of the English negotiations, adopted an equally ruthless attitude toward his ally, Emperor Charles VI. In May 1712 Bolingbroke instructed James Butler, 2nd duke of Ormonde, who had succeeded Marlborough as commander in chief, not to take part in any future battles. In November Philip’s renunciation of his claim to the French throne was formally made before the Spanish Cortes, and later in the same month his younger brother Charles, duc de Berry, renounced any claim to the throne of Spain. In March 1713 Louis XIV’s recognition of these renunciations was formally registered by the French Parlement.
The peace terms on which England and France finally agreed were advantageous to England but were also much more favourable to the Bourbons than the terms that Louis XIV had been prepared to accept in previous negotiations. In 1710 he had been ready to pay for troops to expel his grandson from Spain; in 1709 he would have been satisfied if Philip could have been allowed to retain Naples and Sicily; in 1706 he asked only that Naples, Sicily, and Milan be retained for his grandson.
