Sir George Gabriel Stokes, 1st Baronet,  (born Aug. 13, 1819, Skreen, County Sligo, Ire.—died  Feb. 1, 1903, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, Eng.), British physicist and mathematician noted for his studies of the behaviour of viscous fluids, particularly for his law of viscosity, which describes the motion of a solid sphere in a fluid, and for Stokes’s theorem, a basic theorem of vector analysis.
Stokes, who was appointed Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge University in 1849, earlier had published his first papers on fluid motion and the steady motion of incompressible fluids (1842 and 1843) and his work on the friction of fluids in motion and the equilibrium and motion of elastic solids (1845). He worked on fluorescence (he originated the term), used it in the study of ultraviolet light, and demonstrated that quartz, unlike ordinary glass, is transparent to ultraviolet light. He was an advocate of the wave theory of light and the concept of an ether in which the waves of light supposedly must travel. In an attempt to explain the apparently contradictory properties of the ether, he suggested that it behaved much like wax and that it was rigid but would flow under a slow but steady force, such as that applied by the orbiting planets. In addition, he hypothesized that the planets dragged part of the ether along with them by virtue of friction.
A pioneer in the science of geodesy (the study of the size and shape of the Earth and its gravitational field), he published a paper in 1849 on the variation of gravity at the surface of the Earth. In 1851 Stokes was elected to the Royal Society (London) and three years later became its secretary, a post he held for 30 years until he was elected president. He thus became the first man since Sir Isaac Newton to hold the three positions of Lucasian Professor, secretary, and then president of the Royal Society.
In 1854 Stokes suggested that the Fraunhofer lines might be caused by atoms in the outer layers of the Sun that absorb light of certain wavelengths. He failed to pursue the possibility, however, and later disclaimed any prior discovery when the German physicist Gustav R. Kirchhoff published his explanation of the Fraunhofer lines. Stokes was created a baronet in 1889. The stoke (British “stokes”), a unit of kinematic viscosity in the centimetre-gram-second system, was named after him in 1928.
Stokes’s mathematical and physical papers were published in five volumes; the first three under his own editorship in 1880, 1883, and 1901 and the last two under that of Sir Joseph Larmor. Stokes also wrote On Light (1887) and Natural Theology (1891).
