Upton Sinclair, in full Upton Beall Sinclair,  (born September 20, 1878, Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.—died November 25, 1968, Bound Brook, New Jersey), prolific American novelist and polemicist for socialism, health, temperance, free speech, and worker rights, among other causes. His classic muckraking novel The Jungle (1906) is a landmark among naturalistic proletarian work, one praised by fellow socialist Jack London as “the Uncle Tom’s Cabin of wage slavery.”
Sinclair’s parents were poor but his grandparents wealthy, and he long attributed his exposure to the two extremes as the cause of his socialist beliefs. He graduated from the College of the City of New York in 1897 and did graduate work at Columbia University, supporting himself by writing jokes for newspapers and cartoonists and adventure stories for pulp magazines. His first four books—King Midas (1901, first published the same year as Springtime and Harvest), Prince Hagen (1903), The Journal of Arthur Stirling (1903), and a Civil War novel Manassas (1904)—were well received by the critics but did not sell well.
His public stature changed dramatically in 1905, after the socialist weekly Appeal to Reason sent Sinclair undercover to investigate conditions in the Chicago stockyards. The result of his seven-week investigation was The Jungle, first published in serial form by Appeal to Reason in 1905 and then as a book in 1906. Though intended to create sympathy for the exploited and poorly treated immigrant workers in the meatpacking industry, the novel instead aroused widespread public indignation at the low quality of and impurities in processed meats and thus helped bring about the passage of federal food-inspection laws. As Sinclair commented at the time, “I aimed at the public’s heart and by accident I hit it in the stomach.”
The Jungle became a best seller, and Sinclair used the proceeds to open Helicon Hall, a cooperative-living venture in Englewood, New Jersey. This experiment was inspired by a model developed by feminist Charlotte Perkins Gilman. The building was destroyed by fire (possible arson, because of his socialist views) in 1907, whereupon the project was abandoned.
Sinclair and his second wife, Mary Craig Kimbrough, moved to Pasadena, California, in 1916. His muckraking novels continued with King Coal (1917), which is about the poor working conditions in the mining industry. With The Brass Check (1919), Sinclair tackled the financial interests and supposed "free press" principles of major newspapers and the "yellow journalism" they often engaged in to attract readers. His novel Oil! (1927) was based on the Teapot Dome Scandal (it loosely served as the basis of the Academy Award-winning film There Will Be Blood [2007]), and Boston (1928) was inspired by the Sacco-Vanzetti case. His searing novel The Wet Parade (1931; film 1932) is about the tragedy of alcoholism, and The Flivver King (1937) tells the story of Henry Ford and how “scientific management” replaced skilled workers in the automotive industry.
During the economic crisis of the 1930s, Sinclair organized the EPIC (End Poverty in California) socialist reform movement and registered as a Democrat. His 1934 bid for the governorship of California—he ran on the EPIC platform, which featured proposals for state-administered economic relief and reforms throughout a number of societal institutions—was his most successful political campaign. (He had run for the U.S. House of Representatives in 1906 and 1920, for the U.S. Senate in 1922, and for the governorship of California in 1926 and 1930, each time running as a Socialist, and each time he lost.) The campaign was surprisingly popular, helping to build and push to the left the Democratic Party in California and to inspire U.S. Pres. Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal programs, but once again he lost. He was defeated by a joint propaganda campaign, orchestrated by the conservative political and business establishment, newspaper moguls, and Hollywood studio bosses, who brazenly portrayed him as an American communist. Using admen, media consultants, and assorted "dirty tricks," the anti-Sinclair battle has been called one of the most well-orchestrated smear campaigns in American history; bogus interviews were staged and run as legitimate newsreels in movie theatres, a forerunner of “fake news” and the attack ads on television decades later. Sinclair recounted the campaign in I, Candidate for Governor: And How I Got Licked (1935) and said about his experience in politics, “The American People will take Socialism, but they won’t take the label. I certainly proved it in the case of EPIC. Running on the Socialist ticket I got 60,000 votes, and running on the slogan to ‘End Poverty in California’ I got 879,000.”
Inspired by a tour of the northern California redwoods in 1936, Sinclair wrote a children’s story called The Gnomobile. It was one of the first books for children with an environmentalist message, and it was later adapted as a film by Walt Disney in 1967. Sinclair again reached a wide audience with his Lanny Budd series, 11 contemporary historical novels, beginning with World’s End (1940), that were constructed around an antifascist hero who witnesses all the events surrounding World War II. For Dragon’s Teeth (1942), the third novel in the series, about the Nazi takeover of Germany in the 1930s, Sinclair won the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction in 1943.
Of his autobiographical writings, American Outpost: A Book of Reminiscences (1932; also published as Candid Reminiscences: My First Thirty Years) was reworked and extended in The Autobiography of Upton Sinclair (1962). My Lifetime in Letters (1960) is a collection of letters written to Sinclair.
