Edward Levy-Lawson, 1st Baron Burnham, original name Edward Levy, also called (1892–1903) Sir Edward Levy-Lawson, 1st Baronet,  (born December 28, 1833, London, England—died January 9, 1916, London), English newspaper proprietor who virtually created the London Daily Telegraph.
He was educated at University College school. His father, Joseph Moses Levy, acquired the Daily Telegraph and Courier in 1855, a few months after it was founded by Colonel Sleigh. Aided by his son, Levy soon raised it to a leading position and made it the pioneer London penny paper. Edward Levy (he took the added name of Lawson under his uncle’s will in 1875) acted as editor of the Daily Telegraph until his father’s death and then served as its managing proprietor and sole controller until 1903, when he was made a baron and passed over these duties to his son. He had received a baronetcy in 1892.
For many years Lawson was one of the outstanding figures in English journalism. No one in Great Britain did more to brighten and humanize the daily newspaper and transform it from a plain chronicle of the day’s events into a readable and entertaining presentation of the world’s news. The abolition of the last of the paper duties (1861), in which Lawson himself bore an active part, called into being a host of new readers among the middle classes, which welcomed the popular features of the new journalism. His conception of a popular daily paper was that it should be a faithful mirror of the times and appeal to the taste of its readers. Part of this appeal was Lawson’s acknowledgment that, for most readers, “politics are fearfully dull,” especially in comparison with society news; his Daily Telegraph reflected this sentiment.
Under his direction the Daily Telegraph raised large funds for national, patriotic, and charitable objects, dispatched missions of exploration to Central Africa and elsewhere, and started novel features, such as popular correspondences on live topics of the day, which later became the established commonplace of journalism. For many years the Daily Telegraph warmly supported the Liberal Party, but it strongly dissented from Prime Minister William Gladstone’s anti-Turkish policy, and the final severance came on his Irish policy of Irish Home Rule. Lawson was strongly attached to the idea of the British Empire. Edward VII, as prince of Wales and later as king, frequently visited his home.
Burnham served as president of the Institute of Journalists (1892–93) and the Newspaper Press Fund (1908–16), and in 1909 he presided over the first Imperial Press Conference, in London.
