George Geoffrey Dawson, original name George Geoffrey Robinson,  (born October 25, 1874, Skipton-in-Craven, Yorkshire, England—died November 7, 1944, London), English journalist, editor of The Times from 1912 to 1919 and from 1923 until his retirement in 1941. He changed his surname from Robinson to Dawson following an inheritance in 1917.
Dawson was educated at Eton College and at Magdalen College, Oxford, and was elected a fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, in 1898. He entered the civil service and went to South Africa (1901) as private secretary to Lord Milner, then high commissioner, and became a journalist almost by accident when Milner, who was interested in ensuring continued support for his policies, persuaded the owners of the Johannesburg Star to appoint him editor. Dawson became Johannesburg correspondent of The Times and by his dispatches attracted the personal interest of The Times’s publisher, Lord Northcliffe, who in 1912 made him editor of the London newspaper. By 1919, however, Northcliffe’s increasing determination to run the paper as an instrument of his personal policy had led to a clash, and Dawson agreed to go. He was succeeded by Henry Wickham Steed, but in 1923, a year after Northcliffe’s death, when John Jacob Astor (later Lord Astor) became chief proprietor, Dawson was invited to return on terms that gave him authority over editorial policy.
As editor of The Times, Dawson exercised great influence on public affairs for more than a quarter of a century. Although he had quarreled with Northcliffe for doing the same thing, he made The Times a vehicle for his own convictions. A close intimate of Prime Ministers Stanley Baldwin and Neville Chamberlain, Dawson was a leader in the group connected with the quarterly magazine Round Table, which sought to influence national policies through intimate and private exchanges with leading statesmen; he saw himself as the “secretary-general of the Establishment.” A firm believer in appeasement (see international relations), he became, both through The Times and in personal relations with ministers, one of the chief instruments of the policy that reached its climax with the Munich agreement (1938), which gave in to Adolf Hitler’s demands for the Sudetenland region of Czechoslovakia.
