ʿAin Ghazal,  archaeological site of a Pre-Pottery Neolithic settlement near Amman, Jordan, that was active from about 7250 bce to about 5000 bce, during which period the residents transitioned from relying on both wild and domesticated plants for subsistence to becoming a pastoral society.
The Neolithic settlement, which was some 25–30 acres (10–12 hectares) in extent, was discovered in 1974 by contractors building a road between Amman and Al-Zarqāʾ. Excavations began in 1982 and continued into the late 1990s, mostly led by American anthropologist Gary Rollefson. In 2004 the World Monuments Fund placed ʿAin Ghazal on its watch list of endangered cultural heritage sites, citing urban development as the greatest threat to the site’s preservation.
The village was occupied by a few hundred inhabitants beginning in about 7250 bce. They lived in individual houses made from field stones covered with mud and lime plaster and painted with a red pigment. After some 300 years, an influx of new inhabitants rather quickly increased the population to 1,600 people, nearly double what it had been before, and houses began to expand to accommodate multifamily occupation. Over the next 600 years the town continued to grow, and by the end of that period it had become a good-sized metropolis, boasting as many as 3,000 residents. However, around 7000–6900 bce, the village lost about 90 percent of its population and reverted to being a small farming hamlet.
During excavations, archaeologists found numerous figurines that dated from about 6500 bce, before the development of pottery. Many were small figures of animals, about half of which were aurochs (wild cattle), some of which were depicted as being killed. Other figurines were of pregnant women. The most remarkable statues were several human figures made of lime plaster that had been layered over bundles of twigs, reeds, and other grasses. They had short bodies and legs but large heads with prominent eyes that were made of a whiter material than the rest of the figurine and were outlined with a black pigment, possibly bitumen, with pupils marked in the same pigment. A few of the figurines had two heads. These statues were found carefully buried in two caches. It was also discovered that some of the village’s dead were buried under the floors of the houses and that a few skulls had been given faces modeled with lime plaster; similar skull molding was noted in other archaeological sites in the Middle East.
Studies showed that early inhabitants grew such crops as barley, chickpeas, lentils, and wheat and that they had domesticated goats but that they ate a wide variety of other plants and animals as well. As time went on, however, their diet became limited to those plants and animals that were farmed, showing the beginning of an agrarian way of life. Traces of pottery were also found during the latter part of the town’s existence. DNA evidence indicated that neither farming nor the use of pottery was introduced by a new population, however, but rather that the inhabitants of ʿAin Ghazal achieved these developments on their own. This discovery helped to disprove a widely held theory on how these milestones in human development occurred.
