Arthur G. Dove, in full Arthur Garfield Dove,  (born August 2, 1880, Canandaigua, New York, U.S.—died November 23, 1946, Huntingdon, New York), American painter who was one of the earliest nonobjective artists.
Dove graduated from Cornell University in 1903. He began his career as a magazine illustrator, and his early work appeared in Scribner’s, Collier’s, and The Saturday Evening Post. In 1907–08 he traveled to Paris to study. While there, he befriended many other American artists, including Max Weber and Alfred Maurer, and was influenced by Impressionism,  Fauvism, and the work of Paul Cézanne. He exhibited twice in the Salon d’Automne. In 1909 he returned to the United States, met photographer Alfred Stieglitz, and—together with John Marin and Georgia O’Keeffe—became an artist whom Stieglitz championed at 291, his gallery in New York City. Dove exhibited there in 1910, by which time he had fully embraced abstract art.
Dove’s art reflects his belief that colour and form are instruments with which to express the essence beneath the physical exterior of things; his shapes are typically amorphous, his colours muted. In Foghorns (1929), for example, he used size-graduated shapes and gradations of hue to express visually the sound of foghorns. Despite their nonobjective character, his paintings often suggest the undulating qualities of landscape and the forms of nature. Dove also created many ironic collages, such as Goin’ Fishin’ (1925), made of a variety of materials. He worked extensively in pastels throughout the 1920s and experimented with a variety of graphic media.
In the 1920s Dove separated from his wife and child, moved to Long Island, and concentrated on his painting. His numerous works from this period focus on the abstract rhythms of the sea and shore, subjects that suggest mystical undertones. He found a patron in 1922 (Duncan Phillips, founder of the Phillips Collection in Washington, D.C.) but never found solid financial ground. In the late 1930s he became ill, but he continued to paint and produced what most critics consider to be his best work in the 1940s.
