Basketry,  art and craft of making interwoven objects, usually containers, from flexible vegetable fibres, such as twigs, grasses, osiers, bamboo, and rushes, or from plastic or other synthetic materials. The containers made by this method are called baskets.
The Babylonian god Marduk “plaited a wicker hurdle on the surface of the waters. He created dust and spread it on the hurdle.” Thus ancient Mesopotamian myth describes the creation of the earth using a reed mat. Many other creation myths place basketry among the first of the arts given to humans. The Dogon of West Africa tell how their first ancestor received a square-bottomed basket with a round mouth like those still used there in the 20th century. This basket, upended, served him as a model on which to erect a world system with a circular base representing the sun and a square terrace representing the sky.
Like the decorative motifs of any other art form, the geometric, stylized shapes may represent natural or supernatural objects, such as the snakes and pigeon eyes of Borneo, and the kachina (deified ancestral spirit), clouds, and rainbows of the Hopi Indians of Arizona. The fact that these motifs are given a name, however, does not always mean that they have symbolic significance or express religious ideas.
Sometimes symbolism is associated with the basket itself. Among the Guayaki Indians of eastern Paraguay, for example, it is identified with the female. The men are hunters, the women are bearers as they wander through the forest; when a woman dies, her last burden basket is ritually burned and thus dies with her.
Though it would appear that basketry might best be defined as the art or craft of making baskets, the fact is that the name is one of those the limits of which seem increasingly imprecise the more one tries to grasp it. The category basket may include receptacles made of interwoven, rather rigid material, but it may also include pliant sacks made of a mesh indistinguishable from netting—or garments or pieces of furniture made of the same materials and using the same processes as classical basketmaking. In fact, neither function nor appearance nor material nor mode of construction are of themselves sufficient to delimit the field of what common sense nevertheless recognizes as basketry.
In this discussion the word is taken to mean a handmade assemblage of vegetable fibres that is relatively large and rigid, so as to make a continuous surface, usually (but not exclusively) a receptacle. The consistency of the materials used distinguishes basketry, which is handmade, from weaving, in which the flexibility of the threads requires the use of an apparatus to put tension on the warp, the lengthwise threads. What basketry has in common with weaving is that both are means of assembling separate fibres by twisting them together in various ways.
There is no region in the world, except in the northernmost and southernmost parts, where people do not have at their disposal materials—such as twigs, roots, canes, and grasses—that lend themselves to the construction of baskets. The variety and quality of materials available in a particular region bears on the relative importance of basketry in a culture and on the types of basketry produced by the culture. Rainy, tropical zones, for example, have palms and large leaves that require plaiting techniques different from those required for the grass stalks that predominate in the dry, subtropical savanna regions or for the roots and stalks found in cold temperate zones. The interrelationship between materials and methods of construction might in part explain why the principal types of basketry are distributed in large areas that perhaps correspond to climatic zones as much as to cultural groups: the predominance of sewed coiling, for example, in the African savannas and in the arid zones of southern Eurasia and of North America; of spiral coiling and twining in temperate regions; and of various forms of plaiting in hot regions. There is also a connection between the materials used and the function of the basket, which determines whether rigid or soft materials—either as found in nature or specially prepared—are used. In East Asia, for example, twined basketry fashioned out of thin, narrow strips (called laths) of bamboo is effective for such objects as cages and fish traps that require solid partitions with openings at regular intervals. Soft and rigid fibres are often used together: the rigid fibres provide the shape of the object and soft ones act as a binder to hold the shape.
Finally, materials are chosen with a view toward achieving certain aesthetic goals; conversely, these aesthetic goals are limited by the materials available to the basket maker. The effects most commonly sought in a finished product are delicacy and regularity of the threads; a smooth, glossy surface or a dull, rough surface; and colour, whether natural or dyed. Striking effects can be achieved from the contrast between threads that are light and dark, broad and narrow, dull and shiny—contrasts that complement either the regularity or the decorative motifs obtained by the intricate work of plaiting.
Despite an appearance of almost infinite variety, the techniques of basketry can be grouped into several general types according to how the elements making up the foundation (the standards, which are analogous to the warp of cloth) are arranged and how the moving element (the thread) holds the standards by intertwining among them.
