Betsy Ross, née Elizabeth Griscom,  (born January 1, 1752, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania [U.S.]—died January 30, 1836, Philadelphia), seamstress who, according to family stories, fashioned and helped design the first flag of the United States.
Elizabeth Griscom, the eighth of 17 children, was brought up as a member of the Society of Friends, educated in Quaker schools, and became an apprentice to a Philadelphia upholsterer. She married another upholsterer’s apprentice, John Ross, in 1773 and was disowned by the Society of Friends for marrying outside the faith. By 1775 the Rosses had opened a small shop in the commercial district of Philadelphia where they lived. John was killed in January 1776 soon after he joined a local militia company to fight in the American Revolution. Betsy continued to work as a seamstress and upholsterer. In June 1777 she married Joseph Ashburn, who would die in prison in England in 1782 after the merchant marine brigantine on which he was serving was captured during the war. In 1783 Betsy married again, this time to John Claypoole, who had been imprisoned with Ashburn and brought the news of his death and with whom Betsy joined the newly formed Free Quakers. Betsy ran her upholstery business with Claypoole and then for years afterward with her daughters, granddaughters, and nieces, producing flags among other objects.
The story that Betsy Ross made and helped design the American flag has been disseminated since her grandson William Canby presented his paper “The History of the Flag of the United States” to the Historical Society of Pennsylvania in 1870. According to Canby’s account, his grandmother not only made the first Stars and Stripes at George Washington’s behest but also helped design it. Canby based his paper on stories that he had heard from family members, along with his own memories of his grandmother’s tales of her involvement in making flags.
Canby claimed that in June 1776 Washington and a committee from the Continental Congress asked his grandmother to make a flag for the new country on the verge of declaring its independence. The story then goes on to say that Ross made suggestions to improve a rough sketch of the flag that was presented to her—including the use of the five-pointed star rather than the six-pointed one chosen by Washington—and Washington incorporated her suggestions. Ross then fashioned the flag in her back parlour—again, according to the legend.
On June 14, 1777, the Continental Congress adopted the Stars and Stripes as the national flag of the United States. It is known that Ross made flags for the navy, but there is no firm evidence in support of the popular story about her making (and designing) the national flag. Since the turn of the 20th century, the Betsy Ross House on Arch Street in Philadelphia has been a museum; though it is debatable whether Ross actually ever lived or worked in this house, it is likely that she did live and work in the vicinity.
