Charles Harrison,  (born September 23, 1931, Shreveport, Louisiana, U.S.—died November 29, 2018, Santa Clarita, California), American industrial designer whose creations included such iconic consumer items as polypropylene trash cans (including those with wheels) and the plastic version of the 3-D View-Master photographic slide viewer. In 2008 the Smithsonian’s Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum gave Harrison—one of the few early African American industrial designers—a Lifetime Achievement Award “in recognition of an individual who has made a profound, long-term contribution to contemporary design practice.”
Harrison’s father was a university professor of industrial arts, and the youngster grew up in Louisiana; Prairie View, Texas; and Phoenix, Arizona. When he was 16, his elder brother helped him to attend the City College of San Francisco, where for the first time in his life he was in class with white students. Despite struggling with dyslexia, Harrison earned an associate’s degree and decided to pursue a career in industrial design. This decision took him in 1949 to Chicago, where he studied with Henry Glass at the School of the Art Institute and earned a BFA (1954). He later received a master’s degree (1963) in art education from the Illinois Institute of Technology’s Institute of Design.
After completing his military service as a cartographer, Harrison returned to Chicago, where he found a few temporary design jobs and worked for Sears on a freelance basis. It was during this period that he modified the View-Master into a plastic toy suitable for use by children. In 1961 Sears discarded its unwritten policy against employing African Americans, and Harrison was formally hired. He remained with Sears for 32 years, ultimately leading the firm’s design team.
In an era when aesthetics, utility, and cost-effectiveness were in unusual balance, Harrison created a variety of practical domestic goods. Among the more than 700 products that he developed were such items as baby cribs, portable hair dryers, hedge clippers, sewing machines of varying complexity, steam irons, riding lawn mowers, shoe buffers, portable turntables, blenders, circular fluorescent lightbulbs, electric frying pans, consumer power tools, coffee percolators, fondue pots, toasters, stoves, hearing aids, band saws, wheelbarrows, and cordless electric shavers.
As the U.S. economy began to change, the Sears design team was gradually dissolved; Harrison was the last to leave, in 1993. Thereafter he taught at a number of Chicago-area schools, including the University of Illinois at Chicago, Columbia College, and the School of the Art Institute of Chicago. Harrison chronicled his life story in A Life’s Design: The Life and Work of Industrial Designer Charles Harrison (2005), cowritten with one of his former students, Joeffrey Trimmingham.
