Dinanderie,   type of late medieval brass ware made in and around Dinant, Belg.
Brass does not appear to have been used extensively in Europe until the 11th or 12th century, when a considerable industry was established in the Low Countries in the district near the Meuse (Maas) River. By the 15th century its centre, Dinant, had become a prosperous town the name of which was synonymous with excellent brass ware. Included in the production were such domestic articles as ewers, fire irons, candlesticks, dishes, and basins and such ecclesiastical objects as censers, aquamaniles, fonts, and lecterns.
When the town was sacked in 1466 by Charles the Bold, son of Philippe III le Bon, duke of Burgundy, the craftsmen dispersed, and the industry spread to other towns along the Meuse and to Brussels, Bruges, and Tournai, eventually establishing a new production centre in Aachen. Some of the fleeing “brass-beaters” may have gone as far as Nürnberg, which was already becoming famous for its metalworking and was soon to achieve the prominence of the old centres. In the late 15th and 16th centuries the “basin-beaters” of Nürnberg produced numerous embossed dishes and basins of a characteristic type, which were exported to most parts of Europe. These objects have also come to be known as dinanderie.
The earliest type of dinanderie, Gothic in feeling and outline, is generally small and deep and made of a golden-coloured brass. Pieces from the 16th century and later are flatter, larger, and of a darker colour. The embossed decoration, executed with large stamps, falls into two major categories: religious and allegorical subjects and stylized decorative patterns. Additional ornament was provided by punched bands of simple motifs repeated around the rim and encircling the main subject in the centre of the bowl. Many have a raised central boss in the form of an open rose with radiating petals, and some bear inscriptions in Gothic lettering or pseudo-Gothic-Islāmic script. They are quite often found in churches, where they have been used as alms dishes.
