Elsie de Wolfe, in full Ella Anderson de Wolfe, married name Lady Mendl,  (born December 20, 1865, New York, New York, U.S.—died July 12, 1950, Versailles, France), American interior decorator, hostess, and actress, best known for her innovative and anti-Victorian interiors.
De Wolfe was educated privately in New York and in Edinburgh, Scotland, where she lived with maternal relatives. Through that connection she was presented at Queen Victoria’s court in 1883 and introduced to London society. Soon after her return to New York in 1884 she became a devotee of amateur theatricals, then a popular form of charitable fund-raising.
In 1890 the death of her father left the family in somewhat straitened circumstances, and de Wolfe turned to the professional stage. She was assisted in entering the field by her close friend, Elisabeth Marbury, a theatrical agent. She made her debut in Charles Frohman’s production of Victorien Sardou’s Thermidor (1891) and toured with the production for two years. In 1894 she became a regular member of Frohman’s company. In 1901 she formed her own company and presented Clyde Fitch’s The Way of the World on Broadway and in a two-year tour. She retired from the stage in 1905.
At the suggestion of Marbury and Sara Cooper Hewitt, de Wolfe turned to interior decoration, then an almost exclusively masculine field. Her reputation as a set designer, her success in decorating the house she and Marbury shared, and her connections in society all aided her advancement in the field. Architect Stanford White helped her win a commission to design the interior of the Colony Club, New York’s first social club for women. There she demonstrated her signature principles of design: simplicity, airiness (through the use of mirrors and light hues of paint and fabric), and visual (rather than simple stylistic) unity. Her striking success there firmly established her as America’s first woman professional interior decorator.
De Wolfe’s pronounced and distinctly anti-Victorian taste helped shape that of her generation. A series of articles by her in Good Housekeeping and the Delineator was collected into the widely influential The House in Good Taste (1913). Her affluent clients brought her wealth, and she and Marbury became noted hostesses. In 1903 they bought and began restoring the Villa Trianon in Versailles, France, which became a second hub for their social lives.
During World War I de Wolfe remained in France and won the Croix de Guerre and the Legion of Honour for her hospital relief work, particularly among gas-burn cases. In March 1926 she married Sir Charles Mendl, a British diplomat in France. On the outbreak of World War II they moved to Hollywood; Lady Mendl was restored to U.S. citizenship, which had been lost by her marriage, by special act of Congress. After the war de Wolfe returned to Villa Trianon, where she died in 1950. Her autobiography, After All, was published in 1935.
