Francesco Primaticcio, also called Bologna, Le Primatice, or Primadizzi,  (born April 30, 1504, Bologna, Emilia [Italy]—died  1570, Paris, France), Italian Mannerist painter, architect, sculptor, and leader of the first school of Fontainebleau.
Primaticcio was first trained as an artist in Bologna, under Innocenzo da Imola and later Bagnacavallo. He also studied with Giulio Romano and assisted him in his work on the decorations of the Palazzo del Te in Mantua. When the French king Francis I invited Romano to assist in the redecoration of the Fontainebleau Palace in 1532, Romano sent Primaticcio in his place, and, once there, Primaticcio became one of the principal artists in France. He would remain an artist at Fontainebleau for the rest of his life.
In his initial work at Fontainebleau, Primaticcio employed a decorative style that combined stucco work and mural painting. He returned to Rome for a couple of years to purchase artworks for Francis I, and on his return he decorated the Cabinet du Roi with a series of paintings, now lost, that flouted rational perspective in painting and stressed the primacy of the human figure. Primaticcio’s stylistic use of exaggerated musculature and active, elongated figures in these works was to exert great influence on French painting for the remainder of the 16th century.
In 1543 Primaticcio completed a number of decorations, most depicting scenes from the Life of Alexander the Great, for the bedchamber of the duchesse d’Étampes; all of these works survive. During this period he also completed work on the Galerie d’Ulysse (1541–70) and the Salle de Bal (or Galerie Henri II). The former was completely destroyed under Louis XV, and the latter has been heavily restored. Primaticcio increased his use of foreshortening and illusionistic treatment of subjects in his later work. His design for the ceiling of the chapel of the Hotel de Guise in Paris (1557) was to be the artist’s last major work. For the last decade of his life, Primaticcio collaborated with the sculptor Germain Pilon on the tomb of Henry II in the abbey church of St. Denis near Paris. In his decorations Primaticcio was one of the first artists in France to replace religious themes with those of classical mythology. He subdued the violence of Italian Mannerism, investing it with a quiet and characteristic French elegance.
