Frank Gehry, in full Frank Owen Gehry, original name Ephraim Owen Goldberg, also called Frank O. Gehry,  (born February 28, 1929, Toronto, Ontario, Canada), Canadian American architect and designer whose original, sculptural, often audacious work won him worldwide renown.
In 1947 Gehry and his family immigrated to Los Angeles, where he soon began taking night classes at Los Angeles City College. He then studied architecture at the University of Southern California (1949–51; 1954) and city planning at Harvard University (1956–57). After working for several architectural firms, including those of Victor Gruen in Los Angeles and André Remondet in Paris, he established his own company, Frank O. Gehry & Associates, in 1962 and its successor, Gehry Partners, in 2002.
Reacting, like many of his contemporaries, against the cold and often formulaic Modernist buildings that dotted many cityscapes, Gehry began to experiment with unusual expressive devices and to search for a personal vocabulary. In his early work he built unique, quirky structures that emphasized human scale and contextual integrity. These experiments are perhaps best embodied by the “renovations” he made to his own home (1978 and 1994) in Santa Monica, California. Gehry essentially stripped the two-story home down to its frame and then built a chain-link and corrugated-steel frame around it, complete with asymmetrical protrusions of steel rod and glass. He made the traditional bungalow—and the architectural norms it embodied—appear to have exploded wide open. Gehry continued those design experiments in two popular lines of corrugated cardboard furniture, Easy Edges (1969–73) and Experimental Edges (1979–82). His ability to undermine the viewer’s expectations of traditional materials and forms led him to be grouped with the deconstructivist movement in architecture, although his play upon architectural tradition also caused him to be linked to postmodernism.
Treating each new commission as “a sculptural object, a spatial container, a space with light and air,” Gehry was rewarded with commissions the world over throughout the 1980s and ’90s. These works possessed the deconstructed quality of his Santa Monica home but began to display a pristine grandeur that suited his increasingly public projects. Notable structures from the period include the Vitra Furniture Museum and Factory (1987) in Weil am Rhein, Germany; the American Center (1994) in Paris; and the Frederick R. Weisman Art Museum (1993) at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis.
Gehry’s reputation soared in the late 1990s. By that time his trademark style had become buildings that resemble undulating free-form sculpture. This form reached its zenith in his Guggenheim Museum Bilbao (1997) in Spain, a structure that arguably caused a museum building boom in the early 21st century. In that structure, Gehry combined curvaceous titanium forms with interconnecting limestone masses to create a sculptural feat of engineering. He further explored those concerns in the Experience Music Project (1995–2000; renamed the Museum of Pop Culture in 2016) in Seattle. Constructed of a fabricated steel frame wrapped in colourful sheet metal, the structure was, according to Gehry, modeled on the shape of a guitar—particularly, a smashed electric guitar. As with the Guggenheim structure, he employed cutting-edge computer technology to uncover the engineering solutions that could bring his sculptural sketches to life. Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles was designed before the Bilbao museum but was completed in 2003 to great acclaim.
Gehry was in high demand in the 21st century. He designed a number of cultural institutions, including a performing arts centre (2003) for Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, New York; the Jay Pritzker Pavilion (2004) in Chicago’s Millennium Park; and the New World Center (2011) for the New World Symphony orchestral academy in Miami Beach, Florida. For his 2008 renovation of the Art Museum of Ontario in Toronto, Gehry retained the original building (1918) but removed an artistically unsuccessful entryway that had been added in the 1990s. Although the updated museum shows many characteristic Gehry touches, one critic called it “one of Mr. Gehry’s most gentle and self-possessed designs.”
As the 21st century progressed, Gehry continued to receive numerous large-scale commissions. His building for the Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health (2010) in Las Vegas is seemingly a pile of collapsed stainless-steel facades. In 2012 he completed his first skyscraper, 8 Spruce Street, a 76-story residential tower in New York City. By the mid-2010s Gehry had cemented his audacious style, but he proved that he could still surprise audiences. He notably experimented with different forms and materials to create the jewel-like building for the Fondation Louis Vuitton (2014) in the Bois de Boulogne, Paris. His other projects from the decade include the brightly coloured Biomuseo (2014), a biodiversity museum in Panama City, Panama, and a number of buildings for Facebook (2015 and 2018) in Palo Alto, California. The 2020s saw the completion of the long-awaited Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial (2020) in Washington, D.C., a renovation and extension of the Philadelphia Museum of Art (2021), and a tower for the LUMA Arles campus (2021), France.
Although critical opinion is sometimes divided over his radical structures, Gehry’s work made architecture popular and talked-about in a manner not seen in the United States since Frank Lloyd Wright. Among Gehry’s many awards are the Pritzker Architecture Prize (1989), the Japan Art Association’s Praemium Imperiale prize for architecture (1992), the National Medal of the Arts (1998), the American Institute of Architects Gold Medal (1999), the Gold Medal for Architecture from the American Academy of Arts and Letters (2002), and the Presidential Medal of Freedom (2016).
