Glassware,  any decorative article made of glass, often designed for everyday use. From very early times glass has been used for various kinds of vessels, and in all countries where the industry has been developed glass has been produced in a great variety of forms and kinds of decoration, much of it of great beauty. For the composition and properties of glass and the manufacture of various glass products such as glass containers, window glass, plate glass, optical glass, and glass fibres, see industrial glass.
It is not certain in which of the civilizations of the ancient Near East glass was first made. The earliest wholly glass objects from Egypt are beads dating from some time after c. 2500 bc. A green glass rod found at Eshnunna in Babylonia may go back earlier, possibly to 2600 bc. A small piece of blue glass found at Eridu dates from before 2200 bc. The manufacture of glass vessels, which may have begun slightly earlier in Mesopotamia, was carried to a high point of excellence in Egypt during the 18th dynasty (c. 1490 onwards). These vessels are distinguished by a peculiar technique: the shape required was first formed of clay (probably mixed with dung) fixed to a metal rod. On this core the body of the vessel was built up, usually of opaque blue glass, on which, in turn, were coiled threads of glass of contrasting colour. The threads were pulled alternately up and down by a comb-like instrument to form feather, zigzag, or arcade patterns (see photograph). The threads—usually yellow, white, or green in colour, and sometimes sealing-wax red—were rolled in (marvered) flush with the surface of the vessel. Finally, if desired, handles—often of translucent glass and sometimes of patterned “canes”—were added. The vessels were nearly always small, mainly for unguents and the like. Occasionally glass was decorated on the lapidary’s wheel. Glass is known to have been made on the palace site of Tell el-Amarna, the residence of Akhenaton (reigned c. 1379–62 bc), and the number of fragments found in and near the palace of Amenhotep III (reigned c. 1417–1379 bc) at Thebes suggests that it was made there also. This palace activity seems then to have died down and after the 21st dynasty (1085–945 bc) to have ceased altogether.
In Mesopotamia the Nineveh tablets of the reign of Ashurbanipal (668–c. 626 bc) and the remains of glass in various forms excavated at Nimrūd (ancient Calah, Assyria) indicate that glassmaking was carried on there during the 8th to the 6th centuries bc. It is probable that certain vessels of palish-green or deep blue glass, cut from a solid mass as if from stone, are Mesopotamian and date from as early as the 8th century bc, as a dish from controlled excavations in Phrygia proves. A vase of this type, contrasting completely with the core-wound glass of Egypt, bears the cartouche (panel enclosing the name) of the Assyrian king Sargon II (reigned 721–705 bc), and it is probable that glass treated in this way was manufactured over a long period in Mesopotamia.
Glass was made in Greece in Mycenaean times (c. 1400–1200 bc) usually in the form of small molded architectural details. A few pieces suggest, however, that perhaps some vessel glass also was made by the Egyptian technique, though not in Egyptian forms. Other Aegean-area glass of this period may have been imported from Egypt.
In general, glass of the earlier half of the 1st millennium bc is scarce and displays little homogeneity. From the 6th century bc, however, glass begins to appear in great quantities once again, particularly on the Greek-inhabited islands of the Aegean, in Greece itself, in Italy and Sicily, and even farther west. This contrasts with the meagre contemporary finds on Egyptian soil. The later glasses in the old Egyptian core-wound technique were probably made in Syria or some part of the Greek world. Such vessels were still small but differ in shape from the earlier Egyptian dynastic work. They were usually decorated with light-coloured threads on a dark, usually blue, ground (familiar from the Egyptian 18th dynasty), but a notable variation was displayed in pieces decorated with dark purple threads on a white ground. In the Hellenistic period (roughly from the 4th century bc) the shapes of glass degenerated. The technique of decoration, however, remained the same; new colour combinations were used, and indeed these combinations continued into the era of blown glass.
