Henry William Stiegel, German Heinrich Wilhelm Stiegel,  (born May 13, 1729, near Cologne—died  Jan. 10, 1785, Charming Forge, Pa., U.S.), ironmaster, glassmaker, and town builder whose spectacular rise and fall in early American industry is now remembered because of the high-quality blue, purple, green, and crystal-clear glassware that he produced.
Stiegel arrived in Philadelphia in 1750, and by 1760 he was one of the most prosperous ironmasters in the country, having built the forge Elizabeth Furnace, in Lancaster County, Pa., and a second ironworks, Charming Forge, in Berks County. In 1762 he purchased a huge tract in Lancaster County, where he laid out and built a town, Manheim. Encouraged by the patriotic adoption of a boycott of British imports and having already made window glass and bottles at Elizabeth Furnace, Stiegel built a glassworks, later called the American Flint Glassworks, at Manheim; work began in 1768. He imported Venetian, German, and English glassworkers, to make utilitarian vessels and fine tableware. Nicknamed “Baron” for his lavish style of living, Stiegel maintained three mansions staffed with servants; the one at Manheim, of imported English brick, included a chapel, where he preached the gospel to his workers, and a roof platform, where concerts were given. His comings and goings in a coach-and-four with liveried retainers were announced by a cannon salute and rooftop band music. These princely expenditures and the adverse economic conditions caused by the approaching war and by colonial preference for imported tableware reduced him to bankruptcy. In 1774 he was in debtors prison, and his glassworks was sold. He worked as a foreman at Elizabeth Furnace until that, too, went bankrupt. He then earned a modest living as a preacher and taught school and music until his death. The Zion Lutheran Church at Manheim, which received its land from Stiegel for five shillings and “one red rose annually,” has observed since 1892 a yearly “Ceremony of the Payment of the Rose Day.”
