John Astbury, byname Astbury Of Shelton,  (born 1688, England—died  1743, Shelton, Staffordshire), pioneer of English potting technology and earliest of the great Staffordshire potters.
Although from 1720 several Astburys were working in Staffordshire, it is John who is credited with the important Astbury discoveries and creations. He allegedly masqueraded as an idiot in order to learn the craft from the potting brothers John Philip and David Elers, who in 1688 had emigrated from Holland. Establishing a factory at Shelton in the early 18th century, he succeeded in producing yellowish-glazed red earthenware decorated with bits of white pipe clay (which he was the first to import from Devonshire); his mode of decorating with such appliqués is called sprigging. Thus, some of the earliest Staffordshire figures in brown and white clay covered with a lead glaze have been attributed to him (a surviving example depicting the victory of Admiral Vernon at Porto Bello is dated 1739; Victoria and Albert Museum, London).
Astbury is credited with being the first (1720) Staffordshire potter to use flint for improving the quality of earthenware mixture by making it whiter. Figures now attributed to him reveal variously toned clays, as well as colours clouded to enrich them. He quite possibly originated the popular pew groups; i.e., two or more rigidly posed, salt-glazed stoneware figures, some engaged in such activities as playing bagpipes, wearing stylized costumes and seated on stiff pews. Similar groups of musicians only have also been attributed to him. His other typical figure groups are soldiers and equestrians, rather crude in appearance, modelled by hand after being cast in simple molds. His utilitarian products include mugs, variously shaped bowls, and teapots. He also made agate and marbled wares.
Astbury’s son Thomas experimented with the lead-glazed earthenware that was later called creamware and, improved by the great Josiah Wedgwood, eventually renamed Queen’s ware. It was developed from the earlier white stoneware body and covered with a lead glaze. Astbury ware is now found primarily in museums and in renowned private collections. During the mid-20th-century renaissance of Staffordshire pottery, Astbury figures, particularly the pew groups, brought premium prices, some in the thousands of pounds.
