Kaare Klint,   (born Dec. 15, 1888, Copenhagen—died  March 28, 1954), Danish architect and celebrated furniture designer who originated the highly influential modern Scandinavian style, which notably enlarged the vocabulary of progressive design. He was also a leading exponent of ergonomics, an aspect of technology that applies biological and engineering data to problems related to the mutual adjustment of man and machine, seeking to ensure that the tools and machines man uses and the work he performs are in accordance with his physical characteristics.
The son of P.V. Jensen Klint, considered Denmark’s leading early 20th-century architect, Kaare worked first as an architect but later as a furniture designer. He founded (1924) the Danish Academy of Art, in which he became the first professor of the furniture department. Unlike his French and German contemporaries, his designs, indebted to the simplest Chippendale, Biedermeier, and Far Eastern styles and, particularly, to the furniture of the American Shakers, had an honest, sophisticated charm and warmth achieved through craftsmanship (a stark contrast to strictly machine-made products) without drawing attention to an obvious handmade look.
Like his father, Klint encouraged the study of past styles, not to copy them but to learn from them the functionality of form and construction. But, unlike his father, he did not advocate modernity for its own sake. He made painstaking studies in drawing of human requirements and functions, balancing a beautiful appearance with a fulfillment of purpose. His teak deck chair of 1933, for example, is unquestionably functional and is designed to provide the maximum amount of comfort, yet in itself a clean and beautiful piece.
Many of Klint’s designs depend for their aesthetic effect on wood finishes, almost to the point of preciosity. Every piece ultimately serves its function, such as a sideboard proportioned to store standard tablewares. His style from the 1920s and 1930s had vast influence on Western designers, notably Hans Wegner and Finn Juhl, and reached a height of popularity after 1945 throughout Europe and the United States.
