Korean calligraphy,  the Korean art of beautiful writing as it was derived from Chinese calligraphy.
Koreans have used Chinese characters probably since the 2nd or 3rd century ce. Even after the invention of Hangul in 1447, Chinese was used as the official script until the 19th century.
A few inscribed stone monuments remain from the Three Kingdoms period (c. 57 bce–668 ce). Ancient Koreans, eager to adopt Chinese culture, developed a calligraphy reflecting Chinese styles. In the following Unified Silla dynasty (668–935), a devotion and adherence to the Tang culture of China gave birth to such great masters of calligraphy in Korea as Kim Saing and Choi Ch’i-wŏn, whose styles of writing basically followed those of the Chinese calligraphers Ouyang Xun and Yu Shinan.
The angular, squarish style of Ouyang Xun, Yu Shinan, and Yan Zhenqing, inherited from the Silla dynasty, continued in the Koryŏ period (918–1392) until roughly 1350, when the rounded, fluent style of the Chinese calligrapher Zhao Mengfu, of the Yuan dynasty, was introduced and became the vogue. Since that time the zhao style has remained the basic undercurrent in Korean calligraphy.
At first the calligraphy of the Chosŏn dynasty (1392–1910) followed the zhao style, but early in the 16th century a mannered, vulgar style began to be evident. Individual styles as seen in Chinese calligraphy began to emerge in the 19th century as a result of Korea’s close cultural contacts with Qing China.
The greatest master of the Chosŏn period was Kim Chŏng Hi, who established the so-called ch’usa style. His calligraphy is derived from the lishu script of China, but his sense of pictorial composition, harmony within asymmetry, and animation by unmatched, forceful strokes made his style unique.
The influence of Japanese calligraphy began to be felt about 1920. Since World War II, calligraphy in both North and South Korea has been profoundly influenced by governmental decisions to replace all Chinese characters with words written in the native alphabet. As a consequence, modern Korean calligraphy has developed along new lines.
