McCollum v. Board of Education, in full Illinois ex rel. McCollum v. Board of Education of School District (No. 71, Champaign County, Illinois),  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on March 8, 1948, ruled (8–1) that an Illinois public school board had violated the First Amendment’s establishment clause when it allowed religious instruction during school hours and on school property.
In 1940 members of different religious faiths formed the Champaign (Illinois) Council on Religious Education, and it subsequently received permission from the local school board to provide free religious instruction. Parents were given consent cards to sign that permitted their child to take the classes, which were taught by Roman Catholic priests, Protestant teachers, and Jewish rabbis, all of whom were approved and supervised by the school superintendent. The classes took place in the school building during regular hours and were offered one day a week.
Vashti McCollum, a taxpayer and parent of a child in the school system, sued, claiming that the program violated the establishment clause, which generally prohibits the government from establishing, advancing, or giving favour to any religion; the clause is extended to the states by the Fourteenth Amendment. A state court subsequently upheld the program, holding that it did not violate any of the constitutional provisions cited by McCollum. The Supreme Court of Illinois also affirmed on the ground that state law granted the local board of education authority to establish such a program.
The case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court on December 8, 1947. It noted that the school building, the site of the religious instruction, was funded by taxpayers. Furthermore, according to the court, the school officials were cooperating with the organization in “promoting religious instruction.” On the basis of these findings, the court held that the program was “beyond all question” using “the tax-established and tax-supported public school system” to help “religious groups spread their faith.” This was in direct violation of the First Amendment, which “erected a wall between Church and State which must be kept high and impregnable.” Accordingly, the court found that the religious-instruction program was unconstitutional. The ruling of the Illinois Supreme Court was reversed.
