Mueller v. Allen,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 29, 1983, ruled (5–4) that a Minnesota law that allowed state taxpayers to deduct various educational expenses—including those incurred at sectarian schools—did not violate the First Amendment’s establishment clause, which generally prohibits the government from establishing, advancing, or giving favour to any religion.
The Minnesota statute in question permitted taxpayers, when determining their state income taxes, to deduct certain expenses related to the education of their children at public or nonpublic elementary or secondary schools. Insofar as the statute permitted deductions for children attending sectarian schools, state taxpayers—including Van D. Mueller—challenged its constitutionality; Claude E. Allen, Jr., the commissioner of the state’s Department of Revenue, was named as a respondent.
A federal district court granted the state’s motion for summary judgment, holding that the statute was “neutral on its face and in its application” and did “not have a primary effect of either advancing or inhibiting religion.” The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed.
The case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court on June 29, 1983. In reaching its decision, the court used the so-called Lemon test, which it had outlined in Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971). The test required that a statute must (a) have “a secular purpose,” (b) “have a primary effect that neither advances nor inhibits religion,” and (c) “avoid[s] excessive government entanglement with religion.” Regarding the first part of the test, the court observed that the tax deduction had
Concerning the second prong, the court decided that the deduction did “not have the primary effect of advancing the sectarian aims of nonpublic schools,” because it was only one of numerous tax deductions permitted under Minnesota’s laws. In addition, the court noted that the deduction was available to all parents, regardless of whether their children attended public or private schools.
Finally, the court refused to find a violation of the Lemon test’s third component. According to the court, the only possible area where excessive entanglement might arise was when state officials had to determine what textbooks could be deducted. However, the court held that this evaluation was not significantly different from the loaning of secular textbooks to religious schools, a process that the court had upheld in Board of Education v. Allen (1968).
On the basis of those findings, the Supreme Court ruled that the tax law did not violate the establishment clause. The decision of the Eighth Circuit was upheld.
