Bengali,  majority population of Bengal, the region of northeastern South Asia that generally corresponds to the country of Bangladesh and the Indian state of West Bengal. The Bengali people speak dialects of Bangla—as they call the Bengali language—which belongs to the Indo-Aryan group of the Indo-Iranian branch of the Indo-European language family.
The Bengali are of diverse origin, having emerged from the confluence of various communities that entered the region over the course of many centuries. The earliest inhabitants of the region are believed to have been the Vedda from Sri Lanka. Later the Vedda were joined by Mediterranean peoples who spoke Indo-European languages. In the 8th century peoples of Arab, Turkish, and Persian descent began to enter the area. Eventually all these groups merged to become the people now known as Bengali.
Most of the Bengali in Bangladesh are practitioners of Sunni Islam, while the majority of the Bengali in West Bengal follow Hinduism. This religious difference traces largely to the 13th century, when Muslim forces invaded the region from the northwest. At the time, the population of Bengal comprised a mixture of Hindus and Buddhists. Following the arrival of the Muslims, most of the residents of eastern Bengal converted to Islam, while Hinduism became the predominant religion in the western region.
In the early 21st century the majority of the Bengali population remained rural, in both Bangladesh and West Bengal. Of the rural Bengali, a large portion are engaged in agriculture, their principal crops being rice and jute, followed by assorted pulses (legumes) and oilseeds. In the rural context, men are typically responsible for most of the work outside the home, while women manage domestic matters. Labour is less clearly divided in urban areas, however; there many middle- and upper-class women pursue careers in professions such as medicine and education.
Whether Hindu or Muslim, the Bengali people engage in a broad spectrum of artistic activity. Both Hindus and Muslims share the Hindustani classical music and dance tradition, while they also display a strong penchant for nonclassical popular forms. The Bengali of Bangladesh, for instance, created many unique popular music genres, such as baul and marfati, that have remained without true equivalents outside the country. Meanwhile, the Bengali of West Bengal  produced internationally acclaimed films, most of which have a prominent musical component.
The historical prevalence of Islamic arts, especially in Bangladesh, is evident in the many mosques, mausoleums, forts, and gateways that have survived from the Mughal period (16th–18th century). Like Muslim architecture elsewhere in South Asia, these structures are characterized by the pointed arch, the dome, and the minaret. The best-preserved example is the 77-dome mosque at Bagerhat in southern Bangladesh. The ruins of Lalbagh Fort, an incomplete 17th-century Mughal palace at Dhaka, also provide some idea of the older Islamic architectural traditions in Bengal.
Bengali literature dates to before the 12th century. The Caitanya movement, an intensely emotional form of Hinduism inspired by the medieval saint Caitanya (1485–1533), shaped the subsequent development of Bengali poetry until the early 19th century, when contact with the West sparked a vigorous creative synthesis. The modern period has produced, among others, the Nobel Prize-winning poet Rabindranath Tagore.
Major Muslim Bengali holidays are the two canonical festivals, ʿĪd al-Fiṭr, the “Festival of Breaking Fast,” which marks the end of the fasting month of Ramadan, and ʿĪd al-Aḍḥā, the “Festival of Sacrifice,” which is the culmination of the annual hajj (pilgrimage) to Mecca. Important Hindu Bengali holidays include the annual festivals devoted to various Hindu deities, most notably Shiva, Kali, Durga, Lakshmi, and Sarasvati. Holi, a spring festival, is celebrated by both Muslims and Hindus.
