Caucasian peoples,  various ethnic groups living in the Caucasus, a geographically complex area of mountain ranges, plateaus, foothills, plains, rivers, and lakes, with grasslands, forests, marshes, and dry steppes. The complex of regions harbours more than 50 separate peoples, ranging from language communities with only a few hundred speakers to large national groups numbering millions. This diversity is not of recent date. Pliny the Elder related that the Romans carried on their business there through 80 interpreters. Arab geographers called the Caucasus Jabal al-Alsun, Mountain of Languages.
The languages of the Caucasus belong to four families: Caucasian (or Paleocaucasian), Indo-European, Turkic, and Semitic. Whereas speakers of the latter three groups are known to have migrated to the Caucasus in historical times, speakers of the Caucasian languages occupied the area at the dawn of history.
The Caucasian peoples are subdivided, like the Caucasian languages, into two northern branches and a southern branch. The southerners, comprising the Georgians, the closely related Mingrelians and Laz, and the Svan, make up the Republic of Georgia and live in western Transcaucasia (the Laz live in Turkish territory). Among the many peoples that make up the two smaller northern groups, the Chechens, who constitute the majority of the population of Chechnya republic in southwestern Russia, and the Kabardians, settled along the Kuban and upper Terek river basins, are the most populous. Among other northern Caucasian peoples are the Abkhaz, the Ingush, and the Lezgi. There are a vast number of less populous groups.
Of the Indo-European peoples, the ancestors of the Armenians entered Transcaucasia from Anatolia in the early 1st millennium bce. A second ancient Indo-European group is the Ossetes, or Ossetians, in the central Greater Caucasus; they are a remnant of the eastern Iranian nomads who roamed the south Western Steppe from the 7th century bce until the 4th century ce (when they were dispelled by the Huns) and who were successively known as Scythians, Sarmatians, and Alans. Slavic groups account for more than one-third of the total population of the Caucasus; they live in the north and consist mainly of Russians and Ukrainians. Finally, there are such Indo-European groups as Kurds, Talysh, Tats, Greeks, and Roma (Gypsies) distributed in various areas of the Caucasus.
Among the Turkic peoples are the Azerbaijani (Azerbaijanians) in the southwest and the Kipchak Turks in the north. Of mixed ethnic origin, the Azerbaijani are at least in part composed of the indigenous population of eastern Transcaucasia and possibly an admixture of the Medians of northern Persia. They were in turn Persianized during the rule of the Sasanians (3rd–7th century ce) and, after conquest by Seljuq Turks in the 11th century, Turkicized. The Turkic influence remained strong throughout the following centuries. The Kipchak Turks are a group of small but distinct peoples including the Kumyk, Nogay, Karachay, and Balkar. The indigenous Kumyk, like the other Kipchak Turks, are largely Muslim. Their language was for some three centuries the lingua franca of the region, but in the 20th century it was supplanted by Russian. The Nogay are thought to have become a distinct group formed after the disintegration of the Golden Horde. Most were nomads until the early 20th century. The Karachay and the Balkar are of uncertain origin.
The only Semitic peoples in the Caucasus are the Assyrians, who fled to Russian territory from Turkish persecution at the end of World War I and live mainly in the cities.
The traditional economy of the peoples of the Caucasus is based on agriculture, cattle and sheep herding, and cottage industries. The main crops are millet, barley, wheat, and corn (maize). Wine production is highly developed in Transcaucasia, especially in Georgia. Crafts, such as rug weaving, are developed in Dagestan republic, Russia; Armenia; and Azerbaijan.
In the treeless highlands, villages consist of stone houses clustered together and built into the mountain slope. In the western Caucasus, villages consist of individual homesteads surrounded by fences. The buildings are made of wood or of wattles coated with clay. In central and eastern Transcaucasia, houses have a cupola-shaped vault on pillars, with an opening at the top that serves as a window and smoke vent.
Everywhere in the Caucasus are traces of a patriarchal clan system and a tribal organization of society. These features have been best preserved among the mountaineers. In general, however, the tribal system gradually gave way to a system of village communities. Feudal relations developed especially in Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan and in some parts of the northern Caucasus. During the Soviet period all areas were subjected to heavy Russian influence.
Traditionally, the major religions in the Caucasus have been Islam (notably the Turkic groups), the Eastern Orthodox church (chiefly Georgians), the Armenian Apostolic church, and Judaism. There are also numerous minority sects.
