Chakma, also called Changma, Sakma, or Sangma,  largest of the indigenous populations of Bangladesh, also settled in parts of northeastern India and in Myanmar (Burma). Their Indo-Aryan language has its own script, but the Chakma writing system has given way, for the most part, to Bengali script.
The earliest history of the Chakma people is not known. Some suggest that they migrated from the ancient Indian kingdom of Magadha (what is now west-central Bihar state) to Arakan (now part of Myanmar) and then to the region the British would later designate as the Chittagong Hill Tracts. They began farming bamboo, rice, cotton, and vegetables in the Chittagong Hills, and the majority of Chakmas—numbering about 300,000—remained there into the 21st century. They live in close proximity to less-populous tribes such as the Marma (Magh, or Mogh), Tripura (Tipra), and Tenchungya (Tanchangya).
After the departure of the British in 1947, however, Chakma fortunes fell rapidly. Expecting to become part of the newly independent state of India, to whose majority Hindu population the Buddhist Chakma were culturally similar, they were distressed to find that their region had at the last minute been ceded to Muslim-majority Pakistan. To add to their grievances, some 54,000 acres (about 21,850 hectares) of arable Chakma farmland was flooded and some 100,000 people were displaced when the Karnaphuli River was dammed (about 1957 to 1963) at Kaptai. Furthermore, once the country of Bangladesh was formed in 1971 from the Pakistani state of East Pakistan, settlement of the Chittagong region by vast numbers of Bengalis was officially sanctioned. As the result of one factor or the other, tens of thousands of Chakmas migrated to India and settled there or were settled by the government in the Indian states of Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh, and Tripura. Most were not granted citizenship there.
Now distributed across three countries, the Chakmas struggle to maintain their culture in the 21st century. They maintain a clan organization unique to the Chittagong region. Though it is increasingly difficult with the shrinkage of their traditional lands, they continue to farm; their once predominant use of shifting agriculture has given way mostly to small permanent farms. Chakma women weave distinctive fabrics to supplement family income and provide clothing.
Chakmas practice Theravada Buddhism tinged with aspects of animism and Hinduism. Some pre-Buddhist traditions, such as sacrificing a pig when a bride arrives at the groom’s village, have been retained, along with a custom of eating pork.
