Dayak, also spelled Dyak, Dutch Dajak,  the non-Muslim indigenous peoples of the island of Borneo, most of whom traditionally lived along the banks of the larger rivers. Their languages all belong to the Indonesian branch of the Austronesian (Malayo-Polynesian) language family. Dayak is a generic term that has no precise ethnic or tribal significance. Especially in Indonesian Borneo (Kalimantan), it is applied to any of the (non-Muslim) indigenous peoples of the interior of the island (as opposed to the largely Malay population of the coastal areas). In Malaysian Borneo (Sarawak and Sabah), it is used somewhat less extensively and is often understood locally to refer specifically to Iban (formerly called Sea Dayak) and Bidayuh (formerly called Land Dayak) peoples. At the turn of the 21st century the Dayak population of Borneo could be estimated roughly at 2.2 million.
Although lines of demarcation are often difficult to establish, the most prominent of the numerous Dayak subgroups are the Kayan (in Kalimantan usually called Bahau) and Kenyah, primarily of southeastern Sarawak and eastern Kalimantan; the Ngaju of central and southern Kalimantan; the Bidayuh of southwestern Sarawak and western Kalimantan; and the Iban of Sarawak.
In the past, the highly developed and complex religious practices of the Dayak peoples involved numerous local spirits and omen animals. Intertribal warfare was common, with headhunting a major feature. Since the mid-20th century, however, Dayak peoples have steadily adopted Anglicanism, Roman Catholicism, and Protestantism; by the early 21st century the vast majority of the population was Christian.
Historically, these riverine peoples lived mostly in longhouse communities, seldom with more than a few hundred members, and traced their descent through both the male and female lines. The family was the basic unit, and children remained with their parents until married. Despite the lack of unity between groups closely related in language, custom, and marriage, a boy often sought his bride outside his own village and went to live in her community. In contemporary society, however, many young Dayak men and women leave home before they are married, often to study or work in urban areas; many also pursue rural employment, usually at timber camps or on oil palm plantations.
Among the Iban and Bidayuh, there have never been any formal class distinctions. The Kayan and Kenyah, by contrast, traditionally recognized three main strata of society—the upper stratum consisting of the family and near relatives of the village chiefs, the middle consisting of common villagers, and the lower comprising captives of war and other persons looked down upon for various reasons. While still recognized by many older villagers today, class distinctions have lost much of their meaning for the younger generation.
Most Dayak village economies are based on the shifting cultivation of hill rice for subsistence (as opposed to sale). Fishing and hunting are subsidiary activities. Traditional iron tools, such as machetes and spears, are still important, although blowpipes are most significant as cultural artifacts in the 21st century.
