Gond,  group of aboriginal peoples (now officially designated as Scheduled Tribes) of central and south-central India, about two million in number. They live in the states of Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, and Odisha. The majority speak various and, in part, mutually unintelligible dialects of Gondi, an unwritten language of the Dravidian family. Some Gond have lost their own language and speak Hindi, Marathi, or Telugu, depending on which is dominant in their area.
There is no cultural uniformity among the Gond, although the religion of all Gond peoples centres in the cult of clan and village deities, together with ancestor worship. The most developed are the Raj Gond, who once had an elaborate feudal order. Local rajas, linked by ties of blood or marriage to a royal house, exercised authority over groups of villages. Aside from the fortified seats of the rajas, settlements were formerly of little permanence; cultivation, even though practiced with plows and oxen, involved frequent shifting of fields and clearing of new tracts of forest land. The Raj Gond continue to exist outside the Hindu caste system, neither acknowledging the superiority of Brahmans nor feeling bound by Hindu rules such as the ban on killing cows.
The highlands of the Bastar region in southern Chhattisgarh are the home of three important Gond tribes: the Muria, the Bisonhorn Maria, and the Hill Maria. The last, who inhabit the rugged Abujhmar Hills, are the most isolated. Their traditional type of agriculture is slash-and-burn (jhum) cultivation on hill slopes; hoes and digging sticks are still used more than plows. The villages are periodically moved, and the commonly owned land of each clan contains several village sites occupied in rotation over the years. Bisonhorn Maria, so called for their dance headdresses, live in less-hilly country and have more-permanent fields that they cultivate with plows and bullocks. The Muria are known for their youth dormitories, or ghotul, in the framework of which the unmarried of both sexes lead a highly organized social life; they receive training in civic duties and in sexual practices.
