Hakka, Chinese (Pinyin) Kejia or (Wade-Giles romanization) K’o-chia,  ethnic group of China. Originally, the Hakka were North Chinese, but they migrated to South China (especially Guangdong, Fujian, Jiangxi, and Guangxi provinces) during the fall of the Nan (Southern) Song dynasty in the 1270s. Worldwide they are thought to number about 80 million today, although the number of Hakka speakers is considerably lower. They are considered to be a branch of the Han.
Their origins remain obscure, but the people who became the Hakka are thought to have lived originally in Henan and Shanxi provinces in the Huang He (Yellow River) valley. They moved southward from there in two large migrations, one in the early 4th century and another in the late 9th century, perhaps to escape warfare or the domination of Inner Asian peoples. Their final migration in the 13th century took them farther south to their present areas of concentration.
The name Hakka may have been derived from a Cantonese pronunciation of the Mandarin word kejia (“guest people”), which the northerners were called to distinguish them from the bendi, or natives. Alternately, it may have been a name the Hakka gave themselves when they migrated south. Having settled in South China in their own communities, the Hakka never became fully assimilated into the native population. Unlike most other Chinese before the 20th century, they shunned such practices as foot binding. Their language has affinities with both Cantonese, the language of the people of Guangdong province, and Mandarin, the language of much of northern and central China; many of the Hakka tongue’s initial sounds are a bridge between the two dialects.
During the 18th and 19th centuries, when conditions in South China became very bad and land quite scarce, the Hakka often were involved in land feuds with the bendi. The Taiping Rebellion (1850–64), which is said to have resulted in the death of more than 20 million people and completely shattered South China, initially grew out of these local conflicts. Although the bendi eventually joined the revolt, Taiping leadership was mainly of Hakka origin.
After the rebellion, the Hakka continued to be involved in little skirmishes with their neighbours, as a result of which many migrated to other areas. Today many Hakka live in such widely scattered locations as Taiwan, Malaysia (including Sabah and Sarawak on Borneo), Singapore, Thailand, and even Jamaica. In South China they continue to dwell mainly in the less fertile upland areas and in Hong Kong.
