Maguindanao, also spelled Magindanao or Magindanaw, also called Maguindanaon,  ethnolinguistic group living primarily in south-central Mindanao, the largest island in the southern Philippines. With a name meaning “people of the flood plain,” the Maguindanao are most heavily concentrated along the shores and in the flood lands of the Pulangi-Mindanao River basin, although many now live in the surrounding areas. They speak an Austronesian language, written in Latin script, that is related to the languages of the Central Philippines. In the second decade of the 21st century, the Maguindanao numbered nearly 1.4 million, making them the largest of the Philippine Muslim groups collectively identified as Moro.
Although Islam was likely introduced to Mindanao in the 14th or early 15th century, the religion was not solidly established among the Maguindanao until about 1515, when Sharif Muhammad Kabungsuwan, a Muslim missionary from the sultanate Johor (on the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula) converted the ruling Maguindanao families. Shortly thereafter, the sultanate of Maguindanao was founded, with its seat in the city of Cotabato, at the mouth of the Mindanao River. The sultanate expanded throughout the 16th and 17th centuries, reaching its summit of strength and influence under Sultan Kudarat (reigned c. 1619–71). About the time of Sultan Kudarat’s death, Buayan, a rival upriver sultanate, began to gain strength, and by the late 18th century, it had replaced Maguindanao as the dominant sultanate of southern Mindanao. From a social, spiritual, and historical perspective, Maguindanao and Buayan remained among the most prominent sultanates of the southern Philippines in the 21st century. None of the sultanates, however, retained much political power.
Maguindanao society is stratified and family-oriented, with those who are able to trace their ancestry directly to Maguindanao royalty accorded the highest rank. Communities usually consist of closely related families and are headed by an individual who bears the title of datu. At least in theory, such a title indicates not only descent from royalty but also membership in a lineage that traces through Sharif Muhammad Kabungsuwan or Sultan Kudarat to the Prophet Muhammad himself.
Although many Maguindanao live in or around the cities in the central Mindanao River basin—notably Maganoy, Datu Piang, Dinaig, and Buluan—most of the population maintains an agricultural livelihood. Wet-rice farming predominates. Aside from rice, corn (maize) and coconuts are among the most important crops.
Although the Maguindanao are strongly Muslim, their religion, like that of other Muslim groups of the southern Philippines, is notably infused with local tradition. For example, in addition to observing major Muslim holidays, such as the end of the fasting month of Ramadan, they hold various rituals and celebrations in conjunction with the agricultural cycle. Moreover, many Maguindanao recognize the presence of an array of natural spirits that interact with the human world. In some instances, a traditional shaman—rather then a Muslim imam—may be consulted to perform certain rites, such as exorcisms, that involve those spirits.
Many ceremonies and festivities are accompanied by some sort of music. Among the most emblematic of Maguindanao musical traditions is the kulintang percussion ensemble. The ensemble draws its name from its melodic centrepiece, a single row of seven or eight small horizontally suspended “pot gongs,” similar to those of the bonang in the Javanese gamelan of Indonesia. Other instruments of the ensemble include several larger, vertically suspended gongs—some with deep rims, some with narrow ones—as well as a tall single-headed drum. Kulintang sets constitute heirloom property, and ownership of such instruments has remained a traditional symbol of status. Both men and women may participate in the ensemble, and they often engage in spirited competition on the gong row. Aside from instrumental music, the Maguindanao perform a broad spectrum of vocal repertoire, ranging from songs related to the recitation of the Qurʾān to love songs and lullabies to epics and other narrative forms.
The Maguindanao are also distinguished in the realm of visual art. Historically, they have been renowned as metalworkers, producing the wavy-bladed kris ceremonial swords and other weapons, as well as gongs. Their woven mats and colourful fabrics—especially the malong tube skirts (similar to the sarongs of Malaysia and Indonesia)—are also admired throughout the region.
