Malay, Malay Orang Melayu (“Malay People”),  any member of an ethnic group of the Malay Peninsula and portions of adjacent islands of Southeast Asia, including the east coast of Sumatra, the coast of Borneo, and smaller islands that lie between these areas. The Malays speak various dialects belonging to the Austronesian (Malayo-Polynesian) family of languages.
The Malays were once probably a people of coastal Borneo who expanded into Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula as a result of their trading and seafaring way of life. That this expansion occurred only in the last 1,500 years or so is indicated by the fact that the languages of the Malay group are all still very much alike though very divergent from the languages of other peoples of Sumatra, Borneo, and other neighbouring lands. In the early 21st century the Malays constituted about half of the population of Peninsular Malaysia (West Malaysia) and about one-eighth of the population of East Malaysia (Sarawak and Sabah).
Malay culture has been strongly influenced by the cultures of other areas, including Thailand, Java, and Sumatra. The influence of Hindu India was historically very great. The Malays were largely Hinduized before they were converted to Islam in the 15th century.
Many Malays are rural people, living in villages rather than towns. Much of the Malay Peninsula is covered by jungle, and the villages, with populations from 50 to 1,000, are located along rivers and coasts or on roads. Traditional houses are built on pilings that raise them four to eight feet off the ground, with gabled roofs made of thatch; houses of the more affluent have plank floors and tile roofs. The principal food crop is rice from paddies, and rubber and palm oil are the main cash crops. The Malay Peninsula in the late 1970s produced more than two-fifths of the world’s supply of natural rubber, and by the early 21st century the region had become a top producer of palm oil.
Traditionally, Malay social organization was somewhat feudal, with a sharp division between nobility and commoners. The head of a village was a commoner, but the chief of the district, to whom the village head reported, was a member of the nobility. Since the late 20th century, however, the nobility has been replaced by appointed and elected officials subject to a parliament and other elected bodies, although class distinctions have persisted. With rapidly accelerating rural-to-urban migration, many Malays have left their villages to settle in cities, towns, and suburbs, where they now work in virtually every industry.
Marriages have traditionally been arranged by the parents. The typical household consists of the husband and wife and their children. Marriage and inheritance are governed by Sharīʿah (Islamic law).
The Malay religion is Sunni Islam of the Shāfiʿiyyah school. Muslim religious holidays are observed. Some Hindu ritual survives, as in the second part of the marriage ceremony and in various ceremonies of state. In some rural areas the Malays have also preserved some of their old beliefs in spirits of the soil and jungle, which are partly Hindu in origin; they often have recourse to traditional healers (bomohs) for the treatment of disease.
