Nūristāni, also called Nūri or Kāfir,  people of the Hindu Kush mountain area of Afghanistan and the Chitral area of Pakistan. Their territory, formerly called Kāfiristān, “Land of the Infidels,” was renamed Nūristān, “Land of Light” or “Enlightenment,” when the populace was forcibly converted to Islam from the local polytheistic religion by the Afghan emir ʿAbd al-Raḥmān  at the turn of the 20th century. The territory now forms part of the Afghan province of Nūristān. In the early 21st century, the total Nūristāni population was estimated to be more than 100,000, with the vast majority living in Afghanistan; just a few thousand lived in Pakistan.
The  Nūristāni languages belong to the Indo-Aryan subgroup of the Indo-Iranian branch of the Indo-European language family. The Nūristāni are nominally Sunni Muslims but continue many of their traditional ways dating from before their conquest by the Afghans in 1895–96.
Their earlier record was one of brigandage and plundering; they were, and still are, intensely loyal to their own people and strongly cherish their independence. They have a clan organization with village government and are now settled agriculturists. The region as a whole has a most distinctive culture, and although it is possible to establish certain cultural differences between the three main valleys, the Nūristāni share a culture which gives them a unique position within Afghanistan.
The houses in the highest northern regions are built of stone or clay, but in the forested regions they are mainly of wood, often (to save space) with multiple stories and arranged in steplike terraces on the mountain slopes. The small enclosed fields (often no bigger than an ordinary floor space), mostly lying in steep, narrow mountain valleys, are cultivated by the women, while the men hunt or tend livestock. The main crop is wheat, supplemented by barley, corn (maize), millet, and peas. Grapes and mulberries are grown in the lower areas. Livestock consists mainly of goats, with some cattle and a few sheep in the upper, wider valleys. There are no horses.
An early European account of the inhabitants of what is now Nūristān is given in George Scott Robertson’s The Kafirs of the Hindu Kush (1896), based on the author’s stay in the village of Kamdesh in 1890–91. The book’s publication coincided with the military offensive and forced conversion by ʿAbd al-Raḥmān. Remnants of the area’s pre-Islamic religion and culture have survived among the few thousand members of the Kalash ethnic group living in and around the city of Chitral, Pakistan.
