Abul Kalam Azad, original name Abul Kalam Ghulam Muhiyuddin, also called Maulana Abul Kalam Azad or Maulana Azad,  (born November 11, 1888, Mecca [now in Saudi Arabia]—died February 22, 1958, New Delhi, India), Islamic theologian who was one of the leaders of the Indian independence movement against British rule in the first half of the 20th century. He was highly respected throughout his life as a man of high moral integrity.
Azad was the son of an Indian Muslim scholar living in Mecca and his Arabic wife. The family moved back to India (Calcutta [now Kolkata]) when he was young, and he received a traditional Islamic education at home from his father and other Islamic scholars rather than at a madrasah (Islamic school). However, he was also influenced by the emphasis that Indian educator Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan placed on getting a well-rounded education, and he learned English without his father’s knowledge.
Azad became active in journalism when he was in his late teens, and in 1912 he began publishing a weekly Urdu-language newspaper in Calcutta, Al-Hilal (“The Crescent”). The paper quickly became highly influential in the Muslim community for its anti-British stance, notably for its criticism of Indian Muslims who were loyal to the British. Al-Hilal was soon banned by British authorities, as was a second weekly newspaper that he had started. By 1916 he had been banished to Ranchi (in present-day Jharkhand state), where he remained until the beginning of 1920. Back in Calcutta, he joined the Indian National Congress (Congress Party) and galvanized India’s Muslim community through an appeal to pan-Islamic ideals. He was particularly active in the short-lived Khilafat movement (1920–24), which defended the Ottoman sultan as the caliph (the head of the worldwide Muslim community) and even briefly enlisted the support of Mohandas K. Gandhi.
Azad and Gandhi became close, and Azad was involved in Gandhi’s various civil-disobedience (satyagraha) campaigns, including the Salt March (1930). He was imprisoned several times between 1920 and 1945, including for his participation in the anti-British Quit India campaign during World War II. Azad was president of the Congress Party in 1923 and again in 1940–46—though the party was largely inactive during much of his second term, since nearly all of its leadership was in prison.
After the war Azad was one of the Indian leaders who negotiated for Indian independence with the British. He tirelessly advocated for a single India that would embrace both Hindus and Muslims while strongly opposing the partition of British India into independent India and Pakistan. He later blamed both Congress Party leaders and Mohammed Ali Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan, for the ultimate division of the subcontinent. After the two separate countries were established, he served as minister of education in the Indian government of Jawaharlal Nehru from 1947 until his death. His autobiography, India Wins Freedom, was published posthumously in 1959. In 1992, decades after his death, Azad was awarded the Bharat Ratna, India’s highest civilian award.
