Alfried Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach, original name (until 1943) Alfried Von Bohlen Und Halbach,  (born Aug. 13, 1907, Essen, Ger.—died  July 30, 1967, Essen, W.Ger.), German industrialist, last member of the Krupp dynasty of munitions manufacturers.
Alfried Krupp was the son of Bertha Krupp, the heiress of the Krupp industrial empire, and Gustav Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach. Shortly after the outbreak of World War II it became evident that his father was drifting into senility. Alfried assumed his duties, and in 1943 Adolf Hitler issued an unprecedented decree, the Lex Krupp (“Krupp Law”), which, abolishing in this one case the laws of inheritance, preserved the firm as a family property. Alfried now assumed the name of Krupp and became the sole owner of his mother’s vast holdings.
Alfried augmented this empire by seizing property in every country conquered by Germany. Already, in 1943, his salesmen were exporting finished machine products from his new Ukrainian plants and selling them in Bulgaria, Turkey, and Romania. When financier Robert Rothschild refused to sign over his French holdings to Alfried, Rothschild was shipped to the Auschwitz concentration camp and gassed. It was incidents of this kind, together with his exploitation of slave labour, that put Alfried in the prisoners’ dock at the Nürnberg war-crimes trials after the war.
At first the victorious Allies, under the impression that Gustav had been in charge throughout the war, had indicted him. In fact, it was Alfried who had been the head of the family and the firm during the years when the inmates of 138 concentration camps worked for Krupp; Alfried who had built a fuse factory inside Auschwitz to take full advantage of prison labour; and Alfried who had Jewish prisoners at Auschwitz build a howitzer factory in Silesia.
The Nürnberg tribunal sentenced Alfried to 12 years in prison and ordered “forfeiture of all [his] property both real and personal.” Seven months after the outbreak of the Korean War (1950–53), however, John J. McCloy, U.S. high commissioner in American-occupied Germany, granted Alfried amnesty and restored all his holdings. Operating with tremendous skill and zeal, Alfried quickly restored the family firm to its former supremacy. By the early 1960s he was worth more than a billion dollars.
Alfried Krupp’s only son, Arndt, renounced his succession rights and his Krupp name. Thus, when Alfried died in 1967, the company went public, and the Krupp industrial family came to an end.
