Amphibious vehicle,  vehicle for transporting passengers and cargo that can operate on land and in water.
The earliest practical amphibious vehicles used wheels or tracks on land but had watertight hulls to navigate as boats in the water. Unlike landing craft, which were principally designed to deliver troops and equipment to shore before retiring to the sea, amphibious vehicles were capable of transporting and accompanying military forces as they advanced inland. Two principal types appeared during World War II: the LVT (“landing vehicle, tracked”), a tractor developed for the U.S. Marine Corps, and the “duck” (DUKW), an army-sponsored vehicle. The LVT resembled a tank, whereas the DUKW moved on rubber tires ashore and was propeller-driven when afloat. Each began its operational life as little more than a floating truck. The rigours of combat demonstrated the need for armour plating, however, and the LVT, with the addition of a 75-mm gun, became a true amphibious assault craft. Both vehicles played prominent roles in the island-hopping campaign in the Pacific, and the LVT, redesignated the Amphibious Assault Vehicle (AAV) in the 1980s, remained a staple in the U.S. Marine Corps arsenal into the 21st century. Although DUKWs saw action during the Korean War—particularly at the Inch’ŏn landing—many were sold as war surplus and subsequently restored by private collectors or used by tourism companies in waterfront cities such as London and Boston.
Air-cushion machines, such as the British Hovercraft, represented a unique class of amphibious vehicles. Hovercraft were used as English Channel ferries, although their utility declined after the opening of the Channel Tunnel in 1994. The military applications of a high-speed amphibious vehicle with an impressive load capacity were immediately apparent, however. The U.S. Navy took delivery of its first LCAC (“landing craft, air cushion”) in 1984, and 90 more would enter service over subsequent years. Although boasting lighter armament than the LVT and its descendants—its twin gun mounts could support light or heavy machine guns or 40-mm grenade launchers—the LCAC’s range and versatility made it a valuable tool for U.S. Navy and Marine Corps operations. Air-cushion vehicles also saw service in the navies of Japan, Russia, and India, and they were utilized as rescue and ice-breaking craft by the Canadian coast guard.
