bow and arrow,  a weapon consisting of a stave made of wood or other elastic material, bent and held in tension by a string. The arrow, a thin wooden shaft with a feathered tail, is fitted to the string by a notch in the end of the shaft and is drawn back until sufficient tension is produced in the bow so that when released it will propel the arrow. Arrowheads have been made of shaped flint, stone, metal, and other hard materials.
The origins of the bow and arrow are prehistoric; bone arrow points dating to 61,000 years ago have been found at Sibudu Cave in South Africa. The bow served as a primary military weapon from ancient times through the Middle Ages in the Mediterranean world and Europe and for an even longer period in China, Japan, and on the Eurasian steppes. In the climax of Homer’s Odyssey, Odysseus’s prowess with the bow is decisive in his combat with Penelope’s suitors. In the Old Testament, Ahab’s death is the result of an enemy arrow that “struck the king of Israel between the joints of harness.”
The armoured infantry of Greece and Rome generally disdained the bow but were nevertheless often beset by skillful enemy archers, especially those mounted on horseback. The Huns, Seljuq Turks, Mongols, and other peoples of the Eurasian steppes were particularly effective mounted archers, wielding powerful composite recurved bows made of thin laths of wood stiffened at the rear with strips of horn and strengthened at the front with glued-on layers of cattle sinew. Incredibly powerful, these were the most formidable missile weapons of mounted combat until the revolving pistol. In Europe it was the development of the crossbow, which had been known in ancient times but was perfected in the Middle Ages, and the English longbow, introduced to European battlefields in the 14th century, that made the arrow a formidable battlefield missile. The longbow, which seems to have originated in Wales, was as tall as a man and the arrow about half that length, the famous cloth-yard shaft. The bow was held with outstretched arm and the arrow drawn back to the bowman’s ear. An English archer could shoot six aimed shots a minute, and his effective range was about 200 yards, though an arrow could go twice as far in the right hands. The crossbow, in contrast, did not require the same physique or training. The crossbow consisted of a short bow mounted horizontally on a stock or tiller, with a sear and trigger to hold the string in drawn position, to be released on demand. Less accurate than the longbow or composite bow in skilled hands, crossbows were highly effective at short and medium range.
For many cultures, the bow’s importance in warfare has been secondary to its value as a hunting weapon. The North American Indians, the Eskimo, many African peoples, and others used either the regular bow or the crossbow in both hunting and war. Some ancient Japanese wooden bows are 8 feet (2.44 metres) in length; the Japanese also made smaller bows of horn or whalebone. Japanese bows and quivers (for holding the arrows) were often elaborately decorated and signed by the craftsman. The natives of the Andaman Islands, between the Andaman Sea and the Bay of Bengal, produced very large and broad bows. African bow makers generally produced small bows, partly because ranges in the African jungle were usually short. The Eskimo used composite bows of wood and bone backed by sinew, similar to most bows made in Asia. The American Indians’ bows were made either of wood or of wood backed by sinew. Bows have also been made of compositions of several materials, such as wood and horn or wood and metal. Modern composite bows are made of laminated wood, plastic, or fibreglass. Cable and pulleys on the modern compound bow increase accuracy and power. Many sport hunters prefer the bow to firearms; others hunt with both weapons.
The string, too, may be made of a variety of materials, the requisite being toughness. Bowstrings have exhibited an enormous range of variation in materials. The English longbow of the Middle Ages usually had a string of linen or hemp, but Turkish and Arab bows were strung with silk and mohair. Rattan, bamboo, vegetable fibre, and animal sinew or hide have served in many parts of the world.
Arrows have exhibited even greater variations. Usually the shaft is a single piece, but often two different materials, such as wood and metal, are combined; the arrowhead—of metal, stone, bone, or shell—may be affixed by socketing, cementing, or both. Fletches of feathers or of substitutes (leaf, pieces of leather or fur) are nearly always used to stabilize the arrow in flight; arrows with heavy foreshafts, however, may be unfeathered. See also archery.
