Caterpillar Inc., formerly (1925–86) Caterpillar Tractor Company,  major American manufacturer of earth-moving, construction, agricultural, and materials-handling equipment. Its headquarters are in Peoria, Illinois.
The Caterpillar Tractor Company had its origins in two California-based agricultural-equipment companies headed respectively by Charles Holt and Daniel Best in the late 19th century. By the 1890s both firms were making steam-driven wheeled tractors and harvesters to replace horse-drawn harvesting machines on large farms. Benjamin Holt, one of several brothers in the Holt Manufacturing Company, designed  a prototype of the familiar “caterpillar” tractor in about 1904 (a similar track-type tractor was also patented in 1904 by British engineer David Roberts). The Holt tractor ran on continuous metal-belted tracks instead of wheels, and the tracks kept the heavy vehicle from sinking in mud or dirt. The new machines were immediately successful as all-terrain haulers and graders, and the Holts opened a new manufacturing plant in Peoria, Illinois, the site of the firm’s future headquarters. During World War I British and American forces successfully used such treads on their armoured tanks, and the Holt firm prospered further by making thousands of (gasoline-powered) tractors that hauled supplies and ammunition for the Allies.
In 1925 the Holt Manufacturing Company merged with another tractor manufacturer, the C.L. Best Tractor Company, which had been founded by a son of Daniel Best. The new company was incorporated as the Caterpillar Tractor Company, and its headquarters moved to Peoria.
The company stayed afloat during the Great Depression partly by selling tractors and combines to the Soviet Union to facilitate that country’s first Five-Year Plan (1929–33). In 1931 Caterpillar perfected a tractor driven by a diesel engine rather than a gasoline one, and diesel engines soon became standard for all types of heavy-duty vehicles. During World War II, Caterpillar made the diesel engines that powered the Sherman (M4) tank. The firm’s tractor and truck sales skyrocketed after the war, when these machines were needed for reconstruction projects and the building of roads and dams in countries around the world. The name Caterpillar became practically synonymous with bulldozers during this period. The company experienced a series of labour conflicts with its unionized American workforce beginning in 1961, but its growth has continued. The firm adopted its current name in 1986.
Caterpillar Inc. now makes tractors, trucks, loaders, excavators, graders, scrapers, and other heavy machines used in agriculture, construction, mining, logging, and industrial warehousing. The company also makes diesel and gasoline engines for use in trucks, locomotives, ships and boats, and electricity-generating systems. More than one-half of the company’s sales are to customers outside of the United States.
