Chronograph,  an instrument which can be used to measure elapsed time in terms of split seconds, seconds, or minutes. In addition, some chronographs indicate day, month, year, and phases of the moon on separate dials or openings which are superimposed on the face of the timepiece.
A chronograph differs from conventional timepieces in that it performs a variety of functions other than just measuring mean time. One form of chronograph is the stopwatch commonly used in sporting events. Another type is the instrument used in aircraft to record elapsed flying time. This is accomplished by means of a button which the pilot pushes upon takeoff, setting the chronograph in motion. Upon landing, the button is pushed again, stopping the instrument. The actual elapsed time is shown on the dial in terms of hours, minutes, and split seconds.
Pilots can also use a chronograph as a navigational aid to determine ground speed. This is done by consulting two known points, either visually or by radio signal, and calculating the time needed to cover the distance. Stated another way, when time and distance are known factors, speed can be determined, or when speed and distance are known factors, time can be determined.
The first chronograph was invented in 1680 by English clock maker Daniel Quare. It was a form of repeating watch which sounded the hours when a lever was pushed. The first ones were called “squeeze watches” because the wearer had to push or squeeze a pin which protruded from the case. From this simple beginning came the alarm watch which could be set to ring a bell or buzzer at any predetermined time.
In addition to the above uses, there are chronographs for virtually every function where measurement of time is important. For example, one form of chronograph is often used by doctors and nurses to tell them at a glance how often the pulse is beating. Another type is used by manufacturers to determine the length of time it takes to produce parts. Advances in computer technology in the late 20th century saw digital chronographs assume many of the roles previously filled by analog chronographs.
