Churchill tank,  the most successful British tank used in World War II. In 1940, after the evacuation of the British Expeditionary Force from Dunkirk on the French coast, the British government commissioned Vauxhall Motors, Ltd., to design a new tank to replace the Matilda II, which had limited mobility and other deficiencies. The first Churchill model, the Mark I, was ready by June 1941 and entered large-scale production soon afterward. The Mark I was armed with a two-pounder gun in the turret and a 3-inch (76.2-mm) howitzer (artillery piece) mounted on the hull. Like subsequent Churchill models, the Mark I had good speed and turning ability, a robust suspension system, heavy armour plating, and a low silhouette. In the Mark II model, the three-inch howitzer on the hull was replaced by a machine gun.
From the time they entered service in mid-1942, the Mark I and II tended to be outgunned by German panzers (tanks), but their ability to climb hills served them well in the closing phases of the North African campaign. Faced with the need to upgrade their tank’s main armament, the British fitted the next model, the Mark III, with a six-pounder gun. Even this gun was barely adequate by 1943, when the Mark III entered service, so later versions of this model were fitted with a 75-mm (2.95-inch) gun.
The Mark IV closely resembled the Mark III, but its turret was welded rather than cast. The Mark IV was perhaps the most prolific Churchill tank and probably saw the most combat of any model. It was armed with either a six-pounder or a 75-mm gun. The tank weighed 39 tons, had a top speed of 27 km (17 miles) per hour, and a range of 145 km (90 miles). It was served by a crew of five and mounted two 7.92-mm machine guns in addition to its main gun. Its successor, the Mark V, was fitted with a 95-mm howitzer, but the Mark VI and VII returned to the format of the 75-mm gun. These later Churchills were still outgunned by their German counterparts, but their thick protective armour partly compensated for the inadequacy of their firepower.
Churchill tanks took part in the Normandy Invasion and the ensuing Allied campaign across northern France and Germany. Some were adapted to mount flame throwers, and the rugged Churchill chassis could also be fitted with equipment for mine sweeping, bridge laying, and other specialized tasks. A total of 5,640 Churchill tanks were manufactured, and some remained in service with the British army into the 1950s.
