Computerized typesetting,   method of typesetting in which characters are generated by computer and transferred to light-sensitive paper or film by means of either pulses from a laser beam or moving rays of light from a stroboscopic source or a cathode-ray tube (CRT). The system includes a keyboard that produces magnetic tape—or, formerly, punched paper—for input, a computer for making hyphenation and other end-of-line and page-makeup decisions, and a typesetting unit for output. The keyboard may be a counting keyboard, which allows the operator to decide placement and spacing and is suitable for tables, formulas, and equations, or a noncounting keyboard, which is faster and cheaper to operate and suitable for solid text.
The computer must be programmed carefully for optimal word spacing and correct hyphenation. Older typesetters have a photounit with an optical type font carried as a negative image or image master. It may be a grid, disk, drum, or film strip. Light flashed through the characters projects them through a lens onto light-sensitive paper or film. The optical systems are supplanted in newer equipment by laser beams that form the various parts of each character in response to computer-generated electric pulses.
Some systems have a video display terminal (VDT), consisting of a keyboard and a CRT viewing screen, that enables the operator to see and correct the words as they are being typed. If a system has a line printer, it can produce printouts of “hard copy.”
An optical character recognition (OCR) system “reads” typed copy and records the characters on a machine-readable tape. It converts the tape into electronic signals that enter the recognition unit and are converted into copy without an operator at the keyboard.
Photocomposition is perhaps the most important innovation in typesetting since the development of movable type; it and other forms of computerized typesetting eliminate metal casting and produce a page that is virtually indistinguishable from one produced by metal type. Its main advantage is speed. A linecasting machine produces 5 characters per second; an early phototypesetting system can set between 30 and 100. A fully computerized typesetter with sophisticated electronics can set up to 10,000 characters per second, the actual speed being limited by the speed of the film transport mechanism. See also photocomposition.
