Diode,  an electrical component that allows the flow of current in only one direction. In circuit diagrams, a diode is represented by a triangle with a line across one vertex.
The most common type of diode uses a p-n junction. In this type of diode, one material (n) in which electrons are charge carriers abuts a second material (p) in which holes (places depleted of electrons that act as positively charged particles) act as charge carriers. At their interface, a depletion region is formed across which electrons diffuse to fill holes in the p-side. This stops the further flow of electrons. When this junction is forward biased (that is, a positive voltage is applied to the p-side), electrons can easily move across the junction to fill the holes, and a current flows through the diode. When the junction is reverse biased (that is, a negative voltage is applied to the p-side), the depletion region widens and electrons cannot easily move across. The current remains very small until a certain voltage (the breakdown voltage) is reached and the current suddenly increases.
Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) are p-n junctions that emit light when a current flows through them. Several p-n junction diodes can be connected in series to make a rectifier (an electrical component that converts alternating current to direct current). Zener diodes have a well-defined breakdown voltage, so that current flows in the reverse direction at that voltage and a constant voltage can be maintained despite fluctuations in voltage or current.  In varactor (or varicap) diodes, varying the bias voltage causes a variation in the diode’s capacitance; these diodes have many applications for signal transmission and are used throughout the radio and television industries. (For more detail about these and other types of diodes, see semiconductor device.)
Early diodes were vacuum tubes, an evacuated glass or metal electron tube containing two electrodes—a negatively charged cathode and a positively charged anode. These were used as rectifiers and as detectors in electronic circuits such as radio and television receivers. When a positive voltage is applied to the anode (or plate), electrons emitted from the heated cathode flow to the plate and return to the cathode through an external power supply. If a negative voltage is applied to the plate, electrons cannot escape from the cathode, and no plate current flows. Thus, a diode permits electrons to flow from cathode to plate but not from plate to cathode. If an alternating voltage is applied to the plate, current flows only during the time when the plate is positive. The alternating voltage is said to be rectified, or converted to direct current.
