Ecological validity,  in psychology, a measure of how test performance predicts behaviours in real-world settings. Although test designs and findings in studies characterized by low ecological validity cannot be generalized to real-life situations, those characterized by high ecological validity can be. The usefulness of ecological validity as a concept, however, has been much debated, with some questioning the importance of psychological realism (that is, how much processes appearing in the experiment mirror those in everyday life).
Although no universally agreed-upon definition of ecological validity exists, the term often refers to the relationship between phenomena in the real world and their manifestation in experimental settings. A deeper understanding of the concept can be achieved by analyzing its three dimensions: the test environment, the stimuli under examination, and the behavioral response of the study participants.
In psychological assessment, controlled test environments are designed to reduce distractions, confusion, and fatigue so the participants can provide their “best performance.” Historically, to avoid misdiagnosing brain pathology, for example, evaluating a client’s best performance was crucial. However, because neuropsychologists were then asked to predict clients’ functioning in real-world settings, the ecological validity of the traditional laboratory test environment was called into question. Controlled environments often affect a study, and test findings that score low in ecological validity may occur because the participants become aware that they are taking part in an experiment.
Unlike laboratory testing situations, the natural world typically does not provide a quiet, supportive, distraction-reduced environment. Studies whose findings demonstrate high ecological validity often occur in more natural settings—that is, environments with features that are more familiar to the participants or settings that mask part or all of the participants’ perception that an experiment is taking place. Many referral questions posed to neuropsychologists call for the development of testing environments that more closely approximate crucial features of real-world settings.
Evaluating ecological validity requires comparing stimuli used during testing to those encountered in daily life. Cognitive studies routinely employ abstract or arbitrary stimuli, such as using paired colours to establish stimulus-response rules, that bear very little resemblance to real-world elements. Such studies often return results with low ecological validity. On the other hand, naturally occurring stimuli (such as images and sounds) increase ecological validity.
Another important dimension of ecological validity is assuring that the elicited behavioral responses represent someone’s natural behaviours and are appropriately related to the construct being measured. For example, in a simulator assessment of driving, a study in which a participant drove with a steering wheel would have more ecological validity than one in which the participant drove by moving the cursor of a computer with a mouse. The more the response approximates the criterion, the greater the ecological validity.
The two main methods of establishing ecological validity are veridicality and verisimilitude. Veridicality is the degree to which test scores correlate with measures of real-world functioning, and verisimilitude is the degree to which tasks performed during testing resemble those performed in daily life. Both approaches are not without their limitations. One limitation of the veridicality approach is that the outcome measures selected for comparison with the traditional neuropsychological test may not accurately represent the client’s everyday functioning. Some limitations of the verisimilitude approach include the cost of creating new tests and the reluctance of clinicians to put those new tests into practice.
Ecological validity is a controversial concept in psychological research. The lack of agreement among researchers concerning the concept’s definition and value has prevented the development of standardized measures that can be applied to all studies. Comparing across ecological validity research studies is also challenging because of the wide variety of neuropsychological tests used and populations assessed.
Mixed results in current ecological validity literature may be a result of using inappropriate outcome measures. There is some disagreement as to which tests appropriately measure various cognitive constructs, and test results that appear ecologically valid to one researcher may appear arbitrary or ecologically invalid to another. Consequently, variable test selection, population effects, and a dearth of standardized outcome measures limit ecological validity research.
However, the continued pursuit of ecological validity is considered worthwhile. More directed hypotheses attempting to delineate the relationship between particular cognitive constructs and specific everyday abilities involving those constructs may increase the ecological validity of neuropsychological tests. In addition, the development of virtual environments may be one solution that allows the researcher to bridge the gap between events occurring in the study and those occurring in the real world while maintaining control over the experiment. Alternatively, some researchers have also called for an approach that emphasizes the ecological validity of some dimensions at the expense of others, depending upon the study.
