Exposure meter, also called light meter,  photographic auxiliary device that measures the intensity of light and indicates proper exposure (i.e., the combination of aperture and shutter speed) for film or image sensors of a specific sensitivity. Traditional exposure meters are separate handheld devices, though almost every modern camera, both film and digital, comes with a built-in meter.
Older light meters were of the self-generating, or photovoltaic, type, in which a selenium element converted the incoming light directly into an electric current. A microammeter measured this current and was calibrated to indicate the intensity of the light. Exposure was then set by adjusting dials to control aperture opening and shutter speed, taking into consideration the specific sensitivity of the film.
Selenium cells had to be relatively large in order to display adequate sensitivity to light, and eventually they were abandoned in favour of instruments of the variable resistance, or photoconductive, type. In those meters the light-sensitive element, sometimes a cadmium sulfide cell but most often consisting of silicon photodiodes, is connected to a battery-powered circuit and changes its electrical resistance with variations in the light intensity. The change in current is measured by a milliammeter calibrated to read light intensity. Handheld meters measure incident light (light that illuminates the subject of the photography) as well as reflected light (light reflected from the subject and picked up by the camera). Qualities of light other than intensity can be measured, such as colour composition. Some sensors are capable of scanning a small spot, and some can be used to measure the intensity of flashes.
Exposure meters incorporated into cameras measure reflected but not incident light. In some meters, the light-sensitive element is set on the exterior of the camera, but in other cameras, particularly single-lens reflex (SLR) cameras, they are set internally. The latter meters are of the “through-the-lens” (TTL) type, reading light as it is focused by the camera’s lens and strikes the film or sensor. Many of the capabilities of handheld meters are found in built-in meters. Exposure correction can be done either semiautomatically or automatically. In a semiautomatic model, the operator adjusts the aperture and shutter speed until the camera’s display indicates a correct exposure. In fully automatic cameras, the exposure is corrected by the camera mechanism itself.
