Foil,  a sword with a light, flexible blade of rectangular cross section tapering to a blunt point. It was designed as a practice weapon for the smallsword fashionable in the 17th century and is now used primarily in the sport of fencing.
The modern fencing foil has a maximum overall length of 110 cm (3 feet 7 inches) and a maximum weight of 500 grams (about 17.5 ounces), although it is usually lighter for greater speed of movement. The blade is of finely tempered steel up to 90 cm (2 feet 11 1/2 inches) long, with a usually circular handguard up to 12 cm in diameter.
There are two principal forms: the French, with a plain, slightly curved handle, and the Italian, with a crossbar about 5 cm behind the guard and a strap that binds the weapon to the wrist. The Italian foil provides a somewhat stronger grip, whereas the French gives greater freedom of action to the fingers and wrist.
The foil was the first weapon used in international competition by both men and women. In contests, touches must be made with the point on a target that includes the trunk from the top of the collar to the groin lines in front and to a line across the top of the hips in back. The target for both women and men has been the same since 1960. A retreat of more than 4 metres (13 feet) also scores a touch against the defender. Other touches are foul but incur no penalty other than stopping the action and voiding any touches made between the time of the foul and resumption of the match.
An attacker generally has the right-of-way, and the defender must parry, or neutralize, the attack before making a counterattack (riposte). A double touch is scored for the fencer who has the right-of-way. An electrical scoring apparatus was adopted for international events in 1956, but judges still rule on right-of-way.
The first to score either 5 or 15 touches (depending on the scoring system of the bout) against an opponent is the winner.
Fencing with the foil has long been a standard international event. Individual foil for men is one of the few sports that was held at every modern Olympic Games; team competition began in 1904. Olympic medals were awarded to women at individual foil from 1924 and at team foil from 1960.
