Gas-turbine engine,  any internal-combustion engine employing a gas as the working fluid used to turn a turbine. The term also is conventionally used to describe a complete internal-combustion engine consisting of at least a compressor, a combustion chamber, and a turbine.
Useful work or propulsive thrust can be obtained from a gas-turbine engine. It may drive a generator, pump, or propeller or, in the case of a pure jet aircraft engine, develop thrust by accelerating the turbine exhaust flow through a nozzle. Large amounts of power can be produced by such an engine that, for the same output, is much smaller and lighter than a reciprocating internal-combustion engine. Reciprocating engines depend on the up-and-down motion of a piston, which must then be converted to rotary motion by a crankshaft arrangement, whereas a gas turbine delivers rotary shaft power directly. Although conceptually the gas-turbine engine is a simple device, the components for an efficient unit must be carefully designed and manufactured from costly materials because of the high temperatures and stresses encountered during operation. Thus, gas-turbine engine installations are usually limited to large units where they become cost-effective.
Most gas turbines operate on an open cycle in which air is taken from the atmosphere, compressed in a centrifugal or axial-flow compressor, and then fed into a combustion chamber. Here, fuel is added and burned at an essentially constant pressure with a portion of the air. Additional compressed air, which is bypassed around the burning section and then mixed with the very hot combustion gases, is required to keep the combustion chamber exit (in effect, the turbine inlet) temperature low enough to allow the turbine to operate continuously. If the unit is to produce shaft power, the combustion products (mostly air) are expanded in the turbine to atmospheric pressure. Most of the turbine output is required to operate the compressor; only the remainder is available to supply shaft work to a generator, pump, or other device. In a jet engine the turbine is designed to provide just enough output to drive the compressor and auxiliary devices. The stream of gas then leaves the turbine at an intermediate pressure (above local atmospheric pressure) and is fed through a nozzle to produce thrust.
An idealized gas-turbine engine operating without any losses on this simple Brayton cycle is considered first. If, for example, air enters the compressor at 15° C and atmospheric pressure and is compressed to one megapascal, it then absorbs heat from the fuel at a constant pressure until the temperature reaches 1,100° C prior to expansion through the turbine back to atmospheric pressure. This idealized unit would require a turbine output of 1.68 kilowatts for each kilowatt of useful power with 0.68 kilowatt absorbed to drive the compressor. The thermal efficiency of the unit (net work produced divided by energy added through the fuel) would be 48 percent.
If for a unit operating between the same pressure and temperature limits the compressor and the turbine are only 80 percent efficient (i.e., the work of an ideal compressor equals 0.8 times the actual work, while the actual turbine output is 0.8 times the ideal output), the situation changes drastically even if all other components remain ideal. For every kilowatt of net power produced, the turbine must now produce 2.71 kilowatts while the compressor work becomes 1.71 kilowatts. The thermal efficiency drops to 25.9 percent. This illustrates the importance of highly efficient compressors and turbines. Historically it was the difficulty of designing efficient compressors, even more than efficient turbines, that delayed the development of the gas-turbine engine. Modern units can have compressor efficiencies of 86–88 percent and turbine efficiencies of 88–90 percent at design conditions.
Efficiency and power output can be increased by raising the turbine-inlet temperature. All materials lose strength at very high temperatures, however, and since turbine blades travel at high speeds and are subject to severe centrifugal stresses, turbine-inlet temperatures above 1,100° C require special blade cooling. It can be shown that for every maximum turbine-inlet temperature there is also an optimum pressure ratio. Modern aircraft gas turbines with blade cooling operate at turbine-inlet temperatures above 1,370° C and at pressure ratios of about 30:1.
In aircraft gas-turbine engines attention must be paid to weight and diameter size. This does not permit the addition of more equipment to improve performance. Accordingly, commercial aircraft engines operate on the simple Brayton cycle idealized above. These limitations do not apply to stationary gas turbines where components may be added to increase efficiency. Improvements could include (1) decreasing compression work by intermediate cooling, (2) increasing turbine output by reheating after partial expansion, or (3) decreasing fuel consumption by regeneration.
The first improvement would involve compressing air at nearly constant temperature. Although this cannot be achieved in practice, it can be approximated by intercooling (i.e., by compressing the air in two or more steps and water-cooling it between steps back to its initial temperature). Cooling decreases the volume of air to be handled and, with it, the compression work required.
The second improvement involves reheating the air after partial expansion through a high-pressure turbine in a second set of combustion chambers before feeding it into a low-pressure turbine for final expansion. This process is similar to the reheating used in a steam turbine.
Both approaches require considerable additional equipment and are used less frequently than the third improvement. Here, the hot exhaust gases from the turbine are passed through a heat exchanger, or regenerator, to increase the temperature of the air leaving the compressor prior to combustion. This reduces the amount of fuel needed to reach the desired turbine-inlet temperature. The increase in efficiency is, however, tied to a large increase in initial cost and will be economical only for units that are run almost continuously.
