Gasoline engine,  any of a class of internal-combustion engines that generate power by burning a volatile liquid fuel (gasoline or a gasoline mixture such as ethanol) with ignition initiated by an electric spark. Gasoline engines can be built to meet the requirements of practically any conceivable power-plant application, the most important being passenger automobiles, small trucks and buses, general aviation aircraft, outboard and small inboard marine units, moderate-sized stationary pumping, lighting plants, machine tools, and power tools. Four-stroke gasoline engines power the vast majority of automobiles, light trucks, medium-to-large motorcycles, and lawn mowers. Two-stroke gasoline engines are less common, but they are used for small outboard marine engines and in many handheld landscaping tools such as chain saws, hedge trimmers, and leaf blowers.
Gasoline engines can be grouped into a number of types depending on several criteria, including their application, method of fuel management, ignition, piston-and-cylinder or rotor arrangement, strokes per cycle, cooling system, and valve type and location. In this section they are described within the context of two basic engine types: piston-and-cylinder engines and rotary engines. In a piston-and-cylinder engine the pressure produced by combustion of gasoline creates a force on the head of a piston that moves the length of the cylinder in a reciprocating, or back-and-forth, motion. This force drives the piston away from the head of the cylinder and performs work. The rotary engine, also called the Wankel engine, does not have conventional cylinders fitted with reciprocating pistons. Instead, the gas pressure acts on the surfaces of a rotor, causing the rotor to turn and thus perform work.
Most gasoline engines are of the reciprocating piston-and-cylinder type. The essential components of the piston-and-cylinder engine are shown in the figure. Almost all engines of this type follow either the four-stroke cycle or the two-stroke cycle.
Of the different techniques for recovering the power from the combustion process, the most important so far has been the four-stroke cycle, a conception first developed in the late 19th century. The four-stroke cycle is illustrated in the figure. With the inlet valve open, the piston first descends on the intake stroke. An ignitable mixture of gasoline vapour and air is drawn into the cylinder by the partial vacuum thus created. The mixture is compressed as the piston ascends on the compression stroke with both valves closed. As the end of the stroke is approached, the charge is ignited by an electric spark. The power stroke follows, with both valves still closed and the gas pressure, due to the expansion of the burned gas, pressing on the piston head or crown. During the exhaust stroke the ascending piston forces the spent products of combustion through the open exhaust valve. The cycle then repeats itself. Each cycle thus requires four strokes of the piston—intake, compression, power, and exhaust—and two revolutions of the crankshaft.
A disadvantage of the four-stroke cycle is that only half as many power strokes are completed as in the two-stroke cycle (see below) and only half as much power can be expected from an engine of a given size at a given operating speed. The four-stroke cycle, however, provides more positive clearing out of exhaust gases (scavenging) and reloading of the cylinders, reducing the loss of fresh charge to the exhaust.
