Georg Jensen,  (born August 31, 1866, Raadvad, Denmark—died October 2, 1935, Copenhagen), Danish silversmith and designer who achieved international prominence for his commercial application of modern metal design. The simple elegance of his works and their emphasis on fine craftsmanship, hallmarks of Jensen’s products, are recognized around the world.
Jensen was apprenticed to a goldsmith at age 14. His artistic talents were briefly focused on sculpture, but he returned to metalwork, primarily jewelry and silver pieces, produced in the workshop he opened in Copenhagen in 1904. Jensen exhibited his works at several major foreign exhibitions (winning a gold medal at the Brussels Exhibition of 1910) and quickly built a reputation as an outstanding and highly original silversmith. He moved to a larger workshop in 1912 and acquired his first factory building in 1919.
Jensen’s silverware achieved immediate popularity and commercial success. He was, in fact, the first silvermaker to realize a profit from the manufacture of modern silver. Until Jensen’s time virtually all successful silverware producers had relied on a standard repertory of popular traditional designs. Jensen, however, found that the market for his sleek, simple pieces was larger than anyone had predicted. His firm grew rapidly, expanding throughout Europe and opening branches in London and New York City. On both continents Jensen’s work set trends for contemporary tableware. He was among the first designers to fashion steel—formerly considered fit only for low-quality, inexpensive flatware—into handsome, serviceable cutlery.
By 1935 the firm had branches all over the world and carried more than 3,000 patterns in open stock. Out of fairness to his customers, Jensen refused to discontinue old patterns, a practice common among manufacturers of fine silver and tableware. After his death the business was carried on by his son, Søren Georg Jensen. In 1973 the company became part of the Royal Scandinavia Group.
