Hard-target munition, also called hardened target munition or penetrating munition,  ammunition capable of damaging and destroying reinforced targets such as tanks and hardened underground bunkers. Such munitions are specially designed to cause more-serious internal damage to such targets than that caused by standard conventional munitions. Hard-target munitions come in a variety of forms, including artillery shells, bombs, rockets, and missiles.
The earliest penetrating munitions were developed in rudimentary form during World War II. Allied forces used powerful “bouncing bombs” that skipped across the surface of waterways and over torpedo netting to penetrate the concrete structures of dams in Germany’s Ruhr region in 1943. By collapsing the dams, the Allies hoped to flood important industrial and agricultural areas, hampering Germany’s war effort. Although the bombs did breach some dams, the predicted widespread damage did not occur.
Modern penetrating munitions awaited technological developments, such as laser guidance, that allowed for more-precise targeting and better penetration of hard surfaces, thereby increasing their effectiveness during conflict. Tungsten, a very hard metal, has been used since the late 1950s in hard-target munitions. Since the late 1970s, penetrating artillery and armour-piercing rounds have used depleted uranium, an extremely dense radioactive material that burns through armour, rather than deforms, as it penetrates.
Penetrating artillery shells and antitank weapons typically consist of a long thin rod called a fléchette surrounded by a casing (or sabot) that allows the round to fit into the barrel of the firing weapon. After the round is fired, the sabot falls away, and the fléchette continues to the target. Upon impact, the nose of the fléchette splits in a way that allows it to remain sharp. The energy released at impact disintegrates the fléchette as it bores through the surface of the target. That disintegration creates a hot ball of dust and gas that ignites upon contact with the air inside the vehicle, killing its crew and igniting the ammunition and fuel.
Another type of hard-target munition is the so-called bunker-buster bomb. Like penetrating shells, the bunker buster has a long narrow body. The bunker buster is loaded with explosives and equipped with a fuse that delays its explosion until after the bomb has penetrated its target. More-complicated weaponry can even count the number of floors in a building or bunker that it has penetrated and, after a specified number, detonate the explosives. Because it is dropped from an extremely high altitude, a bunker buster must be laser-guided to its target. Bunker busters were used by the United States extensively during the Afghanistan War (2001– ) and the Iraq War (2003–11).
