Home appliance, also called Household Appliance,  any of numerous and varied electric, electromechanical, or gas-powered devices introduced mainly in the 20th century to save labour and time in the household. Collectively, their effect on industrial society has been to eliminate the drudgery and drastically reduce the time long associated with housekeeping and homemaking. Home appliances have had little or no effect outside the world’s urban communities, but within these communities they have had a profound, even revolutionary, impact in social and economic terms. These devices have, for example, facilitated the establishment of single-person households; in two-parent families, they have enabled both parents to enter the labour market and have otherwise freed large amounts of time and energy that homemakers formerly devoted to preparing food and to laundering, house cleaning, and general housework. Hence, a further result has been the greatly diminished employment of persons engaged in domestic service. The trend toward using automatic and powered household implements to ease basic housekeeping chores, once established, soon extended into such additional fields as personal hygiene and grooming.
Efforts to take cooking away from the hearth and onto the stove—which was essentially a space heater and not a food cooker well into the 19th century—probably foreshadowed the housework revolution. Heating stoves were produced with holes whose covers could be removed and into which pots of various sizes could be set to boil. Finally, an effective cooking stove appeared by 1815. It burned wood on a contained hearth and had an iron top above with covered holes for pots. A fire door opened beside the hearth. Improvements flowed steadily thereafter, including an oven—first above the stove top but eventually located beneath it—and a grate that could be shaken to clear ashes. Later, a reservoir was added opposite the firebox to heat and store domestic water. Such stoves continue to be made in small quantities for use in remote or frontier situations, but by 1840 in England and 1860 in the United States, illuminating gas had come into use for cooking and a new kind of stove, or cooker in Britain, had begun its evolution into the modern gas range. Advances in the thermostat throughout the 19th century enabled the development of effective temperature controls for ovens. Kerosene stoves were created about 1875 and later modified for other liquid fuels, including gasoline. The electric range, experimented with very early in the 19th century, became popular in the 1930s and thereafter competed steadily with the gas range. Refinements of both these ranges included increasingly versatile timers to start and end cooking automatically at preselected times; double ovens; overhead or under-stove vents with fans to filter or eject fumes; and such special cooking elements as stockpots, rotisseries, deep fryers, griddles, and broilers with beds of ceramic coals to supply the flavour of charcoal-broiled meats. Range tops or cooking surfaces can be installed separately in counters or cabinets, and ovens can be set in walls, with or without the fireplace from which they sprang. In short, the stove has been automated so that a meal can be cooked in the absence of the cook and so that electricity will do tedious chores such as turning spits and even cleaning the oven.
Whereas the electric stove generates heat through the resistance of iron wire to the passage of electric current, later developments in cooker design apply various forms of electromagnetic radiation. An infrared cooker, used mainly in commercial applications and especially to keep cooked foods warm, employs an infrared lamp; the unit must be housed in red glass that filters the radiation, thus confining it to the implement. The ability of radio-frequency radiation to heat food quickly without heating the surrounding area had long been noted in various radiation experiments. This potential was harnessed in the development of the microwave oven, which became widely popular from the early 1970s, at first commercially, then in homes. It is particularly valued for its speed in cooking any food, especially quick-frozen food.
The electric hot plate was one offshoot of early electric-cooking experiments that had a continuing life of its own, and it helped spawn a bewildering variety of specialized small appliances—each with an electric heating element and a food container—including electric skillets, griddles, pancake and waffle irons, woks, stockpots, grills, toasters, coffee makers (percolator, drip, and espresso), and warming trays.
Automatic refrigerators, thermostatically controlled and operating either on electric power or on gas, became popular in the 1930s. With this, the householder’s obligation to remain at home to greet the iceman every day vanished, ending a reliance on manually recharged ice boxes that went back at least 3,000 years to the Chinese practice of storing ice in caves to preserve foods. The new age and the development of quick-frozen foods quickly led to home use of combination refrigerator-freezers that could maintain freezer-compartment temperatures as cold as 15° F (-9° C)—cold enough to keep quick-frozen foods for weeks or months. This led, in turn, to the separate chest-type freezer that often could maintain temperatures as low as 0° F (-18° C) and that could safely quick-freeze properly treated fresh foods for frozen storage. Upright, cabinet-style freezers followed, and by 1937 home freezers had become an important element in the marketplace.
Virtually as soon as fractional-horsepower electric motors were developed, they were used to power such utensils as kitchen meat grinders and eggbeaters, leading to electric cake mixers, blenders, and, by the 1970s, to food processors versatile enough to knead dough, puree or liquefy vegetables, grate cheese, chop nuts or salad greens, grind meat, beat eggs, and perform many other culinary chores. Electric can openers, some of which came with knife-and scissor-sharpening capabilities, replaced manual can openers in many homes. An electric motor now turned the formerly hand-powered ice cream freezer. Reciprocating electric knives or rotary-bladed slicers could subtract tedium from the undemanding chores of slicing bread or meat. Food wastes could be chopped into mush and washed down kitchen drains by automatic waste disposers, and solid refuse could be compressed to a fraction of its volume and baled in trash compactors. Automatic electric dishwashers could be programmed by push button to follow any desired cycle to wash, rinse, and dry a large load of dishes, with or without pre-soaking, in one unattended hour.
