Hurricane,  British single-seat fighter aircraft manufactured by Hawker Aircraft, Ltd., in the 1930s and ’40s. The Hurricane was numerically the most important British fighter during the critical early stages of World War II, sharing victory laurels with the Supermarine Spitfire in the Battle of Britain (1940–41) and the defense of Malta (1941–42). Hurricanes served in all theatres of war where British forces were engaged.
The Hurricane emerged from efforts by Sydney Camm, Hawker’s chief designer, to develop a high-performance monoplane fighter and from a March 1935 Air Ministry requirement calling for an unprecedented heavy armament of eight wing-mounted 0.303-inch (7.7-mm) machine guns. Designed around a 1,200-horsepower, 12-cylinder, in-line Rolls-Royce engine soon to be dubbed the Merlin, the Hurricane was an evolutionary development of earlier Camm designs, notably the Fury biplane fighter. A low-wing monoplane with retractable landing gear, the Hurricane, aside from its clean lines and heavy armament, was a conventional design. Its wings, rear fuselage, and tail surfaces were covered by fabric, though the fabric wing-covering soon gave way to aluminum.
The first Royal Air Force (RAF) fighter capable of exceeding 300 miles (480 km) per hour in level flight, the plane had excellent flight characteristics.
Hurricanes began entering squadron service in late 1937, and some 500 were on hand when Germany invaded Poland in September 1939. Hurricanes bore the brunt of air-to-air fighting in the Battle of France (May–June 1940), and Hurricanes equipped 30 squadrons (to 19 Spitfire squadrons) at the start of the Battle of Britain. The Hurricane I, the version that fought the battle, had a maximum speed of 330 miles (530 km) per hour (though in practice this could be as low as 305 miles [490 km] per hour) and a ceiling of 36,000 feet (10,980 metres). Slower than the Spitfire, the Hurricane fought at a disadvantage to the German Bf 109 in climb and dive but proved to be a potent bomber destroyer, the concentrated fire of its eight machine guns literally sawing Luftwaffe bombers in half on occasion. In addition, the Hurricane was a forgiving aircraft to fly; this and its wide-set landing gear minimized landing accidents. Finally, the Hurricane’s conventional construction lent itself to speedy repair of battle damage, and shot-up Hurricanes returning quickly to service made an appreciable contribution to victory.
Later models of the Hurricane exploited the steadily increasing power of the Merlin engine to carry heavier armament, so that, though it was superseded as a front-line interceptor by 1941, it remained a capable fighter-bomber. The Hurricane II was built in two main variants, one mounting no fewer than 12 0.303-inch machine guns in the wings and the other mounting four 0.8-inch (20-mm) automatic cannons. Hurricanes were equipped with sand filters for service in the North African desert and with tail hooks and strengthened empennages for duty as Sea Hurricane carrier-fighters. Fitted with underwing bomb shackles, Hurricane fighter-bombers served in North Africa and remained in front-line service in Burma (Myanmar) and India through war’s end. Later versions were modified to carry launching rails for air-to-ground rockets; some carried a pair of underwing 1.6-inch (40-mm) cannons. Perhaps the most bizarre use of Hurricanes was as “Hurricats,” launched by rocket-powered catapult from merchant ships on one-way missions to defend North Atlantic convoys from German patrol bombers.
Hurricanes were exported in small numbers to Belgium, Yugoslavia, Romania, and Turkey. More than 14,000 planes were manufactured before production was halted in 1944, some 1,400 of them by the Canadian Car & Foundry Company. In the dark days of early 1942, Hurricanes were exported to the Soviet Union, and RAF Hurricane units actually served for a brief time with the Red Air Force in the far north. Hurricanes were credited with shooting down more than 1,500 Luftwaffe aircraft in the critical first year of the war, a total barely exceeded by all other British aircraft combined.
