Induction coil,  an electrical device for producing an intermittent source of high voltage. An induction coil consists of a central cylindrical core of soft iron on which are wound two insulated coils: an inner or primary coil, having relatively few turns of copper wire, and a surrounding secondary coil, having a large number of turns of thinner copper wire. An interrupter is used for making and breaking the current in the primary coil automatically. This current magnetizes the iron core and produces a large magnetic field throughout the induction coil.
The principle of operation of the induction coil was given in 1831 by Michael Faraday. Faraday’s law of induction showed that if the magnetic field through a coil is changed an electromotive force is induced whose value depends on the time rate of change of magnetic field through the coil. This induced electromotive force is always, by Lenz’s law, in such a direction as to oppose the change in the magnetic field.
When a current in the primary coil is started, induced electromotive forces are created in both the primary and secondary coils. The opposing electromotive force in the primary coil causes the current to rise gradually to its maximum value. Thus when the current starts, the time rate of change of the magnetic field and the induced voltage in the secondary coil are relatively small. On the other hand, when the primary current is interrupted, the magnetic field is reduced rapidly and a relatively large voltage is produced in the secondary coil. This voltage, which may reach several tens of thousands of volts, lasts only for a very short time during which the magnetic field is changing. Thus an induction coil produces a large voltage lasting for a short time and a small reverse voltage lasting a much longer time. The frequency of these changes is determined by the frequency of the interrupter.
After Faraday’s discovery, many improvements were made on the induction coil. In 1853 the French physicist Armand-Hippolyte-Louis Fizeau placed a capacitor across the interrupter, thus breaking the primary current much more rapidly. Methods for winding the secondary coil were greatly improved by Heinrich Daniel Ruhmkorff (1851) in Paris, by Alfred Apps in London, and by Friedrich Klingelfuss in Basel, who was able to obtain sparks in air about 150 cm (59 inches) long. There are various kinds of interrupters. For the small induction coils a mechanical one is attached to the coil, while the larger coils use a separate device such as a mercury jet interrupter or the electrolytic interrupter invented by Arthur Wehnelt in 1899.
Induction coils were used to provide the high voltage for electrical discharges in gases at low pressure and as such were instrumental in the discovery of cathode rays and X-rays in the early 20th century. Another form of induction coil is the Tesla coil, which generates high voltages at high frequencies. The larger induction coils used with X-ray tubes were displaced by the transformer-rectifier as a source of voltage. In the 21st century smaller induction coils remained in widespread use as a crucial component in the ignition systems of gasoline engines.
