John Erik Jonsson,  (born Sept. 6, 1901, Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.—died  Aug. 31, 1995, Dallas, Texas), American corporate executive under whose management Texas Instruments Inc. became a leading electronics manufacturer. He also served as mayor of Dallas, Texas, from 1964 to 1971.
A graduate of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (Troy, N.Y.), Jonsson worked in the 1920s for the Aluminum Company of America and the Dumont Motor Car Co. In 1930 he was appointed the laboratory superintendent for an oil-exploration company, Geophysical Service, Inc. He became a vice president there in 1942 and steered the company into the field of electronics after World War II. In 1951 he became president of the company, whose name was changed to Texas Instruments Inc. that year.
In 1952 Texas Instruments was licensed by the American Telephone & Telegraph Company to make transistors. The company began making high-frequency germanium transistors for military and industrial computers. By 1954 Texas Instruments’ laboratories, under the direction of Gordon Teal, had developed the world’s first commercial silicon transistors. These quickly found use in the world’s first small, inexpensive transistor radios, which were coproduced by Texas Instruments and another firm. The invention of the silicon transistor was a crucial breakthrough in the electronics industry.
In 1958, the year Jonsson relinquished the presidency and became chairman of the board, a company engineer named Jack Kilby came up with the idea for the world’s first integrated circuit, or chip, which Texas Instruments put into commercial production in 1960. Texas Instruments went on to become one of the world’s major producers of semiconductor chips, microcomputers, and handheld calculators.
In 1966 Jonsson gave up his chairmanship and became semiretired. In 1964 he had been asked to serve the remaining year of Earle Cabell’s term as mayor of Dallas when Cabell resigned to run for the U.S. Congress. Jonsson accepted and was reelected three times, serving as mayor for a total of seven years. Under his leadership the city of Dallas recovered from its stigma as the site of President John F. Kennedy’s assassination and experienced an economic boom. Jonsson led in the creation of the Dallas–Fort Worth Regional Airport Board (opened 1973) and the University of Texas at Dallas, and he also sponsored an extensive highway-building program for the city.
