Lidar,  technique for determining the distance to an object by transmitting a laser beam, usually from an airplane, at the object and measuring the time the light takes to return to the transmitter. The word lidar is derived from light detection and ranging.
The first attempts to measure distance by light beams were made in the 1930s with searchlights that were used to study the structure of the atmosphere. In 1938, light pulses were used to determine the heights of clouds. After the invention of the laser in 1960, lidar was first done using airplanes as the platform for the laser beam. However, it was not until the arrival of commercially available Global Positioning System (GPS) equipment and inertial measurement units (IMUs) in the late 1980s that accurate lidar data were possible.
In a typical lidar system, a laser points downward from the bottom of an airplane and flashes as many as 400,000 pulses per second at the ground. Usually a laser that emits in the near-infrared is used. The pulse is then reflected to a receiver on the airplane. Pulses are received either as single returns, in which all the transmitted light is reflected from a uniform surface such as the ground, or as multiple returns, in which, for example, the pulse hits a forested area and returns multiple reflections from treetops, branches, and ground. The distance from the airplane to the object beneath it is equal to one half of the time between transmission and receipt of the pulse multiplied by the speed of light (d = 1/2tc).
The position and orientation of the aircraft must be known exactly. GPS determines the position of the airplane over the ground, and an IMU with three gyroscopes is used to determine its orientation in flight. Lidar systems are typically accurate to less than 15 cm (6 inches) in vertical elevation.
Lidar has also been used in satellite- and ground-based systems. Those systems operate in much the same fashion as those on airplanes. Space-based systems use powerful lasers because of the greater distance that the laser pulse must travel. In ground-based systems the laser pulses do not need to be transmitted as frequently as those on airplanes.
Because of its accuracy in mapping surface features, lidar is useful in creating topographical maps. Its ability to map the ground in tree-covered areas like the Central American rainforest has proven particularly effective for archaeologists, who have discovered thousands of Mayan buildings covered by vegetation. Forests can be studied with lidar and the profile of the multiple returns can be used to determine what kinds of trees are present. Lidar can also be used to determine ocean depths in shallow areas near land by using two lasers, one that transmits at near-infrared wavelengths that reflect off the water’s surface and the other at optical wavelengths that reflect off the ocean bottom.
