Likert scale,  rating system, used in questionnaires, that is designed to measure people’s attitudes, opinions, or perceptions. Subjects choose from a range of possible responses to a specific question or statement; responses typically include “strongly agree,” “agree,” “neutral,” “disagree,” and “strongly disagree.” Often, the categories of response are coded numerically, in which case the numerical values must be defined for that specific study, such as 1 = strongly agree, 2 = agree, and so on. The Likert scale is named for American social scientist Rensis Likert, who devised the approach in 1932.
Likert scales are widely used in social and educational research. When using Likert scales, the researcher must consider issues such as categories of response (values in the scale), size of the scale, direction of the scale, the ordinal nature of Likert-derived data, and appropriate statistical analysis of such data.
Generally, a Likert scale presents the respondent with a statement and asks the respondent to rate the extent to which he or she agrees with it. Variations include presenting the subject with a question rather than a statement. The categories of response are mutually exclusive and usually cover the full range of opinion. Some researchers include a “don’t know” option, to distinguish between respondents who do not feel sufficiently informed to give an opinion and those who are “neutral” on the topic.
The size of a Likert scale may vary. Traditionally, researchers have employed a five-point scale (e.g., strongly agree, agree, neutral, disagree, strongly disagree). A larger scale (e.g., seven categories) could offer more choices to respondents, but it has been suggested that people tend not to select the extreme categories in large rating scales, perhaps not wanting to appear extreme in their view. Moreover, it may not be easy for subjects to discriminate between categories that are only subtly different. On the other hand, rating scales with just three categories (e.g., poor, satisfactory, good) may not afford sufficient discrimination. An even number of categories, as in a four-point or six-point Likert scale, forces respondents to come down broadly “for” or “against” a statement.
A feature of Likert scales is their directionality: the categories of response may be increasingly positive or increasingly negative. While interpretation of a category may vary among respondents (e.g., one person’s “agree” is another’s “strongly agree”), all respondents should nevertheless understand that “strongly agree” is a more positive opinion than “agree.” One important consideration in the design of questionnaires is the use of reverse scoring on some items. Imagine a questionnaire with positive statements about the benefits of public health education programs (e.g., “TV campaigns are a good way to persuade people to stop smoking in the presence of children”). A subject who strongly agreed with all such statements would be presumed to have a very positive view about the benefits of this method of health education. However, perhaps the subject was not participating wholeheartedly and simply checked the same response category for each item. To ensure that respondents are reading and evaluating statements carefully, a few negative statements may be included (e.g., “Money spent on public health education programs would be better spent on research into new therapies”). If a respondent answers positively to positive statements and negatively to negative statements, the researcher may have increased confidence in the data.
Likert scales fall within the ordinal level of measurement: the categories of response have directionality, but the intervals between them cannot be presumed equal. Thus, for a scale where 1 = strongly agree, 2 = agree, 3 = neutral, 4 = disagree, and 5 = strongly disagree, a mark of 4 would be more negative than either 3, 2, or 1 (directionality). However, it cannot inferred that a response of 4 is twice as negative as a response of 2.
Deciding which descriptive and inferential statistics may legitimately be used to describe and analyze the data obtained from a Likert scale is a controversial issue. Treating Likert-derived data as ordinal, the median or mode generally is used as the measure of central tendency. In addition, for responses in each category, one may state the frequency or percentage frequency. The appropriate inferential statistics for ordinal data are those employing nonparametric tests, such as the chi-square test or the Mann-Whitney U test.
However, many researchers treat Likert-derived data as if it were at the interval level (where numbers on the scale not only have directionality but also are an equal distance apart). They analyze their data using parametric tests, such as analysis of variance (ANOVA) or Pearson’s product-moment correlation, arguing that such analysis is legitimate, provided that one states the assumption that the data are interval level. Calculating the mean, standard deviation, and parametric statistics requires arithmetic manipulation of data (e.g., addition and multiplication).
Since numerical values in Likert scales represent verbal statements, one might question whether it makes sense to perform such manipulations. Moreover, Likert-derived data may fail to meet other assumptions for parametric tests (e.g., a normal distribution). Thus, careful consideration must also be given to the appropriate descriptive and inferential statistics, and the researcher must be explicit about any assumptions made.
