Measurement system,  any of the systems used in the process of associating numbers with physical quantities and phenomena. Although the concept of weights and measures today includes such factors as temperature, luminosity, pressure, and electric current, it once consisted of only four basic measurements: mass (weight), distance or length, area, and volume (liquid or grain measure). The last three are, of course, closely related.
Basic to the whole idea of weights and measures are the concepts of uniformity, units, and standards. Uniformity, the essence of any system of weights and measures, requires accurate, reliable standards of mass and length and agreed-on units. A unit is the name of a quantity, such as kilogram or pound. A standard is the physical embodiment of a unit, such as the platinum-iridium cylinder kept by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures at Paris as the standard kilogram.
Two types of measurement systems are distinguished historically: an evolutionary system, such as the British Imperial, which grew more or less haphazardly out of custom, and a planned system, such as the International System of Units (SI; Système Internationale d’Unités), in universal use by the world’s scientific community and by most nations.
Body measurements and common natural items probably provided the most convenient bases for early linear measurements; early weight units may have derived casually from the use of certain stones or containers or from determinations of what a person or animal could lift or haul.
The historical progression of units has followed a generally westward direction, the units of the ancient empires of the Middle East finding their way, mostly as a result of trade and conquest, to the Greek and then the Roman empires, thence to Gaul and Britain via Roman expansion.
Although there is evidence that many early civilizations devised standards of measurement and some tools for measuring, the Egyptian cubit is generally recognized as having been the most ubiquitous standard of linear measurement in the ancient world. Developed about 3000 bce, it was based on the length of the arm from the elbow to the extended fingertips and was standardized by a royal master cubit of black granite, against which all the cubit sticks or rules in use in Egypt were measured at regular intervals.
The royal cubit (524 mm or 20.62 inches) was subdivided in an extraordinarily complicated way. The basic subunit was the digit, doubtlessly a finger’s breadth, of which there were 28 in the royal cubit. Four digits equaled a palm, five a hand. Twelve digits, or three palms, equaled a small span. Fourteen digits, or one-half a cubit, equaled a large span. Sixteen digits, or four palms, made one t’ser. Twenty-four digits, or six palms, were a small cubit.
The digit was in turn subdivided. The 14th digit on a cubit stick was marked off into 16 equal parts. The next digit was divided into 15 parts, and so on, to the 28th digit, which was divided into 2 equal parts. Thus, measurement could be made to digit fractions with any denominator from 2 through 16. The smallest division, 1/16 of a digit, was equal to 1/448 part of a royal cubit.
The accuracy of the cubit stick is attested by the dimensions of the Great Pyramid of Giza; although thousands were employed in building it, its sides vary no more than 0.05 percent from the mean length of 230.364 metres (9,069.43 inches), which suggests the original dimensions were 440 by 440 royal cubits.
The Egyptians developed methods and instruments for measuring land at a very early date. The annual flood of the Nile River created a need for benchmarks and surveying techniques so that property boundaries could be readily reestablished when the water receded.
The Egyptian weight system appears to have been founded on a unit called the kite, with a decimal ratio, 10 kites equaling 1 deben and 10 debens equaling 1 sep. Over the long duration of Egyptian history, the weight of the kite varied from period to period, ranging all the way from 4.5 to 29.9 grams (0.16 to 1.05 ounces). Approximately 3,500 different weights have been recovered from ancient Egypt, some in basic geometric shapes, others in human and animal forms.
Egyptian liquid measures, from large to small, were ro, hin, hekat, khar, and cubic cubit.
Among the earliest of all known weights is the Babylonian mina, which in one surviving form weighed about 640 grams (about 23 ounces) and in another about 978 grams (about 34 ounces). Archaeologists have also found weights of 5 minas, in the shape of a duck, and a 30-mina weight in the form of a swan. The shekel, familiar from the Bible as a standard Hebrew coin and weight, was originally Babylonian. Most of the Babylonian weights and measures, carried in commerce throughout the Middle East, were gradually adopted by other countries. The basic Babylonian unit of length was the kus (about 530 mm or 20.9 inches), also called the Babylonian cubit. The Babylonian shusi, defined as 1/30 kus, was equal to 17.5 mm (0.69 inch). The Babylonian foot was 2/3 kus.
The Babylonian liquid measure, qa (also spelled ka), was the volume of a cube of one handbreadth (about 99 to 102 millilitres or about 6.04 to 6.23 cubic inches). The cube, however, had to contain a weight of one great mina of water. The qa was a subdivision of two other units; 300 qa equaled 60 gin or 1 gur. The gur represented a volume of almost 303 litres (80 U.S. gallons).
The Hittites, Assyrians, Phoenicians, and Hebrews derived their systems generally from the Babylonians and Egyptians. Hebrew standards were based on the relationship between the mina, the talent (the basic unit), and the shekel. The sacred mina was equal to 60 shekels and the sacred talent to 3,000 shekels, or 50 sacred minas. The Talmudic mina equaled 25 shekels; the Talmudic talent equaled 1,500 shekels, or 60 Talmudic minas.
The volumes of the several Hebrew standards of liquid measure are not definitely known; the bat may have contained about 37 litres (nearly 10 U.S. gallons); if so, the log equaled slightly more than 0.5 litre (0.14 U.S. gallon), and the hin slightly more than 6 litres (1.6 U.S. gallons). The Hebrew system was notable for the close relationship between dry and liquid volumetric measures; the liquid kor was the same size as the dry homer, and the liquid bat corresponded to the dry ʾefa.
In the 1st millennium bce commercial domination of the Mediterranean passed into the hands of the Greeks and then the Romans. A basic Greek unit of length was the finger (19.3 mm or 0.76 inch); 16 fingers equaled about 30 cm (about 1 foot), and 24 fingers equaled 1 Olympic cubit. The coincidence with the Egyptian 24 digits equaling 1 small cubit suggests what is altogether probable on the basis of the commercial history of the era, that the Greeks derived their measures partly from the Egyptians and partly from the Babylonians, probably via the Phoenicians, who for a long time dominated vast expanses of the Mediterranean trade. The Greeks apparently used linear standards to establish their primary liquid measure, the metrētēs, equivalent to 39.4 litres (10.4 U.S. gallons). A basic Greek unit of weight was the talent (equal to 25.8 kg or 56.9 pounds), obviously borrowed from Eastern neighbours.
Roman linear measures were based on the Roman standard foot (pes). This unit was divided into 16 digits or into 12 inches. In both cases its length was the same. Metrologists have come to differing conclusions concerning its exact length, but the currently accepted modern equivalents are 296 mm or 11.65 inches. Expressed in terms of these equivalents, the digit (digitus), or 1/16 Roman foot, was 18.5 mm (0.73 inch); the inch (uncia or pollicus), or 1/12 Roman foot, was 24.67 mm (0.97 inch); and the palm (palmus), or 1/4 Roman foot, was 74 mm (2.91 inches).
Larger linear units were always expressed in feet. The cubit (cubitum) was 11/2 Roman feet (444 mm or 17.48 inches). Five Roman feet made the pace (passus), equivalent to 1.48 metres or 4.86 feet.
The most frequently used itinerary measures were the furlong or stade (stadium), the mile (mille passus), and the league (leuga). The stade consisted of 625 Roman feet (185 metres or 606.9 feet), or 125 paces, and was equal to one-eighth of a mile. The mile was 5,000 Roman feet (1,480 metres or 4,856 feet) or 8 stades. The league had 7,500 Roman feet (2,220 metres or 7,283 feet) or 1,500 paces.
Prior to the 3rd century bce the standard for all Roman weights was the as, or Old Etruscan or Oscan pound, of 4,210 grains (272.81 grams). It was divided into 12 ounces of 351 grains (22.73 grams) each. In 268 bce a new standard was created when a silver denarius was struck to a weight of 70.5 grains (4.57 grams). Six of these denarii, or “pennyweights,” were reckoned to the ounce (uncia) of 423 grains (27.41 grams), and 72 of them made the new pound (libra) of 12 ounces, or 5,076 grains (328.9 grams).
The principal Roman capacity measures were the hemina, sextarius, modius, and amphora for dry products and the quartarus, sextarius, congius, urna, and amphora for liquids. Since all of these were based on the sextarius and since no two extant sextarii are identical, a mean generally agreed upon today is 35.4 cubic inches, or nearly 1 pint (0.58 litre). The hemina, or half-sextarius, based on this mean was 17.7 cubic inches (0.29 litre). Sixteen of these sextarii made the modius of 566.4 cubic inches (9.28 litres), and 48 of them made the amphora of 1,699.2 cubic inches (27.84 litres).
In the liquid series, the quartarus, or one-fourth of a sextarius (35.4 cubic inches), was 8.85 cubic inches (0.145 litre). Six of these sextarii made the congius of 212.4 cubic inches (3.48 litres), 24 sextarii made the urna of 849.6 cubic inches (13.92 litres), and, as in dry products, 48 sextarii were equal to one amphora.
Completely separated from the Mediterranean-European history of metrology is that of ancient China, yet the Chinese system exhibits all the principal characteristics of the Western. It employed parts of the body as a source of units—for example, the distance from the pulse to the base of the thumb. It was fundamentally chaotic in that there was no relationship between different types of units, such as those of length and those of volume. Finally, it was rich in variations. The mou, a unit of land measure, fluctuated from region to region from 0.08 to 0.13 hectare (0.2 to 0.3 acre). Variations were not limited to the geographic; a unit of length with the same name might be of one length for a carpenter, another for a mason, and still another for a tailor. This was a problem in Western weights and measures as well.
Shihuangdi, who in 221 bce became the first emperor of China, is celebrated for, among other things, his unification of the regulations fixing the basic units. The basic weight, the shi, or dan, was fixed at about 60 kg (132 pounds); the two basic measurements, the zhi and the zhang, were set at about 25 cm (9.8 inches) and 3 metres (9.8 feet), respectively. A noteworthy characteristic of the Chinese system, and one that represented a substantial advantage over the Mediterranean systems, was its predilection for a decimal notation, as demonstrated by foot rulers from the 6th century bce. Measuring instruments too were of a high order.
A unique characteristic of the Chinese system was its inclusion of an acoustic dimension. A standard vessel used for measuring grain and wine was defined not only by the weight it could hold but by its pitch when struck; given a uniform shape and fixed weight, only a vessel of the proper volume would give the proper pitch. Thus the same word in old Chinese means “wine bowl,” “grain measure,” and “bell.” Measures based on the length of a pitch pipe and its subdivision in terms of millet grains supplanted the old measurements based on the human body. The change brought a substantial increase in accuracy.
Medieval Europe inherited the Roman system, with its Greek, Babylonian, and Egyptian roots. It soon proliferated through daily use and language variations into a great number of national and regional variants, with elements borrowed from the Celtic, Anglo-Saxon, Germanic, Scandinavian, and Arabic influences and original contributions growing out of the needs of medieval life.
A determined effort by the Holy Roman emperor Charlemagne and many other medieval kings to impose uniformity at the beginning of the 9th century was in vain; differing usages hardened. The great trade fairs, such as those in Champagne during the 12th and 13th centuries, enforced rigid uniformity on merchants of all nationalities within the fairgrounds and had some effect on standardizing differences among regions, but the variations remained. A good example is the ell, the universal measure for wool cloth, the great trading staple of the Middle Ages. The ell of Champagne, two feet six inches, measured against an iron standard in the hands of the Keeper of the Fair, was accepted by Ypres and Ghent, both in modern Belgium; by Arras, in modern France; and by the other great cloth-manufacturing cities of northwestern Europe, even though their bolts varied in length. In several other parts of Europe, the ell itself varied, however. There were hundreds of thousands of such examples among measuring units throughout Europe.
