Memristor, in full memory resistor,  one of the four fundamental passive electrical components (those that do not produce energy), the others being the resistor, the capacitor, and the inductor. The memristor, which is a nonlinear component with properties that cannot be replicated with any combination of the other fundamental components, combines a persistent memory with electrical resistance (R; such as produced by a resistor). In other words, a memristor has a resistance that “remembers” what value it had when the current was last turned on, which means that it could, in theory, be used for creating solid-state devices that store data without requiring a constant energy flow to maintain their present values.
The memristor was first hypothesized in 1971 by Leon Chu, who was then an electrical engineering professor at the University of California, Berkeley. Chu realized that the fundamental relationship between the four basic circuit variables—electric current (I), voltage (V), charge (Q), and magnetic flux (Φ)—could be expressed by using four different differential equations, each with a different constant of proportionality, corresponding to the configurations used in the resistor (dV = R dl), the capacitor (dQ = C dV; where C indicates the capacitance), the inductor (dΦ = L dI; where L is the inductance), and the memristor (dΦ = M dQ; where M is the memristance).
Although memristor-like electrical behaviour was occasionally seen in the ensuing decades of the 20th century, the first controlled memristor was not built until 2005, using tools from nanotechnology. The credit for the first functional memristor goes to the Hewlett-Packard Company—in particular, researchers R. Stanley Williams, Dmitri B. Strukov, Gregory S. Snider, and Duncan R. Stewart—for building a bi-level titanium dioxide thin film containing dopants (impurities) on one side that migrate to the other side when a current is applied and back when the opposite current is applied, changing the resistance in each case. Hewlett-Packard is working on incorporating memristors into traditional integrated circuits.
