Morita Akio,  (born Jan. 26, 1921, Nagoya, Japan—died Oct. 3, 1999, Tokyo), Japanese businessman who was cofounder, chief executive officer (from 1971), and chairman of the board (from 1976 through 1994) of Sony Corporation, world-renowned manufacturer of consumer electronics products.
Morita came from a family with a long tradition of sake brewing and was expected to follow in the family business. Instead he showed an early interest in technology, eventually attending Ōsaka Imperial University and graduating in 1944 with a degree in physics. During World War II he was assigned to the Air Armoury at Yokosuka, where he met Ibuka Masaru, industry’s representative on the Wartime Research Committee. Together the two men worked to develop thermal guidance systems and night-vision devices.
After the war Morita worked with Ibuka to establish a communications laboratory in Tokyo. In 1946 they cofounded Tokyo Telecommunications Engineering Corporation (Tōkyō Tsūshin Kōgyō), renamed Sony Corporation in 1958. Morita’s major concerns were the financial and business matters; he was responsible for marketing Sony products worldwide. Some of Morita and Ibuka’s product successes include early consumer versions of the tape recorder (1950; Ibuka had developed magnetic recording tape a year earlier), the transistorized radio (1955), and the “pocket-sized” transistor radio (1957).
Morita had a corporate vision that was global in scope. Indeed, the name Sony was chosen after the founders searched dictionaries trying to find a name that would be pronounceable in any language. (Sony was derived from the Latin sonus, “sound.”) In 1961, under Morita’s direction, Sony became the first Japanese company to sell its shares on the New York Stock Exchange. In addition, he moved himself and his family to the United States for a year in 1963 in order to better understand American business practices and American ways of thinking. Once Sony products began to sell well internationally, Morita opened factories in the United States and Europe in addition to those in Japan.
With Ibuka’s innovative consumer products and Morita’s business savvy, Sony became a major competitor in the electronics industry. Morita pioneered the concept of branding, making sure that the name Sony was prominent on all products and refusing to sell products to other businesses to be packaged under their labels. The corporation also used American-style advertising to great advantage. Frequently, however, Morita helped Sony to prosper by recognizing the potential in new products. It was at Morita’s urging that the Sony Walkman portable tape player was developed and marketed (company insiders doubted that there was enough consumer demand for the device). The Walkman was one of Sony’s most popular consumer products in the 1980s and ’90s.
Not all decisions made by Morita were so successful; the belief and determination he invested in winning products were sometimes invested in missteps as well. For instance, Sony was one of the first to release videocassette recorders (VCRs) for home use, but Sony’s version, Betamax (Beta), was soon overwhelmed by the more popular VHS version; it was some time before Morita was willing to allow Sony to shift to the industry standard of VHS. After the Beta problem, however, Morita concluded that Sony must forge partnerships with other electronics firms. Thus, when Sony developed the CD storage disk that would eventually revolutionize computer data storage and the music industry, it was done in partnership with the Dutch firm Philips Electronics NV to ensure that an industry standard for the product was achieved from the start.
As Sony’s stature grew, so did Morita’s in the international business community. He sat on a number of boards representing Japanese business. He was vice-chairman of the Keidanren (Japanese Federation of Economic Organizations), a group that has a powerful influence over decisions made by the Japanese government concerning business and economics. Morita also was a longtime member of the “Wise Men” (as the eight-member Japan–U.S. Economic Relations Group is informally called).
Morita was closely involved in the management of the Sony company until his retirement, owing to ill health, in 1994. His autobiography, Made in Japan: Akio Morita and Sony, was published in 1986.
