Norman Robert Campbell,  (born March 7, 1880, London, Eng.—died May 18, 1949, Nottingham), British physicist and philosopher of science who is best known for his contributions to the theory and practice of physical measurements.
Campbell was educated at Eton College before being admitted in 1899 to Trinity College, Cambridge, from which he graduated and became a scholar in 1902. In 1904 he was elected a fellow of the school, and in 1912 he earned a postdoctoral degree (D.Sc., or Doctor of Science).
Campbell was a research assistant at the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge, where he worked under the great experimental physicist Sir J.J. Thomson and contributed to the study of spontaneous ionization in gases and radioactivity. In 1910 Campbell joined Sir William Bragg’s research group at the University of Leeds, where he studied X-ray ionization on an honourary basis until a formal position was created for him in 1912. During this period at Leeds, Campbell met and married Edith Utley Sowerbutts, who taught science at the Leeds Girls’ High School. In 1914 Campbell joined the electrotechnics and photometry department of the British National Physical Laboratory, where he worked under physicist Clifford Patterson on military research. Following the end of World War I, Campbell was recruited by Patterson to form part of the research staff for what later became the General Electric Company Research Laboratory, where he spent the rest of his career.
Before joining Patterson in 1919, however, the Campbells adopted two babies, a boy and a girl, and withdrew for nine months to adjust to family life. During this self-imposed retreat, Campbell wrote Physics: The Elements (1920; republished posthumously in 1957 in an expanded edition as Foundations of Science: The Philosophy of Theory and Experiment), which is still influential for its consideration of philosophical issues related to physical measurements and epistemology.
During World War II, Campbell’s son was killed in action in 1941 by a torpedo in the Mediterranean, which led the grieving couple to retire and move to Dorset. In 1944 the Campbell’s home was destroyed by a stray German bomb, which left Norman virtually unharmed but severely injured Edith. Following her death in 1948, he moved in with his daughter and her children.
Campbell’s major works include Modern Electrical Theory (1907), which rejected the existence of the so-called ether and foreshadowed certain ideas of relativity; The Principles of Electricity (1912); What Is Science? (1921); and An Account of the Principles of Measurement and Calculation (1928). Two of Campbell’s essays, “Measurement” and “Numerical Laws and the Use of Mathematics in Science,” are included in Encyclopædia Britannica’s Gateway to the Great Books (1963).
