Repeating rifle, also called repeater,  rifled shoulder arm typically designed with a spring-loaded tubular or box magazine holding metallic cartridges, each of which is fed into the chamber or breech by a lever, pump, bolt, or semiautomatic mechanism. Before the invention of the self-contained cartridge (projectile, powder, and primer in a fixed casing), a repeater had to have separate magazines for powder and ball. Alternative arrangements included multiple barrels, multiple breeches (e.g., harmonica guns or revolving cylinder rifles), or the loading of several shots into a single barrel (superposed loading) discharged with a movable lock.
The first effective breech-loading and repeating flintlock firearms were developed in the early 1600s. One early magazine repeater has been attributed to Michele Lorenzoni, a Florentine gunmaker. In the same period, the faster and safer Kalthoff system—designed by a family of German gunmakers—introduced a ball magazine located under the barrel and a powder magazine in the butt. By the 18th century the Cookson repeating rifle was in use in North America, having separate tubular magazines in the stock for balls and powder and a lever-activated breech mechanism that selected and loaded a ball and a charge, also priming the flash pan and setting the gun on half cock.
During the era of percussion ignition (c. 1830–70), the revolving-cylinder arms of makers such as Miller and Colt provided the most-practical repeating arms system. With the advent of metallic cartridges, repeating longarms—employing lever, pump, bolt, and semiautomatic systems—became common. Among the earliest made in quantity was the Spencer lever-action repeater. Manufactured in rifle, carbine, and musket configurations, the Spencer repeater saw significant use among Union troops in the American Civil War. Winchester became famous for lever- and pump-action rifles, and perhaps the best-known bolt-action design was formulated by Mauser. By 1900 most countries had adopted repeating rifles of one kind or another as basic infantry weapons. Virtually all were bolt-action rifles with magazines holding five or six cartridges.
