Tomahawk, also called Tomahawk cruise missile or BGM-109,  American-made low-flying strategic guided missile that may be launched from naval ships or submarines to strike targets on land. It flies at low altitudes to strike fixed targets, such as communication and air-defense sites, in high-risk environments where manned aircraft may be vulnerable to surface-to-air missiles.
The Tomahawk is a long-range, unmanned weapon with an accuracy of about 5 metres (16 feet). The 5.6-metre- (18.4-foot-) long missile has a range of up to approximately 2,400 km (about 1,500 miles) and can travel as fast as 885 km (550 miles) per hour.
Tomahawks are launched vertically from ships, but they can be launched horizontally from torpedo tubes on attack submarines or from external launchers attached to a submarine’s hull. The missile is powered by a solid propellant during its launch phase. Thereafter it is powered by a turbofan engine that does not emit much heat, which makes infrared detection difficult. It can also elude detection by radar because it has a small cross section and operates at low altitudes. Once it reaches land, the Tomahawk uses inertial and terrain-contour-matching (TERCOM) radar guidance, in which a map stored on the missile’s computer is continually compared with the actual terrain to locate the missile’s position relative to the target. Similarly, the target is identified from a stored image. As the TERCOM scans the landscape, the Tomahawk missile is capable of twisting and turning like a radar-evading fighter plane, skimming the landscape at an altitude of only 30–90 metres (100–300 feet).
During the opening salvos of a regional attack, military planning calls for sea-based Tomahawks to be used to compromise and suppress enemy air operations and defenses. Tomahawks may be retasked in flight, possibly circling for a period before their human handlers select another target for them to attack. Tomahawks can also use their onboard cameras to transmit battle-damage assessment data back to military analysts.
Submarine-launched Tomahawk missiles entered service in 1983 with conventional (i.e., nonnuclear) land-attack and antiship missile variants, as well as with a land-attack missile carrying a nuclear warhead. The nuclear variant has since been retired, and a land-attack cluster-bomb variant that disperses bomblets has been added. By the start of the Persian Gulf War in 1991, Tomahawks had been fitted to surface ships.
Tomahawk missiles were first used in 1991 during the Persian Gulf War as part of Operation Desert Storm, where they destroyed hardened targets (such as surface-to-air missile sites, command-and-control centres, the Iraqi presidential palace in Baghdad, and electrical power plants). The Persian Gulf War also saw the first coordinated Tomahawk and manned-aircraft strike in history. Tomahawks were subsequently used extensively in Iraq to enforce “no-fly zone” operations in the early 1990s and during the Iraq War (2003–11). They were also used in Bosnia (1995), Libya (1996 and 2011), Sudan (1998), Yemen (2009), and Afghanistan (1998 and during the Afghanistan War, which began in 2001).
