tool and die making,   the industrial art of manufacturing stamping dies, plastics molds, and jigs and fixtures to be used in the mass production of solid objects.
The fabrication of pressworking dies constitutes the major part of the work done in tool and die shops. Most pressworking dies are utilized in the fabrication of sheet-metal parts that range in size from the finger stop on a dial telephone to the panels of an automobile body. Each pressworking die consists of two sections, called punch and die, or male and female. Both sections are mounted firmly in an electrically or hydraulically driven press. In a working cycle the press ram, on which the male section is mounted, descends into the fixed female section. Any metal interposed between the sections is cut or shaped to a prescribed form. Like the dies, the presses range in size from extremely small to gigantic. A bench press is often small enough to be picked up manually; but the press that stamps out the roof of a car is generally about three stories high and capable of exerting tons of force.
The tooling involved in plastic molding is quite similar to that of stamping dies. The principal difference is that stamping requires force, while molding does not. In plastic molding, two units are required whose design is such that, when brought together, they make up a system of closed cavities linked to a central orifice. Liquid plastic is forced through the orifice and into the cavities, or molds, and when the plastic solidifies, the molds open and the finished parts are ejected.
The development of modern tools and dies can be traced to the American inventor and manufacturer Eli Whitney, who first implemented the concept of the planned manufacturing of interchangeable parts. Each part was manufactured to prescribed dimensions with the aid of tooling, so that the highly skilled craftsmen previously required for manufacturing were no longer needed since no additional fitting or selective assembly of the parts was necessary. Whitney’s tooling consisted of templates (tool-guiding patterns) and rudimentary fixtures—the antecedents of today’s tools and dies—and he successfully demonstrated the feasibility of manufacturing interchangeable parts by mass-producing firearms for the War of 1812.
The successful introduction of interchangeable parts and the development of machine tools, both in the 19th century, brought the modern machine shop into being. Then, as now, the independent machine shop was called a job shop, which meant that it had no product of its own but served large industrial facilities by fabricating tooling, machines, and machinepart replacements. Eventually, some machine shops began to specialize in tooling to the exclusion of other work.
The development of the power press gave rise to a demand for another form of tooling, the press die, the function of which is to cut and form sheet metal into predetermined shapes and configurations. The work of fabricating press dies is similar to, but not identical with, that of producing jigs, fixtures, and other tooling, which led to many of the specialized machine shops labeling themselves tool and die shops. The 20th-century developments of die casting and injection molding have brought about the demand for still other forms of tooling—the dies used in die casting and plastic molding. The making of these tools has also been taken over by the tool and die shops.
In the second half of the 20th century, however, the traditional tool and die shop was gradually replaced by specialized job shops that produce only one form of tooling. This trend can be attributed to the growing sophistication of tooling, for shops with the skills and equipment necessary to fabricate one form of tooling are seldom equipped for another. Even the single form of toolmaking called diemaking is becoming specialized; some shops now limit themselves to dies for special applications, such as automotive body dies.
