Trident missile,  American-made submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) that succeeded the Poseidon and Polaris missiles in the 1980s and ’90s. It is the sole strategic-range nuclear weapon of the United Kingdom and constitutes the sea-based leg of the United States’ nuclear forces.
Under development from the late 1960s, the Trident developed into two models. The first version, the Trident I, or C-4, was 34 feet (10.4 m) long and 6 feet (1.8 metres) in diameter. It could deliver eight independently targetable 100-kiloton nuclear warheads to a range of 4,000 nautical miles (7,400 km). The Trident II, or D-5, is about 46 feet (14 metres) long and carries multiple independently targeted warheads. It has a maximum range of about 6,500 nautical miles (12,000 km).
The Trident warheads are launched by three solid-fueled booster stages and are dispersed toward their targets by a liquid-fueled “bus” in the missile’s front end. With inertial guidance refined by stellar or satellite navigation, Tridents are more accurate than most land-based ballistic missiles. At the time of their deployment during the Cold War, their accuracy gave them the ability, unprecedented among SLBMs, to threaten hardened missile silos and command bunkers in the Soviet Union, and their extended range allowed their submarines to patrol almost anywhere in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, making detection extremely difficult.
Beginning in 1979, Trident I missiles were fitted aboard older U.S. Poseidon-carrying submarines and newer Ohio-class vessels. The Ohio submarines were built with larger missile tubes designed to accommodate the newer Trident II beginning in 1990. Between 1994 and 1999 the United Kingdom commissioned its Vanguard submarines to carry the Trident II, which was fitted with warheads of British design. The British Trident IIs are reported to carry an average of three 100-kiloton warheads each, while the U.S. missiles are variously reported as carrying four, six, eight, or even more 475-kiloton warheads. The numbers of warheads are subject to budget constraints and (in the case of the United States) arms-control treaties with Russia.
