turbine,  any of various devices that convert the energy in a stream of fluid into mechanical energy. The conversion is generally accomplished by passing the fluid through a system of stationary passages or vanes that alternate with passages consisting of finlike blades attached to a rotor. By arranging the flow so that a tangential force, or torque, is exerted on the rotor blades, the rotor turns, and work is extracted.
Turbines can be classified into four general types according to the fluids used: water, steam, gas, and wind. Although the same principles apply to all turbines, their specific designs differ sufficiently to merit separate descriptions.
A water turbine uses the potential energy resulting from the difference in elevation between an upstream water reservoir and the turbine-exit water level (the tailrace) to convert this so-called head into work. Water turbines are the modern successors of simple waterwheels, which date back about 2,000 years. Today the primary use of water turbines is for electric power generation.
The greatest amount of electrical energy comes, however, from steam turbines coupled to electric generators. The turbines are driven by steam produced in either a fossil-fuel-fired or a nuclear-powered generator. The energy that can be extracted from the steam is conveniently expressed in terms of the enthalpy change across the turbine. Enthalpy reflects both thermal and mechanical energy forms in a flow process and is given by the sum of the internal thermal energy and the product of pressure times volume. The available enthalpy change through a steam turbine increases with the temperature and pressure of the steam generator and with reduced turbine-exit pressure.
For gas turbines, the energy extracted from the fluid also can be expressed in terms of the enthalpy change, which for a gas is nearly proportional to the temperature drop across the turbine. In gas turbines the working fluid is air mixed with the gaseous products of combustion. Most gas-turbine engines include at least a compressor, a combustion chamber, and a turbine. These are usually mounted as an integral unit and operate as a complete prime mover on a so-called open cycle where air is drawn in from the atmosphere and the products of combustion are finally discharged again to the atmosphere. Since successful operation depends on the integration of all components, it is important to consider the whole device, which is actually an internal-combustion engine, rather than the turbine alone. For this reason, gas turbines are treated in the article internal-combustion engine.
The energy available in wind can be extracted by a wind turbine to produce electric power or to pump water from wells. Wind turbines are the successors of windmills, which were important sources of power from the late Middle Ages through the 19th century.
Water turbines are generally divided into two categories: (1) impulse turbines used for high heads of water and low flow rates and (2) reaction turbines normally employed for heads below about 450 metres and moderate or high flow rates. These two classes include the main types in common use—namely, the Pelton impulse turbine and the reaction turbines of the Francis, propeller, Kaplan, and Deriaz variety. Turbines can be arranged with either horizontal or, more commonly, vertical shafts. Wide design variations are possible within each type to meet the specific local hydraulic conditions. Today, most hydraulic turbines are used for generating electricity in hydroelectric installations.
In an impulse turbine the potential energy, or the head of water, is first converted into kinetic energy by discharging water through a carefully shaped nozzle. The jet, discharged into air, is directed onto curved buckets fixed on the periphery of the runner to extract the water energy and convert it to useful work.
Modern impulse turbines are based on a design patented in 1889 by the American engineer Lester Allen Pelton. The free water jet strikes the turbine buckets tangentially. Each bucket has a high centre ridge so that the flow is divided to leave the runner at both sides. Pelton wheels are suitable for high heads, typically above about 450 metres with relatively low water flow rates. For maximum efficiency the runner tip speed should equal about one-half the striking jet velocity. The efficiency (work produced by the turbine divided by the kinetic energy of the free jet) can exceed 91 percent when operating at 60–80 percent of full load.
The power of a given wheel can be increased by using more than one jet. Two-jet arrangements are common for horizontal shafts. Sometimes two separate runners are mounted on one shaft driving a single electric generator. Vertical-shaft units may have four or more separate jets.
If the electric load on the turbine changes, its power output must be rapidly adjusted to match the demand. This requires a change in the water flow rate to keep the generator speed constant. The flow rate through each nozzle is controlled by a centrally located, carefully shaped spear or needle that slides forward or backward as controlled by a hydraulic servomotor.
Proper needle design assures that the velocity of the water leaving the nozzle remains essentially the same irrespective of the opening, assuring nearly constant efficiencies over much of the operating range. It is not prudent to reduce the water flow suddenly to match a load decrease. This could lead to a destructive pressure surge (water hammer) in the supply pipeline, or penstock. Such surges can be avoided by adding a temporary spill nozzle that opens while the main nozzle closes or, more commonly, by partially inserting a deflector plate between the jet and the wheel, diverting and dissipating some of the energy while the needle is slowly closed.
Another type of impulse turbine is the turgo type. The jet impinges at an oblique angle on the runner from one side and continues in a single path, discharging at the other side of the runner. This type of turbine has been used in medium-sized units for moderately high heads.
In a reaction turbine, forces driving the rotor are achieved by the reaction of an accelerating water flow in the runner while the pressure drops. The reaction principle can be observed in a rotary lawn sprinkler where the emerging jet drives the rotor in the opposite direction. Due to the great variety of possible runner designs, reaction turbines can be used over a much larger range of heads and flow rates than impulse turbines. Reaction turbines typically have a spiral inlet casing that includes control gates to regulate the water flow. In the inlet a fraction of the potential energy of the water may be converted to kinetic energy as the flow accelerates. The water energy is subsequently extracted in the rotor.
There are, as noted above, four major kinds of reaction turbines in wide use: the Kaplan, Francis, Deriaz, and propeller type. In fixed-blade propeller and adjustable-blade Kaplan turbines (named after the Austrian inventor Victor Kaplan), there is essentially an axial flow through the machine. The Francis- and Deriaz-type turbines (after the British-born American inventor James B. Francis and the Swiss engineer Paul Deriaz, respectively) use a “mixed flow,” where the water enters radially inward and discharges axially. Runner blades on Francis and propeller turbines consist of fixed blading, while in Kaplan and Deriaz turbines the blades can be rotated about their axis, which is at right angles to the main shaft.
