Weapon of mass destruction (WMD),  weapon with the capacity to inflict death and destruction on such a massive scale and so indiscriminately that its very presence in the hands of a hostile power can be considered a grievous threat. Modern weapons of mass destruction are either nuclear, biological, or chemical weapons—frequently referred to collectively as NBC weapons. See nuclear weapon, chemical warfare, biological warfare.
The term weapons of mass destruction has been in currency since at least 1937, when it was used to describe massed formations of bomber aircraft. At that time these high-flying battleships of the air seemed to pose an unstoppable threat to civilian centres located far from any war front—as indeed they did during World War II (1939–45), notably in the firebombings of such cities as Hamburg, Germany, and Tokyo, Japan, when tens of thousands of civilians died in a single night. With the dropping of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima, Japan, the fearsome power of conventional bombs paled before the spectacle of an entire city centre destroyed and some 66,000 people instantly killed by the blast and heat of a single nuclear weapon. (By the end of the year, radiation injury brought the death toll to 140,000.) During the Cold War the United States, the Soviet Union, and other major powers built up enormous stockpiles containing tens of thousands of nuclear bombs, missile warheads, and artillery shells—so many that the military and diplomatic standoff of that era was sometimes described as a “balance of terror.” At the same time both superpowers also amassed stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons, the two other principal types of modern WMD. Chemical weapons consist of liquids and gases that choke their victims, poison their blood, blister their skin, or disrupt their nervous system. Chlorine gas (a choking agent) and mustard gas (a blistering agent) were fired in artillery shells against entrenched troops during both World War I (1914–18) early in the 20th century and the Iran-Iraq War (1980–88) toward the end of the century. Biological weapons contain natural toxins or infectious agents such as bacteria, viruses, or fungi; sprayed or burst over populated areas, they might cause limited but severe outbreaks of such deadly diseases as anthrax, pneumonic plague, or smallpox. Biological weapons have not been used in modern war since the Japanese spread plague-infected lice in areas of China during World War II. However, the relative ease with which both biological and chemical agents can be prepared, packaged, delivered, and set off have raised fears that they might become the weapon of choice of terrorists. Indeed, since the end of the Cold War the main concern regarding all WMD has been proliferation, that is, the potential for lesser powers, “rogue states,” or international terrorist groups to acquire the means to produce and deliver WMD. Efforts to control the spread of WMD are enshrined in international agreements such as the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty of 1968, the Biological Weapons Convention of 1972, and the Chemical Weapons Convention of 1993.
