Ernesto Zedillo, in full Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de León,  (born December 27, 1951, Mexico City, Mexico), president of Mexico from 1994 to 2000.
Reared in a working-class family in Mexicali, Mexico, just south of the California border, Zedillo returned to his native Mexico City in 1965 to study at the National Polytechnic Institute. In 1971 he joined the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), the dominant political party in Mexico since 1929. Zedillo also studied in the United States, receiving his doctorate in economics from Yale University in 1981.
Zedillo then worked for Mexico’s central bank and at the Ministry of Programming and Budget, becoming secretary in 1988. As such, he successfully controlled Mexico’s immense foreign debt and reduced the inflation rate from 160 percent to only about 8 percent in five years. He also helped Mexico achieve its first balanced budget. Appointed secretary of education in 1992, Zedillo decentralized the public school system and attempted to revise textbooks and raise the literacy rate. In 1993 he became campaign manager for PRI presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio, and when Colosio was assassinated on March 23, 1994, Zedillo was named the party’s candidate. He won by a comfortable margin, although the election was the closest in the PRI’s history. As president, he continued the economic policies of his predecessor, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, but devoted a major effort to restoring public confidence, which was so badly damaged by the scandals of the Salinas administration.
Soon after taking office, Zedillo faced an economic crisis as the country was forced to devalue the peso, causing the Mexican stock market to plunge. In 1995 he accepted the terms of a U.S. plan to stabilize the currency, and by the late 1990s Mexico’s economy was slowly improving. Zedillo also instituted a number of reforms designed to end political corruption and create freer elections. Barred by the constitution from running for reelection, he announced in 1999 that the PRI would, for the first time, hold a presidential primary; critics, however, charged that the vote was rigged. Francisco Labastida Ochoa was selected to be the PRI’s candidate, but he was defeated in the 2000 presidential election by Vicente Fox of the National Action Party (PAN). Zedillo left office later that year, ending the PRI’s 71-year rule of Mexico.
