alienation,  in social sciences, the state of feeling estranged or separated from one’s milieu, work, products of work, or self. Despite its popularity in the analysis of contemporary life, the idea of alienation remains an ambiguous concept with elusive meanings, the following variants being most common: (1) powerlessness, the feeling that one’s destiny is not under one’s own control but is determined by external agents, fate, luck, or institutional arrangements, (2) meaninglessness, referring either to the lack of comprehensibility or consistent meaning in any domain of action (such as world affairs or interpersonal relations) or to a generalized sense of purposelessness in life, (3) normlessness, the lack of commitment to shared social conventions of behaviour (hence widespread deviance, distrust, unrestrained individual competition, and the like), (4) cultural estrangement, the sense of removal from established values in society (as, for example, in intellectual or student rebellions against conventional institutions), (5) social isolation, the sense of loneliness or exclusion in social relations (as, for example, among minority group members), and (6) self-estrangement, perhaps the most difficult to define and in a sense the master theme, the understanding that in one way or another the individual is out of touch with himself.
Recognition of the concept of alienation in Western thought has been similarly elusive. Although entries on alienation did not appear in major social science reference books until the 1930s, the concept had existed implicitly or explicitly in classical sociological works of the 19th and early 20th centuries written by Karl Marx, Émile Durkheim, Ferdinand Tönnies, Max Weber, and Georg Simmel.
Perhaps the most famous use of the term was by Marx, who spoke of alienated labour under capitalism: work was compelled rather than spontaneous and creative; workers had little control over the work process; the product of labour was expropriated by others to be used against the worker; and the worker himself became a commodity in the labour market. Alienation consisted of the fact that workers did not gain fulfillment from work.
Marxism, however, represents only one stream of thought concerning alienation in modern society. A second stream, which is considerably less sanguine about the prospects for de-alienation, is embodied in the theory of “mass society.” Observing the dislocations brought about by industrialization in the 19th and early 20th centuries, Durkheim and Tönnies—and eventually Weber and Simmel as well—each, in his own way, documented the passing of traditional society and the consequent loss of the sense of community. Modern man was isolated as he had never been before—anonymous and impersonal in an urbanizing mass, uprooted from old values, yet without faith in the new rational and bureaucratic order. Perhaps the clearest expression of this theme is contained in Durkheim’s notion of “anomie” (from Greek anomia, “lawlessness”), a social condition characterized by rampant individualism and the disintegration of binding social norms. Both Weber and Simmel carried the Durkheimian theme further. Weber emphasized the fundamental drift toward rationalization and formalization in social organization; personal relations became fewer, and impersonal bureaucracy became larger. Simmel emphasized the tension in social life between the subjective and personal, on the one hand, and the increasingly objective and anonymous, on the other.
The definitions of alienation given above—powerlessness, meaninglessness, normlessness, cultural estrangement, social isolation, and self-estrangement—can serve only as a rough guide because there can be radically different conceptions of the idea within any one of the categories. Thus, with respect to self-estrangement, one can be “out of touch” with oneself in several quite different ways. Furthermore, writers have differed not only in their definitions but also in the assumptions that underlie these definitions. Two such contrasting assumptions are the normative and the subjective. First, those who held most closely to the Marxian tradition (for example, Herbert Marcuse, Erich Fromm, Georges Friedmann, and Henri Lefebvre) treated alienation as a normative concept, as an instrument for criticizing the established state of affairs in the light of some standard based on human nature, “natural law,” or moral principle. In addition, Marxian theorists insisted upon alienation as an objective condition quite independent of individual consciousness—hence, one can be alienated at work irrespective of one’s feelings about the work experience. Alternatively, some writers emphasized that alienation is a social-psychological fact: it is the experience of powerlessness, the sense of estrangement. Such an assumption is often found in analyses and descriptions of deviant behaviour and in the work of such theoreticians as Robert K. Merton and Talcott Parsons.
Many attempts to measure and test the incidence of alienation in various populations (such as urban dwellers or assembly line workers) have yielded ambiguous results that challenge the usefulness of alienation as a conceptual tool for social science research. Some social scientists have concluded that the concept is essentially philosophical.
