Evolutionary psychology,  the study of behaviour, thought, and feeling as viewed through the lens of evolutionary biology. Evolutionary psychologists presume all human behaviours reflect the influence of physical and psychological predispositions that helped human ancestors survive and reproduce. In the evolutionary view, any animal’s brain and body are composed of mechanisms designed to work together to facilitate success within the environments that were commonly encountered by that animal’s ancestors. Thus, a killer whale, though distantly related to a cow, would not do well with a cow’s brain, since the killer whale needs a brain designed to control a body that tracks prey in the ocean rather than eating grass in a meadow. Likewise, a bat, though also a mammal, needs a brain designed to run a tiny body that flies around catching insects at high speeds in the dark. Evolutionary psychologists ask: What are the implications of human evolutionary history (e.g., living in omnivorous and hierarchical primate groups populated by kin) for the design of the human mind?
Charles Darwin himself perhaps deserves the title of first evolutionary psychologist, as his observations laid the groundwork for the field of study that would emerge more than a century later. In 1873 he argued that human emotional expressions likely evolved in the same way as physical features (such as opposable thumbs and upright posture). Darwin presumed emotional expressions served the very useful function of communicating with other members of one’s own species. An angry facial expression signals a willingness to fight but leaves the observer an option to back off without either animal being hurt. Darwin’s view had a profound influence on the early development of psychology.
In 1890 William James’s classic text The Principles of Psychology used the term evolutionary psychology, and James argued that many human behaviours reflect the operation of instincts (inherited predispositions to respond to certain stimuli in adaptive ways). A prototypical instinct for James was a sneeze, the predisposition to respond with a rapid blast of air to clear away a nasal irritant.
In 1908 William McDougall adopted this perspective in his classic textbook An Introduction to Social Psychology. McDougall believed that many important social behaviours were motivated by instincts, but he viewed instincts as complex programs in which particular stimuli (e.g., social obstacles) lead to particular emotional states (e.g., anger) that in turn increase the likelihood of particular behaviours (e.g., aggression).
McDougall’s view of social behaviour as instinct-driven lost popularity as behaviourism began to dominate the field in the 1920s. According to the behaviourist view championed by John B. Watson (who publicly debated McDougall), the mind is mainly a blank slate, and behaviours are determined almost entirely by experiences after birth. Anthropological observation in the 20th century also contributed to the blank slate viewpoint. Anthropologists reported vastly different social norms in other cultures, and many social scientists made the logical error of presuming that wide cross-cultural variation must mean no constraints on human nature.
The blank slate viewpoint began to unravel in the face of numerous empirical findings in the second half of the 20th century. A more careful look at cross-cultural research revealed evidence of universal preferences and biases across the human species. For example, men the world over are attracted to women who are in the years of peak fertility, whereas women most commonly prefer men who can provide resources (which often translates into older males). As another example, males in more than 90 percent of other mammalian species contribute no resources to the offspring, yet all human cultures have long-term cooperative relationships between fathers and mothers in which the males contribute to offspring. Looked at from an even broader comparative perspective, these general human behaviour patterns reflect powerful principles that apply widely across the animal kingdom. For example, investment by fathers is more likely to be found in altricial species (those with helpless offspring, such as birds and humans) than in precocial species (whose young are mobile at birth, such as goats and many other mammals).
Evolutionary psychology, which emerged in the late 1980s, is a synthesis of developments in several different fields, including ethology, cognitive psychology, evolutionary biology, anthropology, and social psychology. At the base of evolutionary psychology is Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection. Darwin’s theory made it clear how an animal’s physical features can be shaped by the demands of recurrent problems posed by the environment. Seals are more closely related to dogs than to dolphins, but seals and dolphins share several physical features shaped by common problems of aquatic life (where fins and streamlined body shape assist in catching one’s dinner and reduce the chance of becoming dinner for an aquatic predator). Besides overt physical features designed by natural selection, animals also inherit central nervous systems designed to generate the behaviours needed to run those bodies. The behavioral inclinations of a bat would not work well in the body of a dolphin or a giraffe, and vice versa.
Zoologists and comparative psychologists have uncovered many behavioral and psychological mechanisms peculiarly suited to the demands of particular species. For example, dogs use smell for hunting, and, consequently, they have many more olfactory receptors than humans do and are thousands of times more sensitive to various odours. Humans, on the other hand, can see in colour, whereas dogs cannot; colour vision may be useful for detecting ripe fruit, something humans eat but canines do not. Bats have echolocation capacities allowing them to create the mental equivalent of a sonogram of the night world through which they must navigate at rapid speeds, searching for foods that include rapidly flying insects.
In addition to differences in sensory and perceptual capacities, natural selection has favoured many open-ended learning and memory biases designed to fit the ecological demands confronted by each species. For example, rats have poor vision and rely on taste and smell to find food at night. Consequently, they easily condition taste aversions to novel flavours but not to visual stimuli. Quail, on the other hand, have excellent vision and rely on visual cues in food choice, and they show the opposite learning bias—conditioning nausea more readily to visual cues than to tastes or smells.
