Gifted child,  any child who is naturally endowed with a high degree of general mental ability or extraordinary ability in a specific sphere of activity or knowledge. The designation of giftedness is largely a matter of administrative convenience. In most countries the prevailing definition is an intelligence quotient (IQ) of 130 or above. Increasingly, however, schools use multiple measures of giftedness and assess a wide variety of talents, including verbal, mathematical, spatial-visual, musical, and interpersonal abilities.
In countries that make special provision for educating gifted pupils, the prevailing method of selection consists of written tests. Although standard IQ tests are the most commonly used means of identifying gifted children, other tests of both intelligence and creativity are also used. Tests vary widely in their validity and reliability for different ages and cultures; therefore, fair identification procedures always take into account a wide variety of behaviours that may be signs of giftedness.
It is generally agreed that gifted children differ from their peers in ways other than intellectual ability alone. Evidence of this was found by the American psychologist Lewis M. Terman, who in 1921 initiated a study of more than 1,500 gifted children with IQs higher than 140. Following the study participants as they aged, Terman observed a greater drive to achieve, along with greater mental and social adjustment, among the gifted group as compared with nongifted children. In another early 20th-century study, which focused on children with IQs greater than 180, psychologist Leta Hollingworth found that individuals within this group were very sensitive to the ways in which they differed from others and often suffered from problems such as boredom and rejection by their peers. Variability of development is another characteristic observed in gifted children. In the late 20th century, the term asynchrony was used to describe the developmental characteristics of gifted children; that is, their mental, physical, emotional, and social abilities may all develop at different paces.
In theory, there are three ways of educating children who are intellectually and academically more advanced than their peers: (1) acceleration, whereby the gifted child is allowed to learn material at a more rapid pace or is promoted more rapidly through grades; (2) enrichment, whereby the gifted child works through the usual grades at the usual pace but with a curriculum supplemented by a variety of cultural activities; and (3) differentiation, whereby gifted children are accelerated or enriched within the regular classroom.
Special schools or classes enable gifted children to progress at an accelerated pace. The instruction, method, and materials can be adapted to the needs of each student, and, because the children work and study with others who are bright, each is motivated to put forth his best effort. Despite the opposition many educators have to special provisions for gifted children, research shows that grouping gifted children together is best for them, that this does no harm to average children, and that acceleration in these groups provides greater opportunity for challenge and intellectual development than does enrichment alone. See also creativity; genius; prodigy.
