John Gray,  (born 1951, Houston, Texas, U.S.), American self-help author and pop psychologist who built a business empire out of his most famous book, Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus (1992).
As a teenager Gray became involved in the Transcendental Meditation (TM) movement and eventually became the personal assistant of TM founder Maharishi Mahesh Yogi. Gray took a vow of celibacy and traveled with the guru for nine years, learning firsthand the necessary attributes of a charismatic leader. In 1979 he left the movement and moved to California, and in 1982 he married Barbara DeAngelis, who also became a best-selling self-help author. Together they began a business that specialized in weekend sex-and-relationship workshops. The marriage ended in 1984, the same year Gray self-published his first book, What You Feel You Can Heal.
Throughout the 1980s he worked as a “spiritual counselor” and conducted relationship seminars. His credentials as a professional psychologist were questionable to some, as he held degrees from the Maharishi International University (from 1995 Maharishi University of Management) in Iowa and obtained his Ph.D. through correspondence courses. In 1990 he self-published a second book, Men, Women, and Relationships, which he described as “a thick book of my research into the differences between men and women.”
In 1992 Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus was released and became a best seller. It was based on Gray’s premise that men and women have different emotional requirements and that a misunderstanding of the differences leads to the breakdown of relationships. The book’s lighthearted tone as well as its ample selection of examples, anecdotes, remedies, and peculiar metaphors and analogies (e.g., “men are like blowtorches, women are like ovens”) had immense appeal. It remained on best-seller lists for more than four years and on paperback best-seller lists even longer; it was eventually published in more than 35 languages. Gray expanded the “Mars and Venus” concept into a series of phenomenally successful books, including Mars and Venus in the Bedroom (1995), Mars and Venus on a Date (1997), Truly Mars and Venus (2003), and Why Mars and Venus Collide (2008). The books spawned an array of similarly themed products: videos, motivational seminars, counseling franchises, a Broadway show, a magazine, a board game, and a short-lived sitcom (2000–01).
Although Gray took credit for revitalizing scores of foundering relationships, a number of people criticized his view of contemporary relationships, claiming his work was little more than an exhaustive reworking of age-old gender stereotypes. As the number of books featuring the “Mars and Venus” formula grew, he was accused of simply rehashing themes and stories from his previous books.
