Kin selection,  a type of natural selection that considers the role relatives play when evaluating the genetic fitness of a given individual. It is based on the concept of inclusive fitness, which is made up of individual survival and reproduction (direct fitness) and any impact that an individual has on the survival and reproduction of relatives (indirect fitness). Kin selection occurs when an animal engages in self-sacrificial behaviour that benefits the genetic fitness of its relatives. The theory of kin selection is one of the foundations of the modern study of social behaviour. British evolutionary biologist W.D. Hamilton first proposed the theory in 1963 and noted that it plays a role in the evolution of altruism, cooperation, and sociality; however, the term kin selection was coined in 1964 by British evolutionary biologist Maynard Smith.
The apparent altruistic behaviour of many animals is, like some manifestations of sexual selection, a trait that at first seems incompatible with the theory of natural selection. According to the theory of sexual selection, even though some individuals possess certain conspicuous physical traits (such as prominent coloration) that places them at greater risk of predation, the trait is thought to remain in the population because the possessors of such traits have greater success in obtaining mates. Altruism is a form of behaviour that benefits other individuals at the expense of the one that performs the action; the fitness of the altruist is diminished by its behaviour, whereas individuals that act selfishly benefit from it at no cost to themselves. Accordingly, it might be expected that natural selection would foster the development of selfish behaviour and eliminate altruism. This conclusion is not so compelling when it is noticed that the beneficiaries of altruistic behaviour are usually relatives. They all carry the same genes, including the genes that promote altruistic behaviour.
Genes are passed from direct parentage, but they are also passed by assisting the reproduction of close relatives. Natural selection favours genes that increase the reproductive success of their carriers, but it is not necessary that all individuals that share a given genotype have higher reproductive success. It suffices that carriers of the genotype reproduce more successfully on the average than those possessing alternative genotypes. A parent shares half of its genes with each progeny, so a gene that promotes parental altruism is favoured by natural selection if the behaviour’s cost to the parent is less than half of its average benefits to the progeny. Such a gene will be more likely to increase in frequency through the generations than an alternative gene that does not promote altruistic behaviour. Parental care is, therefore, a form of altruism readily explained by kin selection. (In other words, the parent spends energy caring for the progeny because it increases the reproductive success of the parent’s genes.)
Kin selection also extends beyond the relationship between parents and their offspring. It facilitates the development of altruistic behaviour when the energy invested, or the risk incurred, by an individual is compensated in excess by the benefits ensuing to relatives. The closer the relationship between the beneficiaries and the altruist and the greater the number of beneficiaries, the higher the risks and efforts warranted in the altruist. Individuals that live together in a herd or troop usually are related and often behave toward each other in this way. Adult zebras (Equus burchellii, E. grevyi, and E. zebra), for instance, will turn toward an attacking predator to protect the young in the herd rather than fleeing to protect themselves. Other examples include:
The elements of kin selection (that is, direct fitness and indirect fitness) lead directly to the concept now known as Hamilton’s rule, which states that aid-giving behaviour can evolve when the indirect fitness benefits of helping relatives compensate the aid giver for any losses in personal reproduction it incurs by helping.
