Multiple intelligences,  theory of human intelligence first proposed by the psychologist Howard Gardner in his book Frames of Mind (1983). At its core, it is the proposition that individuals have the potential to develop a combination of eight separate intelligences, or spheres of intelligence; that proposition is grounded on Gardner’s assertion that an individual’s cognitive capacity cannot be represented adequately in a single measurement, such as an IQ score. Rather, because each person manifests varying levels of separate intelligences, a unique cognitive profile would be a better representation of individual strengths and weaknesses, according to this theory. It is important to note that, within this theory, every person possesses all intelligences to some degree.
Gardner posited that in order for a cognitive capacity to qualify as an independent “intelligence” (rather than as a subskill or a combination of other kinds of intelligence), it must meet eight specific criteria. First, it must be possible to thoroughly symbolize that capacity by using a specific notation that conveys its essential meaning. Second, neurological evidence must exist that some area of the brain is specialized to control that particular capacity. Third, case studies must exist that show that some subgroups of people (such as child prodigies) exhibit an elevated mastery of a given intelligence. Fourth, the intelligence must have some evolutionary relevance through history and across cultures. Fifth, the capacity must have a unique developmental history for each individual, reflecting each person’s different level of mastery of it. Sixth, the intelligence must be measurable in psychometric studies that are reflective of differing levels of mastery across intelligences. Seventh, the intelligence must have some definite set of core operations that are indicative of its use. Last, the proposed intelligence must be already plausible on the basis of existing means of measuring intelligence.
Gardner’s original theoretical model included seven separate intelligences, with an eighth added in 1999:
These eight intelligences can be grouped into the language-related, person-related, or object-related. The linguistic and musical intelligences are said to be language-related, since they engage both auditory and oral functions, which Gardner argued were central to the development of verbal and rhythmic skill. Linguistic (or verbal-linguistic) intelligence, manifested both orally and in writing, is the ability to use words and language effectively. Those who possess a high degree of verbal-linguistic intelligence have an ability to manipulate sentential syntax and structure, easily acquire foreign languages, and typically make use of a large vocabulary. Musical intelligence includes the ability to perceive and express variations in rhythm, pitch, and melody; the ability to compose and perform music; and the capacity to appreciate music and to distinguish subtleties in its form. It is similar to linguistic intelligence in its structure and origin, and it employs many of the same auditory and oral resources. Musical intelligence has ties to areas of the brain that control other intelligences as well, such as is found in the performer who has a keen bodily-kinesthetic intelligence or the composer who is adept at applying logical-mathematical intelligence toward the manipulation of ratios, patterns, and scales of music.
Person-related intelligences include both interpersonal and intrapersonal cognitive capacities. Intrapersonal intelligence is identified with self-knowledge, self-understanding, and the ability to discern one’s strengths and weaknesses as a means of guiding one’s actions. Interpersonal intelligence is manifested in the ability to understand, perceive, and appreciate the feelings and moods of others. Those with high interpersonal intelligence are able to get along well with others, work cooperatively, communicate effectively, empathize with others, and motivate others.
The four object-related intelligences—logical-mathematical, bodily-kinesthetic, naturalistic, and spatial—are stimulated and engaged by the concrete objects one encounters and the experiences one has. Those objects include physical features of the environment such as plants and animals, concrete things, and abstractions or numbers that are used to organize the environment. Those who exhibit high degrees of logical-mathematical intelligence are able to easily perceive patterns, follow series of commands, solve mathematical calculations, generate categories and classifications, and apply those skills to everyday use. Bodily-kinesthetic intelligence is manifested in physical development, athletic ability, manual dexterity, and understanding of physical wellness. It includes the ability to perform certain valuable functions, such as those of the surgeon or mechanic, as well as the ability to express ideas and feelings as artisans and performers. Spatial intelligence, according to Gardner, is manifested in at least three ways: (1) the ability to perceive an object in the spatial realm accurately, (2) the ability to represent one’s ideas in a two- or three-dimensional form, and (3) the ability to maneuver an object through space by imagining it rotated or by seeing it from various perspectives. Though spatial intelligence may be highly visual, its visual component refers more directly to one’s ability to create mental representations of reality.
Naturalistic intelligence is a later addition to Gardner’s theoretical model and is not as widely accepted as the other seven. It includes the ability to recognize plants, animals, and other parts of the natural environment as well as to see patterns and organizational structures found in nature. Most notably, research remains inconclusive as to whether the naturalistic intelligence fulfills the criterion of being able to be isolated in neurophysiology. In 1999 Gardner also considered whether a ninth intelligence, existential, exists.
