Sándor Ferenczi,  (born 1873, Miskolc, Hung., Austria-Hungary—died  1933, Budapest), Hungarian psychoanalyst noted for his contributions to psychoanalytic theory and his experimentation with techniques of therapy.
After receiving his M.D. from the University of Vienna (1894), Ferenczi served as an army doctor, specializing in neurology and neuropathology and acquiring skill in hypnosis. He first met Sigmund Freud in 1908 and became a member of Freud’s “inner circle,” the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society. Thus began his long, close friendship and collaboration with Freud, whom he accompanied on many travels, including a journey to Clark University, Worcester, Mass. (1909). He founded the Hungarian Psychoanalytic Society in 1913 and became a professor of psychoanalysis at the University of Budapest in 1919.
Ferenczi began to diverge from classic psychoanalytic practice in the course of exploring new possibilities for improving therapeutic technique. He believed that the use of free association as a means of achieving the recollection of painful early emotional experiences could be supplemented by more active methods when obstacles to free association were encountered in therapy. He advocated abstention from sex and other pleasurable biological acts as a means of storing up libido (emotional energy) that could then be used to hasten the therapeutic process. This method proved impractical and even counterproductive, however, because of the intense hostility it aroused in dissatisfied patients.
Ferenczi advanced many of his ideas on psychotherapy in The Development of Psychoanalysis (1924), written in collaboration with Otto Rank. In this work, which became a centre of controversy among psychoanalysts, he also suggested that the recollection of certain traumatic memories is not essential for modifying neurotic patterns. In Thalassa: A Theory of Genitality (1924), he suggested that the wish to return to the womb and the comfort of its amniotic fluids symbolizes a wish to return to the origin of life, the sea.
From about 1929 Ferenczi came to a view of therapy that was the reverse of his earlier approach. His final technique favoured the creation of a loving, permissive atmosphere by the therapist to counterbalance the rejection and emotional deprivation the patient had experienced with his parents. Ferenczi’s assertion that the therapist could openly express his affection for the patient and could even encourage him to act out childhood experiences was criticized by other psychoanalysts. Though Ferenczi never openly broke with Freud, there was an increasing distance between them during his later years.
