Transvestism, also called cross-dressing,  practice of wearing the clothes of the opposite sex.
The term transvestism came into use following the publication in 1910 of Die Transvestiten (The Transvestites), a work by German physician Magnus Hirschfeld. The term originally was applied to cross-dressing associated with nonheterosexual behaviour. It also was used to describe cross-dressing with intent to derive sexual pleasure. Later in the 20th century, however, transvestism was distinguished from cross-dressing for sexual excitement, which became known as transvestic disorder, a recognized mental condition. In addition, transvestism often was mistakenly associated with homosexuality. Individuals who are asexual, bisexual, heterosexual, or homosexual may engage in cross-dressing.
Transvestism is distinguished from transsexualism, in which the individual feels that he or she should be a member of the opposite sex. Most transvestites, in fact, are men who comfortably fill male roles in society and are satisfied with their biological sex. By contrast, transsexuals, both male and female, are uncomfortable with their sex and usually cross-dress for an extended period before they undergo surgery. That most transvestites are men is at least in part a result of the role of fashion in Western culture; in the mid-to-late 20th century, Western women wearing trousers and other clothes once considered to be exclusively men’s clothes are not seen as deviant.
Transvestites may quite early in life express interest in the clothes and manners of the opposite sex. Individuals typically are not distressed by their behaviour. By comparison, in transvestic disorder, cross-dressing associated with sexual arousal and erotic fantasies causes the affected individual significant distress or disrupts his or her work or social life. The disorder is diagnosed when arousal in the context of cross-dressing has occurred repeatedly over a period of six months. Transvestic disorder is distinguished from fetishistic disorder, in which a single favourite garment, such as shoes or underwear, forms the centrepiece of the person’s fetish. Some persons who practice cross-dressing keep their behaviour a secret because of negative societal connotations.
Some cross-dressers are known as “drag queens.” Such individuals typically wear flamboyant outfits in a consciously exaggerated caricature of artwork or femininity. Drag and other forms of cross-dressing are considered performance art when presented to an audience.
