Pompidou Centre, French Centre Pompidou, in full Centre National d’Art et de Culture Georges Pompidou (“Georges Pompidou National Art and Cultural Centre”),  French national cultural centre on the Rue Beaubourg and on the fringes of the historic Marais section of Paris; a regional branch is located in Metz. It is named after the French president Georges Pompidou, under whose administration the museum was commissioned.
The Pompidou Centre was formally opened on January 31, 1977, by the French president, Valéry Giscard d’Estaing. Its overpowering industrial-looking exterior, which dwarfs its surroundings, attracted notoriety for its brightly coloured exterior pipes, ducts, and other exposed services. The architects were Renzo Piano of Italy and Richard Rogers of Britain. The Pompidou Centre quickly became a popular attraction and was reckoned to be the most frequently visited cultural monument in the world.
Primarily a museum and centre for the visual arts of the 20th century, the Pompidou Centre houses many separate services and activities. Its museum of modern art brought under one roof several public collections of modern art previously housed in a number of other Paris galleries. There are also frequent temporary exhibitions devoted to modern themes. In addition there is a large public library, a centre for industrial design, a film museum, and an important musical centre associated with the French conductor and composer Pierre Boulez, known as the Centre for Musical and Acoustical Research (Ircam). The music centre comprises rehearsal rooms, studios, and a concert hall and presents concerts devoted primarily to modern music.
The Pompidou Centre—Metz, an outpost of the centre, opened in May 2010. The avant-garde building, designed by Ban Shigeru of Japan and Jean de Gastines of France, is situated in a park and features an undulating roof of woven timbre that was inspired by a Chinese bamboo hat. The Metz’s collection is devoted to modern art and includes works by Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse, and Joan Miró.
