Kemalpaşazâde, also called Ibn Kemal, Ibn Kemal Paşa, or Şemseddin Ahmet ibn Süleyman ibn Kemal Paşa,  (born c. 1468, Edirne, Ottoman Empire—died  April 16, 1534, Constantinople), historian, poet, and scholar who is considered one of the greatest Ottoman historians.
Born into an illustrious military family, as a young man he served in the army of İbrahim Paşa, vezir (minister) to Sultan Bayezid II. He later studied under several famous religious scholars and soon began teaching at religious colleges. A highly respected scholar, he was commissioned by Sultan Bayezid II to write an Ottoman history in Turkish, Tevarih-i Al-i Osman (“The Chronicles of the House of Osman”), which covers the events between the accession of Sultan Bayezid II in 1481 and the Battle of Mohács in 1526 during the reign of Sultan Süleyman Kanuni, known in the West as the Magnificent. The style of the history is highly ornate, abounding in complex literary devices. Around 1516, Kemalpaşazâde was appointed military judge of Anatolia and accompanied Selim I (1512–20) on a military campaign to Egypt, during which he translated the works of the Egyptian historian Abu al-Mahāsin ibn Taghribirdi from Arabic. Falling from court favour, however, he returned to his native Edirne to teach until he was recalled during the reign of Süleyman, who named him supreme head of the religious institution, a post he held until his death.
Although best known as a historian, Kemalpaşazâde was also a great scholar and a talented poet. He wrote numerous scholarly commentaries on the Qurʾān, treatises on jurisprudence and Muslim theology and philosophy, and, in Arabic, a philological work entitled Daqaʿiq al-Haqaʿiq (“The Subtleties of Verities”). His best poetical works include the Nigaristan (“The Picture Gallery”), written in Persian and modelled upon the Būstān and the Golestān of Saʿdī; a poem, Yusuf ü Züleyha, in rhymed couplets retelling the story of Joseph and Potiphar’s wife; and Divān (“Collected Poems”), consisting mainly of lyrics.
