Lee Myung-Bak,  (born December 19, 1941, Ōsaka, Japan), South Korean business executive and politician who was president of South Korea from 2008 to 2013. He previously served as mayor of Seoul (2002–06).
Lee was born in wartime Japan and was the fifth of seven children. In 1946 his family returned to Korea, but their boat capsized during the journey, and they landed ashore with little more than the clothes they were wearing. They settled in his father’s hometown of P’ohang, and, to help support his family, Lee sold rice snacks during the day and attended school at night. He enrolled at Korea University in Seoul in 1961, paying his tuition by working as a garbage collector. He was imprisoned in 1964 for participating in protests against the normalization of relations between South Korea and Japan. Lee was blacklisted by the government for his student activism, which limited his job prospects with some of the larger established firms.
He joined the fledgling Hyundai Construction company in 1965. At the time, it had fewer than 100 employees, and Lee advanced quickly through the executive ranks. When he resigned as CEO in 1992, the Hyundai Group had some 160,000 employees, and its products ranged from automobiles to heavy machinery to consumer electronics.
Lee entered politics in 1992, winning election to the National Assembly as a member of the conservative New Korea Party. He was reelected in 1996, only to resign two years later after he was found guilty of violating campaign spending limits. He withdrew from politics and spent a year of self-imposed exile in the United States.
He returned to South Korea and was elected mayor of Seoul in 2002 and took office that year. His administration focused on improving the livability of the central business district, most notably through an ambitious urban beautification project. This included the restoration of the Ch’ŏnggye (Cheonggye) Stream, a downtown waterway paved over by Hyundai some four decades earlier. While business owners initially balked at the project’s $900 million price tag, it proved to be a success with both Seoul natives and tourists when it opened in September 2005.
Upon completion of his term as mayor in 2006, Lee successfully campaigned for the presidency of South Korea, winning election by a landslide on December 19, 2007. A 2001 business scandal surfaced in the days leading up to the election, however, and the matter was directed to an independent counsel. In February 2008, shortly before he took office as president, Lee was cleared of all corruption charges.
Lee’s administration faced several challenges in its first year. One of his first acts was to reopen the Korean market to beef imports from the United States, which had been stopped in 2003 because of concerns over bovine spongiform encephalopathy (mad cow disease). The resumption of imports prompted widespread antigovernment protests and caused Lee’s approval rating to plummet. Lee also had to cope with the effects of the global financial crisis on the South Korean economy, which then stabilized in 2009 and grew in 2010. His administration continued negotiations on a free-trade accord with the United States, the original version of which had been agreed upon by both countries in 2007 but not ratified.
The perennial problem of unstable relations with North Korea was ongoing, perhaps exacerbated by the approach of Lee’s administration toward the North, which was more hard-line than that of his predecessor, Roh Moo-Hyun. There were a few positive moments, such as an October 2010 reunion between relatives from both North and South who had been separated by the Korean War, but more often the relationship was chilly or even overtly hostile. In March 2010 a South Korean warship was sunk in the Yellow Sea off Paengnyŏng (Baengnyeong) Island, killing 46 sailors, and an international team of investigators held the North responsible. In late November North Korean artillery units bombarded Yŏnp’yŏng (Yeonpyeong) Island, and several civilians and members of the military on the island died. Lee apologized for having failed to prevent such an attack, and his defense minister resigned over the incident.
Lee’s term ended in 2013, and he was succeeded by Park Geun-Hye, the country’s first female president. In 2018 Lee was indicted on various charges, notably bribery and embezzlement. He denied any wrongdoing, claiming that the allegations were politically motivated. Later that year Lee was convicted and sentenced to 15 years in prison. However, in 2019 he was released on bail as he appealed his conviction. The following year South Korea’s Supreme Court denied his appeal, and he returned to prison.
