Marc Ravalomanana,  (born December 12, 1949, Imerikasina, Madagascar, French Union [now Madagascar]), Malagasy entrepreneur and politician who served as president of Madagascar (2002–09).
Ravalomanana had a Protestant education, first by missionaries in his native village of Imerikasina, near Antananarivo, and then at a Protestant secondary school in Sweden. Returning to Antananarivo, he launched a family venture selling homemade yogurt, which quickly grew into a booming business. In less than two years, with assistance from the Protestant church, he secured a loan from the World Bank to purchase his first factory, and he soon had a monopoly of dairy and oil products. His company, TIKO, would become the largest domestically owned business in Madagascar.
Ravalomanana became politically active and was elected mayor of Antananarivo in 1999. While serving in this post, he gained the reputation as a bold manager. He balanced the city’s budget while embarking on a massive urban-restoration project, though he was criticized because some houses bulldozed during the operation were still being lived in. Under his administration, the city’s waste-disposal services and water quality also improved.
In 2001 Ravalomanana challenged Didier Ratsiraka, the incumbent president for more than two decades, in the December presidential election. When the election results were made available, Ravalomanana’s lead over Ratsiraka appeared narrow enough to necessitate a runoff vote (required when neither candidate wins a majority). Ravalomanana, however, claimed that the results had been tampered with and that he was the clear winner—claims supported by observers—and demanded a recount. The recount was not immediately forthcoming, however, and the situation remained tense.
Ravalomanana enjoyed significant support, particularly in Antananarivo, where his supporters staged numerous demonstrations and launched a general strike in January 2002 that lasted for several weeks. When that was not enough to persuade the country’s High Constitutional Court —which had been padded with Ratsiraka’s appointees just prior to the election—to order a recount, Ravalomanana declared himself president. He held an inauguration on February 22 and began establishing his administration, despite the fact that the international community did not recognize him as the legitimate leader of the country and Ratsiraka still claimed the presidency. Ratsiraka’s administration fled to the port city of Toamasina (also known as Tamatave) and attempted to blockade Antananarivo, utilizing such tactics as blocking roads and destroying bridges to prevent the delivery of food and fuel into the city. His supporters fought with those of Ravalomanana, with each side eventually controlling various sections of the country.
In late April the High Constitutional Court (which had since had its preelection body of judges reinstated by the country’s Supreme Court) ruled that a recount proved Ravalomanana had indeed won more than 50 percent of the vote, but Ratsiraka would not accept the results of the recount. Nonetheless, Ravalomanana was inaugurated a second time on May 6, 2002. Supporters of each candidate continued to clash, though, as the country teetered on the cusp of civil war. Fighting between the two sides did not cease until midsummer, when Ravalomanana’s forces were able to take control over areas previously held by Ratsiraka’s supporters. International recognition of Ravalomanana’s government followed.
Although the political crisis was over, Ravalomanana was faced with its aftermath: the country’s stability was precarious at best, and the economy was weakened. He promptly addressed the situation, implementing economic reforms and working tirelessly to entice foreign investors back to the country; his efforts won praise from foreign donors and international organizations. Ravalomanana also tried to foster a sense of national reconciliation. He created his own political party, I Love Madagascar (Tiako I Madagasikara; TIM), which did well in the December 2002 legislative elections. Ravalomanana was relatively popular in the early years of his term, though he still faced periodic unrest, including failed coup attempts in 2003 and 2006.
In mid-2006 Ravalomanana announced that the presidential election would be held ahead of schedule in December of that year. Opposition groups were unable to field a strong candidate, and he was reelected with about 55 percent of the vote in an election that international observers generally considered free and fair. Ravalomanana’s popularity began to waver in some quarters in 2007, although his TIM party was able to maintain a strong majority of seats in the September 2007 legislative elections.
In late 2008 Ravalomanana was challenged by Andry Rajoelina, the mayor of Antananarivo and a popular opposition leader. Rajoelina accused Ravalomanana of misappropriating public funds and ruling the country as a dictator and called for him to step down, which Ravalomanana refused to do. The struggle between Ravalomanana and Rajoelina came to a head in January 2009, when dozens were killed during opposition protests. Rajoelina was fired from his mayoral post, and the conflict between the two leaders developed into a tense stalemate with sporadic bouts of violence. The crisis intensified in March, when the head of the army was removed by a faction of troops who no longer supported Ravalomanana’s administration.
Although Ravalomanana had the support of the international community, domestically he was faced with the loss of military support and continued public unrest, and on March 17 he agreed to step down from office and hand power to the military. Within hours, military leaders transferred power to Rajoelina, who had already declared himself president. The international community widely condemned the military’s unconstitutional transfer of power to Rajoelina as a coup.
Ravalomanana went into exile on the African continent, but Madagascar was still left in the grips of political crisis, as Rajoelina was internationally shunned and did not have complete support of the Malagasy public. Over the next several months, Ravalomanana, along with Rajoelina and other Malagasy political leaders, participated in several mediation sessions led by international organizations in an attempt to alleviate the crisis. Rajoelina, however, rejected the outcome of these negotiations in late 2009. (For additional detail, see Madagascar: History, The Third Republic, Power Struggle.)
In August 2010 a Malagasy court convicted Ravalomanana in absentia of murder and sentenced him to life in prison with hard labour. The conviction was for the deaths of at least 30 of Rajoelina’s supporters that occurred when Ravalomanana’s presidential guard troops opened fire on protesters during a march on the presidential palace in February 2009; Ravalomanana rejected the verdict.
Although a new president, Hery Martial Rakotoarimanana Rajaonarimampianina, was inaugurated in January 2014, Ravalomanana remained in exile until October 2014. He was promptly detained by authorities after his arrival back in Madagascar and held without charges. In December he was permitted to return to his home, albeit under an order of house arrest. That order was not lifted until May 2015.
In the run-up to the 2018 presidential election, Ravalomanana stated his intention of being a candidate. However, new electoral laws championed by Rajaonarimampianina and passed in April 2018 prevented Ravalomanana’s candidacy on the basis of his 2010 conviction; they also introduced problems for other potential candidates. Ravalomanana’s supporters were joined by others in protesting the new electoral laws. After two protesters were killed by security forces, the demonstrations continued with the added purposes of denouncing the actions of the security forces and calling for Rajaonarimampianina’s resignation. In May the country’s High Constitutional Court struck down parts of the new laws, which led to the removal of the barriers to Ravalomanana’s candidacy in the upcoming presidential election, scheduled for November 7, 2018.
Ravalomanana was one of 36 candidates vying for the presidency, as were Rajoelina and Rajaonarimampianina. Ravalomanana came in second place in the November 7 poll, winning about 35 percent of the vote; he trailed Rajoelina, who garnered about 39 percent. With no candidate winning more than 50 percent, Ravalomanana faced Rajoelina in the December 19 runoff. He was defeated by Rajoelina, who captured more than 55 percent of the vote. Citing what he alleged were electoral flaws, Ravalomanana rejected the results and sought to have them cancelled by filing complaints with the High Constitutional Court. The court, however, rejected his complaints and upheld the election results.
