Rafic al-Hariri, Rafic also spelled Rafik or Rafiq, in full Rafīq Bahāʾ al-Dīn al-Ḥarīrī,  (born November 1, 1944, Sidon, Lebanon—died February 14, 2005, Beirut), Lebanese businessman, politician, and philanthropist who, as prime minister of Lebanon (1992–98; 2000–04), was instrumental in rebuilding the country after its protracted civil war. His assassination in 2005 fomented political tensions between Lebanon and Syria, leading ultimately to the withdrawal of Syrian forces, which had occupied the country since the civil war.
Hariri, the son of a poor Sunni Muslim farmer, briefly attended Beirut Arab University before immigrating to Saudi Arabia in 1966. There he taught mathematics and worked as a part-time accountant for a Saudi contracting firm. In 1970 he set up his own construction business and began amassing a fortune by building hotels, convention centres, and palaces throughout the Middle East. Hariri later expanded his empire to include banking, real estate, insurance, and telecommunications. Along the way, he acquired homes all over the world and used his wealth to improve the lives of the less fortunate. In 1983 he set up the Hariri Foundation, which financed the education of thousands of Lebanese students in Europe and the United States. In addition, Hariri paid the expenses for dozens of Lebanon’s rival leaders, who attended the 1989 Ṭāʾif peace conference in Saudi Arabia, which was instrumental in bringing about the end of the Lebanese civil war.
In 1992 Hariri was elected to the Lebanese parliament and then appointed the country’s prime minister under a constitution that required a Sunni head of government. A week after taking office, he signaled his sensitivity to Lebanon’s rival religions by naming a cabinet that was equally composed of Christians and Muslims. Hariri’s agenda included the rebuilding of Lebanon into the Middle East’s financial and trading capital by implementing his $10 billion plan to repair the country’s infrastructure, negotiating a peace agreement with Israel, and ending terrorism, both at home and abroad. Friction between Hariri and his longtime political rival Émile Lahoud, then president, led to the former’s resignation in 1998.
Hariri was reelected in 2000, and he faced the task of revitalizing Lebanon’s economy and attempting to rebuild a portion of southern Lebanon that had recently been reclaimed after 22 years of Israeli occupation. Under Hariri, the country experienced a resurgence of tourism that helped its economy, but the issue of Syrian influence in Lebanon polarized the country’s political figures and divided Hariri and President Lahoud. To protest a Syrian-backed constitutional amendment that would have extended Lahoud’s term, Hariri resigned in October 2004. The following year he was assassinated in a car bombing. Many suspected that Syrian leaders orchestrated the attack, and, in response to the ensuing political unrest, as well as pressure from the United Nations (UN), Syria withdrew its troops from Lebanon in April 2005, ending the country’s 29-year occupation.
In September of that year, four Lebanese generals with suspected links to Hariri’s death were taken into custody. A special UN tribunal began an inquiry into Hariri’s assassination in March 2009; the next month, the four generals—who by that time had been held for several years without charge—were released due to the tribunal’s finding that there was insufficient evidence on which to charge them.
In late June 2011 the UN tribunal investigating Rafic al-Hariri’s death issued arrest warrants for four suspects, identified by Lebanese officials as affiliates of Hezbollah, a Lebanese Shiʿi militia group and political party that often found itself at odds with Hariri. In August 2020 one of the suspects, Salim Ayyash, was convicted in playing a role in his assassination, though the tribunal said it did not find any evidence of involvement from Hezbollah’s leadership.
Saad al-Hariri, Rafic al-Hariri’s son, was thrust to the leadership of his father’s political bloc after his father’s death and carried on the political legacy. He became prime minister in June 2009 and remained in the post until June 2011. He held the post again from December 2016 until January 2020.
