Ricardo Martinelli, in full Ricardo Alberto Martinelli Berrocal,  (born March 11, 1952, Panama City, Panama), Panamanian businessman and politician who served as president of Panama (2009–14).
Martinelli was educated primarily in the United States; he attended Staunton Military Academy in Virginia and the University of Arkansas, where he earned a degree in business in 1973. He went on to study finance at the Central American Institute of Business Administration (INCAE Business School) in San José, Costa Rica. Martinelli later owned Super 99, Panama’s largest chain of supermarkets, which he joined in 1981 following a stint at Citibank. He was director (1985–87) of the Chamber of Commerce of Panama before serving (1994–96) as the country’s director of social security. In 1998 he formed the Democratic Change (Cambio Democrático; CD) political party. He then took office as chairman of the board of directors of the Panama Canal Authority and minister of canal affairs (1999–2003).
Martinelli made his first bid for the presidency in 2004 and finished last among four candidates, receiving only 5.3 percent of the vote. For his 2009 run he led a coalition of right-wing parties and contributed significant funding to his own cause: he financed a media campaign in which he presented himself as an outsider vying for an office that had been held by traditional political powers since 1989, when dictator Manuel Noriega was deposed in a U.S. invasion. Early in the campaign the candidate of the ruling Democratic Revolutionary Party (Partido Revolucionario Democrático; PRD), Balbina Herrera, was considered the favourite, but Martinelli’s campaign promise of “real change” resonated among poor voters. Moreover, he already had the support of many of Panama’s business leaders. He won by a wide margin, garnering some 60 percent of the vote in the May 3 presidential election.
The early challenges of Martinelli’s presidency included fighting an escalating crime rate and stabilizing a shrinking economy. He also aimed to influence the initiation of a free-trade agreement that had been signed with the United States but had stalled in the U.S. Congress. By the end of 2010, however, many Panamanians were questioning his policies and his authoritarian manner. Charges of cronyism and nepotism were leveled at him, as his appointments to high-level positions included those of a pair of his friends to the Supreme Court—José Abel Almengor, who had been Martinelli’s security secretary, and Alejandro Moncada, who had been removed in 2000 from the Technical Judicial Police for serious ethical breaches. 
The dismissal of Vice Pres. Juan Carlos Varela of the Panameñista Party from the post of foreign minister on August 30, 2011, (he remained vice president) triggered the resignations of other cabinet members in solidarity and marked the end of the coalition that had brought Martinelli to power. Conflict between the two politicians had erupted over proposed constitutional reforms that would have replaced the country’s first-past-the-post presidential electoral system with one that would require a runoff if no candidate won an outright majority. Martinelli also seemed intent on the elimination of the constitutional prohibition against a president’s serving more than one five-year term. Moreover, he sought to consolidate power by coaxing legislators to change party affiliations and join his Democratic Change party. Varela declared that even as a member of the executive, he would now play the role of “leader of the opposition.” In the process, Martinelli’s approval rating plummeted to 46.4 percent in September, a 20-point drop from the 66.9 percent support he had in August—the biggest decline in the popularity of a Panamanian president in 20 years.
Despite the fact that Panama’s economy continued to boom, Martinelli’s approval ratings continued to fall in 2012 as a result of several serious corruption scandals and ongoing confrontations with indigenous groups, labour unions, and the political opposition. The rift that had led to the breakup of the governing coalition in 2011 deepened in 2012 as relations between the president and vice president further deteriorated. President Martinelli filed suit against the vice president, claiming that his former ally had slandered him by accusing the administration of corruption. The allegations stemmed from a bribery scandal linked to an Italian company’s attempt to pay substantial kickbacks to Panamanian government officials in exchange for lucrative government contracts. Martinelli vehemently denied the accusations.
In the 2014 presidential election, Martinelli lent his support to former minister of housing José Domingo Arias, who lost to Varela, and Martinelli’s ally-turned-foe earned a measure of political revenge.In January 2015 the Supreme Court ordered an investigation of Martinelli on charges that he had overseen and profited from the issuing of inflated contracts for the purchase of dried food for a government program while president. Under Panamanian electoral law Martinelli, as the leader of a political party, was immune from prosecution. However, the Supreme Court appealed for an exception from the electoral tribunal, which lifted Martinelli’s immunity in April. In June the Supreme Court initiated another investigation of Martinelli, that time on charges that he had directed the National Security Council to conduct illegal surveillance of businesspeople and politicians. Martinelli—who had not returned to the country since leaving in January, only days before the Supreme Court issued an arrest warrant—said that the charges against him were politically motivated. He later was accused of embezzling government money to fund his surveillance activities.
Acting on a request from the Panamanian government, U.S. officials in 2017 arrested Martinelli in Florida, where he had been living for two years. He fought extradition but ended his battle in May 2018 and was returned to Panama the following month. Martinelli was initially held in El Renancer prison while being tried for interception of communications without judicial authorization; monitoring, persecution and surveillance without judicial authorization; and improperly purchasing espionage equipment with state funds. Meanwhile, he sought to run for mayor of Panama City as well as for a seat in the national legislature before the country’s electoral court barred him in April 2019 from being a candidate in the next month’s elections. In early August Martinelli’s trial concluded, and the three-judge panel found him not guilty.
