Tung Chee-hwa, also spelled Tung Chee Hwa, Chinese (Pinyin) Dong Jianhua or (Wade-Giles romanization) Tung Chien-hua,  (born May 29, 1937, Shanghai, China), Chinese businessman and politician and first chief executive (1997–2005) of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (S.A.R.) of China.
Tung was the son of C.Y. Tung, founder of Orient Overseas—now part of Orient Overseas (International) Limited (OOIL), one of the world’s largest shipping conglomerates. Educated in Hong Kong and Great Britain, the younger Tung graduated from the University of Liverpool in 1960. He then spent six years in the United States studying business practices before returning to Hong Kong to manage the family business. Tung rose to become head of OOIL in 1982 after his father’s death.
In 1985 he joined the People’s Republic of China Consultative Committee for the Basic Law, which had the task of formulating the rules and laws by which Hong Kong would be governed when it reverted from British to Chinese sovereignty in 1997. The final agreement on the Basic Law was achieved in 1990 and went into effect with the assumption of Chinese sovereignty. Tung served as a member of the Executive Council of the Hong Kong colonial government (1992–96) before being selected by the Hong Kong Election Commission in December 1996 to be the first chief executive of the forthcoming S.A.R. He took office the following July 1, the day Hong Kong reverted to Chinese control.
During the Asian financial crisis of 1997–98, Tung both suspended government land sales—an unprecedented measure—and intervened in the stock market in an attempt to slow the impact of the regionwide crisis in Hong Kong. Early in his second term, which began in 2002, Tung appointed a new 14-member ministerial team that would assume the responsibility of policy making, a task once held by civil servants. Tung viewed this action as a move to protect civil servants from political pressures, but critics charged him with attempting to consolidate power and strengthen the office of chief executive.
Tung struggled to maintain popular support following the recession. The greatest setback occurred in July 2003, when some half-million people marched in Hong Kong in protest of a proposed antisubversion law backed by Tung. Amid the public outcry, resignations of top Hong Kong officials, and international criticism, the chief executive withdrew the bill from legislative consideration. However, the failure to pass this legislation, which China had wanted enacted, fueled Beijing’s growing criticism of Tung’s leadership. In March 2005, more than two years before the end of his term, Tung resigned from his position, citing medical reasons. He was replaced by Donald Tsang. Shortly thereafter Tung was elected vice chairman of the 10th Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), China’s top political advisory body, and in 2008 he was reelected to that post for the 11th CPPCC.
