Valerie Jarrett, née Valerie Bowman,  (born November 14, 1956, Shīrāz, Iran), American lawyer, businesswoman, and politician who was a senior adviser (2009–17) to U.S. Pres. Barack Obama.
Bowman was born in Iran and spent much of her childhood traveling abroad, as her father was a physician who assisted developing countries in establishing health care systems. In 1963 her family settled in Chicago. (Bowman’s grandfather Robert Taylor was the first African American head of the Chicago Housing Authority.) She later attended Stanford University (A.B., 1978) and the University of Michigan Law School (J.D., 1981). In 1983 she married William Robert Jarrett, a physician; the couple divorced in 1988.
Working in corporate and real estate law until 1987, Jarrett moved into politics when she became deputy counselor for finance and development in the administration of Chicago Mayor Harold Washington. After Washington’s death, Jarrett remained with the mayor’s office and accepted several positions in the administration of his successor, Richard M. Daley. She served as Daley’s deputy chief of staff and later as a planning commissioner. Jarrett was also chair of the Chicago Transit Authority from 1995 to 2003, and she served as chairman of the board for the Chicago Stock Exchange from 2004 to 2007. Beginning in 1995, she was executive vice president of the Habitat Company, a property management firm responsible for overseeing portions of Chicago’s public housing system. Jarrett became CEO of the company in 2007.
Jarrett was long associated with Barack Obama and his wife, Michelle, whom she had hired as an assistant in 1991 while working for Daley. Jarrett developed an ongoing personal and professional relationship with the couple. She served as the finance chair of Obama’s 2004 Senate campaign and was treasurer of his political action committee. During Obama’s presidential campaign, Jarrett mediated between Obama and members of the African American community who were concerned about the implications of his candidacy, and she also served as an envoy to those who had supported Obama’s primary rival for the Democratic nomination, Hillary Clinton. After Obama’s election in November 2008, she served as cochair of his transition team. Later that month it was announced that Jarrett had been appointed senior adviser to Obama.
Jarrett became a highly influential member of Obama’s inner circle and a forceful advocate of the president’s agenda. She was also known for advancing progressive measures, such as the inclusion of free birth control in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010). Jarrett helped Obama win reelection in 2012, and she continued to serve as senior adviser until his second term ended in 2017. She later wrote the memoir Finding My Voice: My Journey to the West Wing and the Path Forward (2019).
