Abbie Hoffman, byname of Abbott Hoffman,  (born November 30, 1936, Worcester, Massachusetts, U.S.—died April 12, 1989, New Hope, Pennsylvania), American political activist and founder of the Youth International Party (Yippies), who was known for his successful media events.
Hoffman, who received psychology degrees from both Brandeis University (1959) and the University of California, Berkeley (1960), was active in the American civil rights movement before turning his energies to protesting the Vietnam War and the American economic and political system. His acts of protest blurred the line between political action and guerrilla theatre, and they utilized absurdist humour to great effect. In August 1967 Hoffman and a dozen confederates disrupted operations at the New York Stock Exchange by showering the trading floor with dollar bills. In October of that year he led a crowd of more than 50,000 antiwar protesters in an attempt to levitate the Pentagon and exorcise the evil spirits that he claimed resided within.
Hoffman’s ethic was codified with the formal organization of the Yippies in January 1968. Later that year Hoffman secured his place as a countercultural icon when he joined thousands of protesters outside the Democratic Party’s national convention in Chicago. Before the demonstrations degenerated into a street battle between police and protesters, Hoffman and Yippie cofounder Jerry Rubin unveiled Pigasus, a boar hog that would serve as the Yippies’ presidential candidate in 1968. These exploits, among others, led to Hoffman’s being named a defendant in the so-called Chicago Seven trial (1969), in which he was convicted of crossing state lines with intent to riot at the Democratic convention; the conviction was later overturned.
After he was arrested on charges of selling cocaine (1973), Hoffman went underground, underwent plastic surgery, assumed the alias Barry Freed, and worked as an environmental activist in New York state. He resurfaced in 1980 and served a year in prison before resuming his environmental efforts. He was the author of such books as Revolution for the Hell of It (1968), Steal This Book (1971), and an autobiography, Soon to Be a Major Motion Picture (1980). Hoffman’s life—in particular, his underground period and his efforts to draw attention to the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Cointelpro operations—were dramatized in the film Steal This Movie (2000).
