U.S. News & World Report,  online newsmagazine published in Washington, D.C., from 1933. It is known for its annual lists of rankings and its special single-topic issues.
Successfully imitating the general format pioneered by Time magazine, it was established in 1933 as a weekly magazine by the journalist David Lawrence as the United States News. It won general note for its thorough coverage of major news events in Washington, D.C., and the United States, often carrying the complete text of major speeches and documents emanating from the capital. In 1945 Lawrence founded World Report to treat world news as United States News treated domestic news. The two magazines merged in 1948. From its start, U.S. News & World Report had an editorial viewpoint somewhat more conservative than its larger rivals, Time and the American weekly newsmagazine Newsweek, and unlike them it paid scant attention to sports and the arts, except as they might pertain to developing major political and economic stories. In 1962 Lawrence transferred ownership of U.S. News to its employees.
The magazine in 1983 launched a series of signature annual rankings beginning with a ranking of American colleges and universities. In the 21st century these rankings were based on such factors as academic peer reviews and student-to-faculty ratios. U.S. News was purchased by the Canadian-born American media and real-estate mogul Mort B. Zuckerman in 1984. The first rankings guidebook containing statistical data appeared on public newsstands as America’s Best Colleges three years later, and the series continued to expand with America’s Best Hospitals (1990) and America’s Best Graduate Schools (1994). U.S. News established an online presence in 1995, providing the reader with a multimedia experience that in the early 21st century included breaking news and blogs. The magazine also continued to expand its series of rankings with the launch of America’s Best Leaders (2005), America’s Best Health Plans (2005), and Best Places to Retire (2007), among others. In 2008 U.S. News moved from weekly to monthly publication, and in 2011 it discontinued its regular print edition, shifting its focus toward online publication.
