apterygote,  broadly, any of the primitive wingless insects, distinct from the pterygotes, or winged insects. Used in this sense, the term apterygote commonly includes the primitive insects of the following groups: proturans, collembolans (springtails), diplurans, and species in the orders Zygentoma, Archaeognatha, and Monura (formerly the thysanurans).
The taxonomic status of the various groups that are considered apterygotes, however, remains unsettled. A typical apterygote, for example, is wingless and has six legs. The presence of six legs was once an important feature in the identification of true insects and enabled the identification of the apterygotes, including the proturans, collembolans, and diplurans and the now defunct Thysanura—the four groups that together made up the traditional subclass Apterygota (class Insecta). However, the proturans, collembolans, and diplurans are now considered by some entomologists to be offshoots from the main insectan stem of evolution and have been given independent taxonomic status as classes equivalent to the class Insecta. The term apterygote, therefore, is sometimes applied only to those groups thought to be ancestors of pterygotes—i.e., the silverfish, fishmoths, and firebrats (order Zygentoma) and the bristletails (order Archaeognatha), together with the extinct monurans (order Monura). For completeness of discussion, however, and because of the similarities of these primitive hexapods, the proturans, collembolans, and diplurans, as well as orders Zygentoma, Archaeognatha, and Monura, are included in this article.
Protura are minute (to 2 mm [0.08 inch] in length), elongated, and white and lack antennae. Distributed throughout the world in soil and leaf litter, they number about 800 species. Collembola are diverse in form, coloration, and habitat. Most species are less than 3 mm (0.1 inch) in length, but some range to 10 mm (0.4 inch). They have either elongated or globular bodies with antennae and may have a furcula (ventral abdominal springing organ). Collembolans occur in soil and leaf litter throughout the world, including Antarctica. There are more than 8,200 known species. Diplura are white or yellowish, blind, elongated with long antennae, and less than 10 mm in length, although one group attains 50 mm (2 inches). Their two tail filaments (or threadlike structures) can be long and thin, short and thick, or in the form of pincers. Diplurans are widely distributed in soil, leaf litter, and rotting logs. More than 800 species have been described. Zygentoma and Archaeognatha are mainly long with three elongated tail filaments. Mostly 5 to 20 mm (0.2 to 0.8 inch) in length when fully grown, these insects are widely distributed in leaf litter, although some live in ant and termite nests. Zygentoma have small compound eyes and styli (i.e., bristlelike processes) only on the abdomen. Archaeognatha have large compound eyes and styli on the legs and abdomen. More than 350 species of Zygentoma and Archaeognatha are known. The largest of the extinct Monura were about 30 mm (1.2 inches) in length.
The immature stages in all apterygotes are called nymphs. The young are similar to adults, changing little (slight metamorphosis) from molt to molt until sexual maturity is attained. In some groups, molting may continue throughout adult life. The greatest changes occur in the Protura, which is the only anamorphic hexapod group (i.e., an increase in number of body segments occurs at time of molting). The complete number of segments is present only after the third molt. There are at least six stages between molts (instars), and the last is the adult. Little is known about the postembryonic development of Diplura. Most species feed on both living and dead vegetable matter and fungi, although one group preys on other small invertebrates.
The life cycles of the Collembola are diverse. Females may lay up to 800 eggs that hatch in 2 to 40 days. Three to 12 juvenile molts occur in intervals ranging from 11 days to a year, with up to 50 molts occurring in a lifetime, which can last from 4 to 18 months. Most Collembola feed on living or decaying plant material as well as on fungi, algae, and spores, while a few feed on carrion or are predatory.
In Zygentoma there may be more than 40 molts, although the adult stage is usually reached after about 12 molts. The silverfish (Lepisma saccharina) reaches sexual maturity in two or three years and molts multiple times in each subsequent year (sometimes molting more than two dozen times in a single year). They can live as long as seven years. In Archaeognatha there are six instars including adults. Both Zygentoma and Archaeognatha feed on decaying or dried vegetable material. Domestic silverfish eat plant and animal remains, paper, and artificial silk.
Reproduction in apterygote groups is mainly sexual, but parthenogenesis (reproduction without fertilization) can occur. Males deposit sperm packets, often haphazardly, that are taken up by females and stored until the time for fertilization. In proturans small external genitalia of unusual form surround the gonopore in both sexes. Collembolans lack external genitalia, but the gonopore and surrounding area differ. In diplurans external genitalia are absent or vestigial. Zygentoma and Archaeognatha have external genitalia similar to those of the pterygotes. However, the aedeagus in males is used to deposit sperm drops and not as a copulative organ. The deposition and pickup of sperm drops in Zygentoma and Archaeognatha must take place during each adult stage if young are to be produced since the contents of the female sperm receptacle are lost with each molt.
