Black widow,  (genus Latrodectus),  any of several species of black spiders distinguished by an hourglass-shaped marking on the abdomen. Black widows, especially Latrodectus mactans, are found throughout much of the world. The bite of the black widow often produces muscle pain, nausea, and mild paralysis of the diaphragm, which makes breathing difficult. Most victims recover without serious complications, but a bite can be fatal to very small children and the elderly.
L. mactans is the most common species in North America and other parts of the world. The female is shiny black and usually has a reddish to yellow hourglass design on the underside of the spherical abdomen. Sometimes two small triangles, instead of a complete hourglass, are present. The body is about 2.5 cm (1 inch) long. The male, seldom seen because it is often killed and eaten by the female after mating (hence the spider’s name), is about one-fourth the size of the female. In addition to the hourglass design, the male often has pairs of red and white stripes on the sides of the abdomen.
The large web of black widows consists of a loosely organized mesh (cobweb). The female may lay several masses of eggs during one summer. The egg case is suspended in the web and contains 250–750 eggs. It is white or tan in colour and has a papery texture, and it measures up to 12 mm (0.5 inch) in diameter. The young spiders, which are orange and white, emerge in 14 to 30 days. Females may live more than 11/2 years.
In addition to L. mactans, three other black widow species are found in the United States: L. hesperus, L. curacaviensis, and L. geometricus. The latter is also called the brown widow and is native to Africa. In the northern part of its range, L. mactans is found most often in brush piles and near dwellings, whereas L. curacaviensis lives under logs and stones and in woods and fields. In the southeastern United States, L. curacaviensis lives in trees and shrubs above the ground, and L. mactans lives on the ground. L. hesperus is found in western North America. L. hystrix, L. dahli, and L. pallidus are of southern Europe, northern Africa, and southwestern Asia. L. hasselti lives in Australia, where it is called the redback.
Like most spiders, the black widow preys on insects. It makes small punctures in the victim’s body and sucks out the contents as a liquid. Black widows in turn are attacked by mud dauber wasps (see thread-waisted wasp) and other insect parasites and predators. Black widows are members of the comb-footed spider family, Theridiidae.
