Crustacean,  any member of the subphylum Crustacea (phylum Arthropoda), a group of invertebrate animals consisting of some 45,000 species distributed worldwide. Crabs, lobsters, shrimps, and wood lice are among the best-known crustaceans, but the group also includes an enormous variety of other forms without popular names. Crustaceans are generally aquatic and differ from other arthropods in having two pairs of appendages (antennules and antennae) in front of the mouth and paired appendages near the mouth that function as jaws. Because there are many exceptions to the basic features, however, a satisfactory inclusive definition of all the Crustacea is extraordinarily hard to frame.
The largest crustaceans belong to the Decapoda, a large order (about 10,000 species) that includes the American lobster, which can reach a weight of 20 kilograms (44 pounds), and the giant Japanese spider crab, which has legs that can span up to 3.7 metres (12 feet). At the other end of the scale, some of the water fleas (class Branchiopoda), such as Alonella, reach lengths of less than 0.25 millimetre (0.009 inch), and many members of the subclass Copepoda are less than one millimetre in length. The range of structure is reflected in the complex classification of the group. Some of the parasitic forms are so modified and specialized as adults that they can only be recognized as crustaceans by features of their life histories.
Crustaceans are found mainly in water. Different species are found in freshwater, seawater, and even inland brines, which may have several times the salt concentration of seawater. Various species have occupied almost every conceivable niche within the aquatic environment. An enormous abundance of free-swimming (planktonic) species occupies the open waters of lakes and oceans. Other species live at the bottom of the sea, where they may crawl over the sediment or burrow into it. Different species are found in rocky, sandy, and muddy areas. Some species are so small that they live in the spaces between sand grains. Others tunnel in the fronds of seaweeds or into man-made wooden structures. Some members of the orders Isopoda and Amphipoda extend down to the greatest depths in the sea and have been found in oceanic trenches at depths of up to 10,000 metres. Crustaceans colonize lakes and rivers throughout the world, even high mountain lakes at altitudes of 5,000 metres. They range widely in latitude as well: in the high Arctic some crustaceans use the short summer to develop quickly through a generation, leaving dormant stages to overwinter.
A number of crabs are amphibious, being capable of leaving the water to scavenge on land. Some, like the ghost crabs (Ocypode), can run at great speed across tropical beaches. One of the mangrove crabs, Aratus, can climb trees. Some crabs spend so much time away from the water that they are known as land crabs; however, these crustaceans must return to the water when their larvae are ready to hatch. The most terrestrial of the Crustacea are the wood lice (order Isopoda, family Oniscoidea); most live in damp places, although a few isopod species can survive in deserts. In addition to these well-adapted groups, occasional representatives of other groups have become at least semiterrestrial. Amphipods, members of the subclasses Copepoda and Ostracoda, and the order Anomopoda have been found among damp leaves on forest floors, particularly in the tropics.
The crustaceans of most obvious importance to humans are the larger species, chiefly decapods. Fisheries in many parts of the world capture shrimps, prawns, spiny lobsters, and the king crab (Paralithodes) of the northern Pacific and its southern counterpart, the centolla, found off the coast of Chile. Many species of true crabs—such as the blue crab, Dungeness crab, and the stone crab, all in North America, and the edible crab of Europe—are valuable sources of food. The most highly prized decapod is probably the true lobster (Homarus species), although overfishing since the early 20th century has greatly diminished the catches of both the North American and the European species. Freshwater crustaceans include crayfish and some river prawns and river crabs. Many species have only local market value. It is probable that no crustaceans are poisonous unless they have been feeding on the leaves or fruits of poisonous plants.
Another crustacean, the large acorn shell (Balanus psittacus), a barnacle (order Cirripedia) measuring up to 27 centimetres (11 inches) in length, is regarded as a delicacy in South America, and a stalked barnacle (Mitella pollicipes) is eaten in parts of France and Spain. In Japan, barnacles are allowed to settle and grow on bamboo stakes, later to be scraped off and crushed for use as fertilizer.
Copepods and krill are important components of most marine food webs. Planktonic (i.e., drifting) copepods, such as Calanus, and members of the order Euphausiacea (euphausiids), or krill, may be present in such great numbers that they discolour large areas of the open sea, thus indicating to fishermen where shoals of herring and mackerel are likely to be found.
The water flea (Daphnia magna) and the brine shrimp (Artemia salina) are used as fish food in aquariums and fish ponds, and the larvae of the latter are widely used as food for the larvae of larger crustaceans reared in captivity. Ostracods, of which numerous fossil and subfossil species are known, are important to geologists and oil prospectors.
Much damage may be done to rice paddies by burrowing crabs of various species and by the mud-eating, shrimplike Thalassina of Malaya. By undermining paddy embankments, they allow water to drain away, thus exposing the roots of the plants to the sun; if near the coast, salt water may thus be allowed to seep into the paddies. Tadpole shrimps (Triops) are often numerous in rice fields, where they stir up the fine silt in search of food, killing many of the plants. Land crabs and crayfish may damage tomato and cotton crops.
