Hookworm,  any of several parasitic worms of the genera Necator and Ancylostoma belonging to the class Nematoda (phylum Aschelminthes) that infest the intestines of humans, dogs, and cats.
A malady resembling hookworm disease was described in Egypt as early as 1600 bce. A. duodenale was discovered in Europe and associated with the disease in the middle of the 18th century. N. americanus was discovered in North America in 1901–02 by Charles W. Stiles.
The female worm deposits eggs in the intestine of the host. Each egg contains a two- to eight-segmented embryo, which is then passed in the feces. Assuming the embryo reaches suitable soil, it grows and hatches in 24 to 48 hours as an immature, noninfective larva. After two to three days it molts and develops into a mature, infective, nonfeeding larva. On contact with human skin it molts again and penetrates the deeper skin layers, often causing an intense localized “ground itch.” It then invades lymph and blood vessels, is carried to the lungs, passes up the respiratory tract to the mouth, and is swallowed. The larva undergoes a third molt, anchors itself to the intestinal mucosa, molts for a fourth time, and becomes an adult worm. The worms live in the small intestine, and eggs are passed in the feces as early as five to six weeks after the larvae enter the skin.
Average adult A. duodenale worms range in size from 8 to 13 millimetres (0.3 to 0.5 inch), while adult N. americanus specimens range from 5 to 11 millimetres (0.2 to 0.4 inch). The worms then live in the intestine for many months, and some may persist for as long as 10 years. Continual reinfection and acquired partial resistance result in a more or less constant number of worms harboured. Infective larvae when swallowed can develop in the intestine without preliminary lung passage, but this mode of transmission is not common in nature. There are two dog hookworms, A. brasiliense and A. caninum, which may infect humans. Usually these cause an aberrant infection, “creeping eruption” or cutaneous larva migrans. This disease is characterized by serpiginous tunnels in the skin caused by migrations of larvae that are unable to penetrate the innermost layers.
Hookworm infection typically occurs in a zone from approximately latitude 38° N to 34° S and may be encountered in cooler regions, particularly in mines and tunnels. The geographical distribution is determined by temperature and rainfall, which influence development of free-living larvae. Other important factors are drainage, type of soil, social habits and customs, and poor sanitation. Optimum temperature for larval development is between 70° and 85° F (about 21° to 29° C), A. duodenale is better adjusted to the lower range than N. americanus, and the latter predominates in warmer regions.
Fully developed eggs and newly hatched larvae die in a few days if kept below 43° to 46° F (6° to 8° C). Mature larvae can resist freezing temperatures as long as six days, and developmental time is tripled at temperatures of 55° to 60° F (13° to 16° C). Under optimum conditions, infective larvae may remain viable in the soil for several months or longer, but under natural conditions in the tropics the majority rarely survive longer than five or six weeks. A minimum annual rainfall of 40 inches (1 metre) is required to maintain the infection in endemic proportions. The distribution of the rainfall throughout the year is also important—a long dry season is detrimental to larvae in the soil. Drainage and subsoil water level are important in irrigated regions or where canals are present. Coarse, sandy soil with humus is much more favourable for larval development than fine clay or silt loam, since larvae migrate vertically with changes in moisture and temperature. They cannot pass rapidly through fine-textured soils and thus become dry and die.
Hookworm disease is a scourge of tropical climates, resulting in a debilitated anemic population. Anemia in hookworm disease results from sucking of blood by the adult worms in the intestine and the attendant inflammation of the bowel. A single A. duodenale can remove, on the average, almost one cubic centimetre (almost a quarter teaspoon) of blood a day. As a bloodsucker, N. americanus is about one-fifth as efficient. Infected individuals on adequate diet have been classified in four groups according to numbers of N. americanus harboured: (1) carriers, 25 or fewer worms—no symptoms; (2) light infections, 26 to 100 worms—few or no symptoms; (3) moderate infections, 101 to 500 worms—moderate symptoms; (4) heavy infections, more than 500 worms—severe symptoms. In general, the symptoms in classical heavy infections include pallor of skin and mucous membranes, edema of the face and extremities, constipation alternating with diarrhea, abdominal tenderness, increased appetite for bulky foods or unusual substances (such as clay), disorders of the reproductive system (delayed puberty, impotence, irregular menstruation), endocrine insufficiency, stunted growth, cardiac weakness, palpitation, hypersensitiveness of the skin to cold, physical debility, fatigue, dullness, apathy, and depression.
Microscopic laboratory diagnosis is made by searching for characteristic eggs in feces. In light infections, so few eggs may be present that concentration by sedimentation, centrifugation, or flotation methods should be used. Egg-counting techniques are useful in estimation of the number of worms harboured by an individual. Parasitism with a very few eggs in feces is harmless. The laboratory report, therefore, should indicate the degree of infection, as determined by the egg count or, at least, by rough estimation from a direct microscopic smear.
Treatment involves removal of the worms and reduction of anemia. Worm removal in severe cases requires great skill. The vermifuge may be harmful if given before the patient is improved physically. Thus preliminary blood transfusion may be required with dietary and iron therapy before the vermifuge is given. Many vermifuges have been used. Thymol, oil of chenopodium, and carbon tetrachloride were effective but also toxic. They were supplanted by tetrachlorethylene and hexylresorcinol. The former is a safe drug and removes 90 percent or more of the worms on a single treatment. It may, however, cause migration of the roundworm Ascaris lumbricoides. Hexylresorcinol has no serious contraindications, is effective against 80 percent of the worms, and removes 90 percent of A. lumbricoides on a single treatment. Mass treatment, with other anthelminthics, of large groups of heavily infected persons has been successful in reducing the incidence of hookworm, especially during the dry season when the soil contains few larvae and reinfection is minimal. Repetition of treatment every two or three years may be required.
Transmission of infection depends upon improper disposal of human infected excreta. Where humans go barefoot, there is ample opportunity for intimacy of contact with polluted soil. The essentials for ensuring a permanent, adequate control of hookworm infection include: (1) education in the principles of sanitation, emphasizing the importance of adequate disposal of feces, and aid in construction of simple sanitary toilets; (2) establishment of full-time local health services staffed by trained personnel; (3) examination and treatment of persons infected with hookworm disease; (4) continuous observation of the area to prevent the return of conditions conducive to infection.
