Horseshoe worm,  phylum name Phoronida, a small group (about 12 species) of wormlike marine invertebrates that live in tubes secreted by special glands.
These protective tubes become encrusted with shells or are buried in sand. Horseshoe worms, or phoronids, either are solitary or occur in groups of many thousands of individuals; one species is colonial and buds asexually. The body of the horseshoe worm is elongated and measures from 15 to 200 mm (0.6 to 8 inches) in length. It has a U-shaped gut and nerve, excretory, and reproductive organs. Feeding is by means of a protrusible lophophore, a structure at the anterior end that bears a circle or paired spiral of as many as 1,500 ciliated tentacles. The cilia produce a water current, and the tentacles trap food particles beneath a flap (epistome) that covers the central mouth. Groups of lophophores are often grazed on by fish but are then regenerated.
Some phoronid species have separate sexes, but others are hermaphroditic (i.e., both male and female organs occur in the same individual). All have free-swimming ciliated larvae.
Although most horseshoe worms are found intertidally or in shallow ocean regions in temperate zones, their habitats also include tropical regions and ocean depths. In general, horseshoe worms are uncommon; individuals of certain species, however, may carpet the bottoms of shallow bays. Horseshoe worms are of little practical value to man, but their unusual life cycle and obscure ancestry have made them objects of biological interest.
Since their discovery in 1846, horseshoe worms have been associated with every animal phylum, yet the relationship of horseshoe worms to other animals remains controversial. They have not been preserved as fossils in the geological record, although fossil tubes (called Scolithus) may belong to horseshoe worms. Embryological stages often are useful in relating animal groups, but the actinotroch larva of horseshoe worms is unique. On the basis of adult body form, especially similar body regions, the phoronids are grouped near the colonial moss animals (bryozoans) and the lamp shells (brachiopods). The various phoronid species are very similar in body form; only two genera, Phoronis and Phoronopsis (and no higher groups), are recognized.
