katydid,  (family Tettigoniidae), also called long-horned grasshopper or bushcricket, also spelled bush cricket,  any of about 6,000 predominantly nocturnal insects that are related to crickets (the two groups are in the suborder Ensifera, order Orthoptera) and are noted for their mating calls. Katydids are also known for their large hind legs and extremely long threadlike antennae as well as the thick, upwardly curved ovipositor (egg-laying structure) of the females.
The common true katydid (Pterophylla camellifolia) produces the repetitive song for which katydids are named; the song is phoneticized as “katy-did, katy-didn’t.” However, each species of katydid has its own rasping song, produced by stridulation, whereby the forewings, one of which is ridged, are rubbed together. Although katydid songs are species-specific, different species are able to hear one another’s calls. Songs differ as to their purpose, being either reproductive, territorial, aggressive, or defensive in nature.
Katydids are often large, with body lengths that range from about 1 to more than 6 cm (0.4 to more than 2.4 inches). An exception is the predatory bush cricket (Saga pedo; also called the matriarchal katydid), the body of which can grow to about 12 cm (4.7 inches) in length. Although many species are bright green, various colour morphs, including pink and yellow, occur naturally and have been reared in captivity.
Wing form varies widely among katydids. Many species have long wings that cover the body. Siliquofera grandis, for example, which is among the largest of the katydids, has a wingspan of more than 25 cm (9.8 inches). Other species, however, including some common ones, have short wings or are nearly wingless. As a group, katydids are poor flyers. Many species do not fly but only flutter their wings during leaps.
Katydids hear by using a structure called a tympanum, or tympanic organ, one of which is located on each foreleg. There also is a thoracic auditory structure, and some species can communicate through substrate vibration. Males are the primary sound producers, as the females of many species are silent. An important exception are species in the subfamily Phaneropterinae, where the sexes form duets, with females producing ticks in response to the males’ calls.
Katydids are widespread, occurring in every region of the world with the exception of Antarctica. They are especially abundant in the tropics, particularly in the Amazon Rainforest, but are also found in cooler and drier regions, such as the heathlands of Australia, the deserts of the United States, and parts of Canada and northern Europe. They typically are found living on trees, bushes, or grasses, often matching the appearance of their surroundings.
Species of katydids that inhabit areas with distinct seasons typically live for less than a year and produce one generation of offspring, the eggs being the only life stage capable of surviving winter. Species in tropical climates can live for several years and may produce two generations annually, with overlap among various life stages. Depending on the species, eggs may be deposited in the soil or directly into plant tissue; some species lay their eggs on sticks or rocks. The young are similar to adults but have less-developed wings. Katydids feed chiefly on plant matter, though some species are predatory, feeding on other insects.
Katydids display remarkable adaptations for defense, a consequence in part of their generally poor flying ability, which leaves them highly vulnerable to predation. Cryptically coloured species, which blend in with the environment, rely primarily on the mimicry of vegetation. The peacock katydid (Pterochroza ocellata), for example, precisely mimics the discoloration of a dead leaf.
Some katydid species exhibit deimatic (startling) behaviour, in which they use vivid coloration or chemical defenses in their attempts to ward off attack by a predator. When threatened, the mountain katydid (Acripeza reticulata) lifts its wings to expose the bright colours on its abdomen. An otherwise cryptic species, the mountain katydid’s bright markings serve an aposematic function, warning predators of its noxious chemical secretions. Species in the genus Vestria flash brightly coloured markings by lifting their wings and arching their abdomens. Vestria also produce an unpleasant odour when threatened.
Katydids may employ unique communication strategies to avoid detection by predators. Males of the species Docidocercus gigliotosi, for example, may mask their nighttime mating signals from predatory bats by using tremulations, whereby vibrations are sent along plant substrates shared by females. Some katydid species supplement abbreviated songs with tremulations in order to avoid bat predation.
