Long-horned beetle,  (family Cerambycidae), also called longicorn,  any of about 25,000 species of beetles (insect order Coleoptera) whose common name is derived from the extremely long antennae of most species. These beetles occur throughout the world but are most numerous in the tropics. They range in size from 2 to 152 mm (less than 1/8 to about 6 inches). However, these lengths may double or triple when the antennae are included.
Many adults (e.g., Clytus arietes of Europe) visit flowers and have yellow, black, and orange coloration patterns that mimic wasps. Some tropical species of Clytus mimic ants. The African Pterognatha gigas resembles a patch of moss or lichen with a few strands, its antennae, sticking out.
The yellowish or white larvae are often known as roundheaded borers, because the front part of the plump larva is expanded to give it a rounded appearance. Using its strong jaws, the larva bores through and feeds in woody plants for one to two years or more. When ready to pupate, the larva bores a tunnel to the outside, pupates within the tree, and, as a new adult, uses this tunnel as its exit. Because of their wood-boring habits, long-horned beetles can be serious pests of timber and pulpwood trees, landscape trees, fruit trees, and woody ornamental plants.
The long-horned beetle family is divided into several subfamilies, including the following:
The prionids (subfamily Prioninae) have leathery, brownish wing covers (elytra), and the margins of the prothorax (region behind the head) are toothlike and expanded laterally. Included in this group is the pine-inhabiting genus Parandra and the broad-necked prionus (Prionus laticollis), whose larvae live in grape, apple, poplar, blueberry, and other fruit and ornamental tree roots.
The cerambycids (subfamily Cerambycinae) include the ribbed pine borer (Rhagium inquisitor), which has a narrow thorax with a spine on each side and three lengthwise ridges on its wing covers. It lives in pine trees during the larval stage. Another cerambycid is the locust borer (Megacyllene robiniae), which is black with yellow stripes across the body. Female locust borers lay their eggs in black locust trees. After the larvae hatch, they bore into the inner bark of the tree, creating tunnels and leaving the tree susceptible to damaging infection by a species of fungus known as Fomes rimosus (Phellinus rimosus).
The lepturids (subfamily Lepturinae) include the elderberry longhorn (Desmocerus palliatus), also called the cloaked knotty-horn beetle because it looks as if it has a yellow cloak on its shoulders and has knotted antennae. It feeds on leaves and flowers of the elderberry bush, and its larvae bore into the pithy stems.
The lamiids (subfamily Lamiinae) include the sawyer (Monochamus), a gray-brown beetle about 30 mm (1.2 inches) long, not including the long antennae. The larvae live in pines and firs and bore tunnels up to 10 mm (0.3 inch) in diameter. The roundheaded apple tree borer (Saperda candida) can be a major apple pest. The twig girdler (Oncideres cingulata) deposits eggs in twigs and then girdles, or cuts, a groove around the twig. Eventually the twig dies and breaks off, and the larvae develop inside the dead twig. The Asian long-horned beetle (Anoplophora glabripennis), native to China and Korea, is a major pest of many hardwood trees, especially species of maple, boxelder, horsechestnut, buckeye, willow, and elm. Adults are shiny black in colour with irregular white spots and are large, ranging from 1.9 to 3.8 cm (0.75 to 1.5 inches) in body length. They have black antennae with white rings that are between 3.8 to 10.2 cm (1.5 to 4 inches) long. During the summer months, adult females chew through the bark and deposit an egg, causing a visibly dark wound in the tree that is about 1.3 cm (0.5 inch) in diameter. After the larvae hatch, they migrate to the heart of the tree, where they feed and mature and then burrow to the exterior, leaving a hole about 9.5 mm (0.375 inch) wide. The Asian long-horned beetle is thought to have been transported to North America in wood pallets, resulting in infestations in New York in 1996 and several years later in New Jersey, Chicago, Illinois, and Toronto, Ontario. Measures such as removal and destruction of trees, quarantine of infested areas, strict regulations on the transport of wood, and insecticide treatments restrict the Asian long-horned beetle to isolated areas.
