Mesozoan,  any of approximately 50 species of small, ciliated, multicellular animals that parasitize other marine invertebrates belonging to the phyla Rhombozoa and Orthonectida. These wormlike organisms lack digestive, respiratory, nervous, and excretory systems; their bodies consist of two layers of as few as 20 to 30 cells each. Both sexual and asexual reproduction occur. Their relationship to other phyla is obscure as it is not known whether their simple structure is primitive or, as a result of their parasitic existence, degenerate (i.e., changed gradually into a simpler form). Some authorities, however, have suggested a link with the phylum Platyhelminthes, a group of flatworms.
Formerly, all mesozoans were classified into the phylum Mesozoa. Taxonomists have since replaced this single phylum with the phlya Rhombozoa and Orthonectida because of  substantial morphological and life history differences between the two groups. Rhombozoans, such as the genus Pseudicyema, are parasitic in the kidneys of squids and octopuses. Orthonectids, such as Rhopalura, occur in a variety of marine invertebrates, e.g., brittle stars, bivalve mollusks, and polychaete annelids.
In both the rhombozoans and the orthonectids, the number and arrangement of cells is relatively constant for any given species. This definitive cell number is attained during embryonic development. Growth, therefore, consists of the enlargement and differentiation of existing cells. In both groups, chromatin (the material that comprises chromosomes) elimination occurs during early cleavage divisions from the cell line that will give rise to somatic cells (cells that do not produce gametes).
Both groups are very widely distributed wherever appropriate hosts occur in shallow-bottom environments of the sea. They are not found in hosts in open-sea environments, nor have they been found in hosts from tropical coral islands. In many regions, rhombozoans infect entire populations of bottom-dwelling cephalopods, such as squids and octopuses. On the other hand, orthonectids infect only a small percentage of their hosts in a given region. In orthonectids, agametes (asexual reproductive cells), formed during the plasmodial stage, give rise to sexual adults that leave the host for a brief free-swimming period, during which the females are impregnated. The fertilized eggs develop into ciliated larvae that infect new hosts, giving rise to new plasmodia. While in the host, the plasmodia pass through a period of asexual reproduction, forming agametes before adults appear once more.
Rhombozoans have an even more complex life cycle. Two reproductive phases occur in the cephalopod host. During a phase called the nematogen phase, axoblast cells (also called agametes) give rise to wormlike individuals similar to their parents. These remain in the same host, thus increasing the parasite population within the host’s kidney. In the next phase, known as the rhombogen phase, a few axoblasts differentiate into minute organisms known as infusorigens; these are reduced hermaphroditic individuals that remain in the axial cell of the rhombogen and form sperm and egg cells. Following fertilization within the rhombogen, the zygotes develop into ciliated infusoriform larvae, which escape from the parent rhombogen and from the cephalopod. It is still not understood how they infect another cephalopod host.
