Moss animal, also called bryozoan,  any member of the phylum Bryozoa (also called Polyzoa or Ectoprocta), in which there are about 5,000 extant species. Another 15,000 species are known only from fossils. As with brachiopods and phoronids, bryozoans possess a peculiar ring of ciliated tentacles, called a lophophore, for collecting food particles suspended in the water. The bryozoans are a widely distributed, aquatic, invertebrate group of animals whose members form colonies composed of numerous connected units called zooids (hence the term Polyzoa, which means “many animals”). Individual zooids are usually no more than one millimetre (0.04 inch) long, although colonies of some species can exceed 0.5 metre (about 20 inches) in diameter. Until the mid-18th century, bryozoans, like corals, were regarded as plants; hence the name, which means “moss animals.” Seventy-five years later, the bryozoans were distinguished from the cnidarians, and the characteristic structure of the zooid was first described.
Bryozoans are separated into three classes: Phylactolaemata (freshwater dwelling); Stenolaemata (marine); and Gymnolaemata (mostly marine). The order Cheilostomata (class Gymnolaemata), containing 600 genera, is the most successful bryozoan group.
Bryozoan colonies are found in both fresh and salt waters, most commonly as growths or crusts on other objects. Freshwater bryozoans live among vegetation in clear, quiet, or slowly flowing water. Marine species range from the shore to the ocean depths but are most plentiful in the shallow waters of the continental shelf. They cover seaweeds, form crusts on stones and shells, hang from boulders, or rise from the seabed. Bryozoans readily colonize submerged surfaces, including the hulls of ships and the insides of water pipes. A few types of bryozoans form nonattached populations on sandy seabeds.
The zooid walls, which constitute the most permanent portion of the colony, generally are calcareous (i.e., impregnated with calcium carbonate), giving bryozoans a fossil record that dates from the Ordovician onward (i.e., from about 500 million years ago).
Although the component zooids rarely exceed one millimetre in length, bryozoan colonies—formed of numerous asexually budded zooids—vary greatly in size. In the gymnolaemate genus Monobryozoon, which lives between marine sand particles, a colony consists of little more than a single feeding zooid less than one millimetre in height. Colonies of the European Pentapora, however, can reach one metre (3.3 feet) or more in circumference; a warm-water gymnolaemate genus, Zoobotryon, which hangs from harbour pilings, and the freshwater phylactolaemate Pectinatella each produce masses that may be one-half metre across. Colonies that form crusts generally cover only a few square centimetres; erect colonies may rise only two to five centimetres (0.8–2 inches).
The texture of the colonies is variable. Some colonies, especially those in fresh water and on seashores, are gelatinous or membranous; others are tufted, with flat fronds (leaflike structures) or whorls of slender branches, whose horny texture results from light deposits of lime in zooid walls. Still other colonies are hard and have calcified skeletons. Such colonies may form rough-surfaced patches or may rise in slender branching twigs (such as those that form a network in the beautiful lace corals; e.g., Sertella).
The colonies, diverse and complex in structure, are composed of individual modules, or zooids, and each zooid effectively is a complete animal. In all bryozoan colonies, however, the zooids remain interconnected and may exchange nutrients and other substances through interconnecting cables or minute pores in their body walls. A bryozoan colony usually has many zooids, which may be of one type or of types that differ both functionally and structurally. All zooids in a colony arise by asexual budding from the first zooid to form. Zooids capable of feeding have a ring of slender tentacles at one end of the body. Cilia (hairlike projections) that propel tiny particles of food toward the zooid mouth are found on this ring, and the whole feeding organ is called a lophophore. The mouth opens into a digestive tract that is divided into several regions and terminates at an anus, which is outside (but near) the tentacles (hence the name Ectoprocta, meaning “outside anus”). If zooids are disturbed, they withdraw their tentacles inside the body cavity. Only if the zooids have transparent walls, such as in the gymnolaemates Bowerbankia and Membranipora, is the digestive tract visible. The internal living parts of each zooid—i.e., the nervous and muscular systems, the tentacles, and the digestive tract—are called the polypide.
Many animals, bryozoans included, have a life cycle that incorporates phases of asexual and sexual reproduction. Asexual reproduction, in which no gametes (sex cells) participate, produces genetically identical progeny (clones), which separate in larger animals (e.g., sea anemones). In bryozoans, the progeny, called zooids, are produced by an asexual process called budding and almost invariably remain in intimate contact to form a colony. As the colony continues to enlarge by budding, the zooids become sexually mature, producing eggs and spermatozoa. Sexual reproduction, by the production and subsequent fusion of gametes, generates the genetic variability necessary for a species to adapt to changing conditions. Fertilized eggs develop into swimming larvae.
Some bryozoans also propagate colonies asexually. The cheilostome Discoporella has small, nonattached, saucerlike colonies. Groups of zooids at the colony rim detach at special fracture zones and grow into new colonies. The statoblasts (dormant buds) of freshwater bryozoans are another asexual means of reproduction. Asexual reproduction, whether leading to a clone, a colony, or a clone of colonies, is a means of perpetuating and spreading a successful genetic constitution (genotype).
