Peanut worm, also called sipunculid,  any member of the invertebrate phylum Sipuncula, a group of unsegmented marine worms. The head bears a retractable “introvert” with the mouth at its end. The mouth is usually surrounded by one or more rings of tentacles. Peanut worms vary in length from a few to 500 millimetres (1.6 feet) or more in length. Though rare, they may be locally common on seabeds throughout the oceans of the world. Peanut worms are bottom-dwelling (benthic) animals; most burrow in the mud or sand between tide levels or in oozes of the deepest ocean trenches. Some species have other habitats and live in discarded mollusk shells, in sponge siphons, in corals, among the twisted tubes of encrusting polychaetes (marine annelid worms), and even in tangled roots of marine plants.
Externally the sexes are usually alike and separate. Gametes (mature germ cells) are shed into the body cavity and collect in nephridia (excretory organs) that become modified as egg- and sperm-storage organs; they are emitted into the sea from nephridiopores. Fertilization takes place outside the body. The trochophore (free-swimming) larva, which results from spiral cleavage of the zygote (the cell formed by the fusion of two gametes), undergoes metamorphosis to its characteristic shape.
Peanut worms consist of a muscular trunk, cylindrical to globular in shape, and a slender, anterior introvert (retractable proboscis) that is muscular, highly extensible, and capable of being withdrawn into the trunk by retractor muscles. Hooks or spines are often present toward the tip of the introvert, while glandular pores and papillae are scattered over both trunk and introvert. Within the body cavity (coelom) a long alimentary canal spirals backward from the mouth to the posterior region of the trunk, then forward to the dorsal anus near the anterior end of the trunk. A contractile vessel, or compensatory sac associated with the esophagus, extends forward to the tentacles. Fluid passes to extended tentacles, returning to the vessel as they contract; both this and coelomic fluid contain blood cells with hemerythrin. One or two nephridia discharge to the exterior. Gonads develop at the base of the ventral retractor muscles.
The affinities of the peanut worms are obscure. Their development, like that of spoonworms (echiurids), resembles that of annelids in that spiral cleavage and a trochophore larva occur. They differ from annelids, however, in their unsegmented bodies and absence of setae. They differ from spoonworms by the absence of setae, anterior anus, absence of anal vesicles, and presence of tentacles surrounding the mouth at the tip of the introvert. Molecular analyses suggest that peanut worms are more closely related to mollusks, and spoonworms are more closely related to annelids.
