planarian,  (class Turbellaria),  any of a group of widely distributed, mostly free-living flatworms of the class Turbellaria (phylum Platyhelminthes). Planaria is the name of one genus, but the name planarian is used to designate any member of the family Planariidae and related families.
Most planarians occur in fresh water and are sometimes seen in large masses; some species are marine, others are terrestrial. Some species are parasitic; i.e., they obtain nourishment from the body of another living animal.
The body, when elongated, is soft, leaf-shaped, and ciliated. The spade-shaped head has two eyes and sometimes tentacles. The tail is pointed. The mouth is on the ventral, or lower, side, often more than half-way toward the tail. A body cavity, or coelom, is absent. The pharynx, which may be protruded from the mouth, ends in an intestine that is usually blind. The length is usually about 3 to 15 mm (0.1 to 0.6 inch); some grow to more than 30 cm (about 1 foot) long. Tropical species are often brightly coloured. Members of the North American genus Dugesia are black, gray, or brown.
Planarians swim with an undulating motion or creep like slugs. Most are carnivorous night feeders. They eat protozoans, tiny snails, and worms. All are simultaneous hermaphrodites; i.e., functional reproductive organs of both sexes occur in the same individual. The reproductive organs begin to develop in early autumn. Cocoons containing fertilized eggs are laid in spring. In most species, fully developed young emerge and develop without metamorphosis (i.e., radical change), but free-living, ciliated larvae are released in a few marine species. In some species, the organism in the cocoon divides into two parts, each of which develops into a complete individual. New individuals, called buds, form at the tail end of others in the genus Microstomum and may remain attached to the parent for some time; chains formed of three or four buds sometimes occur. Because of their remarkable ability to regenerate lost parts, planarians are often used experimentally to study the process of regeneration.
