Ribbon worm, also called bootlace worm, proboscis worm, nemertine, or nemertean,  any member of the invertebrate phylum Nemertea (sometimes called Nemertinea, or Rhynchocoela), which includes mainly free-living forms but also a few parasites of crustaceans, mollusks, and sea squirts. The majority of the approximately 900 known nemertean species are found in marine habitats. Some, however, live in freshwater or on land. The name proboscis worm derives from the muscular eversible proboscis, which is housed in a fluid-filled chamber above the gut. This tube-shaped organ, which in many aquatic forms has a needlelike stylet, is typically used to trap prey. The stylet may also be used for burrowing; in land-dwelling species it may be used for rapid movement.
The ribbon worms are the simplest animals to possess a circulatory system and a gut with a separate mouth and anus. The body is usually long and slender and is often extended greatly during movement. Most species are less than 20 cm (8 inches) long, but the giant species Lineus longissimus may reach a length of 30 m (100 feet). Some forms that swim in deep water are flat and broad, with finlike appendages. Often uniformly coloured, various species of ribbon worms are vividly patterned with stripes, bands, speckles, or geometric shapes.
Male and female ribbon worms occur in most species, with annual reproduction typical. Usually eggs and sperm are released separately, and fertilization takes place externally. The fertilized egg develops by a process similar to that of flatworms (phylum Platyhelminthes), annelids (phylum Annelida), and mollusks (phylum Mollusca). Ribbon worms can develop in one of two ways: the most common is the direct method, without a larval stage; the other includes a ciliated larval stage, which may be one of two types. One kind, a free-swimming larva of complicated pattern known as the pilidium, is more common; the other type, similar to an adult, is called Desor’s larva. Larvae metamorphose into young ribbon worms after swimming for days or weeks in the plankton. Within the genera Prostoma and Geonemertes, the species may be either dioecious (i.e., separate male and female animals) or hermaphroditic (i.e. male and female reproductive organs in one animal). All ribbon worms have the ability to regenerate lost or damaged parts of their bodies; some species actually break up and form a number of fragments, which then grow into complete individuals. This mechanism provides asexual reproduction.
The affinities of the nemerteans may lie with the flatworms, although molecular evidence generally fails to support this view; both groups have similar types of embryonic development and the same basic body plan. Unlike the flatworms, however, the ribbon worms have a complete gut and a circulatory system. In general, the ribbon worms are regarded as a distinct phylum at the highest point of acoelomate (without a body cavity) development; however, some evidence suggests that one proboscis cavity, or rhynchocoel, may be a true coelom. The important features used to classify the ribbon worms include the position of the brain relative to the mouth, the presence or absence of a stylet (or stylets) on the proboscis, and the position of the lateral nerves relative to the muscle layers.
Certain bloodworm (q.v.) species of the phylum Annelida are also sometimes known as proboscis worms.
