Sahara desert ant,  any of several species of ant in the genus Cataglyphis that dwell in the Sahara, particularly C. fortis and C. bicolor. The navigational capabilities of these ants have been the subject of numerous scientific investigations.
Well adapted to the extreme conditions of their habitat, Sahara desert ants can tolerate surface temperatures of 60 °C (140 °F) or higher for short periods, making them one of the most heat-tolerant groups of insects known. Long legs allow them to move rapidly and elevate their bodies above the scorched sand and salt-pan terrain as they forage for dead insects. The high temperatures of the Sahara preclude navigation through the use of the pheromone trails that aid many ant species in returning to their nests; the volatile chemicals in the pheromones would evaporate far too quickly in the heat for them to demarcate routes reliably.
Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain the mechanism by which these ants are able to return to their nests in a straight line after typically circuitous searches for food up to 100 m (330 ft) away. One hypothesis was that the insects use visual landmarks to plot their courses. However, the territory surrounding their nests is often devoid of any features that could potentially serve as points of reference. The suggestion that the ants use polarized light as a guide is contradicted by the observation that they are able to assess how far they have walked even in the dark.
Matthias Wittlinger of the University of Ulm (Germany) and colleagues hypothesized that the ants measure the distance traveled by registering their leg movements using a sensory ability called proprioception. To test the hypothesis, the researchers conducted experiments in which specimens of C. fortis were trained to walk from a nest to a feeder along a 10-m (33-ft) channel that was open so that directional information could be obtained from the sky. Prior to releasing ants to return home in a parallel test channel, the researchers modified the gaits of two groups of ants. They lengthened the gait of one group by attaching pig bristles to their legs to function as stilts and shortened the gait of the ants in the second group by severing the outer part of each leg. After the treated ants had taken food, they were released to return home. Ants with stilts took longer strides and consistently walked beyond the point where their home site would have been, whereas the ants with shortened legs did not go far enough. When the ants with modified legs later walked from the home site to the feeder, they accurately assessed the return distance home, owing to the same stride length in the outbound and home-bound trips. The investigators concluded that the ants measure the distance traveled by some mechanism that counted the number of steps taken.
Experiments conducted by other scientists determined that the ants in fact do use polarized light as a compass, augmenting the pedometric function of their legs. Upon approaching the nest, the ants then begin using visual and olfactory cues to find the exact location of the entrance.
