Scallop, also called escallop, fan shell, or comb shell,  any of the marine bivalve mollusks of the family Pectinidae, particularly species of the genus Pecten. The family, which includes about 50 genera and subgenera and more than 400 species, is worldwide in distribution and ranges from the intertidal zone to considerable ocean depths.
The two valves of the shell are usually fan-shaped, except for the straight hinge line with winglike projections at either side of the hinge; the valves range in size from about 2.5 cm (1 inch) to more than 15 cm (6 inches). The shell may be smooth or sculptured with radial ribs, which may be smooth, scaly, or knobbed. Scallops range in colour from brilliant red, purple, orange, or yellow to white. The lower valve is usually lighter in colour and less sculptured than the upper.
Scallops have a single large adductor muscle for forcefully closing the valves. At the edge of the mantle (i.e., the soft tissues in contact with most of the valve surface) are short tentacles that hang like a curtain between the valves when they are open. The tentacles detect changes in the chemical composition of the watery medium. Also at the edge of the mantle are numerous light-detecting eyes.
Scallops are most commonly found in sand or fine gravel in relatively clear water. They feed on microscopic plants and animals. Gill cilia (tiny hairlike structures) and mucus aid in the collection and movement of food particles toward the mouth. Scallops are unusual as bivalves in their ability to swim, which they do by spasmodic clapping movements of the valves; the water, ejected in jetlike spurts, propels the animal forward.
During reproduction eggs and sperm are shed into the water, where fertilization occurs. The eggs develop into free-swimming veliger larvae. In the next developmental stage they settle and metamorphose on the sea bottom; some have the ability to crawl. A byssal gland develops and is used to attach the animal firmly to the bottom or to some other solid surface. Some scallops remain attached throughout life; others break free and become spasmodic swimmers.
The most important predator of scallops (besides humans) is the starfish, which attacks by wrapping its arms about the valves and, by the sucking action of its tube feet, pulls the valves apart; it then inserts its stomach between the valves of the scallop and digests the soft parts.
Primitive man ate scallops and used their shells as utensils. During the European Middle Ages the shell design of the pilgrim’s scallop (Pecten jacobaeus) became a religious emblem (the badge of St. James).
Scallops are a popular and commercially important food item; the large adductor muscle is the part normally eaten. The most productive scallop-bearing grounds are in the northeastern part of Georges Bank, off the coast of Massachusetts, and the Bay of Fundy (New Brunswick–Nova Scotia).
The sea scallop, also known as the giant, or deep-sea, scallop (Placopecten magellanicus), is the species commonly taken off New England and eastern Canada. The bay scallop (Aequipecten irradians) is also commonly found there. In the British Isles A. opercularis is the species most commonly sought, for food and as bait for commercial fishing lines.
