Sea pen,  any of the 300 species of the order Pennatulacea, colonial invertebrate marine animals of the class Anthozoa (phylum Cnidaria). The name sea pen derives from their resemblance to quill pens. They occur in shallow and deep waters from polar seas to the tropics.
The central stalk of the animal consists of a lower part, the peduncle, which anchors the colony in mud or sand, and an upper part, the rachis, which bears polyps (hollow stalks with a mouth and tentacles at the free end) or branches bearing several polyps. The central stalk is known as the primary, or axial, polyp. Those branching from it are the secondary polyps. Colonies of some genera—e.g., Chunella—bear few polyps. Others bear as many as 35,000. The mouth and tentacles of the primary polyp are degenerate, consisting of little more than a fleshy stem strengthened by a central horny rod.
Many pennatulaceans, however, do not resemble pens. The sea pansy, Renilla, for example, found along the Pacific and Atlantic coasts of North America, is a flattened kidney-shaped plate consisting of two fused halves. All the polyps are on the upper side. The slender rodlike members of the genera Anthoptilum, Funiculina, Balticina, Stylatula, and Virgularia may grow to a length of 2 metres (about 6 1/2 feet). Shorter forms, growing to no more than 20 centimetres (8 inches), have a few relatively large leaves extending from the central stalk (e.g., Leioptilus). Most sea pens are yellow, orange, red, or brown.
Sea pens can deflate or expand by expelling or taking in water through the interconnecting hollow canals of the polyps. They feed on small organisms captured by the tentacles at the end of each polyp. Most sea pens luminesce, or glow, when they are touched or otherwise stimulated.
The secondary polyps are of two types: siphonozooid and autozooid. Siphonozooids draw a current of water through the colony canal system. Autozooids feed and produce eggs and sperm. These gametes are expelled through the mouth into the open water, where fertilization takes place. The ciliated planula, or free-swimming larva, settles to the bottom and metamorphoses to form the axial polyp of a new colony.
