Llanocetus denticrenatus,  one of the earliest known baleen whales, sole member of the family Llanocetidae, suborder Mysticeti. Llanocetus denticrenatus lived during the Late Eocene Age (37.8 million to 33.9 million years ago). Much of what is known about the species comes from an analysis of an endocast (a cast of the brain cavity) and part of a jaw from a fossil excavated in 1974 and 1975 from Seymour Island, Antarctica. L. denticrenatus was described in 1989.
The Mysticeti include the baleen whales and their extinct relatives. The fossil remains of L. denticrenatus have been dated to 34 million years ago. Only those of Mystacodon selenensis, which date to approximately 36 million years ago, are older in the mysticete lineage. Judging by its 2-metre- (6.5-foot-) long skull, L. denticrenatus was a large animal; the skull itself bore a greater similarity to that of the basilosaurids, the extinct ancestors of living whales, than to that of modern mysticetes. Modern mysticetes feed by filtering water through the baleen plates that line their mouths to strain out plankton, which are then cleaned from the baleen and swallowed in large numbers. As adults, living mysticetes do not have teeth, but they have rudimentary teeth as embryos. L. denticrenatus, however, had teeth throughout its life, but it likely used them for filter feeding.
The structure of the teeth in L. denticrenatus is reminiscent of rounded palm fronds, with deep grooves separating rounded, gear-shaped cusps. With its mouth closed, it probably captured plankton on the mesh of cusps as it expelled water through the grooves in the teeth. The living crabeater seal (Lobodon carcinophagus) has similar teeth that it uses to strain krill from Antarctic waters. The spaces between the cheek teeth in L. denticrenatus were large enough that their diet probably consisted of items larger than those taken by living baleen whales, such as invertebrates and small fish.
There is no evidence for baleen in L. denticrenatus. (While baleen itself is not usually preserved, it is associated with specializations in the jaws that can be seen in fossils.) However, a material that could have been a precursor to baleen may have existed between the extinct whale’s teeth. The fossil analyses of L. denticrenatus suggest that the evolution of a filter-feeding lifestyle among mysticetes could have preceded the evolution of their specialized baleen filters.
An endocast of L. denticrenatus shows that it had specializations that protected the brain from changing pressure. For example, evidence of rete, highly vascularized tissues that surround the brains of deep-diving mysticetes, are preserved in Llanocetus in the form of skull openings and spaces for the blood vessels. The presence of these structures indicates that Llanocetus could visit deep waters where the pressure would injure or kill animals without such specializations. Some paleontologists have hypothesized that other early mysticetes may have possessed similar deep-diving abilities.
