Abbie Park Ferguson,  (born April 4, 1837, Whately, Mass., U.S.—died March 25, 1919, Wellington, S.Af.), American educator, a founder and preserver of Huguenot College as the only women’s college in South Africa in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Ferguson was the daughter of a Congregational minister. She graduated from Mount Holyoke Female Seminary (now Mount Holyoke College) in South Hadley, Massachusetts, in 1856 and then taught school for 13 years, first in Niles, Michigan, in 1856–58 and then in New Haven, Connecticut. From 1869 to 1871 she lived in France as tutor and companion to two young American girls. In 1873 she learned that the Reverend Andrew Murray, a Dutch Reformed minister of Cape Colony, South Africa, had appealed to Mount Holyoke for assistance in establishing a girls’ school in South Africa on the work-study principle established by Mary Lyon. Ferguson and Anna Elvira Bliss (1843–1925), also a Mount Holyoke graduate, answered the appeal and in November 1873 arrived in Cape Town. They made their way to Wellington, Murray’s home, where with funds he had already raised they opened Huguenot Seminary in 1874.
The seminary was an immediate success with the Calvinist and largely rural people of Cape Colony, as it promised to train the teachers needed to staff church-oriented schools. In 1875 the seminary was divided into a lower department under Bliss and an upper one under Ferguson. In 1884 a collegiate department was established, despite the suspicion with which most South Africans viewed higher education for women. Ferguson was also deeply interested in the vast opportunity for missionary work that Africa presented, and to that end she and Bliss formed the Women’s Missionary Society (later the Vrouwen Zending Bond). In 1890 a school for primary students was opened, and Huguenot Seminary was thereafter limited to secondary and collegiate work. Two branches of the seminary were opened in Bethlehem, Orange Free State, and in Greytown, Natal (both now part of South Africa). In 1898 the collegiate department of Huguenot awarded its first two bachelor’s degrees and was reorganized as Huguenot College. Ferguson served as president of the college until her retirement in 1910.
As the only women’s college in South Africa, Huguenot was chronically short of money, space, and faculty, but Ferguson’s dedication overcame every obstacle. On her return from convalescent leave in Europe and the United States in 1905–06, she fought off a faculty plan to merge Huguenot with Victoria College at Stellenbosch and then undertook a strenuous fund-raising campaign that made possible the erection of Ferguson Hall. In 1907 the college was formally chartered by act of Parliament. After her retirement Ferguson devoted much time to organizing and fund-raising for Huguenot. In 1916 the college became a constituent of the newly chartered University of South Africa (Huguenot University College from 1920).
