Academic freedom,  the freedom of teachers and students to teach, study, and pursue knowledge and research without unreasonable interference or restriction from law, institutional regulations, or public pressure. Its basic elements include the freedom of teachers to inquire into any subject that evokes their intellectual concern; to present their findings to their students, colleagues, and others; to publish their data and conclusions without control or censorship; and to teach in the manner they consider professionally appropriate. For students, the basic elements include the freedom to study subjects that concern them and to form conclusions for themselves and express their opinions.
According to its proponents, the justification for academic freedom thus defined lies not in the comfort or convenience of teachers and students but in the benefits to society; i.e., the long-term interests of a society are best served when the educational process leads to the advancement of knowledge, and knowledge is best advanced when inquiry is free from restraints by the state, by the church or other institutions, or by special-interest groups.
The foundation for academic freedom was laid by the medieval European universities, even though their faculties met periodically to condemn on religious grounds colleagues’ writings. Protected by papal bulls and royal charters, the universities became legally self-governing corporations with the freedom to organize their own faculties, control admissions, and establish standards for graduation.
Until the 18th century the Roman Catholic church and, in some areas, its Protestant successors exerted censorship over universities or certain members of their faculties. Similarly, in the 18th and 19th centuries the newly emerged nation-states of Europe constituted the chief threat to universities’ autonomy. Professors were subject to governmental authority and were liable to be allowed to teach only what was acceptable to the government in power. Thus began a tension that has continued to the present. Some states permitted or encouraged academic freedom and set an example for subsequent emulation. For example, the University of Leiden in the Netherlands (founded in 1575) provided great freedom from religious and political restraints for its teachers and students. The University of Göttingen in Germany became a beacon of academic freedom in the 18th century, and, with the founding of the University of Berlin in 1811, the basic principles of Lehrfreiheit (“freedom to teach”) and Lernfreiheit (“freedom to learn”) were firmly established and became the model that inspired universities elsewhere throughout Europe and the Americas.
Academic freedom is never unlimited. The general laws of society, including those concerning obscenity, pornography, and libel, apply also to academic discourse and publication. Teachers are freer within than outside their disciplines. The more highly trained teachers are, the more freedom they are likely afforded: university professors tend to be less restricted than elementary-school teachers. Similarly, students usually gain freedom as they move through the academic system. Teachers in small towns can usually expect more interference in their teaching than teachers in large cities. Academic freedom is liable to contract in times of war, economic depression, or political instability.
In countries without democratic traditions, academic freedom may be unreliably granted and unevenly distributed. In communist countries in the 20th century, when academic freedom did exist at the university level, it was usually in such fields as mathematics, the physical and biological sciences, linguistics, and archaeology; it was largely absent in the social sciences, arts, and humanities. The collapse of communist rule in eastern Europe and the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1989–91 allowed the tentative reappearance of academic freedom in many of those countries. Despite its strong traditions of academic freedom, Germany experienced a virtually complete eclipse of such freedom during the period of Nazi rule (1933–45). At the end of the 20th century, academic freedom seemed strongest in Europe and North America and weakest under various dictatorial regimes in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East.
Since the establishment of the American Association of University Professors in 1915 and its 1944 statement of principles on academic freedom and tenure, the United States has generally been a bastion of academic freedom. This history occasionally has been marred, however. From the 1930s, state legislatures sometimes required teachers to take “loyalty” oaths in order to prevent them from engaging in left-wing (and particularly communist) political activities. During the anticommunist hysteria of the 1950s, the use of loyalty oaths was widespread, and many teachers who refused to take them were dismissed without due process.
In the 1980s and ’90s, many universities in the United States adopted regulations aimed at proscribing speech and writing that was deemed discriminatory against, or injurious or offensive to, individuals or groups on the basis of their race, ethnicity, gender, religion, sexual orientation, or physical disability. Whereas supporters of the measures, known as “speech codes,” defended them as necessary to protect minorities and women against discrimination and harassment, opponents contended that they unconstitutionally infringed the free-speech rights of students and teachers and effectively undermined academic freedom. Many of these mostly conservative critics charged that the codes amounted to the legal enforcement of a narrow range of “politically correct” ideas and expressions.
In the 1990s, distance learning through electronic information technologies raised new questions about infringements on academic freedom: What role do individual scholars have on teams preparing prepackaged courses, and who owns the rights to those courses? Who is responsible for the academic and social outcomes of this teaching method? Other questions concerned the university’s role in controversial public issues. Training programs with nongovernmental organizations and the introduction of community-service learning caused interest groups to challenge the university’s implied sponsorship of various social and political causes. Despite these challenges, academic freedom in the United States continued to be strongly supported by Supreme Court interpretations of the constitutional freedoms of speech, press, and assembly.
