Albert Mansbridge,  (born Jan. 10, 1876, Gloucester, Gloucestershire, Eng.—died  Aug. 22, 1952, Torquay, Devon), largely self-educated educator, the founder and chief organizer of the adult-education movement in Great Britain.
The son of a carpenter, Mansbridge had to leave school at the age of 14 owing to his family’s limited financial resources. He became a clerical worker but simultaneously satisfied his acute desire for additional education by attending university extension classes at King’s College in London. Eventually, he taught evening classes in industrial history, economics, and typing while supporting himself as a clerk during the day.
Mansbridge became distressed that the university extension system—created in 1873—appealed almost exclusively to the upper and middle classes. In 1903, therefore, he founded the Workers’ Educational Association (WEA; originally called An Association to Promote the Higher Education of Working Men). The WEA was quickly recognized by most British universities, and in 1905 Mansbridge abandoned clerical work to become its full-time general secretary.
Under Mansbridge’s administration, the WEA created a tutorial system and a scholarly library (National Central Library) for working people unaffiliated with an academic institution. He organized WEA branches in Australia, New Zealand, and Canada; and, after recovering from spinal meningitis, he established other adult-education groups: the World Association for Adult Education (1918), the Seafarers’ Educational Service (1919), and the British Institute of Adult Education (1921). He delivered the Lowell Lectures in Boston in 1922 and the Earle Lectures for the Pacific School of Religion (in cooperation with the University of California) in 1926. His books include An Adventure in Working-Class Education (1920), The Making of an Educationist (1929), Brick upon Brick (1934), and his autobiography, The Trodden Road (1940). A selection of his essays and addresses appeared in 1944 as The Kingdom of the Mind.
