American Association of University Professors (AAUP),  organization of faculty and researchers employed at American colleges and universities, established in 1915. Among its primary goals are to promote and protect academic freedom and shared governance in institutions of higher learning, to ensure the economic security of those engaged in teaching and research at colleges and universities, and to define and promote professional values and standards for higher education in the United States.
The AAUP was founded following a protest against the firing of a faculty member at Stanford University. The noted economist Edward Ross lost his job in 1900 because the wife of the university’s founder did not agree with his views on economic reform. The philosopher Arthur O. Lovejoy and six other faculty members resigned in protest against the dismissal. In 1913 Lovejoy, who was then teaching at Johns Hopkins University, persuaded 17 other full professors to join him in sending a letter of invitation to other professors of equal rank in nine leading universities to discuss an association of professors from all fields of study. The eminent philosopher and educational theorist John Dewey became the first president and Lovejoy the first secretary of the AAUP at the organization’s founding meeting in New York City in 1915. Early members of the AAUP were primarily interested in developing a code of ethics, protecting academic freedom, and developing standards for promotion.
The AAUP is organized and operated as a nonprofit charitable educational organization. Its governing structure consists of a president, a first vice president, a second vice president, a secretary-treasurer, and a council. The council, which meets at least twice each year, is the elected body charged with executing the AAUP’s functions and acts on its behalf as defined in the association’s constitution. From the council membership comes the executive committee, which exercises powers delegated to it and acts on behalf of the association between meetings of the council. The executive committee also meets at least two times per year.
The AAUP has a strong committee structure that reflects its purposes and the issues facing its membership. Among the several standing committees are those on academic freedom and tenure; academic professionals; accreditation; college and university governance; economic status of the profession; government relations; graduate and professional students; historically black institutions and scholars of colour; professional ethics; sexual diversity and gender identity; teaching, research, and publication; and women in the academic profession. The AAUP’s advisory committees include those related to its two publications, the magazine Academe and the Bulletin of the AAUP, and the Litigation Committee, which provides expert advice on amicus curiae briefs that the association may consider submitting incident to litigation. Several other committees deal with business and investment, elections, grievances, membership, and other matters.
In 2008 the AAUP approved the restructuring of the organization into three entities: the AAUP, the AAUP Collective Bargaining Congress (AAUP-CBC), and the AAUP Foundation. The AAUP-CBC develops and disseminates information and resources in support of collective bargaining, among other activities. The AAUP Foundation is a nonprofit entity whose purpose is to accept donations to the AAUP of money, property, or any other item of value.
