André Coindre,  (born Feb. 26, 1787, Lyon—died May 30, 1826, Blois, Fr.), founder of the Fratres a Sacratissimo Corde Iesu (Brothers of the Sacred Heart), a Roman Catholic religious order primarily devoted to high school and elementary school education; the brotherhood is also a missionary society.
Coindre, in his formative years, witnessed the devastating aftermath of the persecution of the church conducted by French Revolutionary forces. That experience influenced his decisive role in France’s ecclesiastical reconstruction. Educated at the French seminaries in Argentière and in Lyon (1809–12), where he was ordained priest, Coindre zealously began his ministry at Bourg, Fr. In 1813 Napoleon asked him to preach at the primal Cathedral of Saint-Jean, Lyon.
By 1815 Coindre’s fame as a preacher caused the Charterhouse Missionaries, instituted by Cardinal Fesch in 1806, with their headquarters at Lyon, to engage his services. He preached, led missions, and headed diocesan conferences. In 1818 he helped Claudine Thévenet found the Ladies of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary (after 1891 known as Religious of Jesus–Mary) for the education of girls. By 1820 he had established, near Lyon, an orphanage and trade school (Pieux-Secours) for homeless boys, which became so successful that with 10 recruits he founded his religious congregation on Sept. 23, 1821. They dedicated themselves to the apostolate of Catholic education. In the next year, concurrent with founding a new seminary, he organized a group of diocesan missionaries at the monastery of Monistrol-sur-Loire, Fr., which became the Association of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. There he lived, transferring the novices at Pieux-Secours to Monistrol in the same year.
In 1824 and 1825 he opened six more schools; the congregation had grown to such an extent that on Oct. 14, 1824, the first general chapter of the institute was formulated with Coindre as superior general and later (November 1825) vicar general. He was invited to establish a seminary at Blois, where he died suddenly. Coindre’s work was then carried on by his brother Vincent. The order received its final approbation from Pope Pius XI in 1927. Their motherhouse was transferred to Rome in 1950, and their missions have extended throughout the world.
