Andrew Melville,  (born Aug. 1, 1545, Baldovie, Angus, Scot.—died  1622, Sedan, Fr.), scholar and Reformer who succeeded John Knox as a leader of the Scottish Reformed Church, giving that church its Presbyterian character by replacing bishops with local presbyteries, and gaining international respect for Scottish universities.
After attending Scottish universities and the University of Paris, Melville left for Geneva in 1569, where he studied under the Protestant Reformer Theodore Beza. Returning to Scotland in 1574, Melville set out to reform its schools. As principal of the University of Glasgow (1574–80), as visitor to Aberdeen (1575), and as principal of St. Mary’s College at St. Andrews in Edinburgh (1580–1606), he introduced educational methods he had learned from European scholars. Under his influence, new students came from at home and abroad, and many foreign students trained in Scotland returned to teach in Reformed institutions overseas. In Scotland a vacuum had been left in Reformed Church governance after the death in 1572 of its principal leader, John Knox, and Melville in 1574 began to act in his stead, his major concern being the preservation of the independence of the church from state control. The Second Book of Discipline (1578), largely his work, was incorporated in the act of religious settlement of 1592, but only after he had suffered virtual banishment for it in 1584–85.
In 1597, when King James VI of Scotland began to undermine the charter he had earlier granted, Melville led the resistance against royal attacks upon the newly legitimated liberties. Despite royal prohibition, a general assembly met at Aberdeen in 1605, but then respected a royal order of dismissal by simply fixing the date of the next meeting and conducting no other business. That act brought imprisonment or banishment to 14 ministers, and in 1606 Melville was summoned to London with seven other ministers by James, then James I of England, to help resolve the crisis. Melville’s group spoke in behalf of a new assembly, but his satiric Latin poem composed to combat constant Anglican pressures on him turned his own career in another direction. Imprisoned in the Tower of London for four years for his intransigence, Melville was released only to accept a chair in France, that of biblical theology at the University of Sedan, where he remained until his death.
