Charter school,  a publicly funded tuition-free school of choice that has greater autonomy than a traditional public school. In exchange for increased autonomy, charter schools are held accountable for improving student achievement and meeting other provisions of their charters. Charter schools are most often new schools that were not in existence before the charter was granted; a traditional public or private school may also convert to charter school status. The term charter school is used almost exclusively to describe government-funded and largely autonomous schools in the United States and in the Canadian province of Alberta.
In the United States, where charter schools are most prevalent, state laws dictate a range of activities, including school funding, student and staff recruitment, and charter attainment status. Although the details vary by state, some generalizations can be made. For example, charter schools are not typically constrained by traditional public school requirements, such as certain bureaucratic and union rules. In some states such flexibility includes the freedom to hire teachers (including those who lack state certification) on the basis of the schools’ own standards and to adopt specific curricula. Some charter schools may even create their own calendars and set the length of their school days.
The first charter school law was passed in 1991 in Minnesota, and the first charter school was established there in 1992. By 1995 an additional 18 states had passed charter school legislation. The charter school movement then experienced tremendous growth. From the 2003–04 to the 2013–14 school year, the number of charter schools in the United States doubled, growing from 3,000 to 6,000, with the proportion of students enrolled in the schools increasing from 1.6 to 5.1 percent. Charter schools have an open admissions process. When more students apply than can be accommodated, officials typically rely on lotteries to select students randomly.
Because charter schools function as public schools, their operators receive charters from public agencies, usually state or local school boards. Charters are performance contracts that establish each school and contain provisions related to financial plans, curriculum, and governance. The entities that issue charters, usually referred to as sponsors or authorizers, hold the charter school accountable for its performance. Charters are issued for defined limited terms of operation, usually from three to five years. As a result, if charter schools fail to meet the provisions of their charters, the sponsor may take steps to close them down. Indeed, it is generally much easier for sponsors to revoke the charters of charter schools than it is for authorities to close traditional public schools.
Charter schools have varied greatly in terms of student achievement. The range in charter school quality can be explained by the lack of a uniform design among the large number of schools in operation. Nevertheless, the threat of competition from traditional public schools and other charter schools has forced charter school sponsors and organizers to maintain high standards of accountability. However, research on the actual impact of charter school education on student success has remained inconclusive, and thus the value of charter schools is a subject of intense debate.
A primary reason for founding charter schools was to seek an alternative vision of schooling that could not be realized in the traditional public schools. The market metaphor for choice and competition became an essential part of the charter school discussion. Free-market advocates reasoned that charter schools would either stimulate weaker public schools to improve or would drive them out of the education arena through the process of market-based accountability. In so doing, charter schools could encourage systemic change by providing more educational choices, creating competitive market forces.
Many critics argued, however, that charter schools would damage public school systems by diverting resources. Others claimed that the market-based mentality behind charter schools encourages them to engage in practices that are irrelevant to or unproductive for education. For example, many charter schools attract students by using gimmicks, such as free gift cards, enabling the schools to show progress in enrollment while putting few resources toward genuine learning and the improvement of student performance.
