Coeducation,  education of males and females in the same schools. A modern phenomenon, it was adopted earlier and more widely in the United States than in Europe, where tradition proved a greater obstacle.
Coeducation was first introduced in western Europe after the Reformation, when certain Protestant groups urged that girls as well as boys should be taught to read the Bible. The practice became especially marked in Scotland, the northern parts of England, and colonial New England, where young children of both sexes attended dame schools. In the latter half of the 18th century, girls were gradually admitted to town schools. The Society of Friends in England as well as in the United States were pioneers in coeducation as they were in universal education, and, in Quaker settlements in the British colonies, boys and girls generally attended school together. The new free public elementary, or common, schools, which after the American Revolution supplanted church institutions, were almost always coeducational, and by 1900 most public high schools were coeducational as well. Many private colleges from their inception admitted women (the first was Oberlin College in Oberlin, Ohio), and many state universities followed their example. By the end of the 19th century, 70 percent of American colleges were coeducational. In the second half of the 20th century, many institutions of higher learning that had been exclusively for persons of one sex became coeducational.
In western Europe the main exponents of primary and secondary coeducation were the Scandinavian countries. In Denmark coeducation extends back to the 18th century, and in Norway coeducation was adopted by law in 1896. In Germany, on the other hand, until the closing decades of the 19th century it was practically impossible for a girl to get a secondary education, and, when girls’ secondary schools were introduced, their status was inferior to that of schools for boys. At present in many large municipalities, such as Bremen, Hamburg, and Berlin, coeducation at the primary level is the rule; at the secondary level there has been little change.
Antagonism to coeducation in England and on the European continent diminished more rapidly in higher education than in secondary. In England, Girton College at Cambridge was established for women in 1869, and the London School of Economics was opened to women in 1874. Germany permitted women to matriculate in 1901, and by 1910 women had been admitted to universities in the Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark, Sweden, Switzerland, Norway, Austria-Hungary, France, and Turkey.
Since World War II, coeducation has been adopted in many developing countries; China and Cuba are outstanding examples. There are many other countries, however, where social conditioning and religious sanctions have limited its success. In most Arab countries, for example, girls tend to drop out of coeducational schools at the age of puberty.
