Columbia University,  major private institution of higher education in New York, New York, U.S. It is one of the Ivy League schools. Founded in 1754 as King’s College, it was renamed Columbia College when it reopened in 1784 after the American Revolution. It became Columbia University in 1912. Columbia College was the undergraduate liberal arts school for men until 1983, when women began to be admitted. Besides Columbia College, the university includes two other undergraduate schools (the School of Engineering and Applied Science and the School of General Studies) and the affiliated Barnard and Teachers colleges.
Barnard College, one of the Seven Sisters schools, was founded in 1889 (when it also became affiliated with Columbia); it remains an undergraduate liberal arts school for women only. The college was named for Columbia’s 10th president, Frederick Barnard, whose campaign to have women admitted to Columbia resulted in a Collegiate Course for Women in the early 1880s. Women completing the curriculum were awarded a diploma from Columbia, but they had to pursue their courses of study independently. The program was soon abandoned, leading to the establishment of Barnard. The college moved to its present location, across the street from Columbia in the Morningside Heights section of Manhattan, in 1898.
Most courses at the university are open to students of both colleges, and their cultural resources are shared. Upon graduation, a Barnard student receives her degree from Columbia. Total enrollment (excluding Barnard and Teachers colleges) is about 32,000; enrollment at Barnard is about 2,500 and at Teachers about 5,000.
Shaped by the dynamic culture of New York City, Columbia has been less affected by tradition than other private Eastern universities of comparable age and esteem. From the outset it differed from other colleges in its heavier emphasis on such subjects as commerce, government, and navigation. It has numerous strong graduate and professional schools and various institutes for research and advanced study that have a cosmopolitan outlook. Its Teachers College (1887), with the city for a laboratory, is one of the best known in the nation, and the College of Physicians and Surgeons (1767), together with the Presbyterian Hospital and allied institutions, forms the nucleus of one of the country’s renowned medical centres.
