Deborah Meier,  (born April 6, 1931, New York, New York, U.S.), American education scholar, a leading practitioner of progressive reform within the U.S. public school system, and founder of the “small-schools movement,” a vision of education as a cooperative investment of teachers, parents, students, and community.
From 1949 to 1951 Meier attended Antioch College (later called Antioch University) in Yellow Springs, Ohio, and in 1955 she earned an M.A. from the University of Chicago. She was a kindergarten teacher and participated in the Head Start program—which promoted “school readiness” for children in low-income families from birth to five years in the form of health, nutritional, and social support—in Chicago, Philadelphia, and New York City.
As the founder and director of the highly regarded Central Park East (CPE) primary school network, based in the East Harlem section of New York City, Meier gained a reputation as an innovator of small schools that forged creative collaborations between educators and the communities in which the classrooms were based. The CPE schools served predominately low-income neighbourhoods with mainly African American and Latino students, yet, despite their disadvantages, the students from CPE schools became among the city’s highest achievers. The schools had no entrance requirements and served broad-based student populations—including those with special needs—and they competed with the most successful elementary schools in the nation.
In 1985 Meier broadened the scope of the CPE model by creating the Central Park East Secondary School, a public high school in which 85 to 95 percent of the entering students went on to mostly four-year colleges. The school is profiled in High School II (1994), a documentary by Frederick Wiseman. At the same time, she worked with author Ted Sizer to create the Coalition of Essential Schools, a national network of small alternative public schools. Interest in the Coalition grew as it helped to connect more than 50 similar efforts in New York City alone. Despite the reluctance of federal and several city governments to provide schools greater autonomy, the essential and alternative schools movements saw substantial growth. In 1987 she became the first educator to be awarded a MacArthur fellowship. In 1992 Meier served as codirector of the Coalition Campus Project, which successfully redesigned two large failing high schools, creating in their stead a dozen new Coalition schools. She became an adviser to New York City’s Annenberg Challenge, a funding source for educational reform, and was appointed senior fellow at Brown University’s Annenberg Institute. In 1997 she pioneered the Mission Hill School, a pilot project along the lines of the Coalition schools, in Boston’s Roxbury community.
In the mid-1990s, Meier chronicled her educational experiences in The Power of Their Ideas: Lessons for America from a Small School in Harlem. A regular contributor to and editorial board member of The Nation, Dissent, and the Harvard Education Letter, Meier was an outspoken critic of high-stakes standardized testing and U.S. Pres. George W. Bush’s No Child Left Behind policies. Her findings and those of other critics were published in a book she edited with George Wood: Many Children Left Behind: How the No Child Left Behind Act Is Damaging Our Children and Our Schools (2004). Meier later was on the faculty of New York University’s Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development. She also founded the Forum for Education and Democracy.
Among the many other books Meier wrote or coauthored are In Schools We Trust: Creating Communities of Learning in an Era of Testing and Standardization (2002), Playing for Keeps: Life and Learning on a Public School Playground (2010), and These Schools Belong to You and Me: Why We Can’t Afford to Abandon Our Public Schools (2017).
