 No one marvels at the ballpoint pen or overhead projector as a powerful “learning technology.” In short order, most of today’s educational technology apps and Chromebooks may cease to be cool gadgets, too, settling into the background of established tools that help students learn.
But the greatest challenge for “edtech” in the future will simply be this: Will the search for fresh generations of tools be led by teachers, students, and human communities—or by advanced technology that sets its own agenda?
[We all need to become futurist citizens. Julie Friedman Steele explains how.]
Education is all about preparing students to survive in society. That means the knowledge we share, the way we share it, and the tools we use reflect both what we love and fear about our world.
In the coming years, we will alternately love and fear machine intelligence (or “AI”) with screaming intensity. Some of us will declare machine intelligence the quintessential learning tool—the societal leveler that will erase differences in class or race by putting any goal within anyone’s reach. Others will condemn machine learning, contending that it’s eliminating our humanity and individuality and enslaving us to the ruthless and unforgiving god of efficiency.
[Don’t worry about AI, says Garry Kasparov. Authoritarianism is the greatest threat to our future.]
Machines are great at tasks. They may even prove to be great at training people to do specific tasks—from algebra to interpreting an EKG signal. But embedded in the word education are the Latin roots and ideas of educare, or “to bring up,” and educere, which means to bring forth. That makes “education” (in contrast to training) profoundly social.
So how will we build tools for learning that are designed around people—and designed to keep people in charge? If we keep teachers and students in charge of the tools that we use to raise future generations—to educate them—we will yet save humanity.
This essay was originally published in 2018 in Encyclopædia Britannica Anniversary Edition: 250 Years of Excellence (1768–2018).
