 Horace Mann, a pioneer of American public schools in the 19th century, famously called education the “great equalizer of the conditions of men.” But the inverse is also true. Students who receive a poor education, or who drop out of school before graduating, can end up on the wrong side of a lifelong gap in employment, earnings, even life expectancy.
Too often, the difference between a life of promise and a life in peril hinges not on a student’s potential but on the quality of the local public school. That means Americans have a choice to make: whether we will allow education to be a wedge that widens inequality or whether we will use its power, as Horace Mann envisioned it, to create opportunity for all.
[Ray Kurzweil thinks we’ll be a billion times more intelligent than we are now within a few decades. That will have consequences.]
The stakes are high. In Chicago, where I grew up—and where I now work with young at-risk men to help break the cycle of poverty and gun violence—I’ve seen the price that whole communities pay when our schools fail. In neighborhoods where high school dropouts land in gangs, education can be a matter of life and death.
Today’s students don’t have to suffer the same fate. The problems plaguing underperforming schools are not only solvable—they’re actually being solved by school administrators, parents, and teachers in districts across the country. Here is some of what we know is working:
Early childhood education. The years between birth and age five are a critical time for every child’s cognitive and social-emotional development. For children from underserved communities, programs such as Head Start help level the playing field and make sure every child has the chance to make a healthy start.
During the Obama administration, we helped bring the number of states offering state-funded preschool up to 46. Now we’ve got to finish the job.
Higher standards. As secretary of education, I saw firsthand that wealthy school districts and impoverished ones had a big thing in common: wherever we raised our expectations, our kids rose to meet them. As more states have adopted college and career-ready standards, the national graduation rate has hit a record high, with some of the greatest gains being made by low-income students, English-language learners, and Black, Native, and Hispanic students.
Turning around the lowest-performing schools. One of the key contributors to the nation’s soaring graduation rate has been successful efforts to turn around the nation’s lowest-performing schools, where students were previously dropping out at rates of 40 percent or higher. At schools such as Jeremiah E. Burke High School in Dorchester, Massachusetts, an infusion of federal grant funding helped fuel changes—including lengthened school days, more individualized attention, and better teamwork among teachers—that dramatically improved student behavior and academic achievement.
[We humans need to seize the edtech agenda, says Betsy Corcoran. Otherwise technology will take control.]
We’ve built a playbook filled with hundreds of examples like this one—successful efforts that other districts, in other parts of the country, can learn from and emulate. These models are the culmination of more than a decade of relentless investigation, imagination, and iteration in our public schools. Today, as a result, we have a clear understanding of which interventions work and how to replicate them. These strategies are already transforming schools—and lives—across the country.
Still, too much of our progress is concentrated in small pockets of excellence. Our task now, and going forward, is to broaden our impact by identifying, sharing, and scaling this success. To do that, our leaders need the will and the courage to take bolder action.
In autumn 2017 more than five million children began their public education journeys in either pre-kindergarten or kindergarten. The choices we make today and over the next decade will help determine their trajectory. Policymakers and administrators like me tend to frame our goals for education in lofty, moon-shot terms. But this isn’t a moon shot. Our targets are closer than they appear. We’ve already taken the measurements, launched the rocket, and have gone a great distance on our arc of progress. If we make education a top priority, if we use the tools we’ve developed and scale the models that work, it is well within our ability to complete the mission that Horace Mann set out more than a century ago.
This essay was originally published in 2018 in Encyclopædia Britannica Anniversary Edition: 250 Years of Excellence (1768–2018).
