Elizabeth Palmer Peabody,  (born May 16, 1804, Billerica, Massachusetts, U.S.—died January 3, 1894, Jamaica Plain [now part of Boston], Massachusetts), American educator and participant in the Transcendentalist movement, who opened the first English-language kindergarten in the United States.
Peabody was educated by her mother, who for a time operated an innovative girls’ school in the home, and from an early age she exhibited an interest in philosophical and theological questions. In 1820 she opened a school of her own in Lancaster, Massachusetts, and two years later another in Boston. She also studied Greek with the young Ralph Waldo Emerson. She opened a school in 1825 in Brookline, Massachusetts, where she made the acquaintance of William Ellery Channing, with whom she shared a remarkable intellectual intimacy. As her Socratic tutor, Channing introduced Peabody to the Romantic poets and philosophers of the day, and together they examined the emerging liberal theology of Unitarianism. She also served informally as his secretary (1825–34), recording his sermons and seeing them into print. After her school closed in 1832 Peabody supported herself until 1834 mainly through writing, principally her First Steps to the Study of History (1832), and through private tutoring, when she helped Bronson Alcott establish his radical Temple School in Boston. Her Record of a School, based on her journal of Alcott’s methods and daily interactions with the children, was published anonymously in 1835 and did much to establish Alcott as a leading and controversial thinker.
In 1837 Peabody became a charter member of the Transcendentalist Club, members of which included Margaret Fuller, Emerson, Channing, and Alcott. On visits to Emerson and the others she introduced her Transcendentalist friends to the work of the Salem poet-mystic Jones Very and the writer Nathaniel Hawthorne, who had married her sister Sophia (another sister, Mary, married Horace Mann).
In 1839 Peabody opened her West Street bookstore, which became a sort of club for the intellectual community of Boston. On her own printing press she published translations from German by Fuller and three of Hawthorne’s earliest books. For two years she published and wrote articles for The Dial, the critical literary monthly and organ of the Transcendentalist movement; she also wrote for other periodicals.
She was probably the first woman book publisher in America. In 1849 she published a single issue of a Transcendentalist journal, Aesthetic Papers, which contained, among other essays, Henry David Thoreau’s “Civil Disobedience.” Peabody closed her shop in 1850 and for the next 10 years taught school, wrote, and worked to promote public education. Her particular brand of Transcendentalism, anchored firmly in an idea of a just society informed by liberal Christianity, led her to place great emphasis on the education of the young. In 1859 Peabody learned of Friedrich Froebel’s kindergarten work in Germany, and the next year she opened in Boston the nation’s first formal kindergarten. She continued it until 1867, when she undertook a tour of European kindergartens to learn more of Froebel’s thought. Much of her later writing concerned kindergarten education. Those titles include Moral Culture of Infancy, and Kindergarten Guide (1863), Kindergarten Culture (1870), The Kindergarten in Italy (1872), Letters to Kindergartners (1886), and Lectures in the Training Schools for Kindergartners (1888). In 1873 she founded the Kindergarten Messenger, of which she was editor during its two years of publication, and in 1877 she organized the American Froebel Union, of which she was the first president. From 1879 to 1884 she was a lecturer at the Concord School of Philosophy of her old friend Alcott. She also published Reminiscences of Rev. Wm. Ellery Channing, D.D. (1880) and Last Evening with Allston (1886).
