Fang Lizhi,  (born February 12, 1936, Beijing, China—died April 6, 2012, Tucson, Arizona, U.S.), Chinese astrophysicist and dissident who was held by the Chinese leadership to be partially responsible for the 1989 student rebellion in Tiananmen Square.
Fang attended Peking University in Beijing (1952–56) and won a position at the Chinese Academy of Sciences’ Institute of Modern Physics. In 1957 he was publicly rebuked and expelled from the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) for a paper he wrote decrying the Marxist position on physics and calling for a reform of the educational system. He helped to establish a physics department at the University of Science and Technology of China (known as Keda) in Beijing, and he continued his research on solid-state and laser physics while teaching electromagnetics and quantum mechanics. In 1966, at the start of the Cultural Revolution, he was confined for a year and then sent to a communal farm to be “reeducated.” During this period he was isolated from the scientific community, and he redirected his field of study to cosmology. Released in 1969 to teach, Fang was forced to publish his work under a pseudonym.
At the start of the post-Mao era in the mid-1970s, Fang’s party membership was restored, and he was allowed to attend conferences outside China for the first time. He contributed research on a number of subjects in astrophysics and won much acclaim for his work. In 1984 Fang was appointed a vice president of Keda, which had been moved to Hefei, capital city of Anhui province, in the early 1970s. He began to work on restructuring the university and reforming educational policy. His outspoken criticisms were somewhat encouraged until students began to participate in demonstrations; Fang was one of those held responsible and was transferred to the Beijing Astronomical Observatory. He was once more expelled from the CCP early in 1987. When in April 1989 student demonstrations in Tiananmen Square received international attention, Fang again was held responsible, and he took refuge in the U.S. embassy after government troops crushed the protests in early June. He and his wife remained at the embassy until June 1990, when they were allowed to leave the country.
Fang subsequently conducted research at universities in Great Britain and the United States. His last posting before his death was in the physics department at the University of Arizona, Tucson. A collection of his writings and speeches, Bringing Down the Great Wall: Writings on Science, Culture, and Democracy in China, was published in 1991.
