Fanny Jackson Coppin, née Fanny Marion Jackson,  (born 1837, Washington, D.C., U.S.—died Jan. 21, 1913, Philadelphia, Pa.), American educator and missionary whose innovations as head principal of the Institute for Colored Youth in Philadelphia included a practice-teaching system and an elaborate industrial-training department.
Born a slave, Fanny Jackson was bought into freedom by an aunt while still a small girl. She determined to get an education and, while employed as a domestic servant, studied to enter the Rhode Island State Normal School. In 1860 she entered Oberlin College. Upon graduating in 1865, Jackson began teaching Latin, Greek, and mathematics at the Institute for Colored Youth, where she also served as principal of the girls’ high school department. In 1869 she became head principal of the Institute; she was the first African-American woman in the country to hold such a position, and she quickly began to direct the course of the school.
In 1871 Jackson introduced a normal-school department, and within a few years, enrollment in teacher training had far exceeded the enrollment in the classics course. To the ordinary work of teacher training, Jackson added a practice-teaching system in 1878. In 1881 she married the Reverend Levi J. Coppin, who in 1900 became a bishop of the African Methodist Episcopal Church. In 1889, after a 10-year campaign, Fanny Coppin realized her hope to introduce an industrial-training department that offered instruction in 10 trades. To her, vocational training was as important a tool as academic education in the struggle to end racial discrimination.
Fanny Coppin resigned her post with the Institute in 1902. (The school was moved to Cheyney, Pa., in 1904 and eventually became Cheyney State College [1951].) That same year the Coppins sailed for Cape Town, S.Af., and over the next decade she worked tirelessly among the native black women, organizing mission societies and promoting temperance, as well as founding the Bethel Institute in Cape Town. She then returned to Philadelphia, where she spent the remainder of her life. In 1926 the High and Training School of Baltimore was renamed the Fanny Jackson Coppin Normal School (now Coppin State College).
