Fidelia Fiske, Fiske also spelled Fisk,  (born May 1, 1816, Shelburne, Mass., U.S.—died July 26, 1864, Shelburne), American missionary to Persia who worked with considerable success to improve women’s education and health in and around Orumiyeh (Urmia), in present-day Iran.
Fidelia Fisk (she later restored the ancestral final e) early exhibited a serious interest in religion. She was said to have read Cotton Mather’s Magnalia Christi Americana and Timothy Dwight’s Theology by the age of eight. At age 17 she began teaching in district schools. In 1839 she entered Mount Holyoke Female Seminary (now Mount Holyoke College) in South Hadley, Massachusetts, and, after a year’s absence due to typhoid fever, she graduated in 1842 and was promptly appointed to the faculty. Influenced by Mary Lyon, she responded to a call the next year from the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions for a missionary to the Nestorian Christians of Persia. She sailed from Boston in March 1843 and in June landed at Orumiyeh.
After mastering the Syriac language Fiske laboured under severe physical and cultural difficulties to build a small day school into Urmia Seminary, a boarding school for girls that won wide repute. She was virtually a mother to her pupils, who had first to be rescued from the tradition of educational neglect and early marriage to attend the school. Her services as a nurse for the region about Orumiyeh and her missionary work into the countryside and among mountain tribes gradually won her respect and helped set an example that contributed to the slow improvement of the lot of Persian women. The school had grown to an enrollment of some 40 pupils by 1858, when ill health forced Fiske to return to the United States. While serving as an unofficial chaplain at Mount Holyoke and traveling and speaking widely on her missionary work, she wrote Memorial: Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the Mt. Holyoke Female Seminary (1862) and contributed to Thomas Laurie’s Woman and Her Saviour in Persia (1863). Fiske intended to return to Persia when her health was restored, and for that reason she declined the offer of the principalship of Mount Holyoke in 1863. Her health did not improve, however, and she died the next year. Her book Recollections of Mary Lyon was published in 1866.
