George S. Counts, in full George Sylvester Counts,  (born December 9, 1889, near Baldwin City, Kansas, U.S.—died November 10, 1974, Belleville, Illinois), American educator and activist who, as a leading proponent of social reconstructionism, believed that schools should bring about social change.
After graduating (1911) from Baker University, Counts earned a doctorate (1916) in education with a minor in sociology at the University of Chicago under Charles Hubbard Judd and Albion W. Small. He subsequently taught at various universities before joining the faculty of Teachers College, Columbia University, in 1927.
Early in his career Counts studied the influence of powerful social and economic forces in American education. In The Selective Character of American Secondary Education (1922) and The Social Composition of Boards of Education (1927), he argued that the interests of upper-class elites dominated high schools and school boards, thus belying equality of opportunity, particularly for immigrant and African American children. After study tours in the Soviet Union in 1927 and 1929, he published The Soviet Challenge to America (1931). Impressed by Soviet efforts at social planning, he attributed the social and economic devastation of the Great Depression to the lack of planning in the United States. In 1932 Counts spoke before the Progressive Education Association and criticized the organization for not having a social theory to guide education. The controversial speech was later included in the pamphlet Dare the School Build a New Social Order? (1932), in which he called for schools and teachers to help foster a planned collective economy. He also argued that teachers should serve as leaders, effecting social change.
Hoping to spread his ideas, Counts and several colleagues launched a journal of social and educational commentary, The Social Frontier, in 1934. Under his editorship (1934–37) the journal became the voice of the educational theory called social reconstructionism, which was based on the theory that society can be reconstructed through education. By that time Counts had also come to admire the work of historian Charles A. Beard, whose progressive interpretation of history and emphasis on economics affected Counts’s social and educational theory. Also at this time he published The Social Foundations of Education (1934) and The Prospects for American Democracy (1938).
Counts served as president of the American Federation of Teachers (AFT) from 1939 to 1942. By the late 1930s he had become disenchanted with the Soviet Union after the revelations of the purge trials initiated by Joseph Stalin, and he led the fight to keep communists out of the AFT. In 1942 he became the New York state chairman of the American Labor Party, but he left the group that same year. He subsequently helped form the Liberal Party, and in 1952 he unsuccessfully ran for the U.S. Senate from New York.
Counts retired from Teachers College in 1956, but he continued to teach at various universities until 1971. His other works include The Country of the Blind: The Soviet System of Mind Control (1949) and Education and American Civilization (1952).
