Harriet Wiseman Elliott,  (born July 10, 1884, Carbondale, Ill., U.S.—died Aug. 6, 1947, Carbondale),  American educator and public official, a highly effective teacher and organizer who held a number of governmental advisory roles during the administrations of U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Elliott attended the academy of Park College in Parkville, Missouri, and then taught school for a few years before entering Hanover (Indiana) College, from which she graduated in 1910. After a brief period as a high-school principal and another spent in travel, she undertook graduate studies, first in history and later in political science, at Columbia University, New York City, from which she received a master’s degree in 1913. She then joined the faculty of the State Normal and Industrial College of North Carolina (from 1918 the North Carolina College for Women) in Greensboro, with which she remained associated for the rest of her life, becoming professor of history and political science in 1921. She played an active role in the unsuccessful campaign for woman suffrage in North Carolina in 1915.
During World War I, despite her earlier activity on behalf of various peace groups, Elliott headed the education department of the North Carolina division of the Woman’s Committee of the Council of National Defense. In 1925 she took part in Carrie Chapman Catt’s Conference on the Cause and Cure of War. An ardent New Dealer, she served on the advisory committee of the North Carolina Emergency Relief Administration in 1933–35. In the latter year she was named dean of women of her college, which three years earlier had become the Women’s College of the University of North Carolina (now the University of North Carolina at Greensboro). She also took a leave of absence in 1935 to direct a grass-roots educational program in government (and specifically New Deal) agencies that was instituted by the Women’s Division of the Democratic National Committee.
For six months she organized study groups and lectured around the country to great effect. In 1940 she was a member of the Washington Conference on Unemployment Among Young Women called by Eleanor Roosevelt, whose friend she soon became. At that time President Roosevelt named Elliot the consumer representative among the seven members of the National Defense Advisory Commission; she was the only woman among the seven. In 1941 she was appointed associate administrator of the Office of Price Administration and Civilian Supply (OPA) and chief of its consumer division. After several months of ceaseless labour, principally in public education on voluntary price controls, she resigned in December when the mandatory controls she then believed were necessary were not instituted. She was nonetheless appointed to an advisory committee of the Consumer Division of the OPA shortly thereafter. In 1942 she was named to organize and head a women’s division in the Treasury Department. Over the next three years her division enlisted more than a million women to sell war bonds and stamps.
