Hilda Taba,  (born December 7, 1902, Kooraste, Russian Empire [now Estonia]—died July 6, 1967, Burlingame, California, U.S.), Estonian-born American educator, who is considered one of the most-significant contributors to the fields of intergroup education and curriculum design.
As a child, Taba attended the elementary school where her father was the schoolmaster. After completing her undergraduate studies in 1926 at the University of Tartu in Estonia, where she majored in history and education, Taba moved to the United States and began postgraduate studies at Bryn Mawr College, where she received an M.A. in 1927. In 1932 she received a doctoral degree at Teachers College, Columbia University, where William H. Kilpatrick oversaw her work. She also studied with the philosopher John Dewey, whose thought was influential in her later work. Unable to secure a job in Estonia, Taba became a teacher of German in 1933 at the Dalton School, in New York City. The Dalton School was at the time involved in the Eight-Year Study, an investigation into alternative curricula and new practices in areas such as student testing and teacher development. Taba’s participation brought her together with the study’s research director, Ralph Tyler, who hired her as part of his research team at Ohio State University. In 1939 she became the director of the curriculum laboratory at the University of Chicago, which she headed until 1945.
Taba subsequently initiated, designed, and directed several research projects aimed at intergroup education, an educational program that drew extensively on concepts from cognitive and social psychology to increase understanding and tolerance between pupils from different ethnic and cultural backgrounds. Taba’s Intergroup Education Project, launched in New York City in 1945, was a success, and it led to the establishment of the Center of Intergroup Education at the University of Chicago in 1948.
In 1951 Taba accepted an invitation to reorganize and develop social studies curricula in Contra Costa county, California. Among the ideas she and others developed during this project were a spiral curriculum; inductive teaching strategies for the development of concepts, generalizations, and applications; and the organization of learning content on three levels—key ideas, organizational ideas, and facts. These curricular developments gained worldwide recognition in the 1960s and early 1970s. Taba and her colleagues’ attention in the 1950s to the value of a multicultural curriculum foreshadowed similar intercultural and multicultural reforms in the 1990s.
