Homeschooling, also called home education,  educational method situated in the home rather than in an institution designed for that purpose. It is representative of a broad social movement of families, largely in Western societies, who believe that the education of children is, ultimately, the right of parents rather than a government. Beginning in the late 20th century, the homeschooling movement grew largely as a reaction against public school curricula among some groups.
Until the passage of compulsory school attendance laws, beginning in the United States in the mid-19th century, apprenticeships and communal activities were the primary ways young children learned. However, individual instruction was increasingly supplanted by systematized group methods fueled by child labour laws and other social changes that placed more children in schools. Not long after universal compulsory school laws were enacted—a process that was completed in the United States by the early 20th century—some parents and educators grew dissatisfied with the dominant school system and offered alternatives, including learning at home. For instance, in the United States in 1912, Adolf Berle, a professor at Tufts University in Medford, Massachusetts, wrote The School in the Home.
Although instances of homeschooling can be found throughout the 20th century in the United States, neither the term nor the practice became widespread until the last quarter of that century. In the early 1980s there were about 20,000 students homeschooled in the United States, but some three decades later the figure had increased to 1.77 million—about 3 percent of all school-age children—according to estimates by the National Center for Education Statistics. At about the same time, homeschooling was also increasing in other countries, such as the United Kingdom, Australia, and India. Twenty-first-century investigations into education in China and Colombia indicated that homeschooling had also gained a foothold in those countries. Reasons for that rapid growth vary, but they generally centre on perceived deficiencies in traditional education, such as a claimed lack of emphasis on teaching moral and ethical behaviour, a threat of violence in schools, and ineffectiveness in dealing with both learning-disabled and highly gifted children.
Some countries have placed restrictions on homeschooling. For instance, Sweden allows parents to homeschool their children only under “exceptional circumstances.” The practice of homeschooling has been banned in countries such as Brazil and Germany.
Throughout the 1960s and ’70s John Holt, an American teacher and a leading education writer, advocated self-directed learning for children. Holt advised parents to fit the curriculum to the child’s interests, rather than fit the child to the curriculum, and he founded Growing Without Schooling (1977–2001), the first magazine about homeschooling, to share ideas and accounts of families engaged in the practice. Holt coined the word unschooling to describe learning that did not have to take place at home and did not require the school’s teaching and learning techniques. Since that time, however, homeschooling has become the commonly accepted term for many types of learning outside of school.
In the 1970s Americans Raymond Moore and his wife, Dorothy, also prominent education authors and devout Christians, advocated delaying academics for children, especially for boys, until they were developmentally ready for them. Like Holt, Moore found a more-receptive audience for his ideas among parents—and particularly Christian parents—than among school personnel, and Moore became a popular thinker and leader for the burgeoning Christian homeschooling movement. The Moores created their own curricula for homeschooling families to use, which consisted of a three-part formula for instruction: (1) academic study ranging from a few minutes to several hours per day, depending on a child’s maturity, (2) manual labour equal in time to that devoted toward academic study, and (3) home and/or community service constituting an hour or so per day. By the late 1980s, however, Holt had died, and Moore lost influence to other Christian leaders.
At the same time, the work of Charlotte Mason—a 19th-century British educator—had a resurgence among Christian homeschoolers, as a result of the publication of Susan Schaeffer Macaulay’s book For the Children’s Sake: Foundations of Education for the Home and School (1984). Mason advocated teaching Latin or other languages that once provided the foundation of a classical education. Private schools, correspondence schools, and curriculum providers—such as Montessori schools (originated by Italian educator Maria Montessori and characterized by individual initiative and self-direction), Waldorf schools (derived from the work of the spiritualist lecturer Rudolf Steiner), and Roman Catholic and Evangelical schools—all recognized a new market and made their materials available to homeschoolers.
In the United States and its territories, homeschooling has always been a legal option for parents, though with the establishment of formal education it was rarely exercised until the late 20th century. Although legal action has been taken against homeschooling households, it has been prompted by issues such as truancy and educational neglect, not the act of homeschooling itself. As homeschooling grew, so did the monitoring of homeschoolers, and by the early 21st century 40 states had adopted homeschooling regulations. Those regulations, however, vary by state. For example, several states, including New York and North Dakota, are highly restrictive, requiring the provision of achievement test scores or other formal evaluation, parental teacher qualification—for example, requiring a high-school diploma or GED (General Educational Development certificate)—state-approved curriculum, and home visits from state officials. Other states, including Florida and Washington, are more moderately regulated, requiring test scores or another form of professional evaluation. States with less regulation include Wisconsin and Utah, which require only that parents notify the state of their intent to homeschool their children. In some states, such as Texas, no state notification is required. Regulations are often revised or under study. No parent is required to be a certified teacher in order to teach his or her own child at home in Australia, Canada, Ireland, Norway, the United Kingdom, the United States, and other countries where homeschooling is permitted.
Opponents of homeschooling have argued that social integration cannot succeed unless all children are compelled to attend public schools. Critics also contend that the practice does not adequately prepare students academically or socially. However, studies have consistently shown that homeschooling is successful by both social and standard academic measures. Some studies have suggested that, in comparison with publicly and privately schooled students, homeschooled individuals typically score above average on high-school achievement tests and on college and university entrance exams—such as the U.S.-based ACT and SAT. Proponents note that their children socialize with nonfamily members in a variety of settings outside of school and maintain that homeschooling does not undermine democracy and social cohesion. Although some parents teach their children all subjects, many others enlist outside help for particular subjects, especially at the high-school level. Those with computers can access a wide variety of educational software as well as the resources provided by the Internet. Also, some communities and schools allow homeschoolers to use their school libraries, classrooms, and computers. Some states, including Florida, allow the homeschooled to participate in high-school sports and other extracurricular activities, but many do not. Homeschooling supporters otherwise use local and national sports associations for team sports, or they create their own teams.
