Hunt v. McNair,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled (6–3) on June 25, 1973, that a state program under which a religiously affiliated institution of higher education received financial assistance for improvements to its campus did not constitute state support of religion in violation of the First Amendment’s establishment clause (“Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion”).
In a series of cases prior to Hunt, the Supreme Court had provided the foundation for the modern law on government support for church-related schools. The most far-reaching of the cases, Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971), invalidated programs from Pennsylvania and Rhode Island that would have provided aid in the form of faculty salary supplements to religiously affiliated nonpublic K–12 schools. In Lemon the court developed a three-pronged test for determining when a governmental support program passes muster under the establishment clause. The three prongs are that a program or statute’s purpose must be secular, its principal or primary effect must be one that neither advances nor inhibits religion, and it must not foster excessive entanglement between state and religion. In addition, in Tilton v. Richardson  (1971), a decision that was handed down on the same day as Lemon, the court applied the Lemon test in upholding the constitutionality of a state program that provided construction grants to institutions of higher education, including those that were church-related, thus opening the door to later litigation.
The South Carolina Educational Facilities Authority Act established an Educational Facilities Authority (“the Authority”), the purpose of which was to assist institutions of higher education in the construction, financing, and refinancing of projects primarily through the issuance of revenue bonds. Under the terms of the act, projects could encompass buildings, facilities, site preparation, and related items but could not include facilities used or to be used for sectarian instruction or as places of religious worship. Additionally, the act forbade funding for facilities that were used or to be used primarily in connection with any parts of programs of schools or departments of divinity for religious denominations. As such, the act accorded the Authority specified powers over projects, including the power to determine the amount of fees to be charged for the use of projects and to establish regulations for their use.
On January 6, 1970, the Baptist College at Charleston, South Carolina, submitted a request for preliminary approval for the issuance of revenue bonds to the Authority. The college intended to use the funds to complete its dining hall facilities. In return, the college would convey the project, without cost, to the Authority, which would then lease the property back to the college. After payment in full of the bonds, the project would be reconvened to the college. The Authority granted preliminary approval that same month. A state taxpayer challenged the Authority, seeking declaratory and injunctive relief against the operation of the act insofar as it authorized a proposed financing transaction involving the issuance of revenue bonds for the benefit of the Baptist College at Charleston.
In the initial round of litigation, a state trial court denied relief, and the Supreme Court of South Carolina affirmed in favour of the Authority. On further review, the U.S. Supreme Court vacated and remanded the case for reconsideration in light of its intervening decisions in Lemon and Tilton. Following the Supreme Court of South Carolina’s adherence to its earlier position, the U.S. Supreme Court again reviewed the case and affirmed in favour of the Authority.
The Supreme Court held that the proposed transaction did not violate the establishment clause of the First Amendment under the three-pronged Lemon tests of purpose, effect, and entanglement. The court explained that the act creating the Authority had a secular purpose in seeking to aid all institutions of higher education, regardless of whether they were religiously affiliated. Using Tilton for its effect argument, the court found that the college’s operations were not oriented significantly toward sectarian rather than secular education, because there were no religious qualifications for faculty membership or student admission and the percentage of Baptist students was roughly equal to the percentage of Baptists in that area of the state. The court added that the bond issuance would not have the primary effect of advancing or inhibiting religion, because the project would not include any buildings or facilities used for religious purposes.
