Ingrid Mattson,  (born August 24, 1963, Kingston, Ontario, Canada), Canadian religious leader and first woman president of the Islamic Society of North America (ISNA).
Mattson was raised as a Roman Catholic but left the church as a teenager. She developed an interest in Islam as a young adult and converted at age 23. She studied philosophy and fine arts at the University of Waterloo in Ontario, receiving a B.A. in 1987. After graduating, she spent more than a year  in Pakistan, where she worked with Afghan women refugees and met and married a fellow aid worker. In the 1990s she studied Near Eastern languages and civilizations at the University of Chicago, receiving a doctorate in 1999. She joined the faculty of Hartford Seminary in Hartford, Connecticut, in 1998. As professor of Islamic studies and Christian-Muslim relations and director of Hartford’s Macdonald Center for the Study of Islam and Christian-Muslim Relations, she formed the first accredited Muslim chaplaincy training program in North America. From 2012 she held the London and Windsor Community Chair in Islamic Studies at Huron University College, Western University (University of Western Ontario).
In 2001 Mattson was elected vice president of ISNA, an umbrella organization of Islamic groups in the United States and Canada. From 2006 to 2010 she served as president of ISNA—the first woman, the first person from a non-Islamic country, and the first convert to Islam to hold the position. A highly visible figure, she made frequent appearances on television and radio programs and gave public lectures. Mattson was asked to offer one of the prayers at the National Prayer Service honouring the inauguration of U.S. Pres. Barack Obama at the Washington National Cathedral in Washington, D.C., in 2009. Though embraced by many moderate Muslims and others, she also faced wide-ranging criticism from Muslims and non-Muslims alike, some of whom characterized her as too radical and others as not vocal enough in her support for women’s rights in Islam.
