Isabella Marshall Graham, née Isabella Marshall,  (born July 29, 1742, Lanarkshire, Scot.—died July 27, 1814, New York, N.Y., U.S.),  Scottish-American educator and philanthropist who was principal in founding one of the earliest relief societies in the United States to provide assistance to the poor.
Isabella Marshall grew up in Elderslie, near Paisley, Scotland, in a religious family and received a good education. In 1765 she married John Graham, an army surgeon whom she accompanied to Canada in 1767. They lived successively in Quebec, Montreal, and Fort Niagara and on the Caribbean island of Antigua, where John died in 1773.
Graham then returned with her children to Scotland and opened a small school in Paisley. Later she opened a boarding school for girls in Edinburgh, where she also was active in various charitable enterprises, notably a “penny society,” a fund for mutual relief in case of sickness to which the subscribers contributed a penny weekly. The society later became the Society for the Relief of the Destitute Sick. In 1789 she moved to the United States and settled in New York City, where she opened a girls’ school that was immediately successful. She also continued her charitable work and in 1797 led a group of women, including Mother Elizabeth Seton, in organizing a Society for the Relief of Poor Widows with Small Children. Graham gave up teaching the next year to devote her time to philanthropy.
The society was one of the earliest organizations of its kind in the United States, and under Graham’s leadership it distributed assistance to hundreds of needy widows. The society also sought work for them and established a house for needlework. From 1802, when a state charter was granted, the society received money from the legislature to supplement the amount raised by public appeal. Graham was chosen president of the board of women in charge of the Magdalen House of the Magdalen Society upon its organization in 1811. In 1814, shortly before her death, she took the lead in founding the Society for the Promotion of Industry Among the Poor.
