James B. Conant, in full James Bryant Conant,  (born March 26, 1893, Dorchester, Mass., U.S.—died Feb. 11, 1978, Hanover, N.H.), American educator and scientist, president of Harvard University, and U.S. high commissioner for western Germany following World War II.
Conant received A.B. and Ph.D. (1916) degrees from Harvard and, after spending a year in the research division of the chemical warfare service during World War I, returned to Harvard as instructor in chemistry. He won recognition as a brilliant research chemist, becoming department chairman by the age of 38. He specialized in research into free radicals, the chemical structure of chlorophyll, and the quantitative study of organic reactions.
In 1933 Conant was elected president of Harvard. As president he led the university toward a broadening of the social and geographic makeup of the student bodies of the undergraduate college and the professional schools. An advocate of aid to the Allies as early as the late 1930s, Conant became a central figure in organizing American science for World War II, including the development of the atomic bomb. After the war he served as a senior adviser to the National Science Foundation and to the Atomic Energy Commission. In 1953 he was appointed U.S. high commissioner for western Germany and in 1955 ambassador. He became known as a defender of the democratic spirit in the new Germany. Returning to the United States in 1957, he took up an earlier interest in public education and conducted studies of the comprehensive high school and the junior high school.
Conant’s publications include two textbooks, Practical Chemistry, written with N.H. Black (1920), and Chemistry of Organic Compounds (1933). He was particularly successful in writing about science for the nonscientifically trained person, as in On Understanding Science (1947). Among his books on educational policy are Education and Liberty (1953), The American High School Today (1959), Slums and Suburbs (1961), and The Education of American Teachers (1963). His autobiography, My Several Lives, was published in 1970.
