John Amos Comenius, Czech Jan Ámos Komenský,  (born March 28, 1592, Nivnice, Moravia, Habsburg domain [now in Czech Republic]—died  Nov. 14, 1670, Amsterdam, Neth.), Czech educational reformer and religious leader, remembered mainly for his innovations in methods of teaching, especially languages. He favoured the learning of Latin to facilitate the study of European culture. Janua Linguarum Reserata (1632; The Gate of Tongues Unlocked) revolutionized Latin teaching and was translated into 16 languages.
Comenius was the only son of respected members of a Protestant group known as the Bohemian Brethren. His parents died when he was age 10, and after four unhappy years spent living with his aunt in Strážnice, he was sent to a secondary school at Přerov. Though the teaching methods there were poor, he was befriended by a headmaster who recognized his gifts and encouraged him to train for the ministry. Following two years at the Herborn Gymnasium in the Nassau region (now part of Germany), he entered the University of Heidelberg (1613). While there he came under the influence of Protestant millennialists, who believed that men could achieve salvation on earth. He also read with enthusiasm the works of Francis Bacon and returned home convinced that the millennium could be attained with the aid of science.
As a young minister Comenius found life wholly satisfying, but the outbreak of the Thirty Years’ War in 1618 and the emperor Ferdinand II’s determination to re-Catholicize Bohemia forced him and other Protestant leaders to flee. While in hiding, he wrote an allegory, The Labyrinth of the World and the Paradise of the Heart, in which he described both his early despair and his sources of consolation. With a band of Brethren he escaped to Poland and in 1628 settled in Leszno. Believing that the Protestants would eventually win and liberate Bohemia, he began to prepare for the day when it would be possible to rebuild society there through a reformed educational system. He wrote a “Brief Proposal” advocating full-time schooling for all the youth of the nation and maintaining that they should be taught both their native culture and the culture of Europe.
The reform of the educational system would require two things. First, a revolution in methods of teaching was necessary so that learning might become rapid, pleasant, and thorough. Teachers ought to “follow in the footsteps of nature,” meaning that they ought to pay attention to the mind of the child and to the way the student learned. Comenius made this the theme of The Great Didactic and also of The School of Infancy—a book for mothers on the early years of childhood. Second, to make European culture accessible to all children, it was necessary that they learn Latin. But Comenius was certain that there was a better way of teaching Latin than by the inefficient and pedantic methods then in use; he advocated “nature’s way,” that is, learning about things and not about grammar. To this end he wrote Janua Linguarum Reserata, a textbook that described useful facts about the world in both Latin and Czech, side by side; thus, the pupils could compare the two languages and identify words with things. Translated into German, the Janua soon became famous throughout Europe and was subsequently translated into a number of European and Asian languages. Comenius wrote that he was “encouraged beyond expectation” by the book’s reception.
With the liberation of Bohemia less certain than before, Comenius turned to an even more ambitious project—the reform of human society through education. Others in Europe shared his vision, among them a German merchant living in London, Samuel Hartlib, who invited Comenius to England to establish a college of pansophic learning. With approval from the Brethren, Comenius went to London in 1641, reporting back that he had been “fitted out with new clothes befitting an English divine.” He met a number of influential men, engaged in much discussion, and wrote essays of which the most notable was The Way of Light, which set out his program. Parliament went so far as to consider setting up a college “for a number of men from all nations.” This prospect was shattered by the outbreak of the English Civil War, however, and Comenius was obliged to leave the country in 1642. He had been invited to France by Cardinal Richelieu; and the American John Winthrop, Jr., who was in Europe looking for an educator-theologian to become president of Harvard College, may have met Comenius. Instead, Comenius accepted an offer from the government of Sweden to help reform its schools by writing a series of textbooks modeled on his Janua.
He interpreted his agreement with the Swedish government as entitling him to base his textbooks on a system of philosophy he had evolved called “pansophy” (see below). After struggling hard to produce them, however, he found that they failed to satisfy anyone. Nevertheless, in the course of his stay at Elbing, he tried to lay a philosophical foundation for a science of pedagogy. In The Analytical Didactic, forming part of his Newest Method of Languages, he reinterpreted the principle of nature that he had described in The Great Didactic as a principle of logic. He put forward certain self-evident principles from which he derived a number of maxims, some of them full of common sense and others rather platitudinous. His chief attention was directed to his system of pansophy. Ever since his student days he had been seeking a basic principle by which all knowledge could be harmonized. He believed that men could be trained to see the underlying harmony of the universe and thus to overcome its apparent disharmony. He wrote that:
The “expanding of the appetite” for pansophic understanding became his great aim, spelled out in “A General Consultation Concerning the Improvement of Human Affairs.”
