John Goodlad, in full John Inkster Goodlad,  (born August 19, 1920, North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada—died November 29, 2014, Seattle, Washington, U.S.), Canadian-born educator and author who, as a critic of the U.S. educational system, argued that the fundamental focus of education should not be on the promotion of standards-based testing but instead be on preparing young people to be active and engaged citizens in a participatory democracy.
After earning a teaching certificate in 1939, Goodlad began teaching in a one-room rural school and eventually held posts at several other schools in Canada. He earned both a bachelor’s (1945) and a master’s (1946) degree from the University of British Columbia before moving to the United States and earning a Ph.D. (1949) at the University of Chicago. He then held various teaching positions at Emory University, Agnes Scott College, and the University of Chicago. In 1960 he became both a professor of education and the director of a laboratory school at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). Goodlad was named dean of the Graduate School of Education at UCLA in 1967, a position he held until 1983.
In 1984 Goodlad moved to the University of Washington. There, in collaboration with Kenneth A. Sirotnik and Roger Soder, he created (1985) the research-focused Center for Educational Renewal and in subsequent years added two other organizations as affiliates of the centre: the National Network for Educational Renewal (1986) and the Institute for Educational Inquiry (1992). Through those various groups, Goodlad advocated for a redesign of the U.S. educational system that would be grounded on four “Moral Dimensions” that he helped to identify. Goodlad paid particular attention to the preparation of teachers, believing that a teacher’s personality and approach to students are the keys to effective teaching and learning. That led Goodlad to support close collaborations between colleges and universities that prepare teachers and the schools that serve as real-world settings for the teacher candidates.
Goodlad wrote prolifically, and his books include A Place Called School (1984), an extensive four-year study of thousands of American classrooms; Teachers for Our Nation’s Schools (1990); In Praise of Education (1997); and Education for Everyone: Agenda for Education in a Democracy (2004; cowritten with Corinne Mantle-Bromley and Stephen John Goodlad). The memoir Romances with Schools: A Life of Education was published in 2004.
