John Holt, in full John Caldwell Holt,  (born April 14, 1923, New York, New York, U.S.—died September 14, 1985, Boston, Massachusetts), American critic of public education who became one of the most-prominent advocates for homeschooling in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
Raised in New England, Holt graduated from Yale University in 1943 with a degree in engineering. Despite his excellent academic record, Holt came to consider his experiences in formal education largely worthless, concluding that most of his learning had happened outside the classroom. After Yale, Holt served in the U.S. Navy, then joined a pacifist group, and finally traveled through Europe. After his return to the United States, he taught for four years at the Colorado Rocky Mountain School in Carbondale, Colorado, before moving back to the East Coast. There he met his intellectual comrade and collaborator Bill Hull while teaching at a private school in Cambridge, Massachusetts. For seven years Holt and Hull observed one another’s classes, taking notes that became the basis for many of Holt’s books.
How Children Fail (1964), Holt’s first book, contended that compulsory schooling destroys children’s native curiosity and replaces it with a self-conscious and fearful desire to please the teacher. His How Children Learn (1967) contrasted the informal education children receive in the home with compulsory school education. Holt’s critiques of the educational establishment, developed in those books and elsewhere, were unpopular with his teaching colleagues and superiors, although he became a mainstream figure in the mid-1960s, contributing articles to magazines such as Life, The Saturday Evening Post, and Redbook. He was dismissed, however, from several schools for refusing to accommodate the administration, attempting to run his classes without assessments, and suggesting pedagogical reforms that scandalized even progressives. He left teaching in 1968 to lecture at the Harvard Graduate School of Education and the University of California, Berkeley.
Holt’s views became more radical in the early 1970s. His optimism that schools could be improved through a variety of reforms changed to pessimism in 1970 when he met and studied the writings of the philosopher and social critic Ivan Illich, who held that the concept of mass education was inherently self-defeating. Holt also became an outspoken critic of the Vietnam War and refused to pay taxes. He turned down an honorary doctorate from Wesleyan University in 1970, arguing that colleges were “among the chief enslaving institutions” in the United States. Holt’s Freedom and Beyond (1972) showcased his increasing doubts that any schools could challenge the racism and classism that he associated with modern life. Echoing Illich, Holt argued that children need to be liberated from schools altogether. In Escape from Childhood (1974) he argued that children should be granted 11 basic rights, including the right to sue and be sued, to choose their own guardians, and to learn as they wished.
Increasingly marginalized, Holt found himself at the forefront of the burgeoning homeschooling movement after he published Instead of Education: Ways to Help People Do Things Better (1976), which explored a number of possible alternatives to institutional schooling. The following year he founded Growing Without Schooling (1977–2001), the first newsletter in the country for homeschoolers. He worked to build bridges between disparate subgroups within the homeschooling movement such as Christian fundamentalists, Mormons, Adventists, and secularists, and by December 1978, when Time magazine published an article on homeschooling and Holt appeared on The Phil Donahue Show with a homeschooling family, he had again gained the attention of the American mainstream. Holt’s final years were largely spent securing homeschooling’s legal foundation through frequent appearances before courts and legislatures and at rallies across the United States.
