John Davis Pierce,  (born February 18, 1797, Chesterfield, New Hampshire, U.S.—died April 5, 1882, Medford, Massachusetts), Michigan’s first superintendent of public instruction and a leader in the establishment of the University of Michigan.
Though denied an extensive education as a youth because of his father’s early death and consequent family financial limitations, Pierce decided at age 20 to educate himself. He succeeded so well that he was accepted at Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, from which he graduated in 1822. After a brief stint of teaching, he enrolled in the Princeton Theological Seminary and was ordained a minister of the Congregational Church by 1825.
He held pastorates in Sangerfield, New York, and Goshen, Connecticut, but Pierce was a Freemason, and, when the Anti-Masonic Movement caught fire in America in the late 1820s, he lost his pulpits. He then moved to Michigan as a missionary and settled in 1831 in the pioneer town of Marshall.
After playing a prominent role in formulating the articles on education in Michigan’s first constitution (1837), Pierce was appointed the state’s first superintendent of public instruction. In that post he organized the primary schools; arranged for the sale of public lands to support public education; established qualifications for teachers; divided the state into school districts, providing for a library in each; and laid the groundwork for the creation of the University of Michigan.
He resumed his role of town preacher in Marshall in 1841, and in 1847 he was elected to the state legislature. There he supported legislation establishing Michigan’s first normal school. He left state government after serving as a member of Michigan’s constitutional convention in 1850, and his only other participation in public life occurred in 1867–68, when he served as county superintendent of schools for Washtenaw county. He lived nearly all of the final three decades of his life in retirement at his farm near Ypsilanti.
Pierce was the founder and, from 1838 to 1840, the editor of The Journal of Education, the first professional education journal in the Great Lakes region.
