Josephine Clara Goldmark,  (born Oct. 13, 1877, Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.—died Dec. 15, 1950, White Plains, N.Y.), American reformer whose research contributed to the enactment of labour legislation.
Goldmark was the daughter of a well-to-do and cultivated family. After her father died in 1881, she grew up under the influence of Felix Adler, founder of the Ethical Culture movement, who had married her sister. A few years later another sister married U.S. Supreme Court justice Louis D. Brandeis. Goldmark graduated from Bryn Mawr College in 1898 and studied English an additional year at Barnard College. While working as a tutor at Barnard in 1903–05, she became a volunteer assistant to Florence Kelley of the National Consumers League. Within a short time she became publications secretary of the league and then chairman of its committee on legal defense of labour laws.
The first of the painstakingly researched, massively detailed, and dramatically argued reports on social conditions that were to be her life’s work appeared in 1907 under the title Child Labor Legislation Handbook. Five years of work went into Fatigue and Efficiency, published by the Russell Sage Foundation in 1912, in which she demonstrated that excessive working hours were injurious not only to workers but also to overall productivity. She directed the research and compilation of facts that went into many of her brother-in-law’s famous "Brandeis briefs," notably the one filed in Muller v. Oregon in 1908, and, after Felix Frankfurter’s appointment to the Supreme Court in 1916, she frequently served him in a similar capacity. In 1911–13 Goldmark served with Frances Perkins, Robert Wagner, Alfred E. Smith, and others on a committee investigating the disastrous 1911 fire at the Triangle shirtwaist factory in New York City in which 146 workers died. She published The Case for the Shorter Work Day in 1916 and The Case Against Nightwork for Women in 1918.
In 1919 she was named secretary of the Rockefeller Foundation’s Committee for the Study of Nursing Education, headed by Dr. C.-E.A. Winslow of Yale University. As principal investigator for the committee, she examined more than 70 schools of nursing over the next four years. The resulting report, Nursing and Nursing Education in the United States (1923), generally known as the Winslow-Goldmark report, was effective in prompting the upgrading of nursing education, particularly through the establishment of university affiliations and national accreditation procedures. Goldmark also served for a time as director of the New York Visiting Nurses Service.
In the 1920s she and Florence Kelley directed a campaign to secure protection for workers who came in contact with radium paint in the manufacture of instrument dials. Her last book on social problems was Democracy in Denmark (1936). Goldmark spent her final years in Hartsdale, N.Y. Her biography of Kelley, Impatient Crusader, was published in 1953.
