Junior Achievement, officially JA Worldwide,  international nonprofit educational organization that encourages early exposure of young people to business techniques through widely used curricula and after-school programs. By the early 21st century, Junior Achievement had offices in more than 120 countries. In 2004 the JA International branch, created in 1994, merged with the U.S. branch to create JA Worldwide. Headquarters are in Colorado Springs, Colo., U.S.
Conceived in 1916 at a business and agricultural conference, the organization was founded in 1919 as the Boys’ and Girls’ Bureau by American paper manufacturer Horace A. Moses, AT&T president Theodore N. Vail, and Massachusetts senator Murray Crane. Oscar H. Benson—who had recently been integral in designing the infrastructure of the analogous 4-H Club for the U.S. Department of Agriculture—was hired as director. The program was rechristened the Junior Achievement Bureau the following year and was incorporated in 1926. Limited in its early years to children ages 8–12, in 1929 the Junior Achievement program was extended to young people ages 16–21.
In its initial incarnation, Junior Achievement was an extracurricular program that allowed groups of boys and girls to create their own functioning companies. Participants, overseen by an adult adviser, would create a business plan, solicit investments from local businesses, obtain raw materials, manufacture products, and sell them. If the company turned a profit, stockholders received their investment back, along with dividends. Originally headquartered in New York City and restricted to East Coast states, Junior Achievement began expanding rapidly after World War II and by 1955 had opened branches in Canada.
While the company program was retained as a component of Junior Achievement, the organization shifted its focus to developing business and economics curricula for grades K–12 with the release of Project Business in 1975. Project Business, a supplementary program for middle school students, was followed in 1981 by Applied Economics, a comprehensive economics curriculum for high school students. These offerings later diversified into an array of courses and Web-based simulations, many closely correlated to state educational standards. The programs are taught in part by volunteers from both local and large corporations. Critics of Junior Achievement argued that the organization advanced free-market capitalism as fact rather than ideology, glossed over income and gender disparities that played a significant role in business success, and placed unhealthy emphasis on making career decisions at a young age.
