Laura Matilda Towne,  (born May 3, 1825, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, U.S.—died February 22, 1901, Frogmore plantation, St. Helena Island, South Carolina), American educator known for founding one of the earliest and most successful of the freedmen’s schools for former slaves after the American Civil War.
Towne studied homeopathic medicine privately and probably attended the short-lived Penn Medical University for a time; she was also interested in abolitionism. She taught in charity schools in various northern towns and cities in the 1850s and ’60s.
Early in 1862 she responded to a call for volunteers to teach, nurse, and otherwise attend to the large population of former slaves who had been liberated in the Union capture of Port Royal and others of the Sea Islands of South Carolina. In April she arrived at St. Helena Island and within a short time was teaching school, practicing medicine, and helping to direct the distribution of clothing and other goods.
In September 1862 Towne and her friend Ellen Murray established the Penn School, one of the earliest freedmen’s schools, and laid down a rigorous curriculum patterned on the tradition of New England schools. It was for decades the only secondary school available to the African American population of the Sea Islands. From 1870 teacher-training courses were also offered. The school was supported for a time, and only in part, by the Pennsylvania Freedmen’s Relief Association, later by the Benezet Society of Germantown, Pennsylvania, and later still by various members of Towne’s family.
Towne herself lived on her modest inheritance and drew no salary for her work. She served the Sea Islanders also as an informal adviser in legal and other matters, as a public health officer, and as a temperance and children’s advocate. She conducted the school until her death. The school was renamed the Penn Normal, Industrial, and Agricultural School a short time later, emphasizing the vocational training Towne had always resisted. In 1948 it became part of the South Carolina public school system.
