Lucretia Crocker,  (born Dec. 31, 1829, Barnstable, Mass., U.S.—died Oct. 9, 1886, Boston, Mass.),  American educator who worked zealously and effectively to give women an official role in educational decision making and to improve the quality of science education in Boston schools.
Crocker graduated from the State Normal School in West Newton, Massachusetts, in 1850 and remained there for four more years as an instructor in geography, mathematics, and natural science. During 1857–59 she was professor of mathematics and astronomy at Antioch College, Yellow Springs, Ohio, returning to Boston in 1859 to care for her parents.
Over the next 15 years Crocker remained involved in education in a variety of ways: she taught science at a private Boston school operated by a former pupil, was active in promoting the education of African-American children, was secretary and then chairman of the executive committee of the Boston School for Deaf-Mutes (founded by Sarah Fuller in 1869), helped found the Woman’s Education Association of Boston in 1872, and in 1873–76 headed the science department of the Society to Encourage Studies at Home, a correspondence school. In December 1873 she was one of four women elected to the Boston School Committee after the New England Women’s Club had agitated for female representation. The legality of their election was challenged successfully, but a year later, after the state legislature had passed legislation permitting women to sit on the committee, Crocker, Lucretia P. Hale, and four other women were elected and seated.
In 1876 the committee elected Crocker to the newly created and powerful six-member Board of Supervisors. During her 10 years on the board she directed her efforts in particular toward the improvement of science education in the Boston public schools. She worked to secure equipment, materials, and books of the highest quality for the schools and to improve the quality of teaching, the latter most effectively through the Teachers’ School of Science, which she ardently supported. She introduced the teaching of zoology and mineralogy in the schools and in 1883 published Methods of Teaching Geography: Notes on Lessons. Her dedication to science education led to her election to the American Association for the Advancement of Science in 1880.
