Mahathir bin Mohamad, in full Datuk Seri Mahathir bin Mohamad, Mohamad also spelled Mohamed or Muhammed,  (born July 10, 1925, Alor Setar, Kedah [Malaysia]), Malaysian politician who served as prime minister of Malaysia (1981–2003; 2018–20), overseeing the country’s transition to an industrialized nation.
Mahathir, the son of a schoolmaster, was born on July 10, 1925, although official records give his birth date as December 20. He was educated at Sultan Abdul Hamid College and the University of Malaya in Singapore, where he studied medicine. After graduating in 1953, he worked as a government medical officer until 1957 and then entered private practice. He was first elected to parliament in 1964 as a member of the United Malays National Organization (UMNO), the dominant party within the ruling governmental coalition. In 1969, however, Mahathir was expelled from UMNO after his forceful advocacy of ethnic Malay nationalism brought him into conflict with Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman. (Though politically dominant, Malaysia’s ethnic Malay majority was much poorer than the ethnic Chinese minority, which dominated the economy.) The New Economic Policy that the government adopted in 1971 to improve the economic situation of Malays embodied many of the ideas Mahathir had advocated.
Mahathir rejoined UMNO in 1970, was reelected to its Supreme Council in 1972 and to parliament in 1974, and later in 1974 was appointed minister of education. In 1976 he became deputy prime minister and in June 1981 was elected president of UMNO. He became prime minister in July of that year, the first commoner to hold that office.
Mahathir’s long prime ministry gave Malaysia the political stability needed for economic growth. He welcomed foreign investment, reformed the tax structure, reduced trade tariffs, and privatized numerous state-owned enterprises. Mahathir sought to bridge Malaysia’s ethnic divisions by increasing general prosperity. The New Economic Policy, which had encouraged Malay economic success, was replaced in 1991 by the New Development Policy, which emphasized general economic growth and the elimination of poverty. Under Mahathir’s leadership, Malaysia prospered economically, with a growing manufacturing sector, an expanding middle class, rising literacy rates, and increased life expectancies.
In the late 1990s, however, Malaysia’s economy entered a depression, causing a split between Mahathir and his apparent successor, minister of finance and deputy prime minister Anwar Ibrahim. Anwar’s support of open markets and international investments was in opposition to Mahathir’s growing distrust of the West. In 1998 Anwar was dismissed from his posts and arrested, and a wave of antigovernment demonstrations swept the country. Anwar’s conviction and prison sentence sparked more protests under the reformasi (“reform”) banner, which called for Mahathir’s resignation. Nevertheless, Mahathir continued to suppress Anwar’s supporters and consolidate his own power.
Following the September 11 attacks of 2001 in the United States, Mahathir offered his support in the global war against terrorism, but he opposed the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq in 2003. Mahathir, always a controversial figure, often criticized the West, and he raised the ire of many foreign governments and many non-Muslims in particular by attacking Jews in a major speech delivered just days before his retirement as prime minister on October 31, 2003. In 2008, after UMNO and its partners lost their two-thirds legislative majority for the first time in several decades, Mahathir withdrew from the party.
Although he largely retired from public life in 2008, Mahathir emerged as a fierce critic of Prime Minister Najib Razak, a former protégé who had become embroiled in a massive financial scandal involving Malaysia’s state-run development fund 1MDB. Najib Razak was accused of embezzling $700 million from 1MDB, and he and other Malaysian officials became the targets of several international money-laundering investigations. Mahathir announced in January 2018 that he would stand as a candidate for prime minister for a coalition of opposition parties in the general election, and in a stunning upset, on May 9, 2018, the 92-year-old Mahathir won a narrow majority, with his coalition claiming 122 of the 222 seats. He was sworn in as prime minister the following day. During the election campaign, Mahathir had pledged that he would step down after serving two years and cede power to Anwar, and one of his first acts in office was to petition Sultan Muhammad V to pardon Anwar. Anwar was released days later and soon resumed his political career.
The alliance between Mahathir and Anwar was shaky at best, and the exact terms of the promised succession were never spelled out. Mahathir resolved the matter by announcing his resignation as prime minister in February 2020, barely two months ahead of the promised handover. With the deal with Anwar scuttled and with no other parties holding enough seats to form a government, Mahathir remained caretaker prime minister. Malaysia’s king, Sultan Abdullah, met with individual members of parliament in an attempt to resolve the political crisis while Anwar tried to gather a coalition of opposition groups under his banner. Mahathir, for his part, apologized for any confusion that he may have caused and proposed the formation of a nonpartisan government with himself at the head. Although Mahathir and Anwar quickly reconciled and declared that they had assembled a working parliamentary majority, Sultan Abdullah announced that UMNO candidate Muhyiddin Yassin would be Malaysia’s prime minister.
