Maria Kraus-Boelté, née Maria Boelté,  (born Nov. 8, 1836, Hagenow, grand duchy of Mecklenburg-Schwerin [now in Germany]—died Nov. 1, 1918, Atlantic City, N.J., U.S.), German American educator, one of the early exponents of kindergarten, who trained many teachers for that specialization.
Maria Boelté was of a prominent family and was privately educated. As a young woman she became interested in the work of Friedrich Froebel in the education of young children and spent two years studying his methods under his widow in Hamburg, Germany. Boelté then went to London and taught in a kindergarten operated by one of Froebel’s pupils, Bertha Rongé. Boelté ran the London kindergarten by herself after Rongé’s return to Germany and added garden activities and nature study to the course.
In 1867 she returned to Hamburg and taught in the Froebel Union training school for kindergarten teachers. She subsequently opened a kindergarten and training courses in Lübeck, Germany. In 1872, at the request of Elizabeth Peabody, she went to the United States. On her arrival in New York in September, she established a kindergarten and mothers’ classes in a private school.
In 1873 Boelté married John Kraus, a German-born kindergarten advocate who had moved to the United States in 1851 and was at the time attached to the U.S. Bureau of Education; she was known thereafter by the surname Kraus-Boelté. In the autumn of 1873, John Kraus having resigned his position, they opened the New York Seminary for Kindergartners with a model kindergarten. One of the earliest and, because of Kraus-Boelté’s association with Froebel, most authoritative and influential centres of kindergarten work in the United States, the school trained hundreds of Froebelian teachers and taught thousands of children.
In 1877 the two published The Kindergarten Guide in two volumes. After her husband’s death in 1896, Kraus-Boelté continued to operate the training school. In 1899–1900 she was president of the Kindergarten Department of the National Education Association. Largely at her urging, the New York University School of Education offered a summer course in kindergarten education in 1903. Kraus-Boelté taught the course, believed to be the first given under college auspices, and similar ones in 1904 and 1907. She retired in 1913.
