Mary Lucinda Bonney,  (born June 8, 1816, Hamilton, N.Y., U.S.—died July 24, 1900, Hamilton),  American educator and reformer, active in both the early movement for women’s education and the late 19th-century movement to preserve treaties with Native Americans and their land rights.
Bonney was educated in a local academy and for two years at Emma Willard’s Troy Female Seminary, from which she graduated in 1835. Thereafter she taught in schools in Jersey City, New Jersey; New York City; South Carolina; Providence, Rhode Island; Philadelphia; and elsewhere. She also taught for a time at the Troy Female Seminary. In Philadelphia in 1850 she and a friend cofounded the Chestnut Street Female Seminary, of which Bonney remained senior principal for 38 years. In 1883 it was moved to Ogontz, Pennsylvania, as the Ogontz School for Young Ladies. She also was active in the home and foreign mission activities of her Baptist church and of the interdenominational Woman’s Union Missionary Society of America for Heathen Lands.
Congressional proposals in 1879 to abrogate treaties reserving lands in Indian Territory to certain tribes aroused her to action. With help from her missionary circles she mounted a petition campaign that by early 1880 had gathered 13,000 signatures; they presented the petition, calling for the honouring of treaties, to President Rutherford B. Hayes and then to Congress. A second petition, with 50,000 signatures, was presented to the Senate through Senator Henry L. Dawes in 1881, by which time Bonney and her colleagues had become known as the Central Indian Committee. Later that year the group organized formally as the Indian Treaty-Keeping and Protective Association, of which Bonney was chosen president. A third petition (1882), bearing 100,000 signatures, outlined a detailed proposal (drafted by Bonney’s closest associate, Amelia S. Quinton) for the allotment of tribal lands to individual Native Americans. In 1882 the group changed its name to the National Indian Association and in 1883, after the formation of the men’s Indian Rights Association, to the Women’s National Indian Association. After Bonney’s resignation (1884) from the presidency of the organization and her retirement (1888) from the administration of the Ogontz school, she remained active in the Indian reform movement. In 1888 she attended a London conference of Protestant mission societies. There she met and married the Reverend Thomas Rambaut, who died in 1890.
