Mary Smith Garrett and Emma Garrett,  (respectively, born June 20, 1839, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.—died July 18, 1925, North Conway, N.H.; born 1846?, Philadelphia—died July 18, 1893, Chicago, Ill.), American educators who, in the contemporary debate over whether to teach sign language or speech and lipreading to deaf children, were prominent advocates of teaching speech.
Emma graduated from Alexander Graham Bell’s course for teachers of the deaf at the Boston University School of Oratory in 1878 and became a teacher of speech at the Pennsylvania Institution for the Deaf and Dumb in Mount Airy. She was given charge of the newly established Oral Branch of the institution in 1881 and in that same year began teaching summer courses in vocal instruction for other teachers. Mary also became a teacher at the institution. In 1884, at the invitation of civic leaders in Scranton, Pennsylvania, Emma moved to that city to become principal of a day school that shortly afterward was named the Pennsylvania Oral School for Deaf-Mutes. In 1885 Mary left Mount Airy to open a private school in Philadelphia for the teaching of speech to deaf children.
Emma’s school, which became a state institution in 1885, grew rapidly through her energetic fund-raising activities. In 1889 Mary joined Emma in Scranton as a teacher. Their observations of children of various ages soon convinced them that deaf children could master speech far more easily if they were exposed to and trained in it from a very early age. By pamphlet and personal appeal Emma secured an appropriation from the Pennsylvania legislature and a gift of land from a Philadelphia philanthropist, and in February 1892 the sisters opened the Pennsylvania Home for the Training in Speech of Deaf Children Before They Are of School Age, more simply known as the Bala Home for its nearness to that Philadelphia suburb. With Emma as superintendent and Mary as secretary, the school opened with 15 students. Students were admitted at as young as two years of age and underwent a six-year residential course of study. The state took over support of the school in 1893. In that year the Garrett sisters took their students to Chicago to demonstrate their methods at the World’s Columbian Exposition. While there Emma suffered a mental breakdown and took her own life. Mary succeeded to the post of superintendent of the Bala Home and retained the position for the rest of her life.
Through lectures, pamphlets, and journal articles Mary continued to promote teaching speech to deaf children at an early age, and by persuasive lobbying she obtained passage of laws in 1899 and 1901 requiring the exclusive use of oral methods in all state institutions for the deaf. During 1899–1901 she joined Hannah Kent Schoff in campaigning for a juvenile court and probation system in Pennsylvania. She was a member from 1902 of the National Congress of Mothers (later the National Congress of Parents and Teachers) and chairman of its department of legislation (later of child welfare) from 1906 to 1920, during which time she directed the congress’s work for child labour, marriage law, and other reforms. She served also as corresponding secretary of the Pennsylvania Congress of Mothers in 1911–15 and as its first vice president in 1915–25.
