Mary Lyon, in full Mary Mason Lyon,  (born Feb. 28, 1797, near Buckland, Mass., U.S.—died March 5, 1849, South Hadley, Mass.), American pioneer in the field of higher education for women and founder and first principal of Mount Holyoke Female Seminary, the forerunner of Mount Holyoke College.
Lyon began teaching in Massachusetts country schools in 1814 in order to finance her own further education. Between 1817 and 1821 she attended Sanderson Academy at Ashfield, Amherst Academy, and the Reverend Joseph Emerson’s seminary at Byfield. At Byfield she formed a close friendship with Zilpah Grant, one of her teachers. She taught for three years at Sanderson Academy before opening a school of her own in Buckland in 1824. During her four years there she spent summers teaching with Grant at the Adams Female Seminary in New Hampshire and then at the Ipswich Female Seminary. She also attended lectures at Amherst College and the Rensselaer School (now Polytechnic Institute).
In 1828 she joined the Ipswich school full-time. Through these years of teaching she nursed a growing conviction that the education of women, which in the early years of the 19th century depended on the luck and skill of entrepreneurial teachers or on the whims of occasional male benefactors, should be placed on a firm and permanent basis. She and Grant failed to secure an endowment for the Ipswich school or to win support for a projected New England Female Seminary for Teachers. Nonetheless, her conviction led her in 1834 to undertake the raising of funds for a school devoted to the liberal education of women. Her aim was to make such an education available to students of moderate means by having the students share in the domestic work of the school and to make it of such a calibre that even the wealthy should not find better. With enthusiasm and an indomitable spirit as well as considerable tact and diplomacy she secured the necessary financial support for her plan.
A charter was obtained in 1836, and Mount Holyoke Female Seminary opened for classes at South Hadley, Massachusetts, on November 8, 1837, with about 80 students. It was an immediate success, and some 400 applicants were turned away in 1838 for lack of space. The cause of female education had entered a new era.
Lyon served as the principal of Mount Holyoke for 12 years, during which time the curriculum was expanded and new buildings were added. Her energy and clear vision of her goal were the key ingredients in the school’s early success. In 1843 she published A Missionary Offering. The school became Mount Holyoke Seminary and College in 1888 and Mount Holyoke College in 1895, and it remained one of the leading institutions of higher learning for women in the United States.
