Mary Hannah Fulton,  (born May 31, 1854, probably Ashland, Ohio, U.S.—died Jan. 7, 1927, Pasadena, Calif.), American physician and missionary to China who ministered to many thousands not only through her own practice but by greatly expanding the availability of medical education in that country.
Fulton was educated at Lawrence University in Appleton, Wisconsin, and at Hillsdale (Michigan) College. She graduated from the latter in 1874, took a master’s degree in 1877, and for three years taught in public schools in Indianapolis, Indiana. In 1880 she entered the Woman’s Medical College of Pennsylvania, and on graduating in 1884 she set out for southern China, where her elder brother, a minister, had preceded her. Under the auspices of the Presbyterian Board of Foreign Missions, she began her medical practice in Canton. From September 1885 to the spring of 1886 she practiced in Kwangsi province, but intense antiforeign agitation forced her and her brother to return to Canton. She established two dispensaries there in 1887. While conducting her practice amid tens of thousands needing her services, she taught pediatrics at Canton Hospital, where she also directed the care of women patients. Fund-raising tours of the United States in 1891–93 and 1903–04 helped build and support a church for her brother (in which she took space for a dispensary) and, in 1902, the David Gregg Hospital for Women and Children. The hospital included a training school for nurses.
Later in 1902 the Hackett Medical College for Women opened, providing a three- (shortly afterward four-) year course for Cantonese-speaking Christian women. Fulton directed these institutions and carried on her own medical practice until ill health forced her to seek out the more moderate climate of Shanghai in 1915. By that year the Hackett Medical College had graduated more than 60 physicians. In Shanghai Fulton translated numerous English textbooks on medicine and nursing into Cantonese. She also raised funds to build the Cantonese Union Church of Shanghai to house the congregation she had organized. In 1918 she returned to the United States and settled in Pasadena. In her later years she wrote “Inasmuch”: Extracts from Letters, Journals, Papers, etc., a memoir of her work that also included a strong plea for continued support of missionary work in China.
