Medical education,  course of study directed toward imparting to persons seeking to become physicians the knowledge and skills required for the prevention and treatment of disease. It also develops the methods and objectives appropriate to the study of the still unknown factors that produce disease or favour well-being.
Among the goals of medical education is the production of physicians sensitive to the health needs of their country, capable of ministering to those needs, and aware of the necessity of continuing their own education. It therefore follows that the plan of education, the medical curriculum, should not be the same in all countries. Although there may be basic elements common to all, the details should vary from place to place and from time to time. Whatever form the curriculum takes, ideally it will be flexible enough to allow modification as circumstances alter, medical knowledge grows, and needs change.
Attention in this article is focused primarily on general medical education.
Although it is difficult to identify the origin of medical education, authorities usually consider that it began with the ancient Greeks’ method of rational inquiry, which introduced the practice of observation and reasoning regarding disease. Rational interpretation and discussion, it is theorized, led to teaching and thus to the formation of schools such as that at Cos, where the Greek physician Hippocrates is said to have taught in the 5th century bc and originated the oath that became a credo for practitioners through the ages.
Later, the Christian religion greatly contributed to both the learning and the teaching of medicine in the West because it favoured not only the protection and care of the sick but also the establishment of institutions where collections of sick people encouraged observation, analysis, and discussion among physicians by furnishing opportunities for comparison. Apprenticeship training in monastic infirmaries and hospitals dominated medical education during the early Middle Ages. A medical school in anything like its present form, however, did not evolve until the establishment of the one at Salerno in southern Italy between the 9th and 11th centuries. Even there teaching was by the apprentice system, but an attempt was made at systemization of the knowledge of the time, a series of health precepts was drawn up, and a form of registration to practice was approved by the Holy Roman emperor Frederick II. During the same period, medicine and medical education were flourishing in the Muslim world at such centres as Baghdad, Cairo, and Córdoba.
With the rise of the universities in Italy and later in Cracow, Prague, Paris, Oxford, and elsewhere in western Europe, the teachers of medicine were in some measure drawn away from the life of the hospitals and were offered the attractions and prestige of university professorships and lectureships. As a result, the study of medicine led more often to a familiarity with theories about disease than with actual sick persons. However, the establishment in 1518 of the Royal College of Physicians of London, which came about largely through the energies of Thomas Linacre, produced a system that called for examination of medical practitioners. The discovery of the circulation of the blood by William Harvey provided a stimulus to the scientific study of the processes of the body, bringing some deemphasis to the tradition of theory and doctrine.
Gradually, in the 17th and 18th centuries, the value of hospital experience and the training of the students’ sight, hearing, and touch in studying disease were reasserted. In Europe, medical education began slowly to assume its modern character in the application of an increasing knowledge of natural science to the actual care of patients. There was also encouragement of the systematic study of anatomy, botany, and chemistry, sciences at that time considered to be the basis of medicine. The return to the bedside aided the hospitals in their long evolution from dwelling places of the poor, the diseased, and the infirm, maintained by charity and staffed usually by religious orders, into relatively well-equipped, well-staffed, efficient establishments that became available to the entire community and were maintained by private or public expense.
It was not until the mid-19th century, however, that an ordered pattern of science-oriented teaching was established. This pattern, the traditional medical curriculum, was generally adopted by Western medical schools. It was based upon teaching, where the student mostly listens, rather than learning, where the student is more investigative. The clinical component, largely confined to hospitals (charitable institutions staffed by unpaid consultants), was not well organized. The new direction in medical education was aided in Britain by the passage of the Medical Act of 1858, which has been termed the most important event in British medicine. It established the General Medical Council, which thenceforth controlled admission to the medical register and thus had great powers over medical education and examinations. Further interest in medicine grew from these advances, which opened the way for the discoveries of Louis Pasteur, which showed the relation of microorganisms to certain diseases, Joseph Lister’s application of Pasteur’s concepts to surgery, and the studies of Rudolf Virchow and Robert Koch in cellular pathology and bacteriology.
In the United States, medical education was greatly influenced by the example set in 1893 by the Johns Hopkins Medical School in Baltimore. It admitted only college graduates with a year’s training in the natural sciences. Its clinical work was superior because the school was supplemented by the Johns Hopkins Hospital, created expressly for teaching and research carried on by members of the medical faculty. The adequacy of medical schools in the United States was improved after the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching published in 1910 a report by the educator Abraham Flexner. In the report, which had an immediate impact, he pointed out that medical education actually is a form of education rather than a mysterious process of professional initiation or apprenticeship. As such, it needs an academic staff, working full-time in their departments, whose whole responsibility is to their professed subject and to the students studying it. Medical education, the report further stated, needs laboratories, libraries, teaching rooms, and ready access to a large hospital, the administration of which should reflect the presence and influence of the academic staff. Thus the nature of the teaching hospital was also influenced. Aided by the General Education Board, the Rockefeller Foundation, and a large number of private donors, U.S. and Canadian medical education was characterized by substantial improvements from 1913 to 1929 in such matters as were stressed in the Flexner report.
