National Defense University (NDU),  American graduate-level institution of higher education for members of the U.S. military and allied countries’ militaries that was designed to prepare military and civilian leaders to face present and emerging security threats through education in military strategy, foreign culture, strategic thinking, and technology. The university is made up of five colleges, five strategic research centres, and one leadership training program. Its facilities are located in Washington, D.C., and Norfolk, Virginia. More than 1,700 students are enrolled, and more than 700 master of science degrees in national resource strategy and national security strategy are awarded per year.
Before World War II, needs for advanced scholarship in military strategy were met separately by each service branch on an ad hoc basis. For example, the Army Industrial College, which was established in 1924, fell under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army. The war, however, showed that closer ties were needed between the military, the defense industry, and the diplomatic community. The National War College (NWC), formed in 1946, and the Army Industrial College, which was renamed the Industrial College of the Armed Forces (ICAF) in 1946 (becoming the Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy in 2012), addressed that need.
In 1976 the NWC and ICAF joined to form the NDU, which expanded with the addition of the Joint Forces Staff College in 1981 and the Information Resources Management College the following year. The NDU also includes the College of International Security Affairs. The first master’s degrees were awarded at the NDU in 1994.
The NDU administers five research centres to broaden understanding of strategic areas of the world and one program to develop civilian leadership skills. The William H. Perry Center for Hemispheric Defense Studies, founded in 1997, educates civilians from Western Hemisphere nations in military affairs. The Africa Center for Strategic Studies, the Near East South Asia Center for Strategic Studies, and the Center for the Study of Chinese Military Affairs were founded in 2000. Of those, the Africa Center for Strategic Studies is particularly notable for its role in fostering democratic governance in Africa through courses geared to African civilian and military leaders. The Center for Technology and National Security Policy, established in 2001, studies the relationship between technological development and defense planning. The NDU helps administer the Defense Senior Leader Development Program (founded in 1997 as the Defense Leadership and Management Program) to develop leadership skills among civilians working in the defense field.
