National Defense Education Act (NDEA),  U.S. federal legislation passed by Congress and signed into law by Pres. Dwight D. Eisenhower on September 2, 1958, that provided funding to improve American schools and to promote postsecondary education. The goal of the legislation was to enable the country’s educational system to meet the demands posed by national security needs. Of particular concern was bolstering the United States’ ability to compete with the Soviet Union in the areas of science and technology.
The NDEA stands as a major act of reform. It marked the beginning of large-scale involvement of the U.S. federal government in education.
In the wake of World War II, the major movement in American schools was the life adjustment movement, which aimed to provide a curriculum that would teach “life skills” that would be particularly valuable for students who did not plan to continue on to college or other types of postsecondary training after high school. This movement, headed by the vocational educator Charles Prosser, claimed to represent true “democracy” in education, but it was roundly criticized by academicians as “soft.” Adherents of the National Science Foundation and others held education professors and schools of education mainly responsible for what they believed was the low-achieving status of American students, particularly in mathematics, science, and modern foreign languages.
The criticism of American education, especially its public schools, increased immensely with the launching of Sputnik 1, the world’s first artificial satellite, by the Soviet Union in October 1957. Eisenhower, in his Message to Congress on January 27, 1958, called for matching educational programs with national defense needs and recommended the federal government play an important part in this activity. The NDEA was the result of the enlarged federal role in education.
The purpose of the NDEA was to improve and strengthen all levels of the American school system and to encourage students to continue their education beyond high school. Specific provisions included scholarships and loans to students in higher education, with loans to students preparing to be teachers and to those who showed promise in the curricular areas of mathematics, science, engineering, and modern foreign languages; grants to states for programs in mathematics, science, and modern foreign languages in public schools; the establishment of centres to expand and improve the teaching of languages; help to graduate students, including fellowships for doctoral students to prepare them to be professors at institutions of higher learning; assistance for the improvement of guidance, counseling, and testing programs; provisions for research and experimentation in the use of television, radio, motion pictures, and related media for educational purposes; and the improvement of statistical services at the state level.
Supporters of the NDEA pointed to federal legislative precedents, such as the Morrill Act in 1862, which granted land to the states that they could then sell to finance the establishment of colleges, and the Smith-Hughes Act in 1917, which funded vocational agricultural education programs. The NDEA differed from Smith-Hughes, however, in that professors of education, who had lost credibility by their espousal of, and involvement in, life adjustment education, played at best a minor role in the structure and operation of the NDEA. Advocates of the NDEA contended that they were not interfering with the fundamental principle that states and local communities were responsible for the conduct of American schooling and institutions of higher education. Opponents maintained, however, that categorical aid, such as was proposed by the NDEA, would shape educational policy and would place the federal government in charge. This was not, in their view, a constructive policy on the part of the federal government. Other critics, such as the National Education Association and the Council of Chief State School Officers, objected to what they felt was the narrow focus of the NDEA on science and technology plus the act’s reliance on the National Science Foundation university-oriented community for direction as opposed to the broader approach of the education-oriented U.S. Department of Education. In spite of such criticisms, the act was passed by Congress and signed into law in September 1958 by Eisenhower.
The NDEA was amended in 1964. The words “which have led to an insufficient proportion of our population educated in science, mathematics, and modern language and trained in technology” were deleted, as was the reference to giving preference in student loans to those preparing to teach and those with superior capacity in mathematics, science, engineering, or a modern foreign language. Aid was now available for equipment and materials to be used in the instruction of an expanded list of subjects: “science, mathematics, history, civics, geography, modern foreign language, English or reading in public elementary or secondary schools.” One new feature provided assistance for those who were teaching, or preparing to teach, “disadvantaged youth.”
Overall, the NDEA reflected political support for and an attempt to garner public support of an academic curriculum. It placed education in a role of supporting and assisting national policy. The launching of Sputnik 1 galvanized political leaders into action, and books such as What Ivan Knows That Johnny Doesn’t (1961) contributed to the national climate that followed. The NDEA established a precedent and led to programs on behalf of gifted and talented students (especially those in mathematics and science and related subjects) in the early 1960s.
The NDEA stands as a testament to coupling national educational policy with national needs. It represented an involvement—some would say an intrusion—of the federal government in the conduct of schooling at all levels.
