National Autonomous University of Mexico, Spanish Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM),  government-financed coeducational institution of higher education in Mexico City, founded in 1551. The original university building, dating from 1584, was demolished in 1910, and the university was moved to a new campus (constructed 1949–52) at Pedregal de San Angel in the southern part of Mexico City, opening in 1954; the campus was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 2007.
The university was founded as the Royal and Pontifical University by Antonio de Mendoza, the first viceroy of New Spain. From 1553 to 1867, when it was closed by the government of Benito Juárez, the university was controlled by the Roman Catholic church. Although its level of scholarship was originally considered equal to that of other medieval Spanish universities, political and religious interference prevented it from keeping up with the philosophical and scientific innovations that swept Europe from the 17th through the 19th century.
After 1867 a number of independent professional schools—law, medicine, engineering, and architecture—were established by the government. In 1910, under the government of Porfirio Díaz, these separate schools were coordinated into the National University of Mexico. In the 1920s all Mexican universities were placed under government control, but the National University was given administrative autonomy in 1929. Between July and December of 1968 the university was one of the centres of student demonstrations to protest government policies, and in September of that year the campus was occupied by the military. Although there are still accusations of government interference in university affairs, the university officially maintains its administrative independence and is governed by a rector and a council that includes faculty and students. Students still occasionally carry out major demonstrations and strikes at UNAM, such as those sparked in 1999 by the university’s proposal to charge tuition and fees; a limited number of students forced the university to remain closed until February 2000.
The university has faculties of accounting and business administration, architecture, chemistry, dentistry, economics, engineering, law, medicine, philosophy and letters, political and social sciences, professional studies, psychology, sciences, and veterinary medicine and zoology. It also has national schools of music, nursing and obstetrics, plastic arts, and social work. The main campus is renowned for its unique blend of traditional and newer architectural styles and for its buildings’ mosaic murals by notable Mexican artists that depict the country’s pre-Hispanic past.
