parochial education,   education offered institutionally by a religious group. In the United States, parochial education refers to the schooling obtained in elementary and secondary schools that are maintained by Roman Catholic parishes, Protestant churches, or Jewish organizations; that are separate from the public school systems; and that provide instruction based on sectarian principles.
Roman Catholic parochial schools in the United States are organized on a diocesan basis and are supported principally by voluntary offerings from the parishioners and by tuition. The administration of the schools of a diocese is the direct responsibility of the bishop. This work is usually delegated to a priest appointed by the bishop, who is given the title of superintendent of schools or secretary for education. Most dioceses have a school board made up of members appointed by the bishop. Usually this board has no administrative power but acts in an advisory capacity to the bishop and his chief school officer.
The Roman Catholic schools teach the same subjects as the public schools, but two important differences should be noted. In the Roman Catholic curriculum, a course in Christian doctrine is included that presents the matters of faith and morals that are the teachings of the Roman Catholic church. Other courses, particularly in such areas as the social studies and humanities, are often given a Roman Catholic orientation.
Diocesan systems are often organized on a statewide or regional basis in order to share certain educational advantages and to exchange ideas and programs for the betterment of their teachers and schools. All diocesan systems are members of the National Catholic Educational Association.
Among Protestant groups that maintain parochial school systems in the United States, the Lutheran bodies are by far the most active, with around 190,000 children in Lutheran schools. Smaller school systems are sponsored by the Seventh-day Adventists, the National Union of the Christian Schools, the Protestant Episcopal Church, the National Association of Christian Schools (evangelical), and the Quakers, Mennonites, Baptists, Methodists, and Presbyterians.
The administration of most Protestant schools is in the hands of a board of education elected by the sponsoring group—either individual congregation, association of congregations, or association of individuals. This board selects a principal and in cooperation with him develops the policies that control the school program.
The teachers in Protestant schools are drawn from denominational teachers colleges and liberal arts colleges. Special training in Bible and doctrine is required, in addition to the general requirements set for teachers at the elementary and secondary levels. While the course of study for each grade in Protestant schools is substantially the same as that offered in the public schools, Christianity is made a unifying and integrating factor in the educational program.
The Jewish day school or “complete” school (i.e., the Jewish parochial school) in the United States is an educational institution in which a combined program of Jewish and general studies is offered. There are four types of institutions that provide intensive Jewish religious education as well as a complete course of study in general subject matter. The Talmudic day school makes provision for the study of the Hebrew texts of the Pentateuch and major portions of the Prophets and Scriptures, including the Masoretic commentaries, and places great stress on teaching of the Talmud. The secular studies meet the requirements of the city and state authorities. The modern day school stresses the study of Hebrew language, the Bible, Jewish history, prayers, and selected portions from the Talmud. All instruction is in the Hebrew language, with the secular subjects generally being given equal attention and equal time. The integrated day school aims to achieve a blending of instruction in Judaism and secular subjects, while the Hebrew-English private school emphasizes the study of general subjects and provides opportunities for Jewish learning for only five hours a week.
The majority of day schools (85 percent) are sponsored by Orthodox groups. Some that fall in the category of modern day schools are conducted by Conservative and other groups. Day schools operated by Yiddish culture groups include Yiddish language and literature among the basic subjects of instruction.
The two principal national organizations for the support of Jewish education are Torah Umesorah (National Society for Hebrew Day Schools) and the National Council for Torah Education.
