Peking University, also called Beijing University, Chinese (Pinyin) Beijing Daxue or (Wade-Giles) Pei-ching Ta-hsüeh, byname Beida,  university in Beijing, one of the oldest and most important institutions of higher learning in China. Its total enrollment is about 35,000.
The school originated as the Capital College, which was founded in 1898 by the Guangxu emperor as part of his short-lived program to modernize and reform China’s institutions. This school languished after the empress dowager Cixi’s coup d’état of the same year. After the overthrow of the Qing dynasty in 1911/12, the school was renamed Peking University. It was subsequently reinvigorated under the guidance of the new president Cai Yuanpei, and by 1920 it had become a centre for the most progressive currents among China’s intelligentsia and students. During the 1920s two founders of the Chinese Communist Party, Li Dazhao and Chen Duxiu, were on the university’s faculty, and the young Mao Zedong, who began studying Marxism in 1918 under their influence, worked in the university’s library. The noted writer Lu Xun lectured there on Chinese literature in the 1920s.
Student demonstrations at the university in 1919 gave the influential May Fourth Movement its name. During the Sino-Japanese War (1937–45), the university was temporarily relocated to Kunming in Yunnan province. In 1952 the university was reorganized and merged with Yanjing (Yen-ching) University, which had been founded by American Methodist missionaries in 1922. Peking University relocated to Yanjing’s more spacious campus, on the northwestern outskirts of Beijing. The first disturbances of the Cultural Revolution began there in 1966. Education at the university subsequently ceased until 1970 and did not regain a firm basis until after the end of the Cultural Revolution in 1976. In the 1980s the university again became the centre of student demonstrations, which came to a climax in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Peking University has maintained its position as the foremost nontechnical university in China. Students who score the highest in nationwide competitive examinations are admitted to it. The university is especially known for emphasizing the teaching and research of the basic sciences; there has been a more recent effort to develop programs in the applied sciences. In 2000 the school merged with Beijing Medical University. It consists of five faculties: science, humanities, social sciences, medicine, and information and engineering; there are 34 colleges and departments and some 80 research institutes. It also has the largest university library in China (about five million books).
