Preschool education,  education during the earliest phases of childhood, beginning in infancy and ending upon entry into primary school at about five, six, or seven years of age (the age varying from country to country).
The institutional arrangements for preschool education vary widely around the world, as do the names applied to the institutions. The terms usually given to centres for the care of infants—those in the first phase of childhood (about three months to three years of age)—are infant school, day care, day nursery, and crèche—the term crèche being used not only in French-speaking countries but also in such places as Scandinavia, the United Kingdom, Poland, Russia, and Israel. For the second phase of early childhood, other institutional names and arrangements exist, the most common being the “maternal school” (école maternelle), or nursery school, and the kindergarten. Typically, the maternal school (for ages three to four or five) precedes kindergarten (for ages four or five to six), but in some countries—Italy, for instance—a child goes from the maternal directly to the primary school. In Germany, in addition to the Kindergarten, there is the Schulkindergarten (school kindergarten), which is for children of school age who are not considered sufficiently mature and which therefore serves as a kind of preparatory school for primary school. In the United States, kindergarten is considered a part of primary education.
The name usually associated with the initiation of early childhood education in modern times is Johann Friedrich Oberlin, an Alsatian Lutheran pastor in Waldersbach, who founded in 1767 the first salle d’asile (literally, “hall of refuge”), or infant school, for the care and instruction of very small children while their parents worked in the fields. Other educators began imitating his infant school—in Lippe-Detmold, Berlin, Kaiserswerth, Paris, and elsewhere. In France, the salles d’asile changed from private to state-supported institutions in 1833 when they were made part of the national educational system. Later, their name was officially changed to écoles maternelles.
Seemingly independently of the infant-school movement on the European continent, the Scottish reformer Robert Owen in 1816 founded in his model community New Lanark an Institute for the Formation of Character. It served approximately 100 children of the workers in his cotton mills, mostly from 18 months to 10 years of age; and there were separate infant classes for 2- to 5-year-olds, who spent half their time in instruction and half in recreation.
The success of the New Lanark school led to the establishment of England’s first infant school in London in 1818. Set up by the man who had directed Owen’s institute, James Buchanan, it cared for children aged one to six years. According to contemporary accounts, Buchanan brought to London the methods that he had evolved at New Lanark:
Buchanan’s school was imitated by others, notably by the British educator Samuel Wilderspin, who wrote some of the earliest and most widely disseminated monographs on infant education.
In Italy a Roman Catholic father, Ferrante Aporti, read a translated work by Wilderspin and, as a result, established Italy’s first infant school in Cremona in 1829 and devised an educational plan that aimed at a harmonious combination of moral, intellectual, and physical education. Manual work, at all educational ages, was to give education a certain concreteness and rationality, making it a process of pupil involvement; the very young were to start off becoming accustomed to discipline, friendly cooperation, and piety.
With Friedrich Froebel, the German founder of the kindergarten, there arose the first systematic theory of early childhood pedagogy: instead of considering early schooling a form of babysitting or social philanthropy or considering it merely a period of preparation for adult roles, Froebel saw early childhood development as a special phase during which the child expresses himself through play. Child’s play was a process of discovery and recognition that educated the child to the unity, as well as the diversity, of things in nature. These educational premises guided Froebel’s pedagogical institute at Keilhau (founded in 1816), but it was not until 1837 at nearby Bad Blankenburg that he opened his first infant school, which he later called a Kindergarten, or “garden for children.” There he devised a collection of geometric playthings (or “gifts,” as he called them) and various exercises or occupations, such as folding, cutting, and weaving, to make the symbolic forms real or dynamic for the child. Froebel believed that the young child learned best not through formal instruction but through play and imitation, “self-activity.” Within 25 years after Froebel’s death in 1852, kindergartens were founded in leading cities in Austria, Belgium, Canada, Germany, Great Britain, Hungary, Japan, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and the United States. (See kindergarten.)
In 1892 in Italy, the Agazzi sisters, Rosa and Carolina, initiated a blending of Aporti’s infant school and Froebel’s kindergarten and produced a prototypical Italian maternal school (scuola materna). In the school the children were induced to become collaborators in the search for the instruments of their own education—seeking realia (objects from real life) as well as Froebelian symbolic objects to examine.
Similarly concerned with nurturing or favourably exploiting the young child’s natural impulses—in a safeguarded, constructive way—was one of the most famous figures in preschool education, Maria Montessori, who began her studies of educational problems with culturally deprived and mentally deficient children in 1899, when she became director of the Orthophrenic School, in Rome. Because her methods worked with defective children, she felt that they might yield even better results with normal children. Thus, in 1907 she took under her care 60 children, aged three to six, from the slums of the San Lorenzo quarter of Rome and thus inaugurated her first Casa dei Bambini (Children’s House). Individual initiative and self-direction characterized the Montessori philosophy, and thus the teacher was to withdraw to the background and merely supervise the use of “didactic materials,” a large complex of educational tools that Montessori herself developed—such as lacing frames, number rods to develop concepts of numbers, map puzzles, and sandpaper letters that children were to trace with their fingers. Also, although usually each child worked alone, group or social activity was not ignored, for there were group gymnastics, games, and religious exercises; and social manners were taught in serving meals, waiting on tables, and the like. The children learned to read, write, and count and to express themselves artistically.
Across Europe, in Belgium, meanwhile, another doctor of medicine, Ovide Decroly, was pioneering in the education of the very young, also proceeding from the psychological study of abnormal or exceptional children. In 1907 he opened his École de l’Ermitage (School of the Hermitage) near Brussels. Unlike Montessori’s children, however, Decroly’s children worked in groups, and, like the Agazzis’ children, they worked with real things drawn from everyday life. His educational system was based on three processes: observation, expression (oral, written, manual, or artistic), and association of space and time. He felt the universal needs of the child to be food, protection against danger, endurance for the frustrations of life, work, play, self-evaluation, and self-discipline.
Across the channel in Great Britain were two pioneers in the movement to improve the health and environment of the very young: Grace Owen and Margaret McMillan. Both saw the nursery school as a place for fostering health and physical development (prerequisites to any other kind of development) and as a place that should be an extension of the home. Owen wanted every housing development to have a nursery school, where children of various ages would constitute a group resembling a large family and where play would facilitate socialization. McMillan outlined a plan for a three-year course for training teachers for the nursery schools, maintaining that only trained personnel should work with children from three to six years of age. Training centres at Manchester (under Owen), at Deptford (under McMillan), and at London supplied nursery teachers for the entire British Commonwealth as well as for the early nursery schools in the United States.
The first decade of the 20th century saw the start of what might be called “collective” upbringing. In what was then Palestine the new settlers established kibbutzim, in which were established separate homes for the children in order to free the mothers to work in the commune. As the system has now evolved, all children of a kibbutz from birth to one year remain in an “infant house,” cared for by a meṭapelet (upbringer) in charge of four or five babies. During the nursing stage mothers feed their babies in the infant house. The “toddler house,” containing about eight children one to three or four years old, emphasizes socialization. All children visit home daily for a few hours. In the next stage, kindergarten, the child three or four to seven years old is under the care of a teacher and her three assistants (meṭapelet). The aim of this period is readiness for the first grade.
Another variety of collective preschool education is found in Russia, where crèches and kindergartens (detskiye sady and yasli) were inaugurated about 1919, partly through the persuasions of N.K. Krupskaya (Vladimir I. Lenin’s wife), who viewed preschool education as the first step in creating a new Soviet citizen. Today, children are placed in the crèches (voluntarily) from two months until three years of age; these crèches are under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Health. The kindergarten, under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Education, accepts children three to seven years old. All teaching materials used are didactic. The socialization process, respect for authority, and the subordination of individual needs to those of the collective are stressed. Self-discipline and self-reliance are key teaching objectives.
