Prix de Rome, in full Grand Prix de Rome,  any of a group of scholarships awarded by the French government between 1663 and 1968 to enable young French artists to study in Rome. It was so named because the students who won the grand, or first, prize in each artistic category went to study at the Académie de France in Rome.
As part of his official patronage of the arts, King Louis XIV established an art academy in Rome called the Académie de France. This move was prompted by Charles Le Brun, who had previously been instrumental in founding France’s Royal Academy of Painting and Sculpture (Académie Royale de Peinture et de Sculpture) in Paris in 1648. In 1666 French statutes decreed that the newly established Grand Prix de Rome should preferably be awarded to prizewinning pupils from the Royal Academy. The original prizes were awarded to students of painting and sculpture. Prizes for architecture were awarded regularly after about 1720. Many of the greatest French artists and architects of the 18th century went to Rome as prizewinners, including the painters Antoine Coypel, Jean-Honoré Fragonard, and Jacques-Louis David and the sculptors François Girardon, Clodion, and Jean-Antoine Houdon.
During the French Revolution the Académie de France was closed from 1792 until 1801, when it reopened in the magnificent Villa Medici building. In the 19th century prizes for engravers and musicians were added; the most famous prizewinners of that century were the painter J.-A.-D. Ingres, the sculptors Pierre-Jean David d’Angers and Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux, the architect Tony Garnier, and the composers Hector Berlioz, Charles Gounod, Georges Bizet, and Claude Debussy.
The Prix de Rome competitions and awards diminished in prestige and importance during the 20th century and were discontinued altogether by André Malraux, the French minister of cultural affairs, following the student riots of 1968. However, various organizations and groups subsequently adopted the prize’s name for their own competitions, and by the early 21st century there were several Prix de Rome scholarships awarded around the world.
