Robert A. Dahl, in full Robert Alan Dahl,  (born December 17, 1915, Inwood, Iowa, U.S.—died February 5, 2014, Hamden, Connecticut), American political scientist and educator. A leading theorist of political pluralism, Dahl stressed the role in politics played by associations, groups, and organizations.
Dahl was a graduate of the University of Washington (A.B., 1936) and obtained a Ph.D. from Yale University in 1940. He served in the U.S. Army during World War II and was awarded the Bronze Star (with cluster) for distinguished service. After the war, Dahl returned to Yale, where he taught until 1986. He subsequently became Sterling Professor Emeritus of Political Science and Senior Research Scientist Sociology.
In “The Concept of Power” (1957), his first major contribution to the field of political science, Dahl developed a formal definition of power that was frequently cited as an important (though incomplete) insight into the phenomenon. According to Dahl, “A has power over B to the extent that he can get B to do something that B would not otherwise do.” Dahl gave as an example a professor threatening a student with a failing grade if he did not read a certain book during the holidays. In this case, the amount of power held by the professor can be conceived as the difference between the probability that the student would read the book before receiving the threat and the probability that he would read it after receiving the threat. Dahl argued that his definition could be used to compare the power of political actors in a given sphere—for instance, the influence of different U.S. senators on questions of foreign policy. Critics, such as the social theorist Steven Lukes, argued that Dahl’s definition failed to capture other important dimensions of power, such as the capacity of an actor to shape the norms and values held by others.
In his best-known work, Who Governs?: Democracy and Power in an American City (1961), a study of power dynamics in New Haven, Connecticut, Dahl argued that political power in the United States is pluralistic. He thus rebutted power-elite theorists such as C. Wright Mills and Floyd Hunter, who had described the United States as a country ruled by a small group of interconnected individuals occupying key positions of power. In his study, Dahl found that while power was distributed unequally in New Haven, it was also dispersed among a number of groups in competition with each other, rather than monopolized by a single elite group.
Dahl introduced the term polyarchy to characterize American politics and other political systems that are open, inclusive, and competitive (Polyarchy, 1971). The concept allowed him to make a distinction between an ideal system of democracy and institutional arrangements that approximate this ideal. Thus, polyarchies are based on the principle of representative rather than direct democracy and therefore constitute a form of minority rule, yet they are also (imperfectly) democratized systems that limit the power of elite groups through institutions such as regular and free elections.
Despite his critique of elite-power theory, Dahl was faulted after the publication of Who Governs? for underestimating the importance of broad-based civic participation. Indeed, in Who Governs? Dahl had argued that democracy does not require mass participation and in fact rests on the consent of a relatively apathetic population. Later, in Democracy and Its Critics (1989), he recognized the value of an active citizenry and associated polyarchy with political rights such as freedom of expression and association.
Dahl was the author of scores of important papers and several books. The latter include, in addition to those mentioned above, A Preface to Democratic Theory (1956); After the Revolution?: Authority in a Good Society (1970); Size and Democracy (1973), coauthored with Edward R. Tufte; A Preface to Economic Democracy (1985); On Democracy (1998); and How Democratic Is the American Constitution? (2001). He served as president of the American Political Science Association (1966–67) and was a member of numerous research organizations and learned societies, including the National Academy of Sciences, the American Philosophical Society, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and the British Academy.
