Sarah Ann Dickey,  (born April 25, 1838, near Dayton, Ohio, U.S.—died Jan. 23, 1904, Clinton, Miss.),  American educator who devoted her efforts in the post-Civil War United States to creating and enhancing educational opportunities for African-American students.
Dickey had almost no schooling until she was 16, but her determined progress thereafter was rapid, and at the age of 19 she secured a teacher’s certificate. After six years of teaching in her native region she went to Vicksburg, Mississippi, to teach in a freedmen’s school operated by her church, the United Brethren in Christ (1863–65). She graduated from Mount Holyoke Female Seminary (now Mount Holyoke College), South Hadley, Massachusetts, in 1869. She then returned to Mississippi and taught for a year in a freedmen’s school in Raymond. In 1871 she moved to nearby Clinton, where she began working to open an academy for African-American students.
Dickey secured support among the local black community, despite threats from the Ku Klux Klan, and enrolled a board of trustees of prominent Mississippians. In 1873 a charter was granted for the Mount Hermon Female Seminary, which opened in October 1875 in a large brick house situated on 160 acres (65 hectares). Patterned after Mount Holyoke in its work-study system, Mount Hermon had to deal with largely unprepared students. A primary course was instituted to prepare students for the regular work of the seminary. Dickey held standards high, as evidenced by the fact that only one student ever received the diploma of the seminary for having finished the entire course. Several students, however, completed the three- (later four-) year normal course and became teachers. In addition to her teaching and money-raising activities, Dickey reared a number of African-American children left in her care and was active in her community. In 1896 she was ordained a minister of the United Brethren church. When Dickey died, Mount Hermon Seminary passed into the hands of the American Missionary Association, which closed it in 1924 in favour of its own Tougaloo (Mississippi) College.
