Susan Blow, in full Susan Elizabeth Blow,  (born June 7, 1843, Carondelet [now part of St. Louis], Missouri, U.S.—died March 27, 1916, New York, New York), American education reformer who was an ardent advocate of German educational ideas and who launched the first public kindergarten in the United States.
Blow was reared in a deeply religious home. She was educated by tutors and at a private school in New York City. While traveling in Germany in 1870, she became interested in the revolutionary kindergarten methods developed by the German Idealist philosopher Friedrich Froebel. After a year of study under Froebel devotee Maria Kraus-Boelté in New York, Blow opened the first public kindergarten in the United States at the Des Peres School in St. Louis, Missouri, in September 1873. The next year she established a training school for kindergarten teachers, and within a few years St. Louis had become the focal point of the U.S. kindergarten movement. Throughout this period Blow remained the unofficial and unpaid supervisor of the system. Froebelian doctrine tended toward rigidity, and her expression of it, shaped by the influence of German Idealism, was perhaps more so; consequently she was unsympathetic to innovation in method. When younger kindergarten teachers began nonetheless to experiment in the mid-1880s, at a time when her health was precarious, she soon lost contact with the schools.
In 1889 Blow moved east and thereafter lived in Cazenovia, New York, in Boston, and then in New York City. She lectured widely on Froebelian thought, of which she remained the leading American exponent (even Madame Kraus-Boelté was less rigidly doctrinaire than she), and published several books on orthodox kindergarten practice, including Symbolic Education (1894), a two-volume translation of Froebel’s Mother Play (1895), Letters to a Mother on the Philosophy of Froebel (1899), Kindergarten Education (1900), and Educational Issues in the Kindergarten (1908). In 1905–09 she was a lecturer at Teachers College, Columbia University, where the kindergarten innovator Patty Smith Hill was also teaching.
