Texas A&M University,  state university system based in College Station, Texas, U.S., formed in 1948 as an outgrowth of the Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas, which was established in 1871 and opened in 1876. The system includes campuses at Commerce (founded 1889), Kingsville (1925), Corpus Christi (founded 1947), Galveston (1962, administered as a branch of the College Station campus), and Texarkana (1971), as well as Prairie View A&M University (1876), Tarleton State University (1899) in Stephenville, Texas A&M International University (1969) in Laredo, and West Texas A&M University (1909) in Canyon. Tarleton State’s Central Texas branch is in Killeen; the Kingsville campus operates a system centre at Palo Alto College in San Antonio. The Texas A&M System Health Science Center, formed in 1999, comprises five institutions in three cities: the College of Medicine, the Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, and the School of Rural Public Health (College Station); the Institute of Biosciences and Technology (Houston); and Baylor College of Dentistry (Dallas). There is also an academic centre in Castiglion Fiorentino, Italy. In earlier periods, the Texas A&M University System also included Arlington State College (now University of Texas at Arlington) and James Connally Technical Institute (now Texas State Technical College Waco).
The main campus at College Station is one of the largest in the nation, with an area of about 5,200 acres (2,100 hectares). It comprises 10 colleges with fields of study including agriculture, architecture, geosciences, engineering, and public service. A range of undergraduate and graduate degrees and professional degrees in medicine and veterinary medicine are offered. The Galveston branch contains the marine and maritime campus of the university as well as the Texas Maritime Academy and the Texas Institute of Oceanography. Texas A&M is a land-grant, sea-grant, and space-grant university known for its programs in engineering, technology, and agriculture. (Sea-grant and space-grant colleges and universities, like land-grant institutions, obtain federal funding for college research, education, and public service projects related to sea and space.) A major research university, Texas A&M supports institutes for the study of biotechnology, race and ethnicity, nautical archaeology, petroleum, nuclear science, and transportation, among other areas. The George Bush Presidential Library and Museum, commemorating the 41st U.S. president, is on the College Station campus. Enrollment at College Station is approximately 44,500 students; more than 90,000 are enrolled in the system as a whole.
The Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas became the state’s first institution of higher education when it opened in 1876. It was originally created as a military institution, and military training was required until 1965; the university has one of the largest Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) programs in the nation. Although designated as a land-grant college under the Morrill Act of 1862, the college emphasized classical studies, mathematics, and literature courses over science and vocational studies in its first few years. Graduate-level instruction began in 1888; the first master’s degrees were awarded in 1890 and the first doctorate in 1940. In 1963 the college was renamed Texas A&M University, with “A&M” meant to be symbolic of the institution’s former, narrower focus. It received sea-grant status in 1971 and space-grant status in 1989. Twelve Texas A&M students were killed in 1999 during construction of an elaborate log structure that was to be burned for the school’s traditional bonfire, held the night before Texas A&M’s annual football game against the University of Texas.
