University of Maine, in full University of Maine System,  state university system of Maine, U.S. It comprises seven coeducational institutions, including the University of Southern Maine. The University of Maine is a land-grant and sea-grant university based in Orono. It offers a wide range of undergraduate, graduate, and professional programs. There are five colleges, including the College of Natural Sciences, Forestry, and Agriculture, one of the largest of its kind in the United States. Other notable facilities are the Collins Center for the Arts, an agricultural and forest experiment station, and the largest library in the state. There are opportunities for international study, including exchange programs with various Canadian universities. Student enrollment at the main campus exceeds 11,000.
Also within the University of Maine System are campuses at Farmington (founded 1863), Fort Kent (1878), Presque Isle (1903), Machias (1909), and Augusta (1965). All the campuses have baccalaureate programs and, with the exception of Farmington, associate degree programs as well.
The University of Southern Maine (1878) is located in Gorham and Portland and includes the Lewiston-Auburn College. It offers associate, bachelor’s, and graduate and professional degree programs. Facilities in Gorham include a centre for teaching; the Edmund S. Muskie School of Public Service is located in Portland. Total enrollment at Southern Maine is approximately 10,000.
Under the aegis of the Morrill Act of 1862, the University of Maine was established in 1865 as the State College of Agricultural and the Mechanic Arts. Instruction began in 1868, and women were first admitted in 1872. The name was changed to the University of Maine in 1897. It received sea-grant status in 1980 under the provisions of the Sea Grant College Program Act of 1966. Notable alumni include novelist-essayist Mary Ellen Chase and horror-fiction writer Stephen King.
The campus at Farmington became Maine’s first institution of higher education when it was opened as Western State Normal School in 1864. Notable graduates of this school include the twin brothers Francis Edgar Stanley and Freelan O. Stanley, manufacturers of steam-powered cars, and John Frank Stevens, a chief engineer of the Panama Canal.
