University of California,  system of public universities in California, U.S., with campuses at Berkeley, Davis, Irvine, Los Angeles, Merced, Riverside, San Diego, San Francisco, Santa Barbara, and Santa Cruz. The university traces its origins to the private College of California, founded in 1855 in Oakland. In 1868 the college merged with the Agricultural, Mining, and Mechanical Arts College (which had been established as a land-grant school in 1866) to form the University of California; in 1873 the university moved to Berkeley. Over time, other schools became part of the system. A 26-member board of regents governs the system, which has a total enrollment of approximately 200,000.
Berkeley, the main campus of the system, has about 33,000 students. Its 14 schools and colleges include those for optometry, public health, social welfare, public policy, natural resources, journalism, and environmental design and offer some 300 degree programs. A major research institution, it operates the Pacific Earthquake Engineering Research Center, the Energy Institute, the International Computer Science Institute, and the Space Sciences Laboratory; the system also operates (under federal contract) the nearby Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The campus has museums of art, entomology, zoology, anthropology, and paleontology. Its faculty has included many distinguished scientists, such as Nobel laureates Luis W. Alvarez (physics) and Glenn T. Seaborg (chemistry).
The Los Angeles campus (UCLA) was founded in 1919 as the Southern Branch of the university and acquired its present title in 1927. The system’s largest campus, it enrolls about 35,000 students in the College of Letters and Science and in 11 professional schools in fields such as medicine, dentistry, nursing, public health, law, and engineering and applied science; the world-renowned School of Theatre, Film, and Television has an extensive archive of films, newsreels, and television programs. Undergraduate degrees are available in about 120 disciplines, and graduate and professional degrees are offered in 200 areas. UCLA is also one of the country’s top research universities, and its more than 140 research institutes include the Southern California Earthquake Center, the Marine Science Center, the AIDS Institute, and the Institute of Transportation Studies. The university’s athletic teams have won more National Collegiate Athletic Association championships than any other school in the country, especially under men’s basketball coach John Wooden (1948–75). Notable UCLA athletes include Kareem Abdul-Jabbar (basketball), Arthur Ashe (tennis), Evelyn Ashford (track), and Jackie Robinson (baseball).
The San Diego campus, located at La Jolla, was founded as a marine station and became part of the university in 1912. Its 10 schools and divisions serve some 25,000 students in fields such as medicine, pharmacy, and international relations and Pacific studies. Undergraduates enroll in one of six semiautonomous residential colleges. Among its research facilities are the Scripps Institution of Oceanography and the San Diego Supercomputer Center.
The Davis campus, a farm in 1908 and then part of the university’s College of Agriculture, became a general campus in 1959. It offers undergraduate and graduate degrees and includes professional schools of law, medicine, veterinary medicine, and management. Enrollment is approximately 28,000.
The San Francisco campus, originally the university’s Medical Department (1873), is the smallest of the system’s units. In addition to medicine, it has schools of nursing, dentistry, and pharmacy and operates the university medical centre and various medical clinics and research organizations. The San Francisco Art Institute and Hastings College of the Law, both affiliated with the university, are also there.
The Riverside campus, originally the Citrus Experiment Station (1907), also became a general campus in 1959. It has about 15,000 students in programs of education, engineering, management, natural and agricultural sciences, and humanities, arts, and social sciences. Santa Barbara, founded as a teacher’s college in 1891, became part of the university system in 1944. Approximately 20,000 students are enrolled in colleges of letters and science, creative studies, and engineering and in professional schools of education and environmental science and management.
The campuses at Santa Cruz and Irvine were both founded in 1965. Santa Cruz features several small residential colleges as units of the parent institution. With about 15,000 students, it offers degrees in arts, humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, and engineering. It is the headquarters of Lick Observatory. Irvine has programs in 12 academic units, including medicine, engineering, information and computer science, and social ecology; there are about 24,000 students. Construction on the system’s 10th campus, at Merced, began in 2002, and it officially opened in 2005.
Several educational centres in the San Joaquin Valley and one in Washington, D.C., are affiliated with the university system, and a branch of the medical school at San Francisco is in Fresno. The system’s more than 100 libraries hold some 30 million volumes, one of the largest collections in North America. The university’s Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources engages in agricultural and conservation research and operates several research centres throughout the state. In 2000 the system helped create the California Institutes for Science and Innovation, which has facilities at various campuses dedicated to technology research. The system also maintains the world’s largest network of university-operated nature reserves, with units scattered throughout the state covering a total area of more than 200 square miles (520 square km). The system’s Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics operates a variety of facilities, including (under federal contract) Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, California, and Los Alamos National Laboratory in Los Alamos, New Mexico.
