University of Virginia,  public, coeducational institution of higher learning in Charlottesville, Virginia, U.S., on a campus of 1,000 acres (405 hectares) near the foothills of the Blue Ridge Mountains. Founded by Thomas Jefferson, it was chartered in 1819. Jefferson was aided by Joseph C. Cabell (1778–1856), a member of the Virginia Senate and the school’s chief fund-raiser. The school elected Jefferson its first rector of the board of visitors (the governing body). James Madison and James Monroe were other U.S. presidents who served on the university’s board.
Jefferson laid out the campus of his “academical village,” designed its buildings, supervised the construction of the Rotunda (which he designed based on the Pantheon in Rome), planned the curriculum, and selected the faculty. The school opened in 1825 with a faculty of eight. Jefferson introduced an elective system of study and opposed the granting of degrees as “artificial embellishments.” By the time of the American Civil War, the university was second only to Harvard in size of faculty and student body. It was essentially a graduate school until the bachelor of science degree was offered in 1868, and in 1899 the bachelor’s degree became the primary degree offered. (The university had approved a master of arts degree in 1831, the primary degree in the 19th century; the M.D. was first awarded in 1828 and a degree in law in 1842.)
In 1904 Edwin A. Alderman was elected the first president; previously the chief administrative officer had been the chairman of the faculty. Under Alderman (1904–31), the university established its basic modern structure. The McIntire School of Commerce was established there in 1952 and the Center for Advanced Studies in 1965. Special programs include Asian, Afro-American, and African studies, Slavic languages and literature, and environmental and computer sciences.
Enrollment is largest in the College of Arts and Sciences. Other schools teach architecture, education, engineering and applied sciences, and nursing. Its graduate and professional schools include the Colgate Darden School of Business Administration, the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, and schools of law and of medicine. Total enrollment is approximately 18,000.
Mary Washington College in Fredericksburg (chartered in 1908 as a women’s college) was consolidated with the university from 1944 to 1972. By the 1970s women were enrolled in all units of the university; previously, they could attend only selected programs and the graduate schools. Clinch Valley College (1954) at Wise, in southwestern Virginia, is an affiliated school.
