University of Florida,  public coeducational institution of higher learning in Gainesville, Florida, U.S. It is a comprehensive research university with land-grant status and is part of the State University System of Florida. The university awards bachelor’s, master’s, doctoral, and professional degrees and consists of 23 colleges and schools, including the Fisher School of Accounting, the M.E. Rinker, Sr., School of Building Construction, the School of Forest Resources and Conservation, the School of Teaching and Learning, and the College of Health and Human Performance. There are also professional colleges of law, medicine, dentistry, pharmacy, and veterinary medicine; more than 100 undergraduate majors and some 200 graduate programs, as well as an honours program. The university has had one of the most successful collegiate programs for American football in the country.
The university has dozens of research facilities, including the University of Florida Brain Institute, the Whitney Laboratory (a marine research facility located in St. Augustine), the Center for Exercise Science, the Center for Latin American Studies, and the Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, which includes a large citrus research centre in Lake Alfred. The university operates two television and three radio stations. The Florida Museum of Natural History (the largest of its kind in the southern United States), the Samuel P. Harn Museum of Art, and a wildlife sanctuary are on the campus. The university also operates a health science centre in Jacksonville. Total enrollment is approximately 50,000.
The University of Florida is the oldest and largest university in the state. Its history dates to 1853, when the Kingsbury Academy in Ocala was acquired by the state-supported East Florida Seminary. In the 1860s the seminary moved to Gainesville and later was consolidated with Florida Agricultural College, a land-grant school in Lake City. In 1905 it became the University of Florida and returned to Gainesville. Women were first admitted in 1947, and the university was racially integrated in 1958. Notable alumni include physicist John V. Atanasoff (a developer of the electronic digital computer), Olympic swimmer Tracy Caulkins, and Nobel laureate biochemist Marshall Nirenberg.
