University of Toronto,  coeducational institution of higher learning that is the provincial university of Ontario and one of the oldest and largest universities in Canada. It is composed of federated, affiliated, and constituent colleges, a union based originally on British models, and of faculties, schools, institutes, centres, and divisions, modeled more on American lines. All are related to each other through an elaborate and unique Canadian university structure.
The university had its origins in the Anglican-founded state university of the province of Upper Canada—the University of King’s College at York (now Toronto), which was chartered in 1827 but was not established until 1843. In 1850, after bitter religious and political controversy, King’s College was secularized and renamed the University of Toronto. In 1853 University College was created as the teaching body while the university itself became solely an examining and degree-granting body. As a result of the Federation Act of 1887 the university resumed teaching, and several institutions of higher learning became federated or affiliated with the university.
Currently federated or affiliated with the University of Toronto are three autonomous church-related colleges: Victoria (United Church of Canada), Trinity (Anglican), and St. Michael’s (Roman Catholic); a graduate institute, the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education; a graduate residential college, Massey; and three theological colleges: Emmanuel (United Church), Wycliffe (Anglican), and Knox (Presbyterian). There are six undergraduate colleges: University, Woodsworth, Erindale, Scarborough, New, and Innis.
The University of Toronto offers 39 major teaching divisions. It is also the home of the Royal Conservatory of Music, the Banting and Best Department of Medical Research, Connaught Laboratories (which manufacture insulin, discovered by Frederick Banting and others at the university in 1921), the Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, and the University of Toronto Press, one of Canada’s leading publishing houses. The library collections of the university and its related institutions total more than eight million volumes.
The main campus of the university is located on 165 acres (67 hectares) near the centre of downtown Toronto. Total enrollment is more than 52,000 students.
