University of Chicago,  private, coeducational university, located on the south side of Chicago, Illinois, U.S. One of the United States’s most outstanding universities, the University of Chicago was founded in 1890 with the endowment of John D. Rockefeller. William Rainey Harper, president of the university from 1891 to 1906, did much to establish what has come to be regarded as the traditional outlook and character of the university. Internationally recognized as a centre for research and advanced study, it was also a pioneer in adult education and has influenced undergraduate programs elsewhere through its “Chicago plan,” which was designed to ensure a broad-based education. Under the administration of Robert M. Hutchins, president from 1929 to 1945 and chancellor from 1945 to 1951, the college attracted national attention for such innovative policies as measuring student achievement by comprehensive examinations and stressing the reading of “Great Books.” Total enrollment exceeds 14,000.
The university has fostered events of both academic and world significance. In 1892 it established the United States’s first department of sociology. In 1942 it was the site of the first controlled self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction, achieved under the direction of the physicist Enrico Fermi. Other notable achievements by Chicago scholars include the development of carbon-14 dating (1946) and the isolation and first weighing of the element plutonium (1942). The university also lent its name to the Chicago school of economics, which took a neoclassical approach emphasizing the free market; associated with economics professors Frank Hyneman Knight and Jacob Viner, the university trained several future Nobel Prize recipients, including Milton Friedman and James Buchanan. More than 80 Nobel Prize winners have been affiliated with the university.
The university includes an undergraduate college, four graduate divisions (biological sciences, humanities, physical sciences, and social sciences), the Graham School of General Studies (continuing education), and six graduate professional schools (Divinity School, Graduate School of Business, Law School, Pritzker School of Medicine, School of Social Service Administration, and Irving B. Harris Graduate School of Public Policy Studies). The university also has six libraries, including the Joe and Rika Mansueto Library designed by Helmut Jahn. It has a number of centres for advanced scholarship and research, including the Oriental Institute (ancient Middle Eastern studies); the Computation Institute; the James Franck Institute; the Enrico Fermi Institute; the National Opinion Research Center; and the Center for International Studies. Under contract with the U.S. government, the university operates the Argonne National Laboratory, southwest of the city. The University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, begun in 1896 by American educator John Dewey, offer a progressive education program for students from kindergarten through high school. Cultural institutions located on or near campus include the Museum of Science and Industry, the DuSable Museum of African American History, the David and Alfred Smart Museum of Art, and the Frederick C. Robie House (1909; designed by Frank Lloyd Wright).
