University of Nevada,  public coeducational institution of higher learning in Nevada, U.S., comprising campuses in Reno and Las Vegas. It is part of the Nevada System of Higher Education.
The Reno campus, established as a land-grant college, has eight schools and colleges: the Donald W. Reynolds School of Journalism; the College of Agriculture, Biotechnology, and Natural Resources; the Division of Health Sciences; and colleges of business, education, liberal arts, engineering, and science. Research facilities on the campus include the Center for Basque Studies, the Academy for the Environment, the Institute for the Study of Gambling and Commercial Gaming, the Center for Strategic Materials Research and Policy Study, the Nevada Agricultural Experiment Station, the Center for Research Design and Analysis, and the Grant Sawyer Center for Justice Studies. There are approximately 18,000 students enrolled at the Reno branch.
The Las Vegas campus has schools of business, education, engineering, fine arts, health sciences, hotel administration, liberal arts, sciences, and urban affairs. Additionally, the campus offers an honours college, a graduate school, and professional programs in law and dental medicine. Research facilities include the National Supercomputing Center for Energy and the Environment, the International Gaming Institute, the Biomechanics Laboratory, and the Caesars Hospitality Research Center. Enrollment at the Las Vegas campus is approximately 28,000.
The University of Nevada was established as a college preparatory school in Elko in 1874. It relocated to Reno in 1885 and reopened in 1887, when it began providing collegiate course work. Nevada was one of 69 land-grant colleges established under the Morrill Act of 1862, and, as such, initially emphasized a curriculum of agriculture, mining, and mechanic arts. The Las Vegas branch was founded as a formal division of the university in 1957. Noteworthy alumni of the university include Abraham Lincoln Battalion commander Robert Hale Merriman, the reformer and feminist Anne Henrietta Martin, baseball player Matt Williams, basketball players Reggie Theus and Larry Johnson, football players Randall Cunningham and Keenan McCardell, and golfer Patty Sheehan.
