University of Wisconsin,  system of higher education of the state of Wisconsin, U.S. It comprises 13 four-year institutions and 13 two-year colleges. The four-year campuses are located in Eau Claire, Green Bay, Kenosha (Parkside), La Crosse, Madison, Menomonie (Stout), Milwaukee, Oshkosh, Platteville, River Falls, Stevens Point, Superior, and Whitewater. They vary in size from the main campus in Madison (with nearly 40,000 students at the beginning of the 21st century) to the branch campus at Superior (with about 2,800 students).
The original campus of the University of Wisconsin was founded at Madison in 1848 and became a land-grant college in 1866. Women were first admitted in 1863, and it became fully coeducational in 1874.
Central to the university’s mission is the Wisconsin Idea—i.e., “the boundaries of the University are the boundaries of the state.” First articulated in the early 20th century, it focuses on the university’s service to the state by providing policy advice and technical expertise to the government, conducting research geared to the specific needs of the state, and offering outreach programs to its citizens. Academic freedom was enshrined at the university in 1894 in the response by the board of regents to editorial attacks on the teaching of economist Richard T. Ely:
In 1971 the University of Wisconsin at Madison merged with the Wisconsin State Universities system to create the University of Wisconsin System, which thus became one of the largest state university systems in the country, with a total enrollment of more than 150,000 students at its four-year campuses. All of the system’s four-year institutions grant bachelor’s and master’s degrees, while the main campus at Madison and the one at Milwaukee also grant doctoral degrees. The Madison campus is one of the world’s great university research centres. It includes some 20 schools and colleges, including schools of veterinary medicine, social work, pharmacy, natural resources, library and information studies, law, medicine, and nursing, as well as programs in environmental and international studies.
