Waldorf school,  school based on the educational philosophy of Rudolf Steiner, an Austrian educator and the formulator of anthroposophy. Steiner’s first school opened in 1919 in Stuttgart, Germany, for the children of the Waldorf-Astoria Company’s employees; his schools thereafter became known as “Waldorf” schools. Steiner’s first school flourished, and by 1938 schools based on his philosophy had opened in Austria, Germany, Great Britain, Hungary, the Netherlands, Norway, and the United States. Political interference by the Nazi regime forced closure of most Waldorf schools in Europe until after the end of World War II. Afterward, Waldorf schools recovered, becoming the locus of one of the most widespread independent educational movements in the world.
Steiner’s philosophy of education was formulated in opposition to conventional German educational practices of the early 20th century, which were teacher-centred and focused on basic literacy, mathematics, German history, and religion. Steiner also took issue with the exclusivity of the German system, which allowed only a small number of students to continue schooling past Volksschule, the 8-year elementary school. In contrast, Steiner sought a pedagogy that fostered the development of the whole child, eschewing a narrow focus on the intellect. He wanted his schools to be open to all children, coeducational, and designed as 12-year schools. Steiner also proposed that teachers maintain primary governance of the schools, a tradition upheld from the first school in 1919.
Steiner was particularly interested in matching school activities with children’s learning tendencies at different points in childhood. He suggested that children’s development passed through three stages. During the first stage, from birth to age 6 or 7, children learn by imitation, empathy, and experience, he argued, and so early childhood curricula should engage children in traditional life activities (e.g., baking, cleaning, gardening), cultivate feelings through the arts, and stimulate creativity and fantasy through imaginative play. The second stage of development, between ages 7 and 12 or 13, is marked by the child’s need to learn through rhythm and images, according to Steiner. Students in the second stage therefore study visual and dramatic arts, movement, music, and foreign languages in Waldorf schools. Reading instruction begins at age 7; although Waldorf schools’ literacy curriculum has been criticized by some educators as beginning this instruction late, Steiner adopted a wide definition of literacy that included not only reading and writing but experiences that allow students to derive meaning from music, the visual arts, and dance. During the third developmental stage posited by Steiner, which reaches from puberty through young adulthood, curricula at Waldorf schools are designed to develop students’ capacities for abstract thought, conceptual judgment, ethical thinking, and social responsibility. This stage focuses on academics, with teachers who specialize in academic subject areas.
The educational method implemented in Waldorf schools is based on anthroposophy, a philosophy formulated by Steiner that held that through meditation and study individuals could achieve a higher consciousness and be brought into contact with spiritual worlds. Issues related to anthroposophy have been at the centre of most critiques of Waldorf schools, and Steiner’s writings about the racial organization of culture and the evolution of consciousness have led to charges that racism is inherent in anthroposophy and in the Waldorf educational method. Other critics have contended that, although the spiritual foundation of Waldorf education may not be explicitly integrated into material taught in the classroom, it is implicitly present and that students are consistently exposed to anthroposophical values and concepts of spirituality. Such charges have been disputed by Waldorf educators and the Association of Waldorf Schools of North America, who point out that today’s Waldorf schools are racially and culturally inclusive and that they are nondenominational.
