Wolfgang Ratke,  Ratke also spelled Ratich, or Ratichius,  (born Oct. 18, 1571, Wilster, Holstein, Ger.—died  April 27, 1635, Erfurt, Saxony), German educational reformer, especially in the teaching of languages, whose pioneering achievements laid the groundwork for the work of Comenius.
Ratke was educated in Hamburg, and he studied theology (without obtaining a degree) at the University of Rostock. Having abandoned a possible career in the clergy because of his inadequacy at public speaking, Ratke returned to Wilster, where from 1600 to 1603 he studied languages, especially Hebrew. The next eight years he spent as a private teacher in Amsterdam, where he began to develop his new teaching system, based largely on Francis Bacon’s concepts of inductive reasoning from the particular to the general.
Failing to win official backing for his ideas in the Netherlands, Ratke returned to Germany. At the Imperial Diet at Frankfurt in 1612 he urged replacing Latin with the vernacular as the language of higher education. From 1614 to 1622 he tried to establish his pedagogical system successively at Augsburg, Köthen, and Magdeburg. All of these experiments were failures, owing in part to the unprecedented nature of Ratke’s concepts, in part to his limitations as an organizer and administrator, and in part to the hostility of the Roman Catholic Church, which wanted to maintain control over education.
Though unable to put his ideas into successful practice, Ratke made major contributions to education by formulating a number of important reform principles, all of which were successfully applied by various successors. These principles were: learning through experience and experiment rather than by rote, proceeding from the concrete to the abstract, mastering one concept before moving to another, learning through repetition, and perfecting knowledge of the native language before attempting to learn foreign tongues.
Ratke suffered a paralytic stroke in 1633 and died two years later. His teaching methods survived him, however, greatly influencing Comenius and subsequent educational reformers.
