Zilpah Polly Grant,  (born May 30, 1794, Norfolk, Conn., U.S.—died Dec. 3, 1874, Newburyport, Mass.),  19th-century American educator who, through her teaching and administrative efforts, was instrumental in promoting advanced educational opportunities for women.
Grant attended local schools and, to the extent her frail health allowed, worked to help her widowed mother keep the family farm. From age 15 she taught in a variety of schools in nearby towns. In 1820 she seized an opportunity to further her own education and entered the Female Seminary of Byfield, Massachusetts, operated by Joseph Emerson. A year later she became a teacher in the school. In 1824 she accepted the position of “preceptress” of the newly endowed Adams Female Academy in what is now East Derry, New Hampshire. She was accompanied there by Mary Lyon, a younger colleague from Emerson’s school. There she established a rigorous three-year course with examinations required for promotion from one grade to the next, a diploma being awarded for successful completion of the course.
The academy flourished and gained a considerable reputation. The intrusion of the trustees, however, prompted Grant to leave in 1828, taking Lyon and a number of pupils with her, and to establish the Ipswich (Massachusetts) Female Seminary. The school prospered, and with Lyon, Grant began to plan a New England Female Seminary for Teachers. But Lyon left in 1835 to begin the work that would lead to the founding of Mount Holyoke Female Seminary (later Mount Holyoke College), South Hadley, Massachusetts, and four years later the Ipswich Female Seminary closed. Grant moved to Dedham, Massachusetts, and in 1841 she married. In 1852 she became a member of the board of managers of the American Woman’s Educational Association, founded by Catharine Beecher, and was active in the program to recruit and train teachers for schools in the West, making a tour of colleges and seminaries for that purpose in 1855–56. In the latter year she published a pamphlet of Hints on Education. Grant devoted her last years increasingly to religion.
