Tony Smith, in full Anthony Peter Smith,  (born September 23, 1912, South Orange, New Jersey, U.S.—died December 26, 1980, New York, New York), American architect, sculptor, and painter associated with Minimalism as well as Abstract Expressionism and known for his large geometric sculptures.
As a child, Smith was quarantined with tuberculosis and did not emerge into public life until high school. While living behind his parents’ home in New Jersey, he had a private tutor and nurse, and he later recalled building small models out of his medicine boxes during that period of his life. According to the artist, that long-term seclusion and a visit to the pueblos near Taos, New Mexico, at a young age were “formative influences” on his art. He later attended Fordham University in New York City in 1930 and Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., from 1931 to 1932. He returned to New Jersey and opened a bookstore in Newark and later worked for the family waterworks company. In the evenings Smith took classes at the Art Students League in Manhattan.
After deciding to pursue a career in architecture, Smith moved to Chicago in 1937 to enroll at the New Bauhaus school, a short-lived design school established and directed by Hungarian artist László Moholy-Nagy. After just a short stint in school, the aspiring architect took a job with Frank Lloyd Wright, starting at the bottom as a bricklayer and carpenter. He eventually climbed the ranks to clerk of the works, or site supervisor. Taking what he had learned in two years of work with Wright, Smith established an independent architecture firm in New York City that he maintained into the mid-1960s. Though he never earned official certification as an architect, Smith designed more than 20 private residences in that period, with his earlier commissions paying tribute to Wright’s aesthetic.  One of Smith’s most-recognized residences is the home and studio he built on Long Island, New York, for Abstract Expressionist artist Theodoros Stamos in the early 1950s. Raised high above the ground on stilts, the spaceshiplike structure allowed for privacy as well as excellent views and sunlight.
Beginning in 1946 and continuing well into the 1970s, Smith taught at institutions with noteworthy art and architecture schools, including Hunter College (now part of the City University of New York [CUNY]), Cooper Union, Pratt Institute, and New York University, where he taught up-and-coming artists Larry Rivers and Robert Goodnough. Smith’s teaching career gave him the time and resources necessary to continue to make art and the freedom to explore a range of media. During the late 1940s Smith was also further developing ties within the art world and formed strong personal relationships with Jackson Pollock, Barnett Newman, and Mark Rothko—artists who had an impact on his work throughout his life. 
In 1951 Smith had an epiphany about art. One night he took an unsanctioned ride on the unfinished New Jersey Turnpike, without lights, guardrails, and lane markers. The shadowy landscape was punctuated by looming shapes of towers and stacks that were for him invested with mystery and power. By his own account, the experience freed him of many notions he had about art and revealed something to him that art had never shown. It was a turning point for him, and his recollection of the event influenced younger artists, such as Robert Smithson, too.
Between 1953 and 1955, while living in Germany, Smith created the Louisenberg series of paintings. The Louisenberg paintings—colourful geometric grids of repetitive organic shapes—can be viewed as a two-dimensional exercise in understanding sculptural forms. They are considered the works that prefigured the transition to Smith’s next pursuit.
In 1961, while recovering from a serious car accident, Smith gave up his architecture practice and turned his attention to sculpture. The initial period of this artistic shift was marked by the development of a distinct geometric style. Smith began by taping together handmade tetrahedral figures, much as he had done in quarantine as a child. As he would do for most of his three-dimensional work thereafter, he had assistants create large-scale plywood shapes from the final models. They then covered the structure with thick black paint. Works such as The Snake Is Out (1962) were made using that method, but their smooth, hard-edged surfaces made them appear as though they were constructed from sheet metal. Soon after, Smith’s first sculpture truly made from steel, Black Box (1962), was executed by a commercial fabricator. Smith’s often monumental sculptures, which he called “presences,” were based on geometric principles and simplicity of form, fundamental characteristics of Minimalist art. Smith was inspired by the works of James Joyce, Walt Whitman, Henry David Thoreau, and Friedrich Nietzsche, among other writers.
Smith did not exhibit his work until 1964, at age 52, when he was included as a relative unknown in the exhibition “Black, White, and Gray” at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford, Connecticut. The exhibition featured artists working in a new, monochromatic, and seemingly dispassionate aesthetic, showing a marked departure from the Abstract Expressionists, who had dominated the art world for much of the post-World War II era. Two years later Smith participated in the Jewish Museum’s group show “Primary Structures”—the landmark exhibition that helped establish the Minimalist movement—alongside such artists as Donald Judd, Judy Chicago, Carl Andre, and Dan Flavin. In 1967 Smith had his first solo exhibition, at the Wadsworth Atheneum, and then appeared on the cover of the October issue of Time magazine. 
Smith is considered a pioneer of Minimalism and a rare example of an artist who excelled in multiple media. He received the Award of Merit Medal for sculpture in 1978 from the American Academy of Arts and Letters, and he was elected a member in 1979. His sculptures are found mostly outdoors and within private and museum collections throughout North America, Europe, and Asia. Two of Smith’s three daughters, Kiki Smith and Seton Smith, also became visual artists. 
