accordion, French accordéon, German Akkordeon or Handharmonika, Italian armonica a manticino,  free-reed portable musical instrument, consisting of a treble casing with external piano-style keys or buttons and a bass casing (usually with buttons) attached to opposite sides of a hand-operated bellows.
The advent of the accordion is the subject of debate among researchers. Many credit C. Friedrich L. Buschmann, whose Handäoline was patented in Berlin in 1822, as the inventor of the accordion, while others give the distinction to Cyril Demian of Vienna, who patented his Accordion in 1829, thus coining the name. A modification of the Handäoline, Demian’s invention comprised a small manual bellows and five keys, although, as Demian noted in a description of the instrument, extra keys could be incorporated into the design. Numerous variations of the device soon followed.
Within the treble and bass casings of an accordion are the free reeds, small metal tongues arranged in rows alongside pallets (valves) that are cut into metal frames. When air flows around a reed from one side, it vibrates above its frame; airflow in the opposite direction does not cause vibration. Wind is admitted to the reeds selectively through pallets controlled by a keyboard or set of finger buttons. Each pallet admits wind to a pair of reeds, one of which is mounted to sound on the press of the bellows, the other, on the draw.
Some accordions, including the earliest ones, are “single-action,” in which the paired reeds sound adjacent notes of the diatonic (seven-note) scale, so that a button will give, for instance, G on the press and A on the draw. With a single-action accordion, 10 buttons suffice for a range of more than two octaves. For the left hand there are typically two keys, or basses, one providing a bass note, the other a major chord. The single action was early developed, chiefly in Austria and Switzerland, by adding a second row of treble buttons giving the F scale (the first-row scale being C). Various models add rows of buttons for the playing of semitones and additional bass notes and chords.
In “double-action” accordions, the two reeds of each pair are tuned to the same note, thus making each treble or bass note available from the same key or button with both directions of bellows movement. Among these instruments is the piano accordion, with a piano-style keyboard for the right hand. Its invention in the mid-19th century is credited either to the manufacturer Busson or to M. Bouton, both of France.
Couplers, or “registers,” in some double-action instruments activate extra sets of reeds, one pitched an octave below the main set and another off-tuned from the main set to give a tremulant through “beating” (sound-wave interference). Other registers may include a high-octave set of reeds and a second tremulant. Accordions often encompass ranges of seven or eight octaves.
The left-hand provision may also be extended, with more than 120 basses actuated by six or seven rows of buttons. Most of the rows in traditional “fixed-bass,” or Stradella, models give three-note chords—major and minor triads and dominant and diminished sevenths—while “free-bass” accordions overcome melodic restrictions by providing extra buttons or a converter switch for bass melodies and counterpoint. Many accordions include up to five registers for the basses, allowing each bass note to sound over as many as five octaves and each chord to sound in three.
Accordions are played as both concert and folk instruments. A variant of both the accordion and the concertina is the bandonion, a single- or double-action instrument with square shape and finger buttons, invented by Heinrich Band of Krefeld, Germany, in the mid-1840s. Along with the piano accordion, it is a leading solo instrument in Argentine tango orchestras. For precursors of the free-reed instruments, see sheng; for other types, see concertina; harmonica; harmonium.
