oboe, French hautbois, German Oboe,  treble woodwind instrument with a conical bore and double reed. Though used chiefly as an orchestral instrument, it also has a considerable solo repertoire.
Hautbois (French: “high [i.e., loud] wood”), or oboe, was originally one of the names of the shawm, the violently powerful instrument of outdoor ceremonial. The oboe proper (i.e., the orchestral instrument), however, was the mid-17th-century invention of two French court musicians, Jacques Hotteterre and Michel Philidor. It was intended to be played indoors with stringed instruments and was softer and less brilliant in tone than the modern oboe. By the end of the 17th century it was the principal wind instrument of the orchestra and military band and, after the violin, the leading solo instrument of the time.
The early oboe had only two keys. Its compass, at first two octaves upward from middle C, was soon extended as high as the next F. In the early 19th century several improvements occurred in the manufacture of wind-instrument keywork, particularly the introduction of metal pillars in place of the wooden ridges on which the keys had been mounted. This change greatly reduced the threat to the oboe’s airtightness formerly associated with additional keys. In France by 1839 the number of keys had gradually increased to 10.
French players before 1800 had also adopted the narrow modern type of reed. By the 1860s Guillaume Triébert and his son Frédéric had developed an instrument that was almost identical with the expressive, flexible, and specifically French oboe of the 20th century. The instrument in which the finger holes are covered by perforated plates, now the style of oboe that is widely used in the United States and France, was first produced by François Lorée and Georges Gillet in 1906.
Outside France, the decline of patronage and the public enthusiasm for military bands resulted in radically different traditions of playing and manufacture. In Germany and Austria the many-keyed oboe had appeared earlier than in France, and the bore and reed had developed so as to produce an increased loudness that was clearly of military inspiration. This resulted, after Ludwig van Beethoven, in a long period of neglect for the oboe until it was revived in the late 19th century, largely through the efforts of the composer Richard Strauss. Germany and Austria generally adopted the French oboe by approximately 1925.
The history of the oboe in Italy is comparable. The German instrument (with a tiny reed) survives in Russia; though capable of a certain refinement of tone, it lacks the piquancy and sparkle of the French oboe. In Vienna an oboe resembling the German instrument but more antique in character is played by the Philharmonic Orchestra and the Akademie. Its rather reticent and blending quality is perhaps caused more by the highly specialized reed than by the instrument’s inherent qualities.
The chief factor in playing the oboe is the making of the reed and its control by the lips and the mouth. Most serious players make their own reeds, although ready-made reeds can be purchased. The raw material for the device is the plant Arundo donax, which resembles bamboo in appearance. It grows in warm temperate or subtropical regions, but only the crops of the southern French départements of Var and Vaucluse are satisfactory for reed making.
There are several large varieties of oboe. The English horn, or cor anglais, is pitched in F, a fifth below the oboe, and is believed to resemble J.S. Bach’s oboe da caccia. The oboe d’amore, in A, pitched a minor third below the oboe, is made with a globular bell like that of the cor anglais. It was much employed by Bach and is also used in several 20th-century works. Instruments pitched an octave below the oboe are rarer. The hautbois baryton, or baritone oboe, resembles a larger, lower voiced cor anglais in both tone and proportions. The heckelphone, with a larger reed and bore than the hautbois baryton, has a distinctive tone that is rather heavy in the low register. Instruments in other sizes and pitches occur occasionally. Any folk or non-European double-reed woodwind may also be generically called an oboe.
