Sanṭūr, also spelled santour or santoor, also called santouri,  stringed instrument of the hammered dulcimer, or struck zither, family that is found in various forms across southeastern Europe, the Middle East, and South Asia. Related instruments—known by various names, such as the Hungarian cimbalom and the Chinese yangqin—are found in central and western Europe as well as in East Asia. Although the exact provenance of the sanṭūr remains disputed, the instrument is widely believed to have originated in Persia.
The sanṭūr consists of a flat trapezoidal wooden frame or box, across which are stretched metal strings that are beaten with small wooden hammers or mallets. The strings are usually fastened to metal hooks or pins on the left side of the box and to tuning pegs on the right. Depending on the region and tradition in which the instrument is played, the strings typically range in number from about 72 to more than 100. Most of the strings are tuned in sets, or courses, of three, four, or five strings each. (If not tuned to the same pitch, the strings in a course are tuned in octaves.) Contemporary instruments typically have moveable wooden bridges, arranged in two rows that roughly parallel the right and left sides of the instrument. For the most part, each bridge supports a single course of strings.
The sanṭūr has been used in a variety of musical contexts across its area of distribution. In Iran, Iraq, Turkey, and Arabia, for instance, it has been part of the classical music tradition. In the Aegean Islands of Greece, it is prominent in folk music. In South Asia the sanṭūr is strongly associated with the Kashmir region of the northwestern Indian subcontinent, where it was traditionally played in Sufi music, typically in a small ensemble with drums and other stringed instruments. In the mid-20th century, Indian sanṭūr virtuoso Shiv Kumar Sharma adapted the instrument to the Hindustani classical tradition and, by extension, to the solo-concert stage. Since that time the sanṭūr frequently has been featured on film sound tracks and in popular-music performances.
