café, also spelled cafe,  small eating and drinking establishment, historically a coffeehouse, usually featuring a limited menu; originally these establishments served only coffee. The English term café, borrowed from the French, derives ultimately from the Turkish kahve, meaning coffee.
The introduction of coffee and coffee drinking to Europe provided a much-needed focus for the social activities of the sober. The first café is said to have opened in 1550 in Constantinople; during the 17th century cafés opened in Italy, France, Germany, and England.
During the 200 years after the mid-17th century, the most famous coffeehouses of Europe flourished in London as ready points for news, discussion, and faction. Coffeehouse proprietors competed with each other for supplies of both Whig and Tory newspapers; during this time the business of buying and selling insurance, ships, stocks, commodities, and occasionally even slaves was disposed of in coffeehouses; a man of letters, an actor, or an artist might perform or declaim for his coterie in his favourite coffeehouse; and coffeehouses became informal stations for the collection and distribution of packets and letters. By the 19th century, the daily newspaper and the home post had displaced these functions.
About the same time, as painting and literature attest, the French café and restaurant were at their zenith as gathering places for intellectuals and artists. The wealthier gourmands among the intelligentsia might dine in Paris’s high-toned restaurants, as Honoré de Balzac dined at the Véry, while the more modest café or bistro harboured the “Bohemian” artists. The café continued to be an important social institution in France throughout the 20th and early 21st centuries.
During the late 20th century, as espresso and other specialty coffees became popular in the United States, many restaurants specializing in coffee opened. In the 1990s and early 2000s, some cafés began to offer Internet access to the public, giving rise to the so-called Internet café.
