tavern,  an establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises. Tavern keeping has paralleled the growth of trade, travel, and industry throughout history and virtually worldwide. The Code of Hammurabi of ancient Babylonia (c. 1750 bce) provided that the death penalty could be imposed upon a proprietor for diluting beer. In ancient Greece the lesche, which was primarily a local club, served meals to strangers as well as to its local members. By the 5th century bce there were sumptuous Greek establishments called phatnai that served a local and transient clientele of traders, envoys, and government officials.
In ancient Rome no man of any social standing could be seen in a tavern, although one type of establishment, the lupanar, flourished behind locked doors on the quietest of side streets, and men with veiled heads entered in the dark of night to dine, drink, or gamble. Nor was the reputation undeserved, for the deversoria, tabernae, cauponae, and bibulae of republican and imperial Rome were haunts of the jaded and degraded at best and of criminal types at worst. Yet cooked delicacies and full meals were traditionally served in the caupona (low-class inn) and taberna meritoria (better-class tavern). These were long chambers having vaulted ceilings, with serving boys standing at semiattention and the proprietor sitting at a raised platform at one end.
The hostelries of Roman England were derived from the cauponae and the tabernae of Rome itself. These were followed by alehouses, which were run by women (alewives) and marked by a broom stuck out above the door. The English inns of the Middle Ages were sanctuaries of wayfaring strangers, cutthroats, thieves, and political malcontents. The tavern, the predecessor of the modern restaurant, originated the custom of providing a daily meal at a fixed time.
By the middle of the 16th century the dining-out habit was well established among townsmen of all classes. Most taverns offered a good dinner for one shilling or less, with wine and ales as extras. Tobacco was also sold after its introduction into England in 1565. Taverns offered companionship as well as refreshment, and some of the better houses became regular meeting places and unofficial clubhouses. Among the more famous London taverns of Tudor times were the Mermaid, frequented by Ben Jonson and his friends; the Boar’s Head, associated with Shakespeare’s Sir John Falstaff; and the Falcon, where actors and theatre managers of the day gathered.
The identity of the first public drinking and dining establishment in the United States is obscure. It is certain, however, that it was known as an inn, tavern, or ordinary, names not always interchangeable. It is probable that taverns appeared in the United States almost as soon as the first Dutch settlers arrived. Boston’s first tavern, Cole’s, opened its doors in 1634. New York’s first tavern was opened in Dutch colonial days by Governor Kieft, who stated that he was tired of entertaining strangers and travelers in his own home and thus opened a tavern to lodge and feed them. The building became New Amsterdam’s (and later New York’s) city hall and was used for that purpose until about 1700, when a new city hall (now Federal Hall) was built. Colonial courts generally required that some kind of public house be established in each community. These early American taverns were under the strict guardianship of the government, which regulated prices. During the American Revolution the tavern was the customary locus of political planning sessions.
In the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries the tavern remained a centre of social activity primarily as the neighborhood bar of towns and cities and the roadhouse of more rural areas.
