electronic instrument,  any musical instrument that produces or modifies sounds by electric, and usually electronic, means. The electronic element in such music is determined by the composer, and the sounds themselves are made or changed electronically. Instruments such as the electric guitar that generate sound by acoustic or mechanical means but that amplify the sound electrically or electronically are also considered electronic instruments. Their construction and resulting sound, however, are usually relatively similar to those of their nonelectronic counterparts.
Electricity was used in the design of musical instruments as early as 1761, when J.B. Delaborde of Paris invented an electric harpsichord. Experimental instruments incorporating solenoids, motors, and other electromechanical elements continued to be invented throughout the 19th century. One of the earliest instruments to generate musical tones by purely electric means was William Duddell’s singing arc, in which the rate of pulsation of an exposed electric arc was determined by a resonant circuit consisting of an inductor and a capacitor. Demonstrated in London in 1899, Duddell’s instrument was controlled by a keyboard, which enabled the player to change the arc’s rate of pulsation, thereby producing distinct musical notes.
The largest, and perhaps most advanced, of early electric instruments was Thaddeus Cahill’s Telharmonium. Completed in 1906, this instrument employed large rotary generators to produce alternating electric waveforms, telephone receivers equipped with horns to convert the electric waveforms into sound, and a network of wires to distribute “Telharmonic Music” to subscribers in New York City. Complex and impractical, the Telharmonium nevertheless anticipated electronic organs, synthesizers, and background music technology.
The dawn of electronic technology was marked by the invention of the triode vacuum tube in 1906 by Lee De Forest. The triode gave musical instrument developers unprecedented ability to design circuits that would produce repetitive waveforms (oscillators) and circuits that would strengthen and articulate waveforms that had already been produced (amplifiers). In the time period between World Wars I and II, many new musical instruments using electronic technology were developed. These may be classified as follows:
1. Instruments that produce vibrations in familiar mechanical ways—the striking of strings with hammers, the bowing or plucking of strings, the activation of reeds—but with the conventional acoustic resonating agent, such as a sounding board, replaced by a pickup system, an amplifier, and a loudspeaker, which enable the performer to modify both the quality and the intensity of the tone. These instruments include electric pianos; electric organs employing vibrating reeds; electric violins, violas, cellos, and basses; and electric guitars, banjos, and mandolins.
2. Instruments that produce waveforms by electric or electronic means but use conventional performer interfaces such as keyboards and fingerboards to articulate the tones. The most successful of these was the Hammond organ, which implemented the same technical principles as the Telharmonium but used tiny rotary generators in conjunction with electronic amplification in place of large, high-power generators. The Hammond organ was placed on the market in 1935, and it remained a commercially important keyboard instrument for more than 40 years. Other, more experimental early electronic keyboard instruments used rotating electrostatic generators, rotating optical disks in conjunction with photoelectric cells, or vacuum-tube oscillators to produce sound.
3. Instruments that were designed for performance in the conventional sense but which implemented novel forms of performer interfaces. Of these, Leon Theremin’s theremin (1920), Maurice Martenot’s ondes martenot (1928), and Friedrich Trautwein’s trautonium (1930) have been widely used. The theremin is played by the motion of the performer’s hands in the space around a pair of metal antennas; the ondes martenot player uses the right hand to determine the tone’s pitch on a special keyboard while the left hand manipulates a set of buttons and levers to articulate the tone; and the trautonium is played by simultaneously manipulating a fingerboard-like resistance element with one hand and a set of panel controls with the other hand. Composers of the stature of Richard Strauss, Paul Hindemith, Arthur Honegger, Darius Milhaud, Olivier Messiaen, André Jolivet, Edgard Varèse, and Bohuslav Martinů have written for one or more of these instruments.
4. Instruments that were not intended for conventional live performance but instead were designed to read an encoded score automatically. The first of these was the Coupleux-Givelet synthesizer, which the inventors introduced in 1929 at the Paris Exposition. This instrument used a player-piano-like paper roll to “play” electronic circuits that generated the tone waveforms. Unlike a player piano, however, the Coupleux-Givelet instrument provided for control of pitch, tone colour, and loudness, as well as note articulation. The principles of score encoding and sound control embodied in this instrument have become increasingly important to contemporary composers as electronic musical instrument technology has continued to develop.
The next stage of development in electronic instruments dates from the discovery of magnetic tape recording techniques and their refinement after World War II. These techniques enable the composer to record any sounds whatever on tape and then to manipulate the tape to achieve desired effects. Sounds can be superimposed upon each other (mixed), altered in timbre by means of filters, or reverberated. Repeating sound-patterns can be created by means of tape loops. Tape splicing can be used to rearrange the attack (beginning portion) and decay (ending portion) of a sound or to combine portions of two or more sounds to form striking juxtapositions of sound with arbitrarily great length and complexity. By changing the speed of the tape, wide variations in the pitch and tempo of the recorded material can be effected; by playing the tape backward, a sound’s evolution can be reversed. Thus, the composer can exercise precise control over every aspect of his original sound material.
Although Hindemith, Ernst Toch, and others had experimented with it previously, the development of tape music began in earnest in 1948 with the work of Pierre Schaeffer and his associates at the Club d’Essai in Paris, under the auspices of Radio-diffusion et Télévision Française. They called their creations musique concrète—a term emphasizing their choice of a variety of natural sounds as raw material. These sounds were shaped, processed, and then put together (composed) to form a unified artistic whole. The Symphonie pour un homme seul (“Symphony for One Man Only”), composed by Schaeffer and his collaborator, Pierre Henry, is one of the landmarks of musique concrète, for it laid the technical and aesthetic foundations for much of the later tape music.
In 1951 a studio for elektronische Musik was founded at Cologne, W.Ger., by Herbert Eimert, Werner Meyer-Eppler, and others, under the auspices of the Northwest German Broadcasting Studio. While the composers associated with this studio used many of the same techniques of tape manipulation as did the French group, they favoured electronically generated rather than natural sound sources. In particular, they synthesized complex tones from sine waveforms, which are pure tones with no overtones. Certain compositions of Karlheinz Stockhausen, such as the Gesang der Jünglinge (Song of Youth), are illustrative of the resources available in the Cologne studio.
