Pedal harp,   musical instrument in which pedals control a mechanism raising the pitch of given strings by a semitone (single action) or by both a semitone and a whole tone (double action). The modern double-action pedal harp, the standard orchestral harp, covers six and a half octaves (three below and three and a half above middle C). Along the neck, or harmonic curve, are two sets of rotating brass disks; concealed inside the forepillar and in the deep metal plates running along both sides of the neck is a mechanism operated by seven pedals, one for each group of strings of a given pitch name. Depression of the pedal to the first notch shortens the appropriate strings by a semitone, to the second notch, by a whole tone. The shortening is effected by the rotating disks, which grip the string at the proper point. The harp is normally tuned diatonically (to a seven-note octave) in C♭; depressing all pedals to the first notch puts it into C, to the second notch, into C♯. Playing the pedal harp demands skilled coordination between the hands, which pluck the strings with the fleshy part of the fingertips, and the feet, which, with the pedals, select the necessary pitch changes for the strings.
Pedal harps were developed in the 18th century in response to changing musical styles demanding a full chromatic (12-note) octave. In the 17th century, small hooks were placed on the harp neck near each string; when turned, a hook shortened the string by a semitone. Besides interrupting the harpist’s playing, however, the hooks pulled the strings out of plane and sometimes out of tune. In 1720 Celestin Hochbrucker, a Bavarian, attached the hooks to a series of levers in the forepillar (which thenceforth became hollow), controlled by seven pedals.
In about 1750 the Parisian harp-maker Georges Cousineau replaced the hooks by metal plates that gripped the strings while leaving them in plane. Cousineau also expanded the chromatic capability of the harp by building instruments with 14 pedals; although unwieldy, the second seven raised the strings an additional semitone. In 1792 the Parisian maker Sébastien Érard substituted rotating disks for the metal plates. In 1810 he produced a double action by adding a second set of disks controlled by the same pedals, thus virtually establishing the modern harp capable of playing in all major and minor keys.
