Percussion instrument,  any musical instrument belonging to either of two groups, idiophones or membranophones. Idiophones are instruments whose own substance vibrates to produce sound (as opposed to the strings of a guitar or the air column of a flute); examples include bells, clappers, and rattles. Membranophones emit sound by the vibration of a stretched membrane; the prime examples are drums. The term percussion instrument refers to the fact that most idiophones and membranophones are sounded by being struck, although other playing methods include rubbing, shaking, plucking, and scraping.
Although many idiophones and some membranophones are tunable and hence may be melody instruments, both groups serve typically to delineate or emphasize rhythm. Percussion instruments form the third section of the modern Western orchestra, stringed and wind instruments making up the other two sections. The term percussion instrument dates to 1619, when the German music theorist and composer Michael Praetorius wrote of percussa, klopfende Instrument (German klopfen, “to beat”), as any struck instrument, including struck chordophones (stringed instruments). The same combination, including prebow chordophones, constituted the divisio rhythmica in the 7th-century Etymologiae of Isidore, archbishop of Sevilla (Seville).
Idiophones form a diverse and disparate group. Concussion instruments, consisting of two similar components struck together, include clappers, concussion stones, castanets, and cymbals. Percussion idiophones, instruments struck by a nonsonorous striker, form a large subgroup, including triangles and simple percussion sticks; percussion beams, such as the semanterion; percussion disks and plaques, single and in sets; xylophones, lithophones (sonorous stones), and metallophones (sets of tuned metal bars); percussion tubes, such as stamping tubes, slit drums, and tubular chimes; and percussion vessels varying from struck gourds and pots to gongs, kettle gongs, steel drums, bells, and musical cups.
Shaken idiophones, or rattles, include vessels filled with rattling material, such as gourd, basketry, and hollow-ring rattles, as well as pellet bells; strung rattles, such as dancers’ leg rattles or anklets; stick rattles, including the sistrum, originally a forked stick with crossbars on which rattling shells, etc., have been strung; pendant rattles with suspended rattling objects; and sliding rattles.
Other categories include scraped idiophones, comprising scrapers and cog rattles; split idiophones made of split hollow cane, including the Southeast Asian “tuning fork” idiophones and the chopstick; plucked idiophones, such as the jew’s harp, mbira, and music box; friction idiophones, including friction sticks, simple or combined, and musical glasses; and blown idiophones, such as the 19th-century Äolsklavier and piano chanteur.
Musical instruments in which the sound-producing medium is a vibrating membrane fall into four main groups: kettledrums and bowl-shaped drums; tubular drums—whether cylindrical, barrel, conical, double conical, hourglass, goblet, or shallow—and rattle drums, the membranes of which are set in motion by enclosed pellets or by knotted ends of a thong or cord; friction drums, with membranes caused to vibrate by friction; and mirlitons, whose membranes are set in motion by the sound of an instrument or the human voice. Strictly speaking, mirlitons are voice modifiers rather than true musical instruments inasmuch as they have no pitch of their own.
Kettledrums and tubular drums occur in both tunable and nontunable forms; friction drums and mirlitons are not tunable. The membranes of the first two groups are either glued, nailed, lapped, or laced to the body, or shell; if they are glued or nailed, the pitch can be modified by exposure to heat. Lapped and laced heads are readily tunable by tightening the lacings or screws, and wooden wedges may be inserted between the shell and lacings to further increase the membrane’s tension and thus raise the pitch. The membranes of such instruments and of friction drums are set in vibration by percussion, while those of mirlitons vibrate by impact of sound waves. In all groups the shell plays a subordinate acoustical part, acting as resonator only—the greater the diameter of a head, the deeper its sound; and the greater its tension, the higher the pitch. In Western culture the only drums tuned to a definite pitch are kettledrums (the orchestral timpani).
Kettledrums and tubular drums may be struck with the hands, with beaters, or with both combined or with the knotted ends of a thong or cord. Beaters can be cylindrical, club-shaped, straight, curved, or angled, with or without knobs or padding, or may take the form of a switch or wire brush. Friction drums are sounded by rubbing the membrane with a piece of hide or by the more usual method of working an inserted friction stick or cord up and down or by rubbing the membrane with a player’s wet fingers. Acoustically, they are subject to the same laws as other membranophones, but the speed of friction is an influencing factor. They occur in Africa, the Americas, Europe, Asia (India and Japan), and Hawaii. Mirlitons are sounded by directing against the membrane the vibrating air column of a voice, be it human (as in a kazoo) or instrumental (as when affixed, for example, to African xylophone resonators), or by holding the membrane against the player’s vibrating vocal cords.
In addition to the four major categories of membranophones, a small group composed of ground drums and pot drums can also be distinguished. Ground drums, consisting in their simplest form of an animal skin stretched over the opening of a pit, are found in many parts of the world. The skin may also be held taut by several players, each beating it with a stick. These and similar ground drums are played by women in Africa and Australia, and in North America usually by men. By their very nature ground drums are nonportable; a similar type of instrument was made by stretching a skin over the opening of a gourd, clay pot, or other object. Among the Swazi of southern Africa such skins are not attached but held taut. Pot drums are found in Asia, Africa, and the Americas—in Africa and the Americas often in connection with exorcism.
