Cape Canaveral,  cape and city in Brevard county, east-central Florida, U.S. The cape is a seaward extension of Canaveral Island, a barrier island running southeastward along the coast of the Atlantic Ocean. The cape is separated from Merritt Island to the west by the Banana River, and the island is separated from the mainland by the Indian River (both “rivers” actually constitute elongated coastal lagoons). The cape area is the site of operations for the U.S. space program under the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). Following the death of U.S. Pres. John F. Kennedy in 1963, the cape was renamed Cape Kennedy, but it officially reverted to its original Spanish name, which means “place of canes, or reeds,” in 1973.
Spanish explorer Juan Ponce de León visited Cape Canaveral in 1513. Until after World War II the cape was a stretch of barren, sandy scrubland. In 1950, missile testing began there, and in 1958, after NASA was formed, the agency made the cape the basis of its operations for space exploration. The first U.S. crewed flight into outer space occurred on May 5, 1961, when Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was launched from the installation in his Project Mercury capsule, and the first lunar-landing flight, crewed by Neil Armstrong, Edwin Aldrin, and Michael Collins, was launched from the cape on July 16, 1969. The John F. Kennedy Space Center—including a space shuttle landing facility, a visitors’ centre, Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, and a space vehicle assembly building 525 feet (160 metres) tall with 8 acres (3 hectares) of floor area—now occupies much more than the cape itself. It extends 34 miles (55 km) from north to south and is 10 miles (16 km) at its widest point, spanning the Banana River and covering a large portion of Merritt Island. Nearby to the south is Patrick Air Force Base.
The space centre is included in Merritt Island National Wildlife Refuge, which occupies 219 square miles (567 square km) of estuaries, marshes, coastal dunes, scrub oaks, palm and oak hammocks, and pine flatwoods; it was established in 1963 as a buffer zone for NASA activities. The refuge includes the central and southern part of Mosquito Lagoon, much of Merritt Island, and the northern part of the Banana River, as well as a small part of the Indian River in its northwestern section. It preserves the habitat of some 1,000 plant and 500 wildlife species, including endangered species such as manatees, wood storks, and sea turtles, and is also an important site for migratory birds. Parts of the refuge are accessible by road, including a 7-mile (11-km) scenic drive.
The northern part of the wildlife refuge overlaps Canaveral National Seashore, established in 1975. The national seashore covers an area of 90 square miles (233 square km) between New Smyrna Beach (north) and the space centre (south) and includes 24 miles (39 km) of undeveloped barrier beaches between the Atlantic on the east and Mosquito Lagoon (all of which is within the national seashore boundaries) on the west. Apollo Beach, the northernmost, is accessible from New Smyrna Beach and has a visitors’ centre. Klondike Beach, in the middle, is accessible only by foot, horseback, or bicycle. Playalinda Beach and other southern areas can be reached by road from Titusville but are occasionally closed for space launch activity. The park has many shell middens and mounds left by the Timucua people who once inhabited the region, including Turtle Mound (35 feet [11 metres] high). The area is an important nesting place for sea turtles and provides habitat for more than 300 species of birds. The Intracoastal Waterway passes through the northern part of Mosquito Lagoon before entering a canal into the Indian River (west).
The city of Cape Canaveral (including Port Canaveral), just south of the space centre and about 5 miles (8 km) north of Cocoa Beach, was incorporated in 1962. Pop. (2010) city, 9,912; (2018 est.) 10,449.
