Teleost,  (infraclass Teleostei),  any member of a large and extremely diverse group of ray-finned fishes. Along with the chondrosteans and the holosteans, they are one of the three major subdivisions of the class Actinopterygii, the most advanced of the bony fishes. The teleosts include virtually all the world’s important sport and commercial fishes, as well as a much larger number of lesser-known species. Teleosts are distinguished primarily by the presence of a homocercal tail, a tail in which the upper and lower halves are about equal. The teleosts comprise some 30,000 species (about equal to all other vertebrate groups combined), with new species being discovered each year.
The great abundance of some large species, such as the tunas and halibuts, and of smaller species, such as the various herrings, made teleost fishes extremely important to humankind as a food supply. In almost every part of the world, local fishes are used as food by people at all stages of economic development. In addition to being a commercial food resource, teleost fishes provide enjoyment to millions of people and in many countries of the world support a large sportfishing industry.
As aquarium subjects, both marine and, especially, small freshwater teleosts provide aesthetic beauty for millions of aquarists, supporting a multimillion-dollar industry. Part of the interest in teleosts as aquarium fishes is derived from the great diversity of their anatomical structures, functions, and colour. Indeed, these fishes vary more in structure and behaviour than do all the mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians combined.
Teleosts range in size from tiny minnows that are less than one-third of an inch  long when fully adult to large marlins that exceed 3.4 metres (11 feet) in length and 550 kg (1,200 pounds) in weight. Another large fish, the mola, or ocean sunfish (Mola mola), reaches at least 3 metres (10 feet) and may weigh more than 900 kg (2,000 pounds).
Different species and groups have widely varying life cycles and behaviours. Teleost fishes are adapted to widely varied habitats from cold Arctic and Antarctic oceans that remain colder than the freezing point of fresh water to desert hot springs that reach temperatures over 38 °C (100 °F). Usually a particular species will have a restricted temperature tolerance, often 5.5 to 11 °C (10 to 20 °F) above and below the mean temperature of its environment. In terms of physical habitat, the advanced bony fishes are adapted to a wide and interesting variety of conditions, from fast, rock-laden torrential mountain streams in the Himalayas to the lightless depths of ocean trenches 8,370 metres (about 27,500 feet) below the surface, where many species manufacture their own light.
A species of teleost fish is usually restricted to one kind of habitat at any given stage of its life cycle. It may occupy this habitat throughout its life, or it may change habitats as it grows older. The various species living in rocky marine shores, mud flats, sandy shores, and coral reefs are usually all different, a diversity of habitat adaptation reflected in life cycle, behaviour, locomotion, anatomy, and reproduction. Some killifishes, for example, confined to annual ponds in Africa and South America, live only the few months during the rainy season that their ponds retain water. They hatch from eggs buried in the mud, grow up, and lay their own eggs in the mud in the short space of four to eight months. Such fishes are known as annuals. Others, such as the Pacific salmon, hatch from eggs laid in the gravel of cool temperate-zone streams, spend their first year growing in the streams, then enter the sea to grow and migrate for two, three, or four years, and finally return to the streams where they first grew up. There they lay their eggs and die. Such fishes, spawning in fresh water and living most of their lives in the ocean, are called anadromous.
Many freshwater and marine teleosts lay eggs on rocks or aquatic plants, the male and sometimes the female defending the eggs and even the young against predators. Many of these fishes will live two, three, or four years or more, usually spawning in the spring in temperate regions and in the rainy season in the tropics. There are large numbers of teleosts, especially those in the ocean, whose breeding habits are unknown. Most fishes lay numerous eggs, often simply scattering them over plants or in the open ocean, where they provide food for many organisms, only a few young surviving to adulthood. Most offshore marine teleosts lay planktonic (free-floating) eggs, whereas most freshwater fishes lay demersal eggs—that is, eggs that sink to the bottom. Some teleosts—such as certain of the perchlike African cichlids, some catfishes, and some marine fishes (such as cardinal fishes)— are oral brooders, the male or female incubating the eggs in its mouth.
Some fishes, for example, some of the sea perches (Serranidae), are simultaneous hermaphrodites, one individual producing both sperm and eggs. Self-fertilization is evidently possible in some cases, but more often the fish plays the male and female roles alternately. In some species an individual is a male during the early part of its adult life and a female later or vice versa (sequential hermaphroditism).
About a dozen families of teleosts produce living young. In some the eggs are abundantly supplied with yolk and merely hatch in the ovary (ovoviviparous); in others the eggs have little yolk, the young hatching at a relatively undeveloped state and being nourished by a placenta-like structure of the ovary (viviparous).
The behaviour of teleosts is as varied as their other attributes. Some oceanic fishes travel in close-ordered schools, seemingly responding to predation from larger fishes almost as a single organism. Larger, predatory fishes are usually solitary and hunt or wait for prey alone. Many marine shore and freshwater fishes establish territories during the breeding season, and some may travel in relatively loose schools or shoals when not breeding. Many kinds of teleosts enter into symbiotic relationships with other species of fishes and organisms. For example, a small, blind goby along the California coast lives together with a shrimp in the shrimp’s burrow. The shrimp carries food to the goby, while the goby keeps the shrimp’s burrow clean. Many species of wrasses pick parasites from larger fishes, even entering the mouths of these fishes to clean the gill chambers. On the other hand, in South America some small catfishes, 2.5 to 10 cm (1 to 4 inches) long, appear to be parasitic on certain other species of catfishes that reach lengths of over 2.4 metres (8 feet). The smaller fishes enter the mouths of the larger catfishes and feed on gill tissue. Study of the details of teleost behaviour has been greatly increased in the last several decades.
Defining teleost fishes by functional morphology is hard, for they have evolved into many diverse shapes. But if a relatively simple teleost, a trout, is examined, its basic swimming motion can be determined. Forward motion is provided by bending of the body and caudal fin; waves of muscular action pass from the head to the tail, pushing the sides of the body and tail against the water and forcing the fish forward. The structure of the tail and the efficiency of the swimming mechanism are the prime characters that distinguish teleosts from other, “lower,” fishes. The dorsal fin and the anal fin (a ventral median fin) are used partly to aid in stability and in turning and partly in forward locomotion. The paired pelvic or ventral fins and the paired pectoral fins behind the head are used to help stabilize the body and to turn the fish. The fusiform shape of the trout reduces the turbulence and drag of water flowing over the fish’s body, offering least resistance to the water.
The head of the fish must be adapted for feeding, breathing, and detecting prey and enemies. At the same time it must be relatively streamlined, offering as little resistance to the water as possible. The head of a trout is well formed for these functions by being fusiform but expandable, where necessary, to take in food and water. The fish forces the water in one direction, into the mouth, over the gills, and out the gill slits. Backflow is prevented by valves at the mouth and by the gill covers. The fish, however, can eject undesirable particles and water out the mouth by special action. The teleost head is efficient in having eyes and organs for the sense of smell located in optimum spots for seeing and smelling food. At the same time, these organs offer little resistance to water flowing over the head.
