Augustus II, also called Augustus Frederick, byname Augustus the Strong, Polish August II Wettin or August Mocny, German August Friedrich or August der Starke,  (born May 12, 1670, Dresden, Saxony [Germany]—died February 1, 1733, Warsaw, Poland), king of Poland and elector of Saxony (as Frederick Augustus I). Though he regained Poland’s former provinces of Podolia and the Ukraine, his reign marked the beginning of Poland’s decline as a European power.
The second son of Elector John George III of Saxony, Augustus succeeded his elder brother John George IV as elector in 1694. After the death of John III Sobieski of Poland (1696), Augustus became one of 18 candidates for the Polish throne. To further his chances, he converted to Catholicism, thereby alienating his Lutheran Saxon subjects and causing his wife, a Hohenzollern princess, to leave him. Shortly after his coronation (1697) the “Turkish War,” which had begun in 1683 and in which he had participated intermittently since 1695, was concluded; by the Treaty of Carlowitz in 1699, Poland received Podolia, with Kamieniec (Kamenets) and the Ukraine west of the Dnieper River from the Ottoman Empire.
Seeking to conquer the former Polish province of Livonia, then in Swedish hands, for his own Saxon house of Wettin, Augustus formed an alliance with Russia and Denmark against Sweden. Although the Polish Diet refused to support him, he invaded Livonia in 1700, thus beginning the Great Northern War (1700–21), which ruined Poland economically. In July 1702 Augustus’s forces were driven back and defeated by King Charles XII of Sweden at Kliszów, northeast of Kraków. Deposed by one of the Polish factions in July 1704, he fled to Saxony, which the Swedes invaded in 1706. Charles XII forced Augustus to sign the Treaty of Altranstädt (September 1706), formally abdicating and recognizing Sweden’s candidate, Stanisław Leszczyński, as king of Poland (see Altranstädt, treaties of). In 1709, after Russia defeated Sweden at the Battle of Poltava, Augustus declared the treaty void and, supported by Tsar Peter I the Great, again became king of Poland.
When Russia intervened (1716–17) in an internal dispute between Augustus and dissident Polish nobles (Confederation of Tarnogród) and, in 1720, annexed Livonia, the king saw the danger of Russia’s growing influence in Polish affairs. He tried unsuccessfully to create a hereditary Polish monarchy transmissible to his one legitimate son, Frederick Augustus II (eventually king of Poland as Augustus III), and to secure other lands for his many illegitimate children. But his hopes of establishing a strong monarchy came to naught. By the end of his reign, Poland had lost its status as a major European power, and when he died the War of the Polish Succession broke out. A man of extravagant and luxurious tastes, he did much to develop Saxon industry and trade and greatly embellished the city of Dresden.
