George II, in full George Augustus, German Georg August, also called (1706–27) marquess and duke of Cambridge,  (born November 10 [October 30, Old Style], 1683, Herrenhausen Palace, Hanover—died October 25, 1760, London), king of Great Britain and elector of Hanover from 1727 to 1760. Although he possessed sound political judgment, his lack of self-confidence caused him to rely heavily on his ministers, most notable of whom was Sir Robert Walpole.
George Augustus was the only son of the German prince George Louis, elector of Hanover (King George I of Great Britain from 1714 to 1727), and Sophia Dorothea of Celle. He grew up in Hanover and married (1705) the beautiful and intelligent Caroline of Ansbach. Upon the accession of his father to the English throne he was designated prince of Wales. By 1717 George I and his son, who had for years detested each other, were quarrelling openly. The prince’s London residence, Leicester House, became the gathering place for a dissident Whig group headed by Walpole and Viscount Charles Townshend. The tepid reconciliation that took place between George I and the prince in 1720 led to the inclusion of Walpole in George I’s administration, and Walpole lost the prince’s favour when he became one of George I’s leading ministers. The prince, upon his accession as George II, would have dismissed Walpole from office had not Caroline intervened on the minister’s behalf.
During the first two decades of his reign George II followed foreign and domestic developments closely. He supported Walpole’s policy of peace and retrenchment and allowed the minister to use crown patronage to build up his majority in Parliament. Walpole won acknowledgment of George’s legitimacy from many influential Tories who had been Jacobites—supporters of the exiled Stuart pretender to the English throne. Hence, no politician of prominence deserted George’s cause during the abortive Jacobite Rebellion of 1745. Nevertheless, opposition to George and Walpole grew as the pattern of George I’s reign repeated itself: George II and his son Frederick Louis, prince of Wales, quarrelled, and the prince became a leader of an antiadministration faction. By 1742 these dissidents were strong enough to force Walpole to resign. George II quickly found another mentor in John Carteret (later Earl Granville), whose haughty ways proved unpopular in political circles. The two men brought England into the War of the Austrian Succession (1740–48), and in doing so they gave their opponents an opportunity to charge them with subordinating the interests of England to the needs of George’s German possessions. In November 1744 George bowed to parliamentary pressure and accepted Carteret’s resignation. Fifteen months later the king’s ministers, by resigning (temporarily) en masse, forced George to accept into office Carteret’s chief opponent, William Pitt (later earl of Chatham).
During the last decade of his life George II’s interest in politics declined. He was little more than an observer of the events of the Seven Years’ War (1756–63) against France, for it was Pitt who devised the brilliant strategy that eventually brought about a British victory. George died suddenly and was succeeded by his grandson (son of Frederick Louis) King George III.
Throughout his life George II maintained a passion for anything military. He displayed courage while fighting the French at the Battle of Dettingen in 1743—the last time a British king appeared on the battlefield—and he organized each day with the precision of a drill sergeant. His other major interest was music; he loved opera and was a patron of the German composer George Frideric Handel.
