Due diligence,  a standard of vigilance, attentiveness, and care often exercised in various professional and societal settings. The effort is measured by the circumstances under which it is applied, with the expectation that it will be conducted with a level of reasonableness and prudence appropriate for the particular circumstances.
Due diligence is generally expected in any interaction when one party owes a duty of care to the other party, although it is most often associated with professionals and businesses. For example, a patient expects his or her doctor to exercise due diligence when prescribing medications to ensure there are no allergic reactions or harmful interactions with other medications the patient may be taking. Professionals such as lawyers, psychologists, and consultants must also exercise due diligence by protecting the privacy of their clients and guaranteeing confidentiality with regard to sensitive personal information that should not be shared with others. In addition, accounting professionals incorporate due diligence services for their clients by, for example, reviewing benefits plans for funding sufficiency and compliance with regulatory requirements.
Due diligence is also essential in commercial real estate. Potential investors in commercial real estate recognize that they must look beyond the traditional priority of location and verify factors such as compliance with zoning laws, the structural soundness of buildings, and, most important, compliance with environmental laws.
Due diligence is often considered an ethical issue in business because, without such reasonableness and prudence, there is an opportunity for management to misrepresent information to key stakeholders. Proper due diligence should therefore be viewed as a responsible business practice, and the practice should be included in the strategic planning of an organization.
The process of due diligence is most commonly applied to business transactions, often in the context of the sale of a business. Due diligence is expected of the buyer to ensure that all relevant facts regarding the acquisition target have been ascertained prior to consummation of the purchase. Due diligence is also expected in other business contexts, most notably mergers or consolidations, funding new ventures, and performance of partnership duties, as well as within the mutual fund industry. These due diligence expectations arise from, and are enforced by, the common law of the United States (which is a body of law evolving from numerous court decisions).
The standards of due diligence can also be applied through federal statutes. For example, Section 11 of the Securities Act of 1933 may protect issuers of publicly traded stock from liability for inaccurate statements if they can show they performed adequate due diligence in ascertaining the veracity of those statements. In addition, Chapter 8 of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines allows for the reduction of sanctions for organizations that have exercised due diligence by establishing compliance and ethics programs.
