Amulet, also called Talisman,   an object, either natural or man-made, believed to be endowed with special powers to protect or bring good fortune. Amulets are carried on the person or kept in the place that is the desired sphere of influence—e.g., on a roof or in a field. The terms amulet and talisman are often used interchangeably, but a talisman is sometimes defined as an engraved amulet.
Natural amulets are of many kinds: precious stones, metals, teeth and claws of animals, bones, plants, and so on. Man-made amulets, equally varied, include religious medallions and small figurines. Among believers amulets are thought to derive power from their connection with natural forces, from religious associations, or from being made in a ritual manner at a favourable time.
Neanderthals and other prehistoric peoples used natural amulets in burials, and so-called Venus figurines dating to about 25,000 bc may be among the earliest of man-made amulets. The MacGregor papyrus of ancient Egypt lists 75 amulets. One of the commonest was the scarab beetle, worn by the living and dead alike. The scarab (q.v.) symbolized life—perhaps because it pushed a ball of dung that was identified with the sun and was believed to contain the beetle’s eggs, or perhaps because its hieroglyph was the same as that for the verb “to become”—and was thought to restore the dead person’s heart in the next world. In Egypt the magic formulas originally recited over amulets to give them their power were eventually inscribed and worn themselves.
In the Middle Ages Christian amulets included the traditional relics of saints and letters said to have been sent from heaven. Among Jews the preparation of amulets became a rabbinic function. Muslims today often carry verses from the Qurʾān, the names of God, or associated sacred numbers within small satchels. Christians may wear crosses or crucifixes, and statuettes of the Madonna are found in some Roman Catholic households. A popular type of amulet is the “good luck charm” such as the birthstone or rabbit’s foot.
