Anglican religious community,  any of various religious communities for men and for women that first began developing within the Anglican Communion in the 19th century. Although monastic communities were numerous in the pre-Reformation English Church, they were suppressed in the 16th century by Henry VIII when he broke with the Roman Catholic Church. Their revival almost 300 years later was due primarily to the interest and encouragement of some of the leaders of the Oxford Movement, who emphasized the Catholic rather than the Protestant heritage of Anglicanism.
The first community, the Sisterhood of the Holy Cross, was founded in London at Park Village, in 1845. In the following 10 years the Society of the Holy Trinity at Devonport (1845); the Community of St. Mary the Virgin at Wantage, Berkshire (1848); the Community of St. John the Baptist at Clewer, near Windsor (1851); the Community of All Saints, London Colney, Hertfordshire (1851); and the Society of St. Margaret at East Grinstead, Sussex (1855), were founded. Notable among later 19th-century foundations were the Community of the Holy Name, Malvern Link, Worcestershire (1865); the Sisters of Bethany, London (1866); the Sisters of the Church, London (1870); and the Community of the Epiphany, Truro (1883).
Almost all the sisterhoods combined an active life (teaching, nursing, helping in parishes, etc.) with a life of prayer and worship. Anglican sisters were among those who accompanied Florence Nightingale during the Crimean War and took part in the work of raising the standards and status of the nursing profession. In various forms of social and educational work the Anglican sisterhoods offered opportunities of service not readily available to women in mid-19th-century England, but the religious motive predominated in the revival.
Many English sisterhoods opened branch houses abroad, and independent communities were founded in other provinces of the Anglican Communion. In the United States the oldest surviving sisterhood is the Community of St. Mary at Peekskill, New York (1865); in Canada there is the Sisterhood of St. John the Divine (1884), at Willowdale, Ontario, and in Australia the Community of the Holy Name (1886), at Melbourne.
During the 20th century the foundation of new communities continued, though at a slower rate. A number of enclosed communities of contemplative nuns were established both in England and in the United States. A flourishing active community, the Order of the Holy Paraclete, was founded at Whitby, Yorkshire, in 1917.
The first Anglican religious community for men was the Society of St. John the Evangelist (the Cowley Fathers), founded in 1866 at Oxford. Since then numerous other communities or brotherhoods have been founded in England. The largest men’s communities are the Community of the Resurrection (Mirfield Fathers) founded in 1892 at Mirfield, Yorkshire; the Society of the Sacred Mission (Kelham Fathers), at Kelham, Nottinghamshire, founded in 1892; and the Society of St. Francis, Cerne Abbas, Dorset, founded in 1921. An Anglican Benedictine community was established at Pershore in 1914 and moved to Nashdom Abbey, Burnham, Buckinghamshire, in 1926. It has a branch house in the United States. The only indigenous men’s community of any size in the Protestant Episcopal Church in the U.S. is the Community of the Holy Cross, West Park, New York (1881).
In the late 20th century more than 50 Anglican religious communities for men and for women, many with several houses or branches, were in existence. Several English communities have branch houses overseas. In general the communities are not large.
The Anglican Communion has never made provision for religious communities in canonical legislation, and the relations of the communities with the ecclesiastical authorities were at first vague and undefined. Since 1935 it has been possible for those in England to obtain formal recognition from the advisory council on religious communities established for the provinces of Canterbury and York.
