Branch Davidian,  member of an offshoot group of the Davidian Seventh-day Adventist Church that made headlines on February 28, 1993, when its Mount Carmel headquarters near Waco, Texas, was raided by the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF); four federal agents were killed in the assault. A lengthy standoff between the group and government agents then followed. It ended on April 19, after some 80 members of the group, including their leader David Koresh, died when the Mount Carmel complex was burned to the ground following an attempted entrance by Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agents.
The Branch Davidians are one of several groups that continued the work of Victor Houteff (1885–1955), a Bulgarian emigrant to the United States and Seventh-day Adventist (SDA) layman who in a set of tracts entitled "Shepherd’s Rod" (1929) called for reform of the SDA church. Having been rebuffed by Adventist leaders, Houteff and his original followers settled near Waco in 1935 and began to prepare for what they believed was the imminent return of Jesus, complaining that the Adventists had abandoned this task in favour of worldly pursuits. They lived a simple life and avoided most commercial forms of entertainment. The hardworking community became self-sustaining, and its literature circulated to a growing group of believers across the country.
Houteff died in 1955 and was succeeded by his wife, Florence. She not only continued his attempts to discern the signs of the “endtime” but also set April 22, 1959, as the date of the dawn of the new messianic age. Beginning in March 1959, hundreds of believers gathered at the Texas centre. The failure of the prediction led to the splintering of the movement into several factions. In 1962 Florence announced that she had erred, disbanded her following, and sold Mount Carmel. (See also millennialism.)
One of the factions opposed to Florence Houteff’s leadership was led by Ben Roden, who had previously called the Davidians to “Get off the dead Rod [led by Florence Houteff] and move to the living Branch.” Roden gained control of Mount Carmel and established the General Association of Davidian Seventh-day Adventists. He called his members to a purer life and promised that Christ would return soon after the members reached a state of moral maturity. When Roden died in 1978, members were torn between allegiance to his wife, Lois, and his son, George. Lois found an ally in a young convert, Vernon Howell (1959–1993), but her death in 1986 left George in control. Within a year, however, Howell had asserted his leadership and become the head of the Mount Carmel community.
Howell moved quickly to assert his spiritual authority, and one of his first acts was the adoption of a new name, David Koresh. This name suggested that he was a spiritual heir of the biblical King David and that he, like Koresh (Hebrew for Cyrus, the ancient Persian king), was a messianic figure—though not the Messiah, Jesus. (Cyrus is the only non-Jew to whom the title messiah, or "anointed one," is given in Scripture.) Koresh exercised his new authority by taking several “spiritual” wives from among the group’s unmarried members, and in 1989 he asserted that he was the perfect mate for all female members and confided to the Davidians his intention to create a new lineage of children who he believed would eventually rule the world.
Koresh’s interpretation of the Bible rested largely on identifying himself with the Lamb mentioned in Revelation 5. Traditionally, the Lamb is identified with Jesus, but Koresh distinguished between them, suggesting that the Lamb’s role was to loose the seven seals and to interpret the scroll mentioned in Revelation 5:2, thereby bringing forth the endtime revelation of Christ. That Koresh thought that the endtime was imminent is suggested in his commentary on Revelation: “So the question remains—What are the seven seals? And the answer remains—a Revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave Him to show unto His servants things which must shortly come to pass.” At the time of his death, Koresh was hastily preparing his interpretation of the seven seals for publication.
Because several of Koresh’s “spiritual” wives were teenagers, the community was accused of child abuse by a former member and an anticult activist. Those allegations were aired in a 1992 trial in which an ex-member sought custody of his daughter. Coupled with Koresh’s launching of a retail gun business, those child abuse charges began to attract the attention of legal authorities. Investigators, unsophisticated in the apocalyptic language of the Bible adopted by the group, also worried that the Branch Davidians might attack their neighbours or even Waco while fulfilling an imagined endtime scenario. Early in 1993 ATF agents in Texas requested a search warrant for Mount Carmel but decided to make a surprise forced entry rather than serve the warrant.
Following the ill-fated ATF raid in February 1993 and subsequent FBI raid and fire two months later that destroyed Mount Carmel, extensive internal investigations were conducted by the ATF and the FBI, followed by public hearings by both the U.S. House of Representatives and the Senate. The agency reports and hearings sought to place blame for the deaths, and several agents were disciplined for improper actions. In August 1999 the U.S. government admitted that federal agents had indeed fired flammable material into or near the Branch Davidian compound prior to the massive fire. The U.S. attorney general then called for another investigation and a new set of hearings on the case that would be headed by special counsel John Danforth, a former U.S. senator. In July 2000 Danforth issued a preliminary report that absolved the U.S. government of any wrongdoing in its encounter with the Branch Davidians.
A few survivors of the raid were tried in court. They were found not guilty of the murder of the ATF agents but received lengthy jail sentences for their actions during and after the raid. The remaining survivors (some 25 in number) reorganized, published the writing of Koresh, and began the process of rebuilding the movement. By the end of the 1990s it had more than doubled in size, though no clear leadership had emerged.
