bride,  a woman on her wedding day.
The word bride appears in many combinations, some of them archaic—e.g., "bride bell" (wedding bells) and "bride banquet" (wedding breakfast). The bridecake, or wedding cake, had its origin in the Roman confarreatio, a form of marriage in which the couple ate a cake made of salt, water, and flour, and the bride held three wheat ears, symbolic of plenty. In the Middle Ages the wheat ears were worn or carried by the bride. It became the custom for young girls to assemble outside the church and throw grains of wheat over the bride. Later wheat grains were cooked into thin dry biscuits, which were broken over the bride’s head. In 16th-century England, these biscuits took the form of small rectangular cakes made of eggs, milk, sugar, currants, and spices. Every wedding guest had at least one, and the cakes were thrown at the bride as she crossed the threshold. In rural parishes of England, wheat was thrown over the bridal couple with the cry, "Bread for life, pudding forever," expressive of a wish that the newly wed might be always affluent. The throwing of rice, an ancient custom but later than the wheat, is symbolical of the wish that the couple may be fruitful.
The bridecup was the bowl or loving cup in which the bridegroom pledged the bride, and she him. The bridecup was also sometimes a bowl of spiced wine prepared at night for the bridal couple. Bride favours (or bride lace) were at first pieces of gold, silk, or other lace, used to bind up the sprigs of rosemary worn at weddings. Later these took the form of bunches of ribbons. Bridesmaids were usual in Saxon England, and the senior of them attended the bride for some days before the wedding. The making of the bridal wreath, the decorations for the wedding feast, and the dressing of the bride were among her special tasks. The bride’s veil is the modern form of the flammeum, or large veil, which completely enveloped Greek and Roman brides during the ceremony.
Western wedding conventions, including traditions associated with the bride, have been adopted around the world, but there exist notable religious and cultural variations. In Jewish tradition the veil is placed on the bride by the groom, while in Hindu rites the bride’s mother ties a yellow wool bracelet (kautukasutra) around the bride’s wrist. In Japan weddings often blend Western and Shintō traditions, and the bride typically changes attire several times throughout the day.
