camp meeting,  type of outdoor revival meeting that was held on the American frontier during the 19th century by various Protestant denominations. Camp meetings filled an ecclesiastical and spiritual need in the unchurched settlements as the population moved west. Their origin is obscure, but historians have generally credited James McGready (c. 1760–1817), a Presbyterian, with inaugurating the first typical camp meetings in 1799–1801 in Logan county, Kentucky. Other ministers who associated with McGready subsequently spread his methods throughout the southwestern United States.
As the name implies, those who attended such meetings came prepared to camp out, gathering at the prearranged time and place from distances as great as 50 to 65 km (30 to 40 miles) away. Families pitched their tents around a forest clearing where log benches and a rude preaching platform constituted an outdoor church that remained in almost constant session for three or four days. As many as 10,000 to 20,000 people were reported at some meetings. People came partly out of curiosity, partly out of a desire for social contact and festivity, but primarily out of their yearning for religious worship. Activities included preaching, prayer meetings, hymn singing, weddings, and baptisms. The theology of the preachers varied, but a sudden conversion experience was usually emphasized.
Often the occasion for wild enthusiasm and hysteria in the early years, camp meetings acquired a bad reputation among conservative churchmen. The Presbyterian church refused to participate after 1805. Nevertheless, camp meetings were an important part of the frontier ministries of the Methodists, Baptists, Shakers, Disciples, and Cumberland Presbyterians. The Methodist church profited most by their popularity and gradually institutionalized them into its system of evangelism. By 1811 the Methodist bishop Francis Asbury reported in his journal that over 400 camp meetings were held annually along the frontier from Georgia to Michigan.
Camp meetings affected the religious and social life of the frontier in various ways. The emphasis on a sudden conversion experience tended to reduce doctrinal preaching to a minimum, break down the old creedal standards, and undermine the concept of a learned pastoral ministry. The individualistic and activistic attitudes in Protestantism stressed in camp meetings agreed with the character of frontier life and eventually pervaded the religious outlook of rural America. Camp meetings lingered as summer Bible conferences into the 21st century, but their significance passed after 1890, along with the frontier society that created them.
