Chaitanya movement,  intensely emotional movement of Hinduism that has flourished from the 16th century, mainly in Bengal and eastern Odisha (Orissa) state, India. It takes its name from the medieval saint Chaitanya (1485–1533), whose fervent devotion to the god Krishna inspired the movement. For Chaitanya, the legends of Krishna and his youthful beloved, Radha, symbolized the mutual love between God and the human soul and were its highest expression. Bhakti (devotion), conceived as complete self-surrender to the divine will, superseded all other forms of religious practice for Chaitanya.
The Chaitanya movement had its beginnings in Navadwip (Bengal), the saint’s birthplace. From the first, a favourite and characteristic form of worship was group singing known as kirtana. That consisted of the singing of simple hymns and the repetition of Krishna’s name, accompanied by the sounding of a drum and cymbals and by a rhythmic swaying of the body that continued for several hours and usually resulted in states of religious exaltation.
Chaitanya was neither a theologian nor a writer, and the organization of his followers was initially left up to his close companions, Nityananda and Advaita. Those three are called the three masters (prabhu), and their images are established in temples of the sect.
A theology for the movement was worked out by a group of Chaitanya’s disciples who came to be known as the six gosvamins (religious teachers; literally, “lords of cows”). At Chaitanya’s request, that group of scholars remained in Vrindavana, near Mathura, the scene of the Krishna-Radha legends. The six gosvamins turned out a voluminous religious and devotional literature in Sanskrit, defining the tenets of the movement and its ritual practices. Their reestablishment of the pilgrimage sites of Vrindavana and Mathura was an achievement of importance for all Vaishnavas (devotees of the god Vishnu, of whom Krishna is an avatar). Chaitanya appears to have been worshipped as an incarnation of Krishna even during his lifetime. The theory of his dual incarnation as Krishna and Radha in one body also appeared during his lifetime but was systematically developed by the later Bengali hymnists and biographers, beginning with Krishnadasa.
Most of the present leaders of the sect, called gosvamins, are the lineal descendants of Chaitanya’s early disciples and companions. The ascetics are known as vairagins (the “dispassionate”).
