Community of Christ, formerly (1852–69) Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, (1869–2001) Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints,  church that claims to be the legal continuation of the church founded by Joseph Smith at Fayette in Seneca county, New York, in 1830. World headquarters are in Independence, Missouri. In the early 21st century the church’s members numbered about 250,000, with congregations in some 50 countries in addition to the United States and Canada. The Community of Christ does not accept the appellation Mormon because of the association with polygamy.
After Joseph Smith’s death in 1844, the church that he founded broke into factions following various leaders. Rejecting the leadership of Brigham Young, who led the majority group to Utah, a number of the members reorganized under the original name, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, at Beloit, Wisconsin, in 1852. The word Reorganized was added to the title in 1869. This group held that the son of the founder had been designated his successor; Joseph Smith III accepted the leadership of this body in 1860 and was elected president. He was succeeded by his sons, and all of the successors were descendants of the founder until the seventh president, W. Grant McMurray, assumed the post in 1996. In 2001 the church changed its name to Community of Christ.
The Community of Christ rejects the doctrine of polygamy and denies that it was taught and practiced by Joseph Smith. It claims that polygamy was introduced by Brigham Young and his associates and that the revelation on polygamy, which was made public in 1852 by Young in Utah and attributed to Smith, was not in harmony with the original tenets of the church or with the teachings and practices of Smith.
Its system of belief is based upon the teachings of the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the Doctrine and Covenants, a book of revelations received by the prophets of the Community of Christ and accepted by the vote of the general conference.
The Community of Christ believes in the Trinity; the doctrines of faith in God, repentance of sin, baptism by immersion, laying on of hands, and resurrection of the dead; graded reward or punishment after death according to conduct in this life; the continuity of divine revelation and the open canon of scripture; the restoration of Christ’s church on the New Testament pattern; and the doctrine of stewardship in personal and economic life. It anticipates the return of Christ and a millennial reign.
Local congregations are grouped for administrative purposes into two forms of area organizations, districts and stakes. The district organization ties the individual congregations of an area into a fellowship presided over by officers elected at district conferences. The stake organization consists of a number of congregations administered by a central authority, the stake presidency, stake bishopric, and stake high council. Business of the stake is conducted in conferences at which all members of the stake have a right to vote.
The World Conference, which meets biennially in Independence, is the supreme legislative body of the church, and all general administrative officers, including those of the first presidency, must receive its endorsement. The presiding bishop, who is in charge of the exchequer of the church, presents his financial report to the conference for endorsement and for appropriations. Missions are sponsored in various parts of the world.
The church conducts Graceland University in Lamoni, Iowa. Temple School, a ministerial and leadership seminary, is in Independence.
