Diyah,   in Islām, the traditional compensation due for the shedding of blood. In pre-Islāmic times, the compensation required for taking a life was 10 she-camels. The figure was increased to 100 in the area where Islām originated, and this regulation was subsequently endorsed by Muḥammad.
Elaborate rules were laid down concerning injuries of various degrees of severity. The loss of one eye or a foot was thus fixed at 50 she-camels; a blow that penetrated the head or abdomen at 33; the loss of a tooth or a wound that penetrated the skin and exposed the bone at 5 camels. The stipulated age of the camels varied with each case, e.g., for intentional homicide: 25 she-camels that were one year old, 25 that were two years old, 25 that were three years old, and 25 that were four years old.
The stipulations changed when one or both parties were not adult, free, Muslim males. In most circumstances, a minor was not liable to pay the diyah at all. A woman would receive only half the diyah that a male would receive in identical circumstances. If a slave were killed, his diyah would be the same as his market value. If he were wounded, the amount of the diyah would correspond to the loss reflected in his market value. The diyah of a Christian or a Jew came to half or one-third that of a Muslim. If a Christian or a Jew were treacherously murdered, his murderer would be put to death. Women and children were exempt from paying the diyah.
In case of intentional or unintentional murder, the perpetrator (or, in the case of his death, his heirs) was completely responsible for paying the diyah. His relatives might pay for him, but they had no obligation. If the perpetrator could not pay the diyah in full immediately, the time could be extended with the approval of the recipient. Owners of shops or farms were responsible for injuries sustained by their employees while at work.
The diyah could be paid in silver or gold, particularly to town dwellers, who generally would not accept payment in camels. On the other hand, tent dwellers paid their diyahs in camels according to established rules.
