Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople,  honorary primacy of the Eastern Orthodox autocephalous, or ecclesiastically independent, churches; it is also known as the “ecumenical patriarchate,” or “Roman” patriarchate (Turkish: Rum patriarkhanesi).
According to a legend of the late 4th century, the bishopric of Byzantium was founded by St. Andrew, and his disciple Stachys became the first bishop (ad 38–54). Soon after Constantine the Great transferred the capital of the Roman Empire from Rome to Byzantium (330), renamed Constantinople and New Rome, its bishopric was elevated to an archbishopric. The metropolitan of Heraclea Perinthus, to whom Byzantium had formerly been subject, now came under the jurisdiction of Constantinople. In 381 the first Council of Constantinople recognized that the bishop of Constantinople, “being now the New Rome,” had rights equal to those of the bishop of Rome. The Council of Chalcedon (451) ratified this and assigned to his jurisdiction a large area in the Balkans and Asia Minor. In the 6th century the official title of the bishop became “archbishop of Constantinople, New Rome, and ecumenical patriarch.” The successful territorial conquests of the Muslims begun in the 7th century helped augment the spiritual power of the ecumenical patriarchate; Eastern patriarchs of conquered sees were often forced into exile in the capital, where their successors over a long period were selected by the ecumenical patriarch.
From Constantinople, Byzantine Orthodox Christianity spread to most of Eastern Europe, i.e., Bulgaria, Serbia, Romania, and Russia. As a leader of Eastern Christianity, the patriarch of Constantinople represented a clear challenge to the universalist claims of Rome. In 867 Patriarch Photius accused Pope Nicholas I of usurpation in Bulgaria, but a reconciliation took place with Nicholas’ successor, John VIII, in 879–880. Another confrontation between the two churches occurred in 1054, and not until 1964 did the ecumenical patriarch (then Athenagoras I) and the pope (Paul VI) embrace.
After the capture of Constantinople by the Latins in the Fourth Crusade (1204), the ecumenical patriarchate was transferred to Nicaea (1206), but Emperor Michael VIII Paleologus restored it to Constantinople when he retook the city in 1261. When the city fell to the Turks in 1453, becoming the capital of the Muslim Ottoman Empire, the Ottoman government recognized the ecumenical patriarch Gennadius II as the ethnarch of the conquered Orthodox peoples, with increased authority over the territories of the Eastern patriarchates and over the Balkan countries, as well as farther afield.
This power began a long decline when Jeremias II declared the patriarchate of Moscow autocephalous (1593); national churches in Greece (1833), Romania (1865), Serbia (1879), Bulgaria (1870), and Albania (1937) became in their turn autocephalous. The number of dioceses subject to Constantinople was further reduced in 1922, when about 1,500,000 Greek inhabitants of Asia Minor and Thrace were driven across the Aegean by the Turks, leaving few Christians in Asia Minor.
The territory directly subject to the patriarch and his synod in Turkey is confined to the archdiocese of Constantinople itself, with four suburban dioceses of Chalcedon, Terkos, Büyükada, and the islands of Gökçeada and Bozcaada. In Greece the patriarch still has nominal jurisdiction over the monastic state of Mt. Athos, the monastery of St. John the Evangelist on Pátmos, several dioceses in northern Greece, four bishoprics in the Dodecanese, and the autonomous church of Crete. Greek archbishoprics and metropolitanates of Europe, North and South America, Australia and New Zealand, as well as the autonomous church of Finland, are also dependent on the patriarch of Constantinople.
Since 1586 the patriarchate has been located in the Phanar, the northern section of Istanbul (formerly Constantinople), having lost both its cathedral of Hagia Sophia and its historic quarter to the Muslims. The small church of St. George serves as the cathedral for the patriarch, who must be a native Turkish citizen elected by the synod of metropolitans. The Turkish government considers the patriarchate as serving the religious needs of Greeks in Istanbul only. Tension between Greece and Turkey over Cyprus has made the position of the patriarchate in Turkey uneasy.
