Gai’wiio, (Seneca: “Good Message”) also called Longhouse Religion,  new religious movement that emerged among the Seneca Indians of the northeastern United States, one of the Six Nations of the Iroquois Confederacy, in the early 19th century. Its founder was a Seneca chief, healer, and prophet whose epithet was Ganioda’yo (“Handsome Lake”).
Ganioda’yo was the half brother of Cornplanter, another Seneca chief. For much of his life he was an alcoholic and was notorious for his dissolute lifestyle. In 1799 Ganioda’yo fell severely ill and seemed near death. At that time, he later claimed, he received a revelation from three spirits who disclosed to him the will of the divine Creator and the existence of heaven and hell. They also revealed that he would recover from his illness and enjoined him to preach the Gai’wiio, or “Good Message.”
Having regained his health, Ganioda’yo renounced alcohol and witchcraft, encouraged his people to practice plow agriculture and animal husbandry, and taught, among other things, that all people should be treated with compassion. Ganioda’yo claimed to have received subsequent visions, and he devoted the remaining 15 years of his life to promulgating the Gai’wiio among the Six Nations. His teachings later acquired a fixed form as the Code of Handsome Lake.
Although Ganioda’yo gained renown for his prophecies, he fell into disrepute near the end of his life (for reasons that remain unclear), and some of his followers apparently turned away from his teachings. In the 1840s some Seneca began to fear that the message of the Gai’wiio had been lost. Accordingly, a direct descendant of Ganioda’yo, Jemmy Johnson, was appointed to recite the teachings at a longhouse meeting on an Iroquois reservation at Tonawanda, New York. At some point after Johnson’s subsequent conversion to Christianity and death in the 1850s, the authority to recite the code was transferred from one person to several men on various reservations.
Following its renewal by Johnson, the Gai’wiio became a key component of Iroquois identity. From the early 21st century the Code of Handsome Lake was a central feature of the annual Six Nations meeting at the Tonawanda Longhouse, where it was recited, in part or in full, over four days by appointed preachers. It was also recited in every longhouse every two years.
The American anthropologist Arthur C. Parker, who was himself of Seneca descent, transcribed and published a variant of Ganioda’yo’s code in 1913. The work was subsequently treated as a definitive text by many scholars, though in the late 20th century some experts noted great variety among the oral versions of the code, only one of which was represented in Parker’s text. The Canadian anthropologist Anthony F.C. Wallace identified the Handsome Lake religion as a paradigmatic example of a “revitalization movement,” which emerges when a culture under stress from another, dominant culture reinterprets its tradition in order to survive. His The Death and Rebirth of the Seneca (1969) is widely considered the standard study of the tradition’s emergence, transmission, and continuation into the 20th century.
The question of whether Gai’wiio was influenced by Christianity has been debated. Although the notions of a creator and of heaven and hell were not preexisting features of Iroquois religion, the nature and extent of Ganioda’yo’s exposure to Christianity are not clear.
