Garba, also spelled garaba, singular garbo,  type of Indian dance  commonly performed at festivals and on other special occasions in the state of Gujarat, India. It is a joyful style of dance, based on a circular pattern and characterized by a sweeping action from side to side. Garba performances often include singing and a musical accompaniment traditionally provided by dhol (double-headed drum) and the similar but smaller dholak; hand clapping; and assorted metallic idiophones, such as cymbals. Historically, the shehnai (a double-reed instrument) guided the singers, but by the early 21st century that instrument had largely been replaced by a synthesizer or harmonium.
Garba dances celebrate fertility, honour womanhood, and pay respect to any of an array of mother goddesses. In Gujarat the dances customarily mark a girl’s first menstrual cycle and, later, her imminent marriage. Garba dancing also takes place during the nine-day Navratri festival, held annually during the Hindu month of Ashvina (September–October). Although men may participate on some occasions, women are the typical performers of garba.
The basic dance formation is that of a circle that moves counterclockwise; if space is constrained or there are many participants, dancers form concentric circles that move in opposite directions. Ultimately, the performers circle around an image of a mother goddess, such as Durga, or around a symbolic representation of her creative energy—often an illuminated clay pot or a water-filled vessel. Dancing begins slowly and gradually increases in speed.
Garba performance has spread beyond Gujarat to enjoy popularity not only in many other parts of India but in Hindu communities worldwide. The dances are widely performed at the Holi spring festival. Especially since the late 20th century, there has been a notable proliferation of garba competitions and university dance troupes. Folk dances similar to garba can also be found in other parts of India, particularly in Tamil Nadu, in the southeast, and in Rajasthan, the northeastern neighbour of Gujarat.
