Heaven’s Gate,  religious group founded in the United States on a belief in unidentified flying objects. Under a variety of names over the years, including Human Individual Metamorphosis, Bo and Peep, and Total Overcomers Anonymous, the group advocated extreme self-renunciation to the point of castration. It burst into public consciousness following the suicide of 39 of its members in a suburb of San Diego, California,  in March 1997.
Founders Marshall H. Applewhite (1932–1997) and Bonnie Nettles (1927–1985) met in 1972 and soon became convinced that they were the two “endtime” witnesses mentioned in Revelation 11. In 1975 they held gatherings in California and Oregon that attracted their initial followers. Those who attached themselves to “The Two” dropped out of society and prepared for the “transition” to a new life on a spaceship.
When the expected transition did not occur, the group settled in Texas and lived a quiet communal existence practicing disciplines that they believed would prepare them for the eventual movement to a “higher level” of existence.  They had few contacts with outsiders until 1994, when their expectation of the imminent transition was again heightened, and they began a new round of proselytization. They also divested themselves of most of their possessions and began a pilgrimage that led them to California.
Settling in the San Diego area in 1996, they supported themselves by creating sites on the World Wide Web for Internet users and established their own Web site to offer readers a gate to heaven (hence the name by which they would become known). Early in 1997 a rumour circulated among the New Age community that an artificial object, or spaceship, was following the recently discovered Comet Hale-Bopp, which would approach close to the Earth around the time of the spring equinox. As the comet approached, the Heaven’s Gate group, which had shrunk to only 39 members, took poison in three waves of 15, 15, and 9 in the belief that the spaceship would arrive to take them to a better place. Prior to the event, the members of the group made a video explaining their individual reasons for their chosen path.
