Jansenism,  in Roman Catholic history, a controversial religious movement in the 17th and 18th centuries that arose out of the theological problem of reconciling divine grace and human freedom. Jansenism appeared chiefly in France, the Low Countries, and Italy. In France it became connected with the struggle against the papacy by proponents of Gallicanism—a political theory advocating the restriction of papal power—and with opposition to the monarchical absolutism of Armand-Jean du Plessis Cardinal de Richelieu and Louis XIV.
The chief initiator of the movement was Cornelius Otto Jansen, a theologian at the University of Leuven (Louvain) and later bishop of Ypres. Jansen’s views were published posthumously in 1640 in his Augustinus, a vast treatise defending the theology of St. Augustine of Hippo (354–430) and attacking certain teachings and practices associated especially with the Jesuit order. Jansen and his followers claimed that in their opposition to the doctrines of grace defined by Martin Luther (1483–1546) and John Calvin (1509–64), the theologians of the Counter-Reformation had erred in the other direction, emphasizing human responsibility at the expense of the divine initiative and thus relapsing into the 5th-century heresy of Pelagianism—the teaching that humanity is essentially good and can attain salvation without divine aid. Against these alleged Pelagian tendencies, Jansen stressed the damage caused to human nature by original sin—the innate depravity of humanity due to the primordial fall and requiring God’s grace to be saved—and the power of concupiscence; exalted the all-powerful character of the grace made available by Christ the Redeemer that is the sole means of restoring humanity to true freedom; and supported the Augustinian arguments regarding the necessity of grace for any good act, the infallible efficacy of grace, and the absolutely arbitrary character of predestination. Consistent with this pessimistic view of human nature and freedom were the rigoristic views on the sacraments of penance and Holy Communion and on moral issues taken by Jansenism.
The publication of the Augustinus aroused violent controversy. The work was accused, chiefly by the Jesuits, of divesting free will of all reality and of rejecting the universality of the redemption. Nevertheless, the Jansenist interpretation of Christianity spread. It was defended by such disciples as Jean Duvergier de Hauranne, abbot of Saint-Cyran; the nuns of the celebrated Cistercian convent of Port-Royal des Champs; Antoine Arnauld, who became leader of the Jansenist movement; and Pasquier Quesnel, who organized the Jansenist group into a political party at the end of the 17th century. It also attracted such influential figures in French society as the philosopher and mathematician Blaise Pascal and the dramatist Jean Racine.
The papacy struck out against Jansenism in 1653 with the publication of the bull Cum occasione (“With Occasion”) by Innocent X, which condemned five of Jansen’s propositions on the relationship of grace and freedom. The Jansenists acknowledged the heretical tendencies contained in the propositions and the authority of the decision but denied that the propositions in question could be ascribed to Jansen. The general assembly of the French clergy and Pope Alexander VII in 1665 called upon the Jansenists to subscribe to a formula of submission that acknowledged the fact of Jansen’s heretical status. Although Louis XIV was determined to eliminate the Jansenists as a threat to the unity of his kingdom, there was a temporary peace after Clement IX became pope in 1667, and the conflict ceased to be a major concern when the papacy and the French Church clashed on Gallicanism. But after the controversy between the papacy and the monarchy was settled, Louis XIV obtained from Clement XI in 1705 the bull Vineam domini (“Vineyard of the Lord”), which renewed the earlier condemnations, and then in 1713 the bull Unigenitus, which condemned 101 propositions of Quesnel. The promulgation of Unigenitus as French law in 1730 finally caused the decline in strength of the Jansenist party. Organized Jansenism survived only in Holland, where it still exists as a church in Utrecht. It also spread to Italy, where in 1786 the Synod of Pistoia, which was later condemned, propounded extreme Jansenist doctrines.
Jansenism was a complex movement based more on a certain mentality and spirituality than on specific doctrines. It was an attempt, in line with that of the Reformation theologians, to reform the church in the spirit of early Christianity. It opposed what, in its view, was a compromising approach to true Christian theology and practice but was rejected by the church as an exaggerated and unorthodox position.
