Juju,  an object that has been deliberately infused with magical power or the magical power itself; it also can refer to the belief system involving the use of juju. Juju is practiced in West African countries such as Nigeria, Benin, Togo, and Ghana, although its assumptions are shared by most African people. It is neither good nor bad, but it may be used for constructive purposes as well as for nefarious deeds. A monkey’s head is probably the most common juju in West Africa. The word juju is believed to be derived from the French joujou (“plaything”), though some sources claim it is from the Hausa language, meaning “fetish” or “evil spirit.”
Juju operates on the principle of spiritual contagious contact based on physical contact. The underlying belief is that two entities that have been in close contact have similar properties even after being separated. It then becomes possible to manipulate one in order to reach the other. Thus, in that context, a person’s hair, fingernails, a piece of clothing, a shoe, a sock, or a piece of jewel worn by them are all perfect candidates for juju because they are believed to retain the spiritual aura of their owner.
Likewise, it is thought that spiritual similarity can be created by deliberately placing two things in physical contact. The underlying belief is that spiritual assimilation and fusion will take place, with one entity absorbing the qualities of the other. Amulets, charms, and mascots are all common forms of juju. Usually worn for protective purposes, those objects have been infused with a particular type of energy, and wearing them is expected to create paths and possibilities for the wearer, as well as guard them against ill fortunes and evil spirits.
Specialists with extensive know-how and experience typically create juju. The specialist may be a healer, because juju is commonly used as treatment for physical and spiritual ailments—from healing insect and animal bites to counteracting and neutralizing curses. However, the specialist may also be a witch or a sorcerer trying to harm someone through the casting of spells or curses, as well as placing juju objects in their close contact so they may become spiritually contaminated and polluted. For instance, one may be offered spiritually poisoned food or drinks, which is thought to bring about disruption, trauma, or even death if not dealt with promptly and efficiently. A live animal may also be used as a juju. It may be infused with a negative energy and then sent near someone. Once physical contact has been made, it is believed the person will most likely become ill.
