Junzi, (Chinese: “gentleman”; literally, “ruler’s son” or “noble son”)  Wade-Giles romanization chün-tzu,  in Chinese philosophy, a person whose humane conduct (ren) makes him a moral exemplar.
The term junzi was originally applied to princes or aristocratic men. Confucius invested the term with an ethical significance while maintaining its connotation of noble refinement. Unlike the petty person (xiaoren; literally, “little person”), who cannot transcend personal concerns and prejudices and acts only for his own gain, the junzi is cultured (wen) and knows how to act and speak appropriately in any situation; he is thus an exemplar whose virtuous influence promotes a flourishing human community (see de). Although the junzi is not quite as cultivated as the sagely person (shengren)—the rare person whose cultivation is so great that humane behaviour in any circumstance is practically natural—he is a person of profound capacity and importance.
Although the term appears in several classical texts—for example, it appears in one chapter of the Daodejing—the philosophical and moral senses of junzi are primarily Confucian. Always promoting humane government, Confucius was first a bureaucrat and then a teacher of young men aspiring to government service. As stated in the Lunyu (Analects), the collection of sayings attributed to him, Confucius placed at the foundation of human life both study (not only of books but also of human relations) and the repeated practice of what one has studied. Becoming a junzi is the goal of all who practice such self-cultivation and who truly love learning—regardless of their birth, their social status, or (at least in subsequent interpretations of the tradition) their gender.
Before the 20th century, most translations of junzi into English and other Western languages drew upon a literal rendering of the term as a man of noble birth or upon later texts in the Confucian tradition that seemed to emphasize the junzi’s moral nobility or superiority. Thus, until the late-20th century, many Western scholars and Chinese scholars writing in Western languages translated the term as “superior man” or “superior person.” From the mid-20th century, however, it was increasingly common to use such translations as “exemplary person,” “gentleman,” or “gentleperson,” which highlight Confucius’s point that the junzi is not a commander of or ruler over inferior subjects but rather a moral person who leads by his character and conduct.
