Karaism, also spelled Karaitism or Qaraism,  (from Hebrew qara, “to read”), a Jewish religious movement that repudiated oral tradition as a source of divine law and defended the Hebrew Bible as the sole authentic font of religious doctrine and practice. In dismissing the Talmud as man-made law substituted for the God-given Torah, Karaism set itself in direct opposition to Rabbinic Judaism.
The movement began in 8th-century Persia. Though its members were never numerous, it spread to Egypt and Syria and later into Europe by way of Spain and Constantinople.
Karaism proclaimed the Bible to be self-explanatory and sanctioned personal interpretations of the Scriptures. The movement, however, soon found it necessary to develop an oral tradition of its own in applying scriptural principles to daily life. Asceticism became so severe that adherents were not only forbidden to kindle a fire on the Sabbath but even to warm themselves or use the light from a fire lit on Friday. The festival of Hanukkah was suppressed, and great rigour was applied to dietary laws, ritual purity, fasting, clothing, and marriage (adherents were forbidden to marry outside the group). An uncompromising monotheism led to the exclusion of traditional Jewish ritual objects such as phylacteries and mezuzahs.
Initially, supporters of the movement were called Ananites, after Anan ben David, the first literary figure of the group, who worked out a code of life independent of the Talmud. During the 9th or 10th century the name Karaites was adopted to underscore the group’s emphasis on a personal reading of the Bible.
For a long time the movement suffered from numerous schisms and from a lack of competent scholars to defend its position on the Bible. Saʾadia ben Joseph (10th century) was an outspoken and effective opponent of Karaism and tried to exclude Karaites from Jewish communities. He and others, however, were forced by Karaism to develop Jewish philosophy and sharpen their exegesis to defend Rabbinic Judaism’s use of oral tradition (and the Talmud in particular). These controversies stimulated both sides into producing a great mass of polemical literature in Hebrew and Aramaic, the largest collection of which is now in the St. Petersburg Public Library.
Karaites still exist today. The community in Israel is estimated at more than 30,000 and is concentrated around Ashdod and Ramla. Some small communities exist outside Israel; many of those residing in eastern Europe consider themselves ethnically distinct from other Karaite Jews. The liturgy of the Karaites is less rich than that of other Jewish congregations, having little poetry but many readings of scriptural texts.
