Liturgy of the Eucharist,  the second of the two principal rites of the mass, the central act of worship of the Roman Catholic Church, the first being the liturgy of the Word. The liturgy of the Eucharist includes the offering and the presentation of bread and wine at the altar, their consecration by the priest during the eucharistic prayer (or canon of the mass), and the reception of the consecrated elements in Holy Communion.
The liturgy of the Eucharist is the high point of the mass celebration. While the gifts (donations) of the people are being gathered and brought to the altar, an offertory song is typically sung. Meanwhile, the deacon and assistants prepare the altar. The priest washes his hands, and he offers a prayer of thanks to God (quietly or aloud, if no song is being sung) for the gifts of bread and wine that presently will be changed into Christ’s body and blood (see transubstantiation). He then invites the people to pray that their sacrifice will be acceptable to God. The eucharistic prayer follows, in which the holiness of God is honoured, his servants are acknowledged, the Last Supper is recalled, and the bread and wine are consecrated. The host and chalice are then elevated into the air by the priest, who sings or recites, “Through him, with him, in him, in the unity of the Holy Spirit, all glory and honour is yours, almighty Father, forever and ever.” The people respond with “Amen.”
At the start of the Communion rite, the priest calls on the people to pray the most universal of Christian prayers—the Lord’s Prayer (the “Our Father,” or Pater Noster)—whose author, according to the Gospels, was Christ himself. The prayer is said or sung, often while members of the congregation join hands. The members of the congregation are then asked to exchange a sign of peace with their neighbours to signify one family in Christ, an act which usually consists of a handshake or a nod while saying “Peace” or “Peace be with you.”
After the priest prepares the bread and wine, the people exclaim, “Lord, I am not worthy that you should enter under my roof, but only say the word and my soul shall be healed.” Once the priest has administered Holy Communion to his assistants, the people file up to the altar, row by row, and receive the bread first (which is placed in the hand or on the tongue by the priest, deacon, or eucharistic minister) and the chalice of wine, if offered, second. Upon receiving Communion, the people return to their seats and kneel in silent prayer while waiting for all to partake.
Once Holy Communion has been completed and the altar has been cleared, the priest, after a period of silence for reflection on the “mystery” that has just occurred, offers a final greeting. A final blessing is then offered, and the people are dismissed, encouraged to “go in peace to love and serve the Lord.” Variations on the dismissal include “The mass is ended, go in peace,” and “Go in the peace of Christ.” Some parishes sing a final song, though this is not required according to the official order of the mass.
