Methodism,  18th-century movement founded by John Wesley that sought to reform the Church of England from within. The movement, however, became separate from its parent body and developed into an autonomous church. The World Methodist Council (WMC), an association of churches in the Methodist tradition, comprises more than 40.5 million Methodists in 138 countries.
John Wesley was born in 1703, educated in London and Oxford, and ordained a deacon in the Church of England in 1725. In 1726 he was elected a fellow of Lincoln College at Oxford, and in the following year he left Oxford temporarily to act as curate to his father, the rector of Epworth. Wesley was ordained a priest in the Church of England in 1728 and returned to Oxford in 1729. Back in Oxford, he joined his brother Charles and a group of earnest students who were dedicated to frequent attendance at Holy Communion, serious study of the Bible, and regular visitations to the filthy Oxford prisons. The members of this group, which Wesley came to lead, were known as Methodists because of their “methodical” devotion and study.
In 1735, at the invitation of the founder of the colony of Georgia, James Edward Oglethorpe, both John and Charles Wesley set out for the colony to be pastors to the colonists and missionaries (it was hoped) to the Native Americans. Unsuccessful in their pastoral work and having done no missionary work, the brothers returned to England conscious of their lack of genuine Christian faith. They looked for help to Peter Böhler and other members of the Church of the Brethren, who were staying in England before joining Moravian settlements in the American colonies. John Wesley noted in his Journal that at a Moravian service on May 24, 1738, he “felt” his “heart strangely warmed”; he continued, “I felt I did trust in Christ, Christ alone, for salvation; and an assurance was given me that He had taken away my sins, even mine, and saved me from the law of sin and death.” Charles Wesley had reported a similar experience a few days previously.
Some months later, George Whitefield, also an Anglican clergyman who had undergone a “conversion experience,” invited his friend John Wesley to come to the city of Bristol to preach to the colliers of Kingswood Chase, who lived and worked in the most debased conditions. Wesley accepted the invitation and found himself, much against his will, preaching in the open air. This enterprise was the beginning of the Methodist Revival. Whitefield and Wesley at first worked together but later separated over Whitefield’s belief in double predestination (the belief that God has determined from eternity whom he will save and whom he will damn). Wesley regarded this as an erroneous doctrine and insisted that the love of God was universal.
Under the leadership of Whitefield and then of Wesley, the movement grew rapidly among those who felt neglected by the Church of England. Wesley differed from contemporary Anglicans not in doctrine but in emphasis: he claimed to have reinstated the biblical doctrines that human beings may be assured of their salvation and that the power of the Holy Spirit enables them to attain perfect love for God and their fellows in this life. Wesley’s helpers included only a few ordained clergymen and his brother Charles, who wrote more than 6,000 hymns to express the message of the revival. In spite of Wesley’s wish that the Methodist Society would never leave the Church of England, relations with Anglicans were often strained.
In 1784, when there was a shortage of ordained ministers in America after the Revolution, the Bishop of London refused to ordain a Methodist for the United States. Feeling himself forced to act and believing that biblical principles allowed a presbyter to ordain, Wesley ordained Thomas Coke as superintendent and two others as presbyters. In the same year, by a Deed of Declaration, he appointed a Conference of 100 men to govern the Society of Methodists after his death.
Wesley’s ordinations set an important precedent for the Methodist church, but the definite break with the Church of England came in 1795, four years after his death. After the schism, English Methodism, with vigorous outposts in Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, rapidly developed as a church, even though it was reluctant to perpetuate the split from the Church of England. Its system centred in the Annual Conference (at first of ministers only, later thrown open to laypeople), which controlled all its affairs. The country was divided into districts and the districts into circuits, or groups of congregations. Ministers were appointed to the circuits, and each circuit was led by a superintendent, though much power remained in the hands of the local trustees.
The Wesleyan Methodist Church grew rapidly, numbering 450,000 members by the end of the 19th century. Its growth was largest in the expanding industrial areas, where the Methodist faith helped workers—both men and women—to endure economic hardship while they alleviated their poverty. Because their faith encouraged them to live simply, their economic status tended to rise. Consequently, Wesleyan Methodism became a middle-class church that was not immune to the excessive stress on the individual in material and spiritual matters that marked the Victorian age.
At the same time, the autocratic habits of some ministers in authority, notably Jabez Bunting, an outstanding but sometimes ruthless leader, alienated many of the more ardent and democratic spirits, resulting in schisms. The Methodist New Connexion broke off in 1797, the Primitive Methodists in 1811, the Bible Christians in 1815, and the United Methodist Free Churches in 1857. A movement to reunite the Methodist groups began about the turn of the century and succeeded in two stages. In 1907 the Methodist New Connexion, the Bible Christians, and the United Methodist Free Churches joined to form the United Methodist Church; and in 1932 the Wesleyan Methodist Church, the Primitive Methodist Church, and the United Methodist Church came together to form the Methodist Church.
The Methodist Church has shared in the numerical decline that has plagued English churches since about 1910. This decline, together with broader social and cultural changes, inspired a desire to express Wesley’s original ideals in a contemporary form. The church planned new evangelical missions, developed the Kingswood School (Wesley’s foundation) and other boarding schools, and trained Christian teachers at Westminster and Southlands colleges, activities that continued through the rest of the 20th century. Its strong interest in social issues has expanded to include a wide range of national and international problems, especially those connected with race, poverty, and peace.
The Methodist Church immediately became involved in the ecumenical movement and later was a founding member of the British Council of Churches (1942) and the World Council of Churches (1948). Throughout the 20th century it participated in interdenominational dialogues and sought to create unions across denominational boundaries. Relations with the Church of England improved so much by the 1960s that a plan for the reunion of the two churches (in two stages) was approved in principle by both in 1965. The final form of the plan was approved by the Methodist Church with a very large majority in 1969, but the Church of England did not muster a large enough majority to bring the plan into effect. The same happened in 1972, and in 1982 the Anglican church failed to ratify a proposal for a “Covenant for Visible Unity” that was favoured by the United Reformed Church and the Moravian Church as well as by the Methodists. The church also engaged in official discussion with Roman Catholics on national and world levels and found a surprising degree of agreement while it promoted tolerance and understanding on previously contentious issues.
The first woman was ordained to “The Ministry of Word and Sacraments” in 1974. This was the climax of many years of discussion and controversy. It indicated a growing appreciation of the place of women in the life of the church. The theological objections had been carefully considered and rejected before the final step was taken.
