Murjiʾah, (Arabic: “Those Who Postpone”) , English Murjites,  one of the earliest Islamic sects to believe in the postponement (irjāʾ) of judgment on committers of serious sins, recognizing God alone as being able to decide whether or not a Muslim had lost his faith.
The Murjiʾah flourished during the turbulent period of Islamic history that began with the murder of ʿUthmān (third caliph) in ad 656, and ended with the assassination of ʿAlī (fourth caliph) in ad 661 and the subsequent establishment of the Umayyad dynasty (ruled until ad 750). During that period the Muslim community was divided into hostile factions, divided on the issue of the relationship of islām and īmān, or works and faith. The most militant were the Khawārij (Kharijites), who held the extreme view that serious sinners should be ousted from the community and that jihād (“holy war”) should be declared on them. This led the adherents of the sect to revolt against the Umayyads, whom they regarded as corrupt and unlawful rulers.
The Murjiʾah took the opposite stand, asserting that no one who once professed Islam could be declared kāfir (infidel), mortal sins notwithstanding. Revolt against a Muslim ruler, therefore, could not be justified under any circumstances. The Murjiʾah remained neutral in the disputes that divided the Muslim world and called for passive resistance rather than armed revolt against unjust rulers. This point of view was blessed and encouraged by the Umayyads, who saw the political quietism and religious tolerance of the Murjiʾah as support for their own regime. The Murjiʾah, however, regarded their tolerance of the Umayyads as based only on religious grounds and on recognition of the importance of law and order.
The Murjiʾah were the moderates and liberals of Islam, who emphasized the love and goodness of God and labelled themselves ahl al-waʿd (the adherents of promise). To them external actions and utterances did not necessarily reflect an individual’s inner beliefs. Some of their extremists, such as Jahm ibn Ṣafwān (d. ad 746), regarded faith as purely an inward conviction, thus allowing a Muslim outwardly to profess other religions and remain a Muslim, since only God could determine the true nature of his faith.
