Nichiren Buddhism,  school of Japanese Buddhism named after its founder, the 13th-century militant prophet and saint Nichiren. It is one of the largest schools of Japanese Buddhism.
Nichiren believed that the quintessence of the Buddha’s teachings is contained in the Lotus Sutra (Sanskrit: Saddharmapundarika-sutra; “The Scripture of the Lotus of the Good Law”). According to him, the other sects then existing in Japan misunderstood the truth, and he vehemently denounced them and the government that supported them. He blamed the social unrest of the period on the erroneous religious beliefs of the nation and proclaimed that the salvation of the Japanese nation depended on devotion to the truth contained in the Lotus Sutra. He came to conceive of himself as the bodhisattva (“buddha-to-be”) Jōgyō, who was destined to suffer for proclaiming the truth in an era of darkness, an identification apparently verified by the severe persecution he suffered.
Nichiren taught that the historical Buddha was identical with the original, eternal Buddha and that, inasmuch as all human beings partake of the Buddha-nature, all human beings are manifestations of the eternal. He devised three ways of expressing this concept, known as the sandai-hihō (“three great secret laws [or mysteries]”). The first, the honzon, is the chief object of worship in Nichiren temples and is a ritual drawing showing the name of the Lotus Sutra surrounded by the names of divinities mentioned in the sutra (discourse of the Buddha). The second great mystery is the daimoku, the “title” of the sutra; Nichiren instituted the devotional practice of chanting the phrase “Namu myōhō renge kyō" (“I devote myself to the Lotus Sutra of the Wonderful Law”). The third mystery relates to the kaidan, or place of ordination, which is sacred and belongs to the “Lotus of the Good Law.”
After Nichiren’s death, the school split into various subsects, most notably Nichiren-shū (Nichiren Sect) and Nichiren-shō-shū, whose phenomenal growth stemmed from its lay organization, the Sōka-gakkai.
Nichiren-shō-shū traces its line of succession back to one of Nichiren’s six disciples, Nikkō, who, according to documents held by the sect, was the prophet’s chosen successor. The temple he established in 1290 at the foot of Mount Fuji, Daiseki-ji, is still the sect’s headquarters. Nichiren-shō-shū differs from the other Nichiren sects in its elevation of the founder, Nichiren, to a rank higher even than that of the historical Buddha.
Among its rival Nichiren sects, Nichiren-shō-shū had only minor influence until the emergence of the Sōka-gakkai lay organization brought it into a prominent position in Japanese politics. The sect has established branches outside Japan. In the United States the lay organization equivalent to the Sōka-gakkai is called Soka Gakkai International–USA (SGI-USA).
