Pure Land Buddhism, Chinese Jingtu, Japanese Jōdo,  devotional cult of the Buddha Amitabha—“Buddha of Infinite Light,” known in China as Emituofo and in Japan as Amida. It is one of the most popular forms of Mahayana Buddhism in eastern Asia. Pure Land schools believe that rebirth in Amitabha’s Western Paradise, Sukhavati, known as the Pure Land, or Pure Realm, is ensured for all those who invoke Amitabha’s name with sincere devotion (nembutsu, referring to the Japanese formula of invocation, namu Amida Butsu).
The Pure Land belief is based on three Sanskrit scriptures: the Amitāyus-vipaśyana-sūtra (“Discourse Concerning Meditation on Amitāyus”) and the “larger” and “smaller” Pure Land sutras (Sukhāvatī-vyūha-sūtras [“Description of the Western Paradise Sutras”]). These texts relate the story of the monk Dharmakara, the future Amitayus, or Amitabha, who made a series of vows that were meant to be fulfilled with the certainty of natural law when he became a buddha. The most important of these, the 18th, promised rebirth in the Pure Land to all the faithful who called upon his name, who would then remain in that beautiful land, free from pain and want, until they were ready for final enlightenment.
In the larger Pure Land sutra, Buddha tells the story of Amitabha: many eons ago, as a monk, he learned from the 81st Buddha about the glories of innumerable buddha lands, whereupon he vowed to create his own buddha land (which he is now doing), making it 81 times more excellent than all the others and drawing into it all creatures who invoke his name. According to this sutra, in addition to calling upon Amitabha, one needs to accumulate merit and concentrate on enlightenment. In the later, smaller Pure Land sutra, however, the blessed land is not a reward for good works but is accessible to anyone who invokes Amitabha at the hour of death.
In China the beginnings of the Pure Land cult can be traced back as far as the 4th century, when the scholar Huiyuan formed a society of monks and laymen who meditated on the name of Amitabha. Tanluan and his successors Daochuo and Shandao systematized and spread the doctrine in the 6th and 7th centuries and are recognized as the first patriarchs of the school. In art, new emphasis was given representation of Amitabha, together with his attendant bodhisattvas Avalokiteshvara and Mahasthamaprapta. It has survived as an independent sect in China and has had its beliefs accepted by many members of other Buddhist sects in that country.
The Pure Land teaching was transmitted to Japan by monks of the Tendai school but by the 12th–13th century had separated as a distinct sect, mainly through the efforts of the priest Hōnen, founder of the Japanese Pure Land sect. Hōnen believed that most men were, like himself, incapable of obtaining buddhahood on this earth through their own efforts (such as learning, good deeds, or meditation) but were dependent on Amida’s help. Hōnen stressed the recitation of nembutsu as the one act necessary to gain admittance to the Pure Land.
Hōnen’s disciple Shinran is regarded as the founder of the Shin, or True, sect, the largest of the Pure Land groups. According to the Shin school, faith alone is sufficient. Mere recitation of the name of Amida (as practiced by the Jōdo school) is still indicative of a certain reliance on self-effort, just as are other forms of works such as doctrinal studies, austerities, meditations, and rituals. Shin interprets the continued repetition of the name as an expression of gratitude for the salvation that is assured from the very moment faith is first expressed. The school insists on exclusive devotion to Amida; the other Buddhist deities are not worshipped. The Shin sect has abandoned monastic practice, contrary to the usual Buddhist tradition.
The Jōdo sect itself split up into five branches of which two are still in existence—the Chinzei, the larger of the two and often referred to simply as Jōdo, and the Seizan. The Ji, or Time, sect was another variant; its name derived from the sect’s rule of reciting the hymns of Shandao (Japanese: Zendo) six times a day.
