Purification rite,  any of the ceremonial acts or customs employed in an attempt to reestablish lost purity or to create a higher degree of purity in relation to the sacred (the transcendental realm) or the social and cultural realm. They are found in all known cultures and religions, both ancient and modern, preliterate and sophisticated, and assume a wide variety of types and forms.
Every culture has an idea, in one form or another, that the inner essence of man can be either pure or defiled. This idea presupposes a general view of man in which his active or vitalizing forces, the energies that stimulate and regulate his optimum individual and social functioning, are distinguished from his body, on the one hand, and his mental or spiritual faculties, on the other. These energies are believed to be disturbed or “polluted” by certain contacts or experiences that have consequences for a person’s entire system, including both the physical and the mental aspects. Furthermore, the natural elements, animals and plants, the supernatural, and even certain aspects of technology may be viewed as operating on similar energies of their own; they too may therefore be subject to the disturbing effects of pollution. Because lost purity can be re-established only by ritual and also because purity is often a precondition for the performance of rituals of many kinds, anthropologists refer to this general field of cultural phenomena as “ritual purity” and “ritual pollution.”
The rituals for re-establishing lost purity, or for creating a higher degree of purity, take many different forms in the various contemporary and historical cultures for which information is available. Some purification rituals involve one or two simple gestures, such as washing the hands or body, changing the clothes, fumigating the person or object with incense, reciting a prayer or an incantation, anointing the person or object with some ritually pure substance. Some involve ordeals, including blood-letting, vomiting, and beating, which have a purgative effect. Some work on the scapegoat principle, in which the impurities are ritually transferred onto an animal, or even in some cases (as among the ancient Greeks) onto another human being; the animal or human scapegoat is then run out of town and/or killed, or at least killed symbolically. Many purification rites are very complex and incorporate several different types of purifying actions.
Ritual purity and pollution are matters of general social concern because pollution, it is believed, may spread from one individual or object to other members of society. Each culture defines what is pure and impure—and the consequences of purity and pollution—differently from every other culture, although there is considerable cross-cultural overlapping on certain beliefs. Cultures also vary greatly in the extent to which purity and pollution are pervasive concerns: Hinduism, Judaism, and certain tribal groups such as the Lovedu of South Africa or the Yurok of northern California in the United States seem highly pollution-conscious, whereas among other peoples pollution concerns are relatively isolated and occasional. Even within the so-called pollution-conscious cultures, attitudes toward the cultural regulations may vary considerably: the Yurok, on the one hand, are said to consider their purification rituals to be rather a nuisance, albeit necessary for the success of their economic endeavours; but Hindus, on the other hand, seem to incorporate and embrace more fully the many regulations and rituals concerning purity prescribed in their belief and social systems.
Pollution is most commonly transmitted by physical contact or proximity, although it may also spread by means of kinship ties or co-residence in an area in which pollution has occurred. Because purity and pollution are inner states (though there usually are outer or observable symptoms of pollution), the defiled man—or artifact, temple, or natural phenomenon—may at first show no outward features of his inner corruption. Eventually, however, the effects of pollution will make themselves known; the appearance of a symptom or disaster that is culturally defined as a consequence of pollution, for example, may be the first indication that a defiling contact has occurred. Common cross-cultural, human symptoms of pollution include: skin disease, physical deformity, insanity and feeblemindedness, sterility, and barrenness. Nature also may become barren as a result of pollution; but, on the other hand, the natural elements and magical or supernatural forces may run amok as a result of pollution.
In general, the vital energies of man, nature, or the supernatural, as a consequence of pollution, may become either hypoactive or hyperactive. The vital energies may tend to operate in a manner that leads toward decline, loss of potencies and fertility, and death; they may also, however, tend to operate in an opposite manner that leads toward excess, increase and perversion of potencies, and chaos. Both of these tendencies presumably contrast with the tendencies of a state of purity, although the properties, symptoms, or consequences of purity rarely are explicitly defined in cultural ideologies, in contrast to the wealth of detail elaborated on the consequences of pollution.
On the whole, purity seems to be equated with whatever a culture considers to be the most advantageous mode of being and functioning for achieving the paramount ideals of that culture. Thus, throughout most Asian religions (e.g., Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, and Taoism), purity is equated with calmness (physical, mental, and emotional equilibrium) in keeping with the ideal goal—at least for religious adepts—of achieving spiritual transcendence or liberation. In contrast to such Asian religions, groups whose dominant cultural orientation is pragmatic and this-worldly, such as the Yurok, often equate the state of purity with vigour and quickness of mind and body.
Concepts of purity and pollution may tend to merge with several concepts of religion: the sacred, sin, and the forces of evil.
The consequences of contact with both the sacred (the transcendent realm and objects infused with transcendent qualities) and the polluted may be identical, although the reasons for the consequences in the two cases are quite different. The dangers of contact with the sacred may arise from the belief that the gods are offended by pollution; they will punish a person who defiles a sacred precinct or object (for example, in Buddhism and many other religions, a menstruating woman who enters a temple or shrine). The gods may even punish an entire village or tribe for such an offense. To come into contact with the sacred is also viewed as dangerous because the sacred is highly powerful or “charged” with energy; thus, one must be properly strengthened (usually by purification) for the encounter. If one is not thus strengthened, he will be overwhelmed. Although contact with the sacred may have negative consequences for a person, this is not because the sacred is polluting. On the other hand, the dangers of encounter with a polluted person (e.g., an “untouchable” in India) or object (e.g., feces, in most cultures) arise directly from the pollution that passes from that person or object to oneself.
Purity and pollution beliefs may become incorporated into a religious morality system in which pollution becomes a type of sin and an offense against God or the moral order, and purity becomes a moral or spiritual virtue. Thus, for example, in the Old Testament, the pollution of birth must not only be cleansed by symbolic or ritual gestures; it must also be atoned for as a cultic sin that offends the sacred precincts of the Lord. In general, the more universalistic religions—Christianity, Buddhism, and Islām—seem to de-emphasize true pollution concerns, and to subsume them within their frameworks of moral and religious beliefs. Both the Qurʾān of Islām and the New Testament of Christianity show a sharp decrease in rules of specific pollution avoidances (e.g., fewer food prohibitions) compared to the Old Testament. Similarly, the sacred texts of Buddhism stress the unimportance of specific avoidances and rituals (in implicit contrast to the multiple and detailed purity regulations of Hinduism) and the necessity for cultivating one’s spiritual and moral development instead.
Ideas of pollution are often closely associated with beliefs in demons, sorcerers, and witches. All of the latter may be viewed, in part, as personifications of the powers of pollution. People in polluted states are believed to be dangerous not only to others because they may spread their pollution, but they themselves are often thought to be in danger of attack by demons, who are attracted by the defiled person’s impurities (see also angel and demon).
