Roman Curia, Latin Curia Romana,  the group of various Vatican bureaus that assist the pope in the day-to-day exercise of his primatial jurisdiction over the Roman Catholic church. The result of a long evolution from the early centuries of Christianity, the Curia was given its modern form by Pope Sixtus V late in the 16th century. The work of the Curia has traditionally been associated with the members of the Sacred College of Cardinals, acting either as a body or individually as administrators in the various bureaus. A reorganization, ordered by Pope Pius X, was incorporated into the Code of Canon Law (promulgated 1917). Further steps toward reorganization were begun by Pope Paul VI in the 1960s. Among the goals of this curial reform were the modernization of procedures and the internationalization of the curial staff. These reforms are reflected in the second Code of Canon Law (1983).
Responsibility for the coordination of curial activities belongs to the cardinal who, as secretary of state, directs both the Secretariat of State (or Papal Secretariat) and the Council for the Public Affairs of the Church (the latter previously known as the Sacred Congregation for Extraordinary Ecclesiastical Affairs). The various sacred congregations of the Curia are concerned with administrative matters. The Sacred Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith is responsible for safeguarding the doctrine on faith and morals. Though a successor of the notorious Roman Inquisition and, more recently, of the Holy Office, this congregation is now primarily intended to make positive efforts to promote theological orthodoxy and to protect the rights of those accused of failure in this regard. The Index of Forbidden Books, once a responsibility of this congregation, is no longer in effect.
Other sacred congregations are those for the Oriental Churches, Bishops (formerly the Sacred Congregation of the Consistorial), the Sacraments and Divine Worship (formerly Congregation of Rites), the Causes of Saints (concerned with procedures for beatification and canonization and with the preservation of relics, once a responsibility of the now defunct Congregation of Rites), the Clergy (formerly the Sacred Congregation of the Council), Religious and Secular Institutes, Catholic Education (formerly the Sacred Congregation of Seminaries and Universities), and the Propagation of the Faith (also known as the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples).
The judicial branch of the Curia consists of three tribunals: the Apostolic Signatura (the highest judicial body), the Sacred Roman Rota (for judging ecclesiastical cases appealed to the Vatican, especially those concerning the nullity of marriage), and the Sacred Apostolic Penitentiary (for various matters of conscience).
In addition there are various offices and three secretariats for Promoting Christian Unity, for Non-Christians, and for Non-Believers. Several permanent commissions reflect papal concern for scholarly studies; they include the Pontifical Commission for Biblical Studies and the Pontifical Commission for the Revision of the Code of Canon Law.
