Schism,   in Christianity, a break in the unity of the church.
In the early church, “schism” was used to describe those groups that broke with the church and established rival churches. The term originally referred to those divisions that were caused by disagreement over something other than basic doctrine. Thus, the schismatic group was not necessarily heretical. Eventually, however, the distinctions between schism and heresy gradually became less clear, and disruptions in the church caused by disagreements over doctrine as well as disruptions caused by other disagreements were eventually all referred to as schismatic.
The most significant medieval schism was the East-West schism that divided Christendom into Western (Roman Catholic) and Eastern (Orthodox) branches. It began in 1054 because of various disputes and actions, and it has never been healed, although in 1965 Pope Paul VI and the ecumenical patriarch Athenagoras I abolished the mutual excommunications of 1054 of the pope and the patriarch of Constantinople (see 1054, Schism of). Another important medieval schism was the Western Schism (q.v.) between the rival popes of Rome and Avignon and, later, even a third pope. The greatest of the Christian schisms was that involving the Protestant Reformation and the division from Rome.
Opinions concerning the nature and consequences of schism vary with the different conceptions of the nature of the church. According to Roman Catholic canon law, a schismatic is a baptized person who, though continuing to call himself a Christian, refuses submission to the pope or fellowship with members of the church. Other churches have similarly defined schism juridically in terms of separation from their own communion.
In the 20th century the ecumenical movement has worked for cooperation among and reunion of churches, and the greater cooperation between Roman Catholics and Protestants after the second Vatican Council (1962–65) has resulted in more flexible attitudes within the churches concerning the problems of schism. 
