Stela, also spelled stele (Greek: “shaft” or “pillar”), plural stelae,  standing stone slab used in the ancient world primarily as a grave marker but also for dedication, commemoration, and demarcation. Although the origin of the stela is unknown, a stone slab, either decorated or undecorated, was commonly used as a tombstone, both in the East and in Grecian lands as early as Mycenae and the Geometric Period (c. 900–c. 700 bce). Dedicatory stelae can be traced through the Late Bronze Age Canaanite religion from miniature stelae at Hagar to immense numbers of stelae found in Carthaginian temples and sanctuaries. When Akhenaton, the heretical pharaoh of Egypt, founded his new capital, he had stelae carved in the cliffs at the edge of the desert to indicate the city limits.
The largest number of stelae were produced in Attica, where they were usually used as grave markers. These were tall and narrow rectangular shafts carved in relief, topped by a cavetto capital (a concave molding) and a sphinx, and usually having a rectangular base. About 530 bce a simpler form of gravestone was adopted, with a somewhat shorter shaft surmounted only by a palmette finial; a single figure was incised into the stone, which was then painted. By the 5th century the shaft was low and wide, with a more crowded composition of perhaps several figures carved in almost three-dimensional relief.
The dead were represented on the grave stelae as they were in life, the men as warriors or athletes, the women surrounded by their children, the children by their pets or toys. There are seldom signs of grief; instead, the figures assume rather static poses and thus emit a dreamlike pathos. The few stelae that do depict sorrow or even death are moving and attest to the Greek sculptors’ skill at representing human emotion.
In several areas outside of Greece there exist single important examples of the stela form. From the Akkadian period there is a large stela immortalizing the king Naram-Sin and his victorious army. In the old Babylonian period, Hammurabi’s famous law code was engraved on a tall diorite stela; at its top stands Hammurabi, who saw himself as the “good shepherd,” facing the sun god Shamash. There is no ritual or action of any kind. Hammurabi simply stands, gesturing with his right arm as if explaining his code to the divine king.
Another famous stela is the Lhasa rdo-ring (Long Stone of Lhasa), which stands in front of the main entrance to the Jo-khang temple in Tibet, regarded as the holiest of holy places and the centre of Tibet. On the stela is inscribed the text of a bilingual Tibetan-Chinese peace treaty of 821–822 ce between the king of Tibet and the emperor of China.
Stelae were also used throughout the Mayan empire. The most celebrated are the massive, elaborate, and highly detailed figurative stelae found at the ancient city of Copán, in what is now Honduras.
