surah, also spelled sura, Arabic sūrah,  chapter in the sacred scripture of Islam, the Qurʾān. Each of the 114 surahs, which vary in length from several pages to several words, encompasses one or more revelations received by Muhammad from Allah (God). Traditional Muslim classification qualifies each surah as either Makkiyyah (“of Mecca”) or Madaniyyah (“of Medina”). According to some Muslim scholars, these labels indicate whether the surah was revealed to Muhammad while he was preaching in one or the other of those cities. In some cases an intermixture of verses is similarly designated; modern critical scholarship, however, does not accept the validity of these divisions. Except for the first surah, the fātiḥah (Arabic, “opening”), which is a brief seven verses, the surahs are arranged in descending order of length and are numbered serially. They are further identified by a name, usually derived from an unusual image appearing in the text but not necessarily indicative of the general content. About one-fourth of the surahs are also preceded by the fawātiḥ; these are detached letters, the function and meaning of which remain undetermined.
Every surah but the ninth opens with the basmalah formula (“in the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful”) and is followed by numbered verses (āyahs). Written in prose, much of which is of a highly intense quality and is often rhymed, the individual āyahs, rather than the entire surah, are commonly regarded as proofs of God’s authority and existence and a validation of Muhammad’s mission. Indeed, all the surahs—except the fātiḥah, which is a short devotional prayer, and the last two surahs—are in the form of an address from God, either speaking himself in the first person or speaking through the imperative form qul (“say!”) and ordering that the words that follow be proclaimed. The subject matter of the revelations is varied, ranging from stories of previous prophets (Abraham, Moses, Jesus) to an extremely vivid eschatology. The general tone is deeply moralistic and theocentric, reverberating with a demand for obedience to a transcendent but compassionate God.
In pious circles the Qurʾān is often divided into 30 equal sections known as ajzāʾ (singular juzʾ; Persian and Urdu sipāra, or pāra). These break up the surahs arbitrarily, without regard to content, into 30 parts in order to facilitate the systematic reading of the entire Qurʾān in 30 days, or one lunar month.
