Thang-ka, also spelled Tanka,   (Tibetan: “something rolled up”), Tibetan religious painting or drawing on woven material, usually cotton; it has a bamboo-cane rod pasted on the bottom edge by which it can be rolled up.
Thang-kas are essentially aids for meditation, though they may be hung in temples or at family altars, carried in religious processions, or used to illustrate sermons. Thang-kas are not free creations of art, in the Western sense, but are painted according to exact canonical rules. In their subject matter they provide a wealth of understanding of the Tibetan religion. They commonly depict the Buddha, surrounded by deities or lamas and scenes from his life; divinities assembled along the branches of a cosmic tree; the wheel of life (Sanskrit bhava-cakra), showing the different worlds of rebirth; the symbolic visions thought to occur during the intermediate state (Bar-do) between death and rebirth; maṇḍalas, symbolic representations of the universe; horoscopes; and Dalai and Paṇchen lamas, saints, and great teachers, such as the 84 mahāsiddhas (“great perfect ones”).
The thang-ka is derived from Indian cloth paintings (paṭas), from maṇḍalas originally drawn on the ground for each ritual use, and from scrolls used by storytellers. Its painting draws inspiration from Central Asian, Nepali, and Kashmiri schools and, in the treatment of landscape, from the Chinese. Thang-kas are never signed and seldom dated but begin to appear about the 10th century. A precise chronology is made difficult by their close adherence to tradition in subject matter, gestures, and symbols.
Thang-kas are generally rectangular, though the earlier ones tend to be square. The fabric is prepared by stretching muslin or linen on a frame and treating it with lime slaked in water and mixed with animal glue. The thickened and dried surface is then rubbed with a shell to make it smooth and shiny. The outlines of the figures are first drawn in charcoal (in recent times they are often printed) and then filled in with colour, usually mineral, mixed with lime and gluten. The predominant colours are lime white, red, arsenic yellow, vitriol green, carmine vermilion, lapis lazuli blue, indigo, and gold used for backgrounds and ornaments. The painting is mounted on a brocaded silk border with a flat stick at the top and the roller at the bottom. Sometimes a thin silk dust curtain is added. A piece of silk invariably inset in the lower brocade border is known as the “door” of the thang-ka and represents the primeval makers, or source of all creation. Paintings are usually done by laymen under the supervision of lamas but have no religious value unless consecrated by a lama.
