The Family International, formerly Children of God, Teens for Christ, The Family of Love, and The Family,  millenarian Christian communal group that grew out of the ministry of David Berg (1919–94) to the hippies who had gathered in Huntington Beach, California, in the late 1960s. It teaches a message of Christian love based on scripture and Berg’s prophecies. The focus of the first anticult organization—the Parents’ Committee to Free Our Children from the Children of God (FREECOG)—it attracted attention for alleged child abuse and for its use of sex in missionary work. The group abandoned some of its more extreme sexual practices and has remained a moderately successful movement with an international presence.
In 1969 the group, then known as Teens for Christ, left California because of Berg’s prediction of a future earthquake. It reorganized as the Children of God (COG), and Berg became known as Moses David. Initially seen as part of the Jesus People revival then sweeping through hippie communities, the Children of God were distinguished by their belief that Berg was God’s “endtime” messenger. In the early 1970s, inspired by his apocalypticism, members of the sect dressed in sackcloth and conducted demonstrations denouncing America’s abandonment of God.
By 1974, in accord with Berg’s goal of creating an organization composed entirely of full-time missionaries, most COG members had scattered throughout the world to live communally and to spread Berg’s message. Berg communicated his teachings through a series of “Mo Letters” (later recast as a periodical, The New Good News). In 1978 he initiated a major reorganization that led the Children of God to disband and reconstitute as The Family. During this same period Berg led his followers to free themselves from sexual inhibitions and taboos. For example, in a practice called “flirty fishing," he encouraged female members to use their feminine charms while witnessing God’s love to lonely men, a tactic that often led to sexual activity. He also encouraged sexual “sharing” among the adults in The Family.
This sexual activity led to problems in the early 1980s. Most significantly, herpes spread among Family members, and pedophiles within the group preyed upon the children. In 1983 and over the next several years, the group began to curtail this sexual activity. Child protection rules were instituted, and in 1987 flirty fishing was discontinued. The sharing of adult partners within the group continues and remains The Family’s most distinctive and controversial practice.
In the early 1990s the homes of Family members in several countries were raided by government agencies concerned about child welfare. However, extensive investigations discovered no cases of abuse; The Family had seemingly rid itself of this objectionable activity.
Berg died in 1994 and was succeeded by his wife, Maria. The following year she introduced the Love Charter, a constitution spelling out rights and responsibilities for Family members. In 2004 the organization adopted its present name. At the start of the 21st century, The Family International had about 10,000 members in more than 90 countries, making it the most successful communal group to emerge from the 1960s counterculture era.
