Theology,  philosophically oriented discipline of religious speculation and apologetics that is traditionally restricted, because of its origins and format, to Christianity but that may also encompass, because of its themes, other religions, including especially Islam and Judaism. The themes of theology include God, humanity, the world, salvation, and eschatology (the study of last times).
The subject matter of the discipline is treated in a number of other articles. For a survey of systematic interpretations of the divine or sacred, see agnosticism; atheism; deism; dualism; monotheism; nature worship; pantheism; polytheism; theism; and totemism. For a survey of major theological concerns within particular religions, see doctrine and dogma. For treatment of Judeo-Christian theology in the context of other aspects of the tradition, see biblical literature; Christianity; Eastern Orthodoxy; Judaism; Protestantism; and Roman Catholicism. For a treatment of Islamic theology, see Islam.
The concept of theology that is applicable as a science in all religions and that is therefore neutral is difficult to distill and determine. The problem lies in the fact that, whereas theology as a concept had its origins in the tradition of the ancient Greeks, it obtained its content and method only within Christianity. Thus, theology, because of its peculiarly Christian profile, is not readily transferable in its narrow sense to any other religion. In its broader thematic concerns, however, theology as a subject matter is germane to other religions.
The Greek philosopher Plato, with whom the concept emerges for the first time, associated with the term theology a polemical intention—as did his pupil Aristotle. For Plato, theology described the mythical, which he allowed may have a temporary pedagogical significance that is beneficial to the state but is to be cleansed from all offensive and abstruse elements with the help of political legislation. This identification of theology and mythology also remained customary in later Greek thought. In contrast to philosophers, “theologians” (e.g., the 8th-century-bce Greek poets Hesiod and Homer, the cultic servants of the oracle at Delphi, and the rhetoricians of the Roman cult of emperor worship) testified to and proclaimed that which they viewed as divine. Theology thus became significant as the means of proclaiming the gods, of confessing to them, and of teaching and “preaching” this confession. In this practice of “theology” by the Greeks lies the prefiguration of what later would be known as theology in the history of Christianity. In spite of all the contradictions and nuances that were to emerge in the understanding of this concept in various Christian confessions and schools of thought, a formal criterion remains constant: theology is the attempt of adherents of a faith to represent their statements of belief consistently, to explicate them out of the basis (or fundamentals) of their faith, and to assign to such statements their specific place within the context of all other worldly relations (e.g., nature and history) and spiritual processes (e.g., reason and logic).
Here, then, the above indicated difficulty becomes apparent. In the first place, theology is a spiritual or religious attempt of “believers” to explicate their faith. In this sense it is not neutral and is not attempted from the perspective of removed observation—in contrast to a general history of religions. The implication derived from the religious approach is that it does not provide a formal and indifferent scheme devoid of presuppositions within which all religions could be subsumed. In the second place, theology is influenced by its origins in the Greek and Christian traditions, with the implication that the transmutation of this concept to other religions is endangered by the very circumstances of origination. If one attempts, nevertheless, such a transmutation—and if one then speaks of a theology of primitive religions and of a theology of Buddhism—one must be aware of the fact that the concept “theology,” which is uncustomary and also inadequate in those spheres, is applicable only to a very limited extent and in a very modified form. This is because some Eastern religions have atheistic qualities and provide no access to the theos (“god”) of theology. If one nonetheless speaks of theology in religions other than Christianity or Greek religion, one implies—in formal analogy to what has been observed above—the way in which representatives of other religions understand themselves.
If theology explicates the way in which the believer understands his faith—or, if faith is not a dominating quality, the way in which a religion’s practitioners understand their religion—this implies that it claims to be normative, even if the claim does not, as in Hinduism and Buddhism, culminate in the pretension to be absolutely authoritative. The normative element in these religions arises simply out of the authority of a divine teacher or out of a revelation (e.g., a vision or auditory revelation) or some other kind of spiritual encounter as a result of which one feels committed. The academic study of religion, which encompasses also religious psychology, religious sociology, and the history and phenomenology of religion as well as the philosophy of religion, has emancipated itself from the normative aspect in favour of a purely empirical analysis. This empirical aspect, which corresponds to the modern conception of science, can be applied only if it functions on the basis of objectifiable (empirically verifiable) entities. Revelation of the kind of event that would have to be characterized as transcendent, however, can never be understood as such an objectifiable entity. Only those forms of religious life that are positive and arise out of experience can be objectified. Wherever such forms are given, the religious person is taken as the source of the religious phenomena that are to be interpreted. Understood in this manner, the study of religion represents a necessary step in the process of secularization.
Nevertheless, it cannot be said that theology and the history of religions only contradict one another. The “theologies”—for want of a better term—of the various religions are concerned with religious phenomena, and the adherents of the religions of the more “advanced” cultures are themselves constrained—especially at a time of increasing cultural interdependency—to take cognizance of and to interpret theologically the fact that besides their own religion there are many others. In this regard, then, there are not only analytical but also theological statements concerning religious phenomena, particularly in regard to the manner in which such statements are encountered in specific primitive or high religions. Thus, the objects of the history of religions and those of theology cannot be clearly separated. They are merely approached with different categories and criteria. If the history of religions does not surrender its neutrality—since such a surrender would thereby reduce the discipline to anthropology in an ideological sense (e.g., religion understood as mere projection of the psyche or of societal conditions)—theology will recognize the history of religions as a science providing valuable material and as one of the sciences in the universe of sciences.
