Appalachian Regional Commission  (ARC),  U.S. federal-state agency established by Congress in 1965 to promote development in Appalachia. The region, which lies across the spine of the Appalachian Mountains, runs from southern New York to northern Mississippi. As defined by the commission, it has an area of more than 200,000 square miles (518,000 square km) and includes all of West Virginia and parts of 12 other states—Alabama, Georgia, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia. In parts of the region rugged terrain makes access difficult. The economy has historically been based on the extraction of natural resources, including coal and timber, and on manufacturing. More than 40 percent of the population is rural, twice the U.S. average, and poverty rates are high, though the number of high-poverty counties in the region (that is, counties with poverty rates that exceed the U.S. average by a factor of 1.5) dropped from 295 in 1960 to about 90 during 2010–14.
The ARC is overseen by the governors of the 13 Appalachian states in conjunction with a federal representative appointed by the U.S. president and confirmed by the Senate. Local officials, usually working through development districts, make recommendations to their governors, who then submit requests for funding. In addition to programs directly designed to promote economic activity, including business start-ups and expansions, the ARC focuses on education, health, and infrastructure. It funds projects such as workforce training, the expansion of highway systems, and the development of water and sewer facilities. The commission has worked to diversify the economy of the region, promoting service-based industries and tourism in particular, and it has assisted with the development of trade. The ARC has also addressed such problems as the high percentage of school dropouts. Direct aid is sometimes made available to the poorest one-fourth of the 420 counties in the region.
