Assam People’s Council, Assamese Asom Gana Parishad (AGP),  regional political party in Assam state, northeastern India, founded in 1985. The AGP’s initial purported and yet limited objective was to “protect the interests of the genuine residents of Assam” by seeking to deport a large number of illegal immigrants who had been coming into the state, mainly from Bangladesh and especially since the early 1970s. Over time it developed a broader goal of protecting and promoting the regional identity of the state vis-à-vis the central government in New Delhi.
Between 1979 and 1985, Assam experienced a prolonged popular uprising by those strongly opposed to the presence of illegal immigrants in the state. The movement was largely spearheaded by the All Assam Students’ Union (AASU), led by Prafulla Kumar Mahanta. After an agreement with the central government was reached in 1985 (whereby immigrants arriving after 1971 would be subject to deportation), the AASU and others collaborated in the formation of the AGP in order to provide a political alternative to the ruling Indian National Congress (Congress Party).
Success at the state level came early for the AGP. Even though the party had not yet been registered, its candidates (running as independents) participated in the Assam legislative assembly elections that were held in December 1985. They won a majority of seats in the 126-member assembly and formed a government. Mahanta, who had been named party president, became chief minister (head of government).
The transformation from student leaders who had been involved in agitations to ministers who were capable of effective administration, however, proved to be challenging. The AGP’s first tenure in office was replete with allegations of corruption and, more significantly, of providing a free hand to the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA), a militant separatist group whose violent activities had increased dramatically in the state after the AGP took power. The revelations of direct links between the AGP ministers and the ULFA led New Delhi to dismiss the government in Assam in 1990 and impose central rule there.
Once out of power, the AGP was affected by internal bickering, which culminated in a split in the organization in 1991. Some members—led by Bhrigu Kumar Phukan, the home minister in the ousted AGP government—formed a “new” AGP. The main party’s performance in the 1991 assembly elections was dismal, as it won only 19 seats. The Congress Party garnered 66 seats and formed a government.
The two AGP branches subsequently got back together, and the party managed a comeback in the 1996 assembly elections, increasing its seat total to 59. The party ran on a platform of greater autonomy for the state and the right of self-determination. It formed a government with the help of leftist parties, and Mahanta again served as chief minister. The party’s performance in its second term in office, however, was almost a repeat of its first. It became embroiled in a corruption scandal involving fraudulent letters of credit and was spared prosecution only through the intervention of Assam’s governor, who refused to allow law-enforcement agencies to probe into the charges. The AGP government initially took a soft approach toward the ULFA in its handling of the separatist group. It subsequently changed its policy and began a secret campaign in which former ULFA cadres who had surrendered to authorities were recruited to kill the family members of ULFA leaders. Exposure of the plan created an enormous outcry against the party. In the 2001 state assembly elections the AGP could win only 20 seats, even though it had allied itself with the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).
The AGP’s political fortunes continued on a downward slide after 2001, affected by internal divisions and leadership crises. The expulsion of Mahanta as party chief after the 2001 poll debacle and the subsequent installation of Brindaban Goswami as president did not end its woes. Similarly, the return of Mahanta to the party fold in 2008 (after he had formed another splinter AGP group in 2005) was also of no help to its cause. The party did increase its seat total to 24 in the 2006 assembly polls, but in 2011 it could win only 10. Following that defeat, the AGP again elected Mahanta as party president in 2012.
The AGP also was active in national politics. It won seven seats in the 1985 Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament) elections, but it became increasingly marginalized there as its influence declined in Assam. Because of its opposition to the Congress Party in Assam, it generally allied itself with the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance. The AGP failed to win a single seat in the 1999 Lok Sabha elections; only two of the party’s candidates were elected in the 2004 polls; and just one won in the 2009 contest. The party again did not elect a candidate to the Lok Sabha in 2014.
