Basque Nationalist Party, Basque Euzko Alderdi Jeltzalea (EAJ), Spanish Partido Nacionalist Vasco (PNV),  Basque political party that supports greater autonomy for the Basque Country (including Navarra) within Spain.
The Basque Nationalist Party (commonly known by the combined Basque and Spanish acronym, EAJ-PNV) was established in 1895 in Bilbao by journalist Sabino de Arana y Goiri to contest local elections. However, the party soon expanded to the rest of Vizcaya province and later to the entire country. Since its founding, the EAJ-PNV has adopted a moderate Christian Democratic stance, endorsing a mixed economy and opposing unfettered capitalism. This centrism helped the EAJ-PNV achieve widespread support in the Basque Country, and from the 1910s to the ’30s it captured some one-third of the vote and elected several members to the Spanish Cortes (legislature) in Madrid. After the Cortes passed legislation granting the Basque Country autonomy in October 1936, the EAJ-PNV formed an autonomous government and established an alliance with Republican forces against General Francisco Franco during the Spanish Civil War (1936–39).
Following the Republicans’ defeat, Basque nationalism was suppressed, the Basque Country’s statute of autonomy was abolished in 1939, and many of the party’s leaders were forced into exile. With the restoration of democracy in the 1970s, the Basque Country’s second statute of autonomy was approved in 1979, and the EAJ-PNV reestablished itself as the leading political party in the region. Unlike the Basque separatist ETA, the party eschews violence to achieve its goals and has condemned ETA’s terrorist tactics; indeed, in 1989 the EAJ-PNV led mass demonstrations against ETA.
Maintaining control of the Basque government throughout the 1980s and ’90s, the EAJ-PNV joined the Catalan Convergence and Union Party in 1996 in supporting the Popular Party, which governed Spain as a minority government. In the March 2009 regional elections, however, the EAJ-PNV did not win an absolute majority and lost control of the Basque Country for the first time since the region was granted autonomy in 1979. The Spanish Socialist Workers’ Party and the Popular Party then formed a coalition to govern the region. The ETA declared a cessation of its armed activities in October 2011, and the following year the EAJ-PNV returned to power in the Basque Country at the head of a minority government. After regional elections in May 2015, the EAJ-PNV, under the umbrella of the Geroa Bai (“Yes to the Future”) alliance, was able to form the first pro-Basque government in Navarra.
The EAJ-PNV is a member of the Christian Democrat International, and its delegates to the European Parliament are members of the European People’s Party.
