Capacity building,  activities through which vested parties (individuals, organizations, communities, or nation-states) develop the ability to effectively take part in politics or other forms of collective action. The underlying assumption is that by enhancing appropriate skills, attitudes, and knowledge, these parties will be more effective in their respective governing roles. The result is a greater equalization of power, increased access to decision-making venues, and a more even distribution of society’s benefits.
One of the problems in defining capacity building is that the terminology does not imply a specific or unique target. For example, some scholars argue for building the expertise of individuals, while others focus on improving community organizations or institutions of the state. In an attempt to more fully understand capacity building, one might investigate the varied purposes and means associated with the general concept.
At the individual and organizational level, the focus is on increasing the availability of information and participation of underprivileged, underserved, or impoverished members of society. The purpose of these activities is to give voice and status to previously underrepresented populations. The mechanisms for building individual capacity are often leadership training, political activism, and community development. Programs that build awareness are also often highlighted. For nonprofit organizations and communities, capacity is built through technical assistance, organizational development, and interorganizational collaboration.
For some, however, building capacity is part of a much loftier goal of ensuring sustainable institutional arrangements. In the international development arena, scholars are concerned with increasing state competence to efficiently and effectively manage their affairs. In this context, capacity-building efforts may be quite broad and include development of roads and water resources, economic and legal institutions, health and education services, and mechanisms to increase public participation. The goal is to develop strong governing institutions that stabilize legal, economic, and social conditions.
Some argue that capacity-building efforts ignore the greater milieu of power, politics, and history. These critics challenge the underlying assumption that elite powerful interests will recognize, value, and support shared power arrangements. Because mechanisms for building capacity place the state or other powerful political interests in a central role, the result may be a corporatist arrangement whereby the governing body selectively enhances groups more favourable to its policies. This is also true for nonprofit organizations, whose work within communities to enhance political efficacy is structured within a larger political economy. Absent a sincere interest in reform, disingenuous efforts at capacity building may create only the illusion of shared power without substantial implications for effective governance.
