Congress of the People (COPE),  South African political party founded in 2008 by Mbhazima Shilowa, Mluleki George, and Mosiuoa Lekota, former high-ranking members of South Africa’s ruling party, the African National Congress (ANC), who disagreed with the direction of that organization. The new party positioned itself as “progressive” and diverse, pledging to reach out to minorities and women, and promised to tackle several issues confronting South Africans, including high rates of crime, poverty, and unemployment.
In 1994 the ANC won a decisive electoral victory in South Africa’s first multiracial elections and came to dominate the country’s political system. Although the party faced little challenge from other political parties, internal dissent increased. In December 2007 the fracture was evident at the party’s 52nd National Conference in a contentious leadership election, in which Jacob Zuma, a popular but controversial figure, was elected party president over Thabo Mbeki, the incumbent party president and president of the country. Although Zuma enjoyed the strong support of many in the ANC, there was also a sizeable faction that still firmly backed Mbeki and was unhappy with the outcome of the election. The animosity between the two camps continued to escalate in the next year, particularly after September 2008, when the Zuma-led ANC asked Mbeki to resign from the South African presidency; Mbeki did so, reluctantly. In protest, several high-ranking ANC officials who supported Mbeki resigned from their government positions, including Lekota (the country’s defense minister), George (deputy defense minister), and Shilowa (premier of the Gauteng province). In addition, others objected to Zuma’s close ties to the South African Communist Party and the Congress of South African Trade Unions. Although both organizations had long been allies of the ANC, there was growing concern among many ANC members that those groups were exerting too much influence on the ANC under Zuma’s leadership.
Shortly after Mbeki’s forced resignation, there were rumblings that the discord in the ANC was too great to overcome and a new party would emerge. George and Lekota, later joined by Shilowa, organized a conference to explore that option. Held in November 2008, the conference attracted more than 6,000 people and resulted in a decision to move forward with the establishment of a new party, with Shilowa and Lekota as interim party leaders. The new organization—informally called “Shikota,” based on the last names of the two men—set about choosing a name and registering as an official party. Initial efforts were thwarted, as the ANC successfully challenged the group’s first choice, South African National Congress, on the grounds that it was too similar to its own name. The second choice, South African Democratic Congress, was already in use by another registered party. The third suggestion, Congress of the People, was also challenged by the ANC, on the basis that it had ties to that name, which referred to a historic 1955 event that the ANC and other anti-apartheid organizations participated in and from which the renowned Freedom Charter, a document calling for nonracial social democracy in South Africa, emerged. However, the ANC was overruled, and the nascent party was allowed to register under that name.
Congress of the People, or COPE, was officially launched in Bloemfontein on December 16, 2008, a day with special meaning in South Africa. Observed as the Day of Reconciliation, this public holiday is intended to foster a sense of national unity and racial harmony. December 16 also marks the day on which the ANC in 1961 began their armed struggle against apartheid. Lekota was appointed president of the new party, which by that point had attracted many former ANC members and other individuals.
In South Africa’s 2009 elections, held on April 22, COPE won 7 percent of the national vote, finishing in third place, behind the ANC and the Democratic Alliance. Although COPE did not win as many votes as had been initially hoped, the election’s outcome was still an impressive showing for the four-month-old party. Notably, COPE drew from the ANC’s support base, and, although the ANC captured almost 66 percent of the national vote, it won a smaller percentage of votes than in the previous election and was unable to maintain a two-thirds majority in the National Assembly.
COPE’s promising start quickly lost momentum. The next year, a leadership battle between Lekota and Shilowa took centre stage, harming the party’s credibility; in addition, the party was plagued by organizational and communication problems. The battle between Lekota and Shilowa resulted in more than a dozen court cases, and a high court ruled in October 2013 that the rightful leader of COPE was Lekota. He was reelected president at the party’s national congress, held in January 2014. The lengthy leadership squabble left the party in a weakened state to contest the 2014 elections, and COPE won less than 1 percent of the national vote. The party garnered less than 1 percent of the vote again in the 2019 national elections.
