Consociationalism,  a stable democratic system in deeply divided societies that is based on power sharing between elites from different social groups.
Consociational democracy can be found in countries that are deeply divided into distinct religious, ethnic, racial, or regional segments—conditions usually considered unfavourable for stable democracy. The two central characteristics of consociationalism are government by grand coalition and segmental autonomy. Government by grand coalition is the institutional setting in which representatives of all significant segments participate in common decision making with regard to common concerns, whereas decision making remains autonomous for all other issues. In all respects, consociationalism contrasts profoundly with majority-rule democracy (majoritarianism). While the notion of consociationalism has been known since the 17th century, it was conceptualized in the 1960s, in particular by Arend Lijphart, and is used today as both an analytical and a normative category. Based on a number of factors, it takes different forms in different countries, and it has been widely criticized.
Profound social cleavages, such as by ideology, religion, ethnicity, class, or language, are generally thought of as obstacles to the establishment of stable democratic systems. When cleavages are cross-cutting in the sense that an individual is a member of different social segments, the risk is considered to be limited, as this situation creates pressures that have a moderating effect on social conflicts. If the social cleavages and pressures coincide, however, the chances of creating stable democratic political systems are rather poor. But it seems that such systems did exist and have become stable. The explanation is that elite groups could coordinate in order to avoid conflict if social cleavages were not to be cross-cutting. Generalizing from a number of case studies and elaborating on the term used by a number of studies on African political regimes, Lijphart distinguished in the 1960s four characteristics that should be present in order to qualify for the label of consociationalism. First there must be a government by coalition, as well as a second element of segmental autonomy, such as federal arrangements that allow for autonomy in policy fields (i.e., education policy for which responsibility lays with the German Länder, or states). Third, proportionality must prevail in the electoral system but also with regard to civil service appointments and the allocation of public funds. Finally, consociationalism also foresees a minority veto for the protection of vital minority interests.
Whereas examples of consociational democracies can be found all over the world, they developed in Europe in particular. Thus, Switzerland has been characterized as a consociational democracy since 1943, Belgium after World War I, Austria from 1945 to 1966, and the Netherlands from 1917 to 1967. Czechoslovakia was a consociational democracy from 1989 until its partition in 1993. Where consociationalism has ended, it often did so not because of its failure but because of its success: it worked so well that it was no longer needed. Whereas India since 1947, Colombia from 1958 to 1974, Malaysia from 1955, and South Africa since 1994 can be considered successes from a normative view, Cyprus and Lebanon’s experiments ended in civil war. Some scholars actually consider the European Union as a consociational democracy.
Critics of consociationalism argue that its large concepts, such as government by coalition or segmental autonomy, do not allow for clear-cut modelization or even definition. Do all elites always cooperate or only on some issues and in some areas? The classification of consociational countries is also debated. Such classification raises questions such as whether Swiss society’s religious and class cleavages are cross-cutting or not. However, pure consociationalism and pure majoritarianism are ideal types. Most political systems range between these forms.
