corporatism, Italian corporativismo, also called corporativism,  the theory and practice of organizing society into “corporations” subordinate to the state. According to corporatist theory, workers and employers would be organized into industrial and professional corporations serving as organs of political representation and controlling to a large extent the persons and activities within their jurisdiction. However, as the “corporate state” was put into effect in fascist Italy between World Wars I and II, it reflected the will of the country’s dictator, Benito Mussolini, rather than the adjusted interests of economic groups.
Although the corporate idea was intimated in the congregationalism of colonial Puritan New England and in mercantilism, its earliest theoretical expression did not appear until after the French Revolution (1789) and was strongest in eastern Germany and Austria. The chief spokesman for this corporatism—or “distributism,” as it was later called in Germany—was Adam Müller, the court philosopher for Prince Klemens Metternich. Müller’s attacks on French egalitarianism and on the laissez-faire economics of the Scottish political economist Adam Smith were vigorous attempts to find a modern justification for traditional institutions and led him to conceive of a modernized Ständestaat (“class state”), which might claim sovereignty and divine right because it would be organized to regulate production and coordinate class interests. Although roughly equivalent to the feudal classes, its Stände (“estates”) were to operate as guilds, or corporations, each controlling a specific function of social life. Müller’s theories were buried with Metternich, but after the end of the 19th century they gained in popularity. In Europe his ideas served movements analogous to guild socialism, which flourished in England and had many features in common with corporatism, though its sources and aims were largely secular. In France, Germany, Austria, and Italy, supporters of Christian syndicalism revived the theory of corporations in order to combat the revolutionary syndicalists on the one hand and the socialist political parties on the other. The most systematic expositions of the theory were by the Austrian economist Othmar Spann and the Italian leader of Christian democracy Giuseppe Toniolo.
The advent of Italian fascism provided an opportunity to implement the theories of the corporate state. In 1919 Mussolini and his associates in Milan needed the support of the syndicalist wing of the Nationalist Party in order to gain power. Their aim in adopting corporatism—which they viewed as a useful form of social organization that could provide the vehicle for a broad-based and socially harmonious class participation in economic production—was to strengthen Mussolini’s claim to nationalism at the expense of the left wing of the centrist parties and the right wing of the syndicalists.
The practical work of creating Italian fascist syndicates and corporations began immediately after Mussolini’s March on Rome in 1922. Italian industrial employers initially refused to cooperate in mixed syndicates or in a single confederation of corporations. A compromise was arranged that called for pairs of syndical confederations in each major field of production, one for employers and one for employees; each pair was to determine the collective labour contracts for all workers and employers in its field. The confederations were to be unified under a ministry of corporations that would have final authority. This so-called constitution for the corporate state was promulgated on April 3, 1926.
The formation of mixed syndical organs or corporations, which was the central aim of the corporative reform, had to wait until 1934, when a decree created 22 corporations—each for a particular field of economic activity (categoria) and each responsible not only for the administration of labour contracts but also for the promotion of the interests of its field in general. At the head of each corporation was a council, on which employers and employees had equal representation. To coordinate the work of the corporations, Mussolini’s government created a central corporative committee, which turned out in practice to be indistinguishable from the ministry of corporations. In 1936 the national Council of Corporations met as the successor to the Chamber of Deputies and as Italy’s supreme legislative body. The council was composed of 823 members, 66 of whom represented the Fascist Party; the remainder comprised representatives of the employer and employee confederations, distributed among the 22 corporations. The creation of this body was heralded as the completion of the legal structure of the corporate state. However, the system was broken by the onset of World War II.
After the war the governments of many democratic western European countries—e.g., Austria, Norway, and Sweden—developed strong corporatist elements in an attempt to mediate and reduce conflict between businesses and trade unions and to enhance economic growth.
