Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA),  agency within the United States Department of Defense charged with protecting the United States and its allies from the threat of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), such as chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear weapons, and high-yield explosives. Established on October 1, 1998, and headquartered in Fort Belvoir, Virginia, DTRA was given the mission of controlling and reducing the threat of WMDs and providing quality tools and services to the U.S. military to assist in completing this mission.
The DTRA was also established to oversee and implement the Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR) program. This program was created by the Nunn-Lugar Act of 1991 to safeguard the nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons stockpiles within the republics of the former Soviet Union and to assist those countries in meeting their arms-control treaty obligations. The CTR program was later expanded to include safeguarding, securing, and deactivating WMDs outside the former Soviet Union to prevent the trafficking of WMDs and related technologies.
To achieve its mission, the DTRA performs four essential functions: combat support, technology and skill development, threat control, and threat reduction. To satisfy the combat-support function, DTRA performs three basic duties. The first is to use Joint Service Balanced Survivability Assessments in order to protect the United States from an attack by WMDs and formulate better preparations against such a strike. Second, the agency provides operational and analytical support to the Department of Defense and other U.S. government departments on nuclear and WMD issues. Third, the DTRA coordinates the emergency response to a radiological or WMD incident.
The technology development function requires the DTRA to provide the Department of Defense with systems to counter WMDs and their proliferation. It develops sensors and weapons to destroy WMD production facilities; determines the lethality of both conventional and unconventional weapons; and assumes responsibility for research, development, testing, and evaluation. The agency also develops training protocols for U.S. nuclear weapons handlers—as well as accident response protocols for handlers of nuclear materials in the U.S. and around the world—and technologies to protect U.S. personnel against terrorist attacks, especially those involving WMDs. The DTRA mission functions of threat control and threat reduction are components of the CTR program.
