Democratic Party (DP),  South African political party established in 1989 by the merger of the Progressive Federal Party with two smaller liberal parties, the National Democratic Movement and the Independent Party. The Democratic Party opposed apartheid and supported full voting and other civil rights for South Africa’s black majority and constitutional changes toward that end. In 2000 it joined with the New National Party (see National Party) and the Federal Alliance to form the Democratic Alliance.
The history of the DP  may be traced to 1959, when liberal defectors from the United Party formed the Progressive Party. In 1975 the party merged with the Reform Party; the result was the Progressive Reform Party, which, with further recruits from the United Party, became the Progressive Federal Party in 1977. The party later merged with the National Democratic Movement and the Independent Party in 1989 to form the DP. Though the DP formally advocated a constitution with equal rights for all South Africans regardless of ethnicity or creed, it was leery of a majority black African-dominated government and instead advocated for “proportional representation without majority domination,” which ultimately did not come to pass. Following the dismantling of the apartheid system, South Africa held its first election by universal suffrage in 1994, which resulted in the country’s first multiethnic government. The DP won seven seats in the National Assembly, finishing far behind the African National Congress (ANC). In 1999, however, the DP won 38 seats and became the second largest party in the legislature and served as the official opposition to the ruling ANC. The DP subsequently proclaimed itself the party with the “guts to fight back,” and its leader, Tony Leon, cultivated a belligerent attitude toward the ANC. The party also announced its opposition to affirmative action. In 2000 the Democratic Party joined with the New National Party and the Federal Alliance to form the Democratic Alliance, which became South Africa’s official opposition party, though the New National Party withdrew from the alliance the following year. For further information, see article on the Democratic Alliance.
