Democratic Action (AD), Spanish Acción Democrática formerly (1936–41) National Democratic Party,  social-democratic political party of Venezuela.
Democratic Action was founded in 1936–37 as the National Democratic Party during a period when Venezuela’s government had relaxed its restrictive laws regulating political organizations. By the end of 1937, however, the dictatorship, fearing that the opposition was growing too strong, had clamped down on political activities. When Rómulo Betancourt, a left-wing anticommunist who had been sent into exile, returned to Venezuela in 1941, the party was renamed Democratic Action, and Betancourt took over leadership of the party.
The AD endorsed the military coup that overthrew President Isaias Medina Angarita’s government in 1945, and it subsequently came to power as the head of a civilian-military junta, winning more than 70 percent support from Venezuelans in democratic elections. With its support particularly strong among the workers, the AD introduced a number of economic reforms that were opposed by conservatives. In 1948, after Betancourt retired to allow for the election of a successor, the AD-led government was toppled by a military coup; the subsequent military dictatorship outlawed and suppressed the party.
With the overthrow of the dictatorship of Marcos Pérez Jiménez in 1958, the AD resurfaced and became the country’s dominant party for much of the next 30 years. By the late 1980s, however, the AD had begun to lose popularity, largely as a result of Venezuela’s worsening economic situation. The party also suffered from internal division, particularly in 1988, when rival factions disagreed over whom to nominate for president. Although the party’s eventual candidate, Carlos Andrés Pérez, was elected president, the divisions in the party continued to simmer, especially after Pérez backed a group in a failed attempt to oust the party’s leadership. With the country torn by riots and violence stemming from the government’s implementation of austerity measures and Pérez implicated on charges of corruption, Pérez was forced to resign the presidency before the end of his term; the party subsequently suffered from voter disaffection with its policies and corruption. During the 1990s the AD was weakened by internal divisions, but it nonetheless remained an important force in Venezuela elections into the 21st century.
The AD party organization is structured hierarchically; formal decisions are made by a national executive committee led by a general secretary who wields great power. During much of its history the AD advocated state-led development programs to encourage rapid economic development and extensive social welfare programs. Beginning in the 1980s, however, the party endorsed neoliberal economic policies that called for economic deregulation and the privatization of many state-owned ventures, policies that were deeply unpopular among large segments of the Venezuelan population. The party, which has roughly one million members, has historically performed best in rural areas.
