Digital activism, also known as cyberactivism,  form of activism that uses the Internet and digital media as key platforms for mass mobilization and political action. From the early experiments of the 1980s to the modern “smart mobs” and blogs, activists and computer specialists have approached digital networks as a channel for action. Initially, online activists used the Internet as a medium for information distribution, given its capacity to reach massive audiences across borders instantaneously. A more-developed undertaking of digital activism used the World Wide Web as a site of protest that mirrors and amplifies off-line demonstrations. Some forms of digital activism are e-mail and social-media campaigning, virtual sit-ins, and “hacktivism” (disrupting Web sites).
Digital activism has proved to be a powerful means of grassroots political mobilization and provides new ways to engage protesters. Additionally, online actions can be important in countries where public spaces are highly regulated or are under military control. In such cases, online actions are a better option than possibly physically dangerous “live” actions. Online protest also can be used against transnational institutions. Although much digital activism falls into the category of electronic civil disobedience, some activists ask that such online political gestures always represent a communal interest and not an individual agenda and that their motifs and agents be public knowledge so as to dissociate them from acts of cyberterrorism or criminal hacking.
Different digital tactics entail diverse uses of electronic networks. Text-based practices include e-mail campaigns, text messaging, Web postings, and online petitions to advocate for a specific cause. In Web defacing or cybergraffiti, a more-complex text-based online practice, hacktivists alter the home page of an organization.
More-performative actions, such as virtual sit-ins and e-mail bombs, provoke a concrete disruption of the servers’ functionality through the concerted action of participants around the world. Virtual sit-ins are a form of online demonstration in which a networked community gathers on one or several sites to carry out an act of digital dissent. The action is undertaken through a Web-based program that sends repetitive requests to the targeted Web pages. The protesters’ automated “clickings,” simultaneously enacted from multiple computers around the world, provoke such an excess of traffic that the targeted site’s server is unable to handle it. By clogging the bandwidth, the action slows down the site and eventually causes it to shut down.
