Ennahda Party, Arabic al-Nahḍah, full name Ḥizb Ḥarakat al-Nahḍah (“Renaissance Movement Party”),  Tunisian political party, founded in 1981 by Rached Ghannouchi and Abdelfattah Mourou (ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ Mūrū) as the Islamic Tendency Movement. Its platform called for a fairer distribution of economic resources, the establishment of multiparty democracy, and the injection of more religiosity into daily life; it claimed to seek these goals through nonviolent means. After 1984 the party was reorganized to operate clandestinely as well as publicly. In an effort to gain legal recognition, it took its current name in 1989. The party remained illegal during the administration of Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali.
After Ben Ali was forced from power by popular demonstrations in 2011, Ennahda was formally legalized, paving the way for the group to enter candidates in elections. An election was held on October 23 to determine the composition of a 217-member Constituent Assembly, whose mandate was to appoint an interim cabinet and draft a new constitution. Ennahda was the most organized and established contender that was credibly opposed to the old regime. With voter turnout of nearly 70 percent, Ennahda won 90 seats in the assembly.
The party’s strength in Tunisia prompted concerns over its intentions and its ideology, but it proved largely conciliatory throughout the transition to a new government. When concerns arose over women’s rights in 2011, a law was passed requiring parties to alternate male and female candidates in election lists to enforce gender parity. Ennahda complied, and 39 of the 58 women elected to the Constituent Assembly represented the party. In 2013, after the assassinations of two secularist politicians polarized the country and threatened its stability, Ennahda stepped down from power in favour of a caretaker government. The party worked intently with the secularist Nida Tounes party, drafting a new constitution with concessions from both Islamists and secularists that went into effect in 2014. In the subsequent parliament it supported a unity government led by Nida Tounes.
In 2016 Ennahda announced that its activity would focus on ensuring a stable democracy in Tunisia rather than the Islamization of the country, though its political platform would remain rooted in Muslim values. Its leaders attributed the shift to the successful and stable protection of religious freedom under the new constitution: because the government no longer repressed Islamic institutions and devout religious practice, the party no longer needed to edify and mobilize Islamic institutions. Its support for stability was showcased in 2018 when leaders of Nida Tounes turned on their party’s own prime minister, Youssef Chahed, especially due to clashes with the party’s executive director; Ennahda’s continued support for Chahed helped him survive a vote of confidence.
When the second parliamentary election under the 2014 constitution was held in October 2019, the electorate was fractured amid an ongoing economic crisis and growing concern over corruption. Ennahda lost 17 seats but won a plurality, becoming the largest party in the parliament. Although Ennahda initially supported the presidency of Kais Saied, who was elected in October 2019, a constitutional crisis ensued in January 2021 regarding oversight of the prime minister’s cabinet. With the government at an impasse, protests brewed in July, and Saied suspended parliament. Ennahda strongly opposed the action, but Ghannouchi soon called for dialogue over the matter; Saied refused and later made his suspension of parliament indefinite. Critical of Ghannouchi’s inability to confront Saied, more than 100 prominent members of Ennahda split from the party in September.
