Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN), Spanish Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberación Nacional,  insurgent group that became a legal political party of El Salvador at the end of the country’s civil war in 1992. By the end of that decade, the FMLN had become one of the country’s prominent political parties.
On October 10, 1980, the FMLN was created as the paramilitary arm of the Democratic Revolutionary Front (Frente Democrático Revolucionario; FDR), a coalition of dissident political groups backed by Cuba. Throughout the 1980s its members initiated and engaged in hard-fought battles with Salvadoran government troops who were trained and supplied by the United States. In November 1989 the FMLN launched a major offensive on a number of urban centres in the country, including the country’s capital, San Salvador. The fierceness of the attacks took the national army by surprise, but, after weeks of intense fighting and indiscriminate aerial bombardment of San Salvador by the Salvadoran Air Force, the guerrilla units were forced to retreat from the city.
Nevertheless, Salvadoran Pres. Alfredo Cristiani’s loss of faith in the army’s capacity to defeat the FMLN strengthened the president’s commitment to reaching a negotiated settlement with the group. The United Nations-brokered Chapultepec Peace Accords were signed by the Salvadoran government and the FMLN on January 16, 1992, in Mexico City, and the FMLN members then began to disarm. That December the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, the Salvadoran national body responsible for overseeing elections, recognized the FMLN as an official political party.
The FMLN held its first convention in September 1993, endorsing Rubén Zamora Rivas of the Democratic Convergence (Convergencia Democrática; CD) coalition for the 1994 presidential election. Zamora lost in a runoff election to the candidate of the ruling right-wing Nationalist Republican Alliance (Alianza Republicana Nacionalista; Arena). In concurrent legislative elections, however, the FMLN claimed a significant minority of seats.
The FMLN performed well in the 1997 legislative elections, winning just one seat fewer than Arena. Yet when the time came to choose a candidate for the 1999 presidential election, the FMLN was divided between contenders from two factions—one from its orthodox Marxist wing and the other from its modern, or “renovator,” wing. The final selection was former guerrilla leader Facundo Guardado, who was supported mainly by the “renovators.” Guardado did not fare well, winning only 29 percent of the vote. In 2000 the FMLN won the largest number of seats in the National Assembly for the first time, but its 31 seats fell short of a majority in the 84-member body. In 2003 the FMLN claimed the same number of seats. (Both of these elections were marked by irregularities and abstention, with less than 40 percent of eligible voters participating.) In the 2004 presidential race, with a turnout of about two-thirds of eligible voters, Arena’s candidate, Antonio Saca, defeated the FMLN’s Schafik Jorge Hándal, a former guerrilla commander. Arena also won the most seats in the 2006 legislative elections.
The FMLN claimed the most seats in the 2009 legislative elections. In the March 2009 presidential election, the FMLN won control of the Salvadoran government for the first time: its presidential candidate, Mauricio Funes, garnered 51 percent of the vote, defeating the Arena contender, Rodrigo Ávila. Funes took office on June 1, 2009.
