Governmentality,  approach to the study of power that emphasizes the governing of people’s conduct through positive means rather than the sovereign power to formulate the law. In contrast to a disciplinarian form of power, governmentality is generally associated with the willing participation of the governed.
The concept of governmentality takes the definition of government as the exercise of organized political power by a nation or state (see also nation-state) and expands it to include the active consent and willingness of individuals to participate in their own governance. It proposes that government by the state is only one form of governing, that the terms state and government are not synonymous, and that actions taken by the state alone cannot bring about its desired ends.
Governmentality, an expression originally formulated by the 20th-century French philosopher Michel Foucault,  combines the terms government and rationality. Government in this sense refers to conduct, or an activity meant to shape, guide, or affect the conduct of people. Conduct takes on meaning beyond the form of leading and directing. It also refers to the “conduct of oneself” where a sense of self-governance is a guiding force. Rationality, as a form of thinking that strives to be systematic and clear about how things are or ought to be, suggests that before people or things can be controlled or managed, they must first be defined. Therefore, the state designs systems for defining populations, which make them known and visible. They include mechanisms of management and administration (work processes, procedures, rules) and ways of classifying individuals or groups (by income, race, professional and personnel categories), which allow for their identification, classification, ordering, and control.
Governmentality views power as productive. In this perspective, the objectives of power relations take on three forms fundamental to modern authority. Sovereign power is viewed as exercising authority over subjects within a territory or state (taxing, laws), disciplinary power is seen as regulating the ordering of people within a territory (schools, military, work), and government is conceived as a form of power concerned with the capacities and relations between people as resources to be fostered and optimized. Good government is seen as going beyond the exercise of sovereign power in order to foster the population’s prosperity, health, longevity, productivity, and happiness. It is recognized that political power is exercised in a number of ways through different agencies, social groups, and techniques, which may be only loosely associated with the formal bureaucracy of the state. Governmentality, then, is interested in an analysis of the mechanisms of government and the specific and diverse processes or practices found inside and outside state institutions that cut across domains normally thought of as separate—for example, the state, society, and family. Government is viewed not as a sole actor but, rather, as an assemblage of diverse elements, practices, and ways of thinking coming together to both frame and resolve problems.
Governmentality does not intend to supplant the notions of state authority where power is typically exercised vertically through the application of decisions, bureaucratic structure, or rules. Governmentality does suggest, however, that an additional horizontal approach be taken to gain an understanding of underlying relationships, which constitute the people and institutions within a population. Its ultimate concern is how we govern others and ourselves, how a government becomes one for “each and all,” or expressing a concern not just for the population as a whole but also for every individual within the population. Although the state may assign identities to those who govern, where conduct is more or less prescribed (e.g., executive, governor), there is the subtler implication of how to influence the direction of the conduct of the governed. Thus viewed, governing is an art involving the imaginative application of intuition, knowledge, and skills to administration and management.
