Hundred Days of Reform,  (1898), in Chinese history, imperial attempt at renovating the Chinese state and social system. It occurred after the Chinese defeat in the Sino-Japanese War (1894–95) and the ensuing rush for concessions in China on the part of Western imperialist powers.
Following the Sino-Japanese War, a series of clubs sprang up across China urging reform on the Western model. One of these was founded by a civil service examination candidate, Kang Youwei, who led a group of other candidates in the writing of a “Ten Thousand Word Memorial,” which advocated the rejection of the peace treaty and the institution of a whole series of reforms. This petition was ignored by the imperial Qing government. Meanwhile, within established official circles, a group of conservative reformers—led by Zhang Zhidong, whose famous work Quanxue pian (“Exhortation to Learning”) was distributed in 1898—called for the development of Western-style industrialization without the abandonment of China’s cultural heritage.
Spurred by this group and alarmed by the slow dismemberment of China by Western powers in the wake of the Sino-Japanese War, the government began to seriously consider the idea of reform. As a result, Kang finally came to the attention of the Guangxu emperor, and in January 1898 he met with a group of high government officials. On June 11, 1898, the emperor acceded to one of Kang’s requests and issued his first reform decree, urging his subjects to learn useful foreign information. This was the start of what was to be known as the Hundred Days of Reform. On June 16, 1898, Kang was given his first interview with the emperor. Thereafter the government officials who had been advocating moderate reforms were pushed to the background, and Kang, his famous disciple Liang Qichao, and other followers became trusted imperial advisers.
In all, the emperor issued more than 40 edicts, which if enacted would have transformed every conceivable aspect of Chinese society. The old civil service examination system based on the Chinese Classics was ordered abolished, and a new system of national schools and colleges was established. Western industry, medicine, science, commerce, and patent systems were promoted and adopted. Government administration was revamped, the law code was changed, the military was reformed, and corruption was attacked.
The attack on corruption, the army, and the traditional educational system threatened the privileged classes of traditional Chinese society. Conservative forces rallied behind the empress dowager, Cixi; with the army on her side, she carried out a coup d’état and imprisoned the emperor in his palace. Kang and Liang managed to escape to Japan, but six other young reformers were executed. Although some moderate reform measures, such as the establishment of modern schools, were retained, the examination system was reestablished and most of the reform edicts, which had never been enacted anyway, were repealed. In the early 1900s, officials like Zhang Zhidong were allowed to carry out a full-scale reform effort, but it was a piecemeal, belated effort. The failure of the Hundred Days of Reform marked the last attempt at a radical revolution by the imperial regime in China.
