Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle (PDI-P), Indonesian Partai Demokrasi Indonesia-Perjuangan,  political party in Indonesia formed in 1973 through the forced merger of five non-Islamic political parties. In the final three decades of the 20th century, it was one of two opposition parties officially recognized by the government. Although it often was supportive of the policies of President Suharto, its antigovernment faction—led by Megawati Sukarnoputri, daughter of Sukarno, Indonesia’s first president—was instrumental in Suharto’s fall from power in 1998.
In 1973 Suharto’s authoritarian regime implemented political reforms to limit the power of opposition groups and the number of recognized political entities to three: Golkar, a pro-government group that controlled state institutions; and two opposition parties, the Indonesian Democratic Party (later the PDI-P) and the United Development Party. The Indonesian Democratic Party was created from three nationalist groups and two Christian-based parties: the Indonesian Nationalist Party, the Movement for the Defense of Indonesian Independence, the People’s Party, the Catholic Party, and the Christian Party. The uneasy merger of groups that did not share a coherent political ideology resulted in poor electoral performances, which prompted the government—fearing that the Muslim-based United Development Party might become the sole opposition party and pose a threat to its rule—to intervene to strengthen its support of the Indonesian Democratic Party.
In the 1980s and early ’90s the Indonesian Democratic Party rapidly expanded its vote share by appealing to voters frustrated by apparent inequalities in Indonesia’s social and economic structure. Because the party blamed the country’s social ills on the governing regime, Suharto attempted to undermine it. When the party selected Megawati as its leader, the government engineered her removal with the aid of a faction opposed to her. Her dismissal precipitated mass protests and violence in Jakarta, and Megawati and her supporters eventually established a new political party, the PDI-P, to challenge the government.
In 1999 the PDI-P won the largest number of seats in the legislature, and in 2001 Megawati was elected president of Indonesia. In the 2004 parliamentary elections, however, the PDI-P was supplanted by Golkar as the largest party in the lower chamber of the newly formed bicameral legislature, and in July 2004 Megawati was defeated in her bid for reelection. The party again fared poorly in the 2009 legislative and presidential elections, but in the 2014 legislative polls it again garnered the largest number of seats, though it was unable to form a majority coalition. In July 2014 Joko Widodo (Jokowi), governor of Jakarta, was elected president of the country.
