Jamaʿat-i Islami, (Arabic: “Islamic Society”) also spelled Jamaat-e-Islami,  religious party founded in British-controlled India (now Pakistan) in 1941 by Mawlana Abū al-Aʿlā al-Mawdūdī (1903–79). The party was established to reform society in accordance with the faith and drew its inspiration from the model of the prophet Muhammad’s original Muslim community in Medina. It called for moral reform and political action but was not concerned with questions of nationalism or national boundaries because Islam is a universal religion. The Jamaʿat was to provide an alternative to the practices of the Sufi Brotherhoods (tariqas) and was designed to create an elite of educated and devout Muslim leaders that would direct the way toward the revival of Islam. (See Sufism.)
Although a religious party, the Jamaʿat has not remained apart from political activity in Pakistan. Mawdūdī had opposed an independent Pakistan but, yielding to political reality, he focused his, and the party’s, attention on Pakistan in 1947 until his retirement in 1972. In 1953, the Jamaʿat led a violent campaign against the Aḥmadiyyah sect that led to 2,000 deaths. For much of the next two decades, the party remained the voice of the ʿulamāʾ and was active in opposition politics although it did support the wars with India in 1965 and 1971. After the overthrow of Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto in 1977, the Jamaʿat supported General Zia ul-Haq’s Islamization program but opposed his effort to ban student unions. Members of the Jamaʿat supported Saddam Hussein during the Persian Gulf War. They have been active in electoral politics and have sponsored legislation in the senate, both efforts having met with mixed success. The Jamaʿat took part in anti-government demonstrations before the fall of the Benazir Bhutto government in 1996. It was critical of Pervez Musharraf during his presidency in the 2000s, in part because of his cooperation with the United States in the Afghanistan War, and has been outspoken on issues related to the disputed Kashmir region. The Jamaʿat remains active in its efforts to reform society according to Islamic law.
