Kadima, (Hebrew: “Forward”)  centrist Israeli political party formed in November 2005 by Israeli prime minister Ariel Sharon following his split from the Likud party. When his policy of unilateral disengagement from the Gaza Strip and certain West Bank settlements encountered opposition from within Likud, Sharon decided to form a centre-oriented alternative to both the right-wing Likud and the social-democratic Israel Labour Party. A number of prominent members of Likud (e.g., Ehud Olmert, a former mayor of Jerusalem, and Tzipi Livni, Israel’s minister of justice) and a smaller number from Labour (e.g., former prime minister Shimon Peres) left their parties to join Kadima.
Kadima was founded on the basis of a centrist ideology. It supports dialogue with the Palestinians, a two-state solution, and a policy of territorial concession to retain a Jewish majority in Israel.
After Sharon suffered a debilitating stroke in January 2006, Olmert became acting prime minister and assumed leadership of the party. In the March 2006 general election, the first in which Kadima participated, the party secured 29 Knesset seats. After forming a coalition that included Labour-Meimad (a partnership between Labour and Meimad, a moderate religious group; 19 seats), Pensioners’ Party (7 seats), and Shas (12 seats), Olmert was confirmed as prime minister in May. He promised to continue Sharon’s policies of disengagement from Israeli-occupied areas and of setting permanent borders between Israel and the Palestinians by 2010. As time passed, Olmert faced multiple allegations of corruption, and calls for his resignation mounted. In July 2008 he announced that he would step down following party elections scheduled for later that year.
In September 2008 Livni (since March 2006 Israel’s minister of foreign affairs) was elected to lead Kadima, and Olmert formally resigned. Livni was unable to piece together a governing coalition, however, so Olmert remained acting prime minister, and general elections were called for February 2009. Although Kadima won 28 seats (one more than Likud), because of the close and inconclusive nature of the results, it was not immediately clear whether Livni or Benjamin Netanyahu—the head of Likud since Sharon’s departure from that party in 2005—would be invited to form a coalition government. Through the course of coalition discussions in the days that followed, Netanyahu gathered the support of Yisrael Beiteinu (15 seats), Shas (11 seats), and a number of smaller parties, and he was asked by Israel’s president to form the government. In March 2012 Livni lost  Kadima’s leadership election and was replaced by Shaul Mofaz, a retired general and former Likud minister of defense. Livni ran under a new party in the 2013 elections, drawing votes away from Kadima, which received only two seats. The party did not win any seats in the 2015 elections and became defunct thereafter.
