Lettre de cachet,  (French: “letter of the sign [or signet]”), a letter signed by the king and countersigned by a secretary of state and used primarily to authorize someone’s imprisonment. It was an important instrument of administration under the ancien régime in France. Lettres de cachet were abused to such an extent during the 17th and 18th centuries that numerous complaints on the subject appear on the list of grievances presented to the Estates-General of 1789.
State lettres de cachet were sent by the government in the interests of society, either to maintain public order or to assure the proper functioning of institutions. In the first case, a public authority (in Paris the lieutenant general of police) might obtain from the king the orders for someone’s detention for a limited period of time, or a public prosecutor would demand a lettre de cachet for the arrest of an accused person before trial. In the second case, the king might use a lettre de cachet to summon political bodies (such as the Estates-General), to order them to discuss a particular matter or to exclude from their meetings some person or persons considered undesirable. Lettres de cachet were also used to arrest suspect foreigners or spies. They were also granted to private persons for action on another individual. Couched in very brief, direct terms, a lettre de cachet simply commanded the recipient to obey the orders therein without delay, giving no explanation.
Obviously, a device such as the lettre de cachet could be used quite arbitrarily, but research has discounted the common 18th-century belief that lettres de cachet were sometimes delivered blank, though duly signed and countersigned, so that the recipient had only to fill in the name of a personal enemy in order to be rid of him. It was also mistakenly believed that there was an illicit trade in blank lettres de cachet. On the contrary, research has shown that lettres de cachet were delivered only in accordance with a well-defined procedure and after a serious inquiry had been conducted into the grounds of the demand, especially when the demand was made by private persons.
The effect of a lettre de cachet was to initiate and enforce the imprisonment of an individual in a state fortress, particularly the Bastille, or in a convent or hospital. That the duration of the imprisonment was not necessarily specified in the lettre de cachet served to aggravate the arbitrary character of the measure taken. Nor was there any legal mechanism for appeal against a lettre de cachet; release, no less than detention, depended entirely upon the king’s pleasure. In the law of the ancien régime, the lettre de cachet was thus an expression of that exercise of justice that the king reserved to himself, independently of the law courts and their processes, just as he reserved the right to grant lettres de grâce, or pardons, to persons who had been convicted by the courts.
During the French Revolution the use of lettres de cachet was abolished by the Constituent Assembly in March 1790.
