Liberal Party,  a British political party that emerged in the mid-19th century as the successor to the historic Whig Party. It was the major party in opposition to the Conservatives until 1918, after which it was supplanted by the Labour Party. The Liberals continued as a minor party until 1988, when they merged with the Social Democratic Party to form what is now called the Liberal Democratic Party (q.v.). Through its long history, the Liberal Party included various schools of thought, but all Liberals were united by the conviction that the source of progress lay in the free exercise of individual energy. The purpose of politics, therefore, was to create the conditions within which individual energy could thrive to the betterment of all.
This article covers aspects of the Liberal Party in two sections: History and Policy and structure. Resources for further study are recommended in the Bibliography.
After Britain’s First (electoral) Reform Act of 1832, the mainly aristocratic Whigs were joined in the House of Commons by increasing numbers of middle-class members and by a smaller number of Radicals, who, from about 1850, tended to work together in cooperation with the Peelites (antiprotectionist Tories). By 1839 Lord John Russell was referring to “the Liberal party” in his letters to Queen Victoria. Russell’s administration of 1846 is sometimes regarded as the first Liberal government; others reserve the distinction for Lord Palmerston’s 1855 administration. The first unequivocally Liberal government was that formed in 1868 by William E. Gladstone, under whose leadership these various elements became a cohesive parliamentary party. After 1865 the personality and politics of Gladstone dominated the party, which held power under him for a total of more than 12 years between 1868 and 1894. The main achievement of the Liberal Party under Gladstone was its reforms. These included the establishment of a national system of education, voting by secret ballot, the legalization of trade unions, the enfranchisement of the working class in rural areas, reconstruction of the army (involving the abolition of the purchase of commissions), and reform of the judicial system. In the process, Gladstone attached a broad range of popular support to the party.
In 1886 the party was weakened by the defection of the Liberal Unionists, who disliked Gladstone’s plan for Home Rule of Ireland and eventually joined the Conservatives. By the early 20th century the Liberal Party seemed moribund, but a Conservative split helped the Liberals to victory. The period 1906–15, during which the foundations of the British welfare state were laid, was the last during which the Liberals held power alone.
In 1915, during World War I, the Liberal H.H. Asquith formed a national coalition government with the Conservative and Labour parties. However, during the war the Liberals clustered into two distinctly different camps, centred on the rival personalities of Asquith and his successor, David Lloyd George. Aligned with Asquith were those who felt that cherished Liberal beliefs were being threatened by such wartime exactions as military conscription, introduced in 1916. Allied to Lloyd George were those who sided with the Conservatives in seeking a more rigorous prosecution of the war. The Liberals’ divisions became more firmly drawn after the postwar election of December 1918, in which Lloyd George’s Coalition Liberals ran unopposed by their Conservative partners while Asquith’s Independent Liberals were routed. In the years that followed, the party’s internal conflicts exacted a terrible toll on it at precisely the time when the Labour Party was emerging as a coherent and effective source of reform in the country. In the general election of 1924, the Liberals’ share of the popular vote was reduced to less than 20 percent and its parliamentary representation to 40. By 1933 the party was divided between Sir John Simon’s Liberal National supporters of the Conservative-dominated National Government, Sir Herbert Samuel’s opposition Liberals, and a small number of Independent Liberals who still clung to the aging Lloyd George. The Liberals’ last experience of national government was provided by their participation in Winston Churchill’s World War II coalition of 1940–45.
The Liberal Party’s 20th-century nadir came in the 1950s, when it polled as little as 2.5 percent of the popular vote and when serious consideration was given to merging with the Conservatives. Leader Clement Davies rejected Winston Churchill’s overtures in 1951, however, and the Liberals survived as a small rump in the House of Commons for the remainder of the decade. The seeds of political rebirth were sown under the leadership of Jo Grimond (1956–67), when the party generated a revived reputation as an intellectually credible left-of-centre group. Liberals demonstrated a willingness to adopt radical and often innovative approaches to reform, which often brought them close to the ideological space occupied by the Labour Party, though their social and political analysis was not rooted in class loyalty. From the early 1960s on, the party enjoyed spectacular by-election successes; fueled by these performances, an increasing number of Liberal candidates was fielded. Under Jeremy Thorpe the party made substantial progress in the 1974 general election, returning almost 20 percent of the popular vote. The charismatic Thorpe himself fell victim to a scandal in which money was alleged to have been paid to secure the silence of his former homosexual lover, but under Thorpe’s successor as party leader, David Steel (1976–88), the Liberals retained their position as a significant national force in British politics. In return for supporting the minority Labour government of James Callaghan, Steel was able to extract a number of concessions, including an agreement to consult the Liberals on legislation prior to its presentation in Parliament. This “Lib-Lab” pact foundered in 1978, and the Liberals fared poorly in the general election of 1979, but their strategic importance was enhanced by the emergence of the Social Democratic Party (SDP) in 1981. An Alliance (as their cooperation became known) was forged between the two parties in time for the 1983 general election, in which they won 25 percent of the popular vote.
Between 1983 and the formal merger with the larger part of the SDP in 1988, there were a number of tensions between the two parties at all levels over policy, strategy, and electoral arrangements. Notable parliamentary figures such as Cyril Smith and Michael Meadowcroft expressed their doubts about the Alliance, and the Association of Liberal Councillors argued that its own tradition of locally based “community politics” was more truly “mold-breaking” than the comparatively elitist SDP. Yet it became clear that the Liberals fared rather the better under the Alliance. They, rather than the SDP, retained the right to field Alliance candidates in a majority of the most winnable parliamentary seats, while their historic ties to certain areas of the country remained strong. The Liberal Party provided the major part of the organizational infrastructure and resources on which the new party, known initially as the Social and Liberal Democrats and later simply as the Liberal Democrats, was based.
