Local government,  authority to determine and execute measures within a restricted area inside and smaller than a whole state. Some degree of local government characterizes every country in the world, although the degree is extremely significant. The variant, local self-government, is important for its emphasis upon the freedom of the locality to decide and act.
There is more than a technical importance in the difference between the two terms, because they are related to the distinction sometimes drawn between deconcentration and decentralization. Local government is often, but not necessarily, related to the former; local self-government to the latter. These distinctions are important, even if they are blurred. Deconcentration broadly means that, for the sake of convenience, some functions have been devolved from a central government to administration on the spot. Power is still administered through officials appointed by and responsible to the centre, and authority and discretion are vested in the centre. On the other hand, decentralization represents local government in areas where the authority to decide has been devolved to a council of locally elected persons acting on their own discretion with officials they themselves freely appoint and discipline.
The term local self-government has been traditionally used of local government in the United Kingdom and Germany. Thus, the Basic Law (the constitution of Germany) says, “Municipalities must be guaranteed the right to regulate all local affairs on their own responsibility, within the limits prescribed by the laws.” On the other hand, the amended constitution of the French Fifth Republic says, “In the conditions provided for by statute, these [local communities] shall be self-governing through elected councils and shall have power to make regulations for matters coming within their jurisdiction.” This expresses the spirit of deconcentration.
However tightly bound to the central office’s authority and regulations local officials may be, a degree of discretion is unavoidable. Often, again, the fairly pure organs of local self-government, such as the borough councils in the United Kingdom, are obliged to execute the purposes of the central government. Primarily units of local self-government, they are simultaneously units of local obligation acting as ordered by the central government for services such as education and policing.
Thus, modern local government has a twofold aspect—it is a mixture of both deconcentration and decentralization, of central convenience and an acknowledgment that not all authority ought to be exerted by the centre. The mixture is revealed by the extent to which some of the powers exercised by local government units are exercised compulsorily and under fairly strict control by central authority with financial assistance, while others are not. This mixture produces the high complexity of modern local government. Further, local government is a departmentalization of the state’s work, based on the territorial distribution of services, as contrasted with (1) division into departments at the centre or (2) decentralization of functions to public corporations. In local government, territorial distribution of power is the essence.
The history of local government in Western Europe, Great Britain, the United States, and Russia exhibits the growing awareness of its significance. This awareness is a product of a development of parochial and town life which began long before the modern state emerged between the 15th and 17th centuries. Any central control over these and other areas was, until the 18th century, rather scanty. Notable exceptions were France under Jean-Baptiste Colbert or 17th-century Prussia, where local authorities were already overlaid by the heavy hand of the central intendants in the former and the war commissariat in the latter. Many Germanic states, such as the Hanse towns, were nothing but cities. In England and especially New England, the local units—parishes, towns, and cities—emerged from their origins as spontaneous self-governing units. This was also the case in Russia, although there the tsars took strict control of the cities through their provincial governors and over the mir—the village-cum-agricultural unit—through taxes, the police, and the boyars. The state colonized some cities from the beginning. The various local units were gradually integrated by the state, which exacted obligations from them regarding peace, crime and police duties, taxes, military supplies, assistance to the poor, and highways. By ordinances or statutes or judicial decisions, local units were subordinated, so that the idea of an inherent right to self-government was extinguished. By the 19th century all local units had become legal creatures of the state, subsidiary in authority and acting independently by sufferance alone.
The local freedoms of the 19th century were challenged by (1) speed of communications, which reduced administrative time, (2) demands of a planned economy, (3) growth of nationwide political parties with social welfare programs uniform for all parts of the nation, (4) growth of a consciousness favouring a national minimum of services, (5) realization that the best technical administration of modern utilities requires areas knitted together by a central plan that differs from the traditional ones, and (6) needs of civil defense against air attack. These are powerful forces working against claims to purely self-regarding government. On the other hand, local freedom is supported by need for (1) intimate local knowledge and variation, (2) intensity of local interest and enlistment of loyalty and cooperation, (3) small areas for easy impact of the citizen-consumers upon officials-producers, (4) an accessible area of political education, (5) counterweight to the abuse of central power, and (6) the democratic value of a plurality of political experience and confidence. In all plans, decentralization, whether to a regional agency such as the Tennessee Valley Authority in the U.S. or to traditional units, is pressing, necessary, and fruitful.
