Lok Janshakti Party (LJP), English People’s Power Party, Janshakti also spelled Jan Shakti,  regional political party in Bihar state, eastern India. It also has had a small presence on the national political scene in New Delhi.
The LJP was formed in November 2000, following a split in the Janata Dal (United), or JD(U), party. The LJP has focused mainly on improving the welfare of the lower-caste Hindu—notably Dalit (formerly untouchable; now officially a Scheduled Caste)—and the Muslim communities, principally in Bihar but also in neighbouring states. Like many Indian regional parties, the LJP since its formation has been dominated mostly by a single family. Ram Vilas Paswan was the principal founder and longtime president of the party. Also prominent were his son, Chirag Paswan, who served as the chairman of the LJP’s parliamentary board, and younger brothers Pashupati Kumar Paras, who acted as the party’s Bihar unit chief, and Ramchandra Paswan, who was one of its national vice presidents.
The LJP’s first foray into electoral politics was in the 2004 polls for the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament), in which it won four seats. It had allied itself with the Indian National Congress (Congress Party) and the Bihar-based  Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD; National People’s Party) as part of the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance (UPA). Following the UPA victory, Paswan was appointed the minister of chemicals and fertilizers and of steel in the new coalition government.
The LJP continued its alliance with the Congress Party for the February 2005 Bihar state legislative assembly elections, and it won 29 seats in the 243-member chamber. It did not support the RJD, however, and, because the various winning parties were unable to form a governing coalition, rule by the central government in New Delhi was imposed and the assembly dissolved. State assembly elections were held again in October of that year, but the LJP was able to garner only 10 seats.
The LJP-Congress alliance ended before the 2009 Lok Sabha elections. The party’s platform for that contest promised a range of initiatives aimed at improving the socioeconomic and educational development of the lower castes, Muslims, and women that included reserving positions within the government and the judiciary for individuals from those groups. That strategy failed, however, as none of the LJP candidates—including Paswan—won a seat. Paswan rebounded from the defeat when he was elected to the Rajya Sabha (upper chamber of parliament) in 2010.
The LJP decided to ally itself with the RJD and the Samajwadi Party (SP) for the 2010 Bihar assembly elections. Only three of the candidates fielded by the party were elected, however, and the losers included many of Paswan’s relatives. The LJP’s political influence further declined after that, as several party members switched their affiliation to the JD(U). Included among the defectors were two of the three LJP members elected to the state assembly in 2010, who joined the JD(U) later that year. In October 2011 Sabir Ali, the LJP’s other member in the Rajya Sabha, left the party for the JD(U), accusing Paswan of nepotism in his appointments to party offices. Another key defection was that of Shailendra Pratap Singh, who had been the LJP’s spokesperson before joining the JD(U) in May 2013.
The LJP attempted to expand its influence beyond Bihar to other states, but that effort was largely unsuccessful. Although the party set up political units in many states and ran dozens of candidates in the legislative assembly elections of Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, and other states, it was able to establish virtually no political influence in those places. In 2009 the entire LJP apparatus in Jharkhand state merged with the Congress Party, and in 2012 all 212 of the LJP candidates in the Uttar Pradesh assembly elections lost.
The LJP, in an effort to regain influence in Bihar, sought to reestablish its alliance with the Congress Party as well as to continue its ties with the RJD. In 2012 Paswan supported Congress-sponsored legislation in the Rajya Sabha that was intended to open up the multi-brand (i.e., department store) retail business in India to direct foreign investment as part of the LJP overture to Congress. The main goal was to have an agreement between the three parties in place for the 2014 Lok Sabha and Bihar assembly elections. Instead, however, Paswan announced in early 2014 that the LJP had entered into a seat-sharing pact with the BJP for the national elections to be held in April and May. His strategy paid off, as the LJP won six parliamentary seats in Bihar—with Paswan being one of the successful candidates. He was then invited to join the cabinet of Narendra Modi, who had been named prime minister and had formed a government after the BJP won a landslide victory in the polling.
