Missile gap,  term popularized during the late 1950s and early 1960s referring to the perception by U.S. government officials that the United States trailed the Soviet Union in ballistic missile technology.
Following Soviet intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) testing in August 1957 and the successful launch of Sputnik in October, the United States began to believe that the Soviet Union possessed superior missile capability that directly threatened the continental U.S. Moreover, U.S. military and intelligence agencies projected that the Soviet Union would likely significantly improve its missile technology, as well as increase its numbers of nuclear missiles, relative to that of the United States. Members of the administration of Pres. Dwight D. Eisenhower feared that if the United States did not reassess its nuclear posture and regain a comparative advantage in weapons capability, it would not be able to deter a Soviet missile attack.
Fears of a missile gap were further exacerbated by a report issued by an ad hoc civilian group, the Gaither Committee, in November 1957. The Gaither Report gave a comparative analysis of the state of U.S. and Soviet nuclear forces and presented policy proposals. . The report argued that U.S. nuclear strategy could no longer be built around its superior strategic bomber force and its destructive capacity, because those could be neutralized by a surprise missile attack. Instead, the report proposed that the United States develop an invulnerable force, defended by antiballistic missile defenses, capable of massive retaliation. It concluded that to achieve that strategy and maintain the U.S. nuclear deterrent, the defense budget had to increase significantly, and weapons production needed to accelerate. Eisenhower was adamant, however, about reducing security expenditures under his “New Look” program, which increased funding for the air force at the expense of the army and navy . That fueled public debate about whether the administration was allocating enough funds toward closing the missile gap.
Through his military intelligence officials, Eisenhower later learned that the missile gap did not exist. Moreover, if a gap had existed, it would have been in favour of the United States. During the 1960 presidential campaign, Democratic presidential candidate John F. Kennedy promised to rebuild U.S. defense forces, running on the notion that the missile gap was a grave concern. Kennedy was made aware of the truth behind the missile gap by Central Intelligence Agency officials during his campaign and by Eisenhower himself just before Kennedy took office in 1961. A National Intelligence Estimate briefing in September 1961 supported that claim by revealing that the Soviet Union had only 10–25 launchers at the time, which was far below the more than 100 U.S. land-based and sea-based missles forward deployed in foreign countries and on submarines.
