National Action Party (PAN), Spanish Partido Acción Nacional,  conservative Mexican political party with close ties to the Roman Catholic Church. It generally supports minimal government intervention in the economy.
The National Action Party (PAN) was founded in 1939 to represent the interests of business and of the Roman Catholic Church (which had been stripped of legal recognition in 1917), drawing its support largely from the urban middle class and in the northern parts of the country. Over the next six decades it was the principal opposition party to the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (Partido Revolucionario Institucional; PRI). The PAN first contested national elections in 1943, but until the late 1980s it generally fared poorly at all levels, which was largely the result of the broad patronage system that the PRI had developed and the frequent use by the PRI of electoral fraud to secure its dominant status.
In the 1980s the PAN became outspoken in its allegations of electoral fraud against the PRI. The internal reaction within the party was mixed, with some members stressing conciliation and compromise with the PRI and others endorsing greater confrontation. The PAN secured its first governorship in 1989, when it won the state of Baja California Norte. The following August, however, its representation was cut in the Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of the Mexican legislature. At the same time, amid widespread charges of vote rigging, Pres. Carlos Salinas de Gortari of the PRI awarded the PAN the governorship of Guanajuato over the PRI candidate. Salinas’s decision secured the PAN’s cooperation in the national legislature, and in the early 1990s Salinas won the backing of the PAN for key economic and electoral reforms.
In 1994 the PAN presidential candidate captured more than 25 percent of the vote, and the party’s representation in both houses of the legislature expanded. However, the PAN’s most impressive results occurred in state and municipal elections; in 1995 the PAN won both the Jalisco governorship and the Guadalajara mayoralty. The PAN’s support of the PRI’s economic reforms harmed its performance in some locales, as large numbers of Mexicans opposed the policies, and the party, normally the country’s second largest, dropped to third in the national legislative elections of 1997; nonetheless, it still won more than one-fourth of the national vote and helped block the PRI from winning an absolute majority in the Chamber of Deputies for the first time.
The PAN candidate in the 2000 presidential election was Vicente Fox, the popular former governor of Guanajuato. Aided by public dissatisfaction with the PRI over the economy and corruption, Fox won the presidency, ending 71 years of rule by the PRI. The PAN—along with its ecologist coalition partner—also formed the largest bloc in the Chamber of Deputies. Felipe Calderón, a longtime PAN member, won the 2006 presidential election. However, popular frustration with Mexico’s ongoing recession, high unemployment, and gang warfare contributed to PAN’s defeat by the PRI in the July 2009 legislative elections, followed by its loss of the presidency in the 2012 federal election. PAN’s candidate in the 2018 presidential election, Ricardo Anaya, finished a distant second, and the party also had to settle for attaining the second most seats in the elections for both the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies.
