Night of the Long Knives,  in German history, purge of Nazi leaders by Adolf Hitler on June 30, 1934. Fearing that the paramilitary SA had become too powerful, Hitler ordered his elite SS guards to murder the organization’s leaders, including Ernst Röhm. Also killed that night were hundreds of other perceived opponents of Hitler.
By the end of May 1934, Hitler had been chancellor for 16 months and dictator for 14 (under the Enabling Act  of March 24, 1933), but two obstacles to his absolute power remained. First was his old comrade Ernst Röhm, chief of staff of the SA (Sturmabteilung; German: “Assault Division”), or Brownshirts. Röhm wanted to have his troops incorporated into the new Wehrmacht that was being prepared to take the place of the Reichswehr, despite the fact that the conservative-minded generals were resolutely opposed to any such contamination of the army by the SA. Second, German Pres. Paul von Hindenburg was still alive and in office and, if he wished, could have stopped all of Hitler’s plans by handing power over to the Reichswehr. Hitler, knowing that military strength was necessary for his foreign policy and that antagonizing the generals could be fatal to himself, decided to sacrifice Röhm.
Alleging that Röhm was plotting a putsch, Hitler ordered a massacre. On the night of June 30, 1934, Rohm and many more leaders of the SA were shot by members of Heinrich Himmler’s SS (Schutzstaffeln; German: “Protective Echelon”). Some of Hitler’s other enemies were also murdered, including the last chancellor of the Weimar Republic, Kurt von Schleicher; Gregor Strasser, who until 1932 had been second only to Hitler in the Nazi Party; Bavarian ex-separatist Gustav von Kahr; conservative critic Edgar Jung; and Catholic professor Erich Klausener. Vice-Chancellor Franz von Papen only narrowly escaped inclusion among the victims, and he was dismissed from the vice-chancellorship three days later (July 3). The generals, whose chief spokesman was the minister of defense, Werner von Blomberg, were certainly impressed by the efficiency with which Röhm and his SA clique had been eliminated.
Within weeks of Röhm’s death, Hitler made an attempt to settle the question of union with Austria through simple violence. With instructions from Berlin and with active help from the German legation in Vienna, Austrian Nazis on July 25, 1934, tried to take over their country’s government by an insurrectionary putsch. They murdered Austrian Chancellor Engelbert Dollfuss in his chancellery, but the putsch failed in its main purpose. The news of it was received with consternation and disgust in the other European capitals, but the shock was greatest in Rome. Italian dictator Benito Mussolini sent four army divisions up the Brenner Pass and to the Carinthian frontier, and the Italian press vehemently denounced German imperialism and bad faith. Hitler, however, disclaimed all responsibility for the coup, sent a telegram of condolence to Austrian Pres. Wilhelm Miklas, and recalled his minister from Vienna. The next German minister there was Papen, with the mission of steering Austro-German relations “into a friendly and normal channel again.” Soon after arriving in Vienna, he told the U.S. minister, George S. Messersmith, that all of southeastern Europe, to the borders of Turkey, was Germany’s natural hinterland and that achieving control of Austria was to be the first step in that direction.
Hindenburg died on August 2, 1934. Thereupon the German generals agreed to the merging of the office of president of the Reich and supreme head of the armed forces with that of chancellor, in Hitler’s person. The consolidation of power that had begun barely a month before with the purge of Röhm and the SA was complete. The Third Reich was henceforth a totalitarian structure with one man as head of state, commander in chief, and leader of the only political party.
