Northern Ireland Women’s Coalition (NIWC),  political party established in Northern Ireland in 1996 to secure the representation of women in peace negotiations. As advocates for peace and human rights, the NIWC was successful in engaging women in politics and campaigning against sectarian violence, but following electoral losses in 2003, the NICW formally disbanded in 2006.
From 1968 to 1994 Northern Ireland was the site of violent conflict as the minority Roman Catholic community sought reunification with the Republic of Ireland and the majority Protestant community sought to maintain the status quo of union with Britain. The NWIC membership included both Catholics and Protestants. The party took no position on the constitutional status of Northern Ireland and instead agreed on values—equality, inclusion, and human rights—to guide its participation in peace negotiations. As a result of an electoral process designed to ensure the representation of small parties and the tremendous success of the NIWC in mobilizing many women previously disengaged from formal politics, the party won two seats in the 1996 election to a deliberative multiparty forum to participate in peace negotiations involving representatives of Ireland, various political parties of Northern Ireland, and the British government. The party’s elected representatives, Monica McWilliams and Pearl Sagar, were drawn from the Catholic and Protestant communities, respectively, and were elected under the campaign slogan “Wave goodbye to the dinosaurs.”
The multiparty forum proved a difficult setting for the NIWC to make its political debut, as the party’s representatives were frequently subjected to verbal sexual harassment when attempting to speak at the forum. Nevertheless, the important decisions were agreed upon at the smaller peace negotiations, which proved a more-favourable setting for the contribution of the NIWC. Signed on April 10, 1998, the Good Friday Agreement, or Belfast Agreement, was the outcome of those peace talks and made strong provisions on equality and human rights. Specifically, the agreement provided for the establishment of a consultative civic forum, with members drawn from the business, trade-union, and voluntary sectors, among others. In addition, the agreement recognized the right of women to full and equal political participation and committed the British government to advancing the position of women in public life pending the establishment of a regional assembly in Northern Ireland. The provisions for the civic forum and the rights of women in the Good Friday Agreement were attributed to the NIWC’s participation in the peace talks.
In the first elections to the Northern Ireland assembly established by the Good Friday Agreement, the NIWC won two seats. However, the delays and obstacles in implementing the agreement led to the polarization of politics in the region and significantly improved the political fortunes of the more-extreme political parties. That left little political space for a cross-community party organized on the basis of gender. In the assembly elections of November 2003, the NIWC failed to retain either of its seats. In May 2006 the party disbanded, noting that its members were active instead in the institutions established by the agreement.
