Orleanist, French Orléaniste,  any of the constitutional monarchists in 18th- and 19th-century France who favoured the Orléans branch of the house of Bourbon (the descendants of Philippe, duke d’Orléans, younger brother of Louis XIV). Its zenith of power occurred during the July Monarchy (1830–48) of Louis-Philippe (duke d’Orléans from 1793 to 1830).
The Orleanists, enormously rich, had long been the centre of opposition to the encroachment of Bourbon royal power. After the outbreak of the Revolution, Philippe, duke d’Orléans, took the name Philippe Égalité to express his extreme revolutionary views; and his son Louis-Philippe fought, as duke de Chartres, under the republican Tricolor. Executed or exiled during the later Revolutionary and Napoleonic years, the Orleanists returned at the restoration of Louis XVIII and were identified with liberal and bourgeois principles. It is true that Louis XVIII had been induced to grant a constitutional charter, but he and his successor, Charles X, claimed to rule by divine right and to confer liberties upon their subjects of their own will. The difference between the Legitimists and the Orleanists was thus fundamental. So was that between the Orleanists and the Bonapartists; the former aimed at securing political liberty, in addition to equality, before the law and in social life, whereas the latter aimed at subjection to a military despotism.
The July Revolution of 1830 brought Louis-Philippe and the Orleanists into power. Their foremost representatives were Casimir Perier, Jacques Laffitte, Adolphe Thiers, François Guizot, and Albert, duke de Broglie. Eventually the Orleanists split into the conservative Parti de la Résistance (Perier, Guizot), standing for the consolidation of the dynasty and limitation of the franchise, and the more liberal Parti du Mouvement (Laffitte), advocating the spread of liberalism abroad and progressive extension of the franchise. The latter, under the leadership of Odilon Barrot, became after 1831 the “dynastic left” in the Chamber of Deputies.
The Orleanists supported Louis-Philippe’s grandson and heir, Louis-Philippe-Albert, count de Paris, after the fall of the July Monarchy in 1848 and during the Second Republic and Second Empire. The demise of the Second Empire, in 1870, offered another chance for a restoration of the monarchy, but the Third Republic was born while the Orleanists and Legitimists were still arguing over a candidate. After the direct male line of the elder Bourbons died out in 1883, most of the Legitimists joined the Orleanists in fruitlessly supporting the count de Paris for the throne.
