People’s Democratic Party (PDP),  Nigerian political party founded in August 1998 by members of numerous groups and organizations, including the groups known as G-18 and G-34. The party, which has a broad political base, supports economic deregulation, human rights, and greater funding for health care and education, among other goals.
Earlier in 1998, the G-18 and G-34 had openly opposed the plans of the military leader at the time, Gen. Sani Abacha, to continue his rule. Following Abacha’s death in June 1998, the government announced that democratic elections would be held the following year, ending 16 years of military rule. In preparation for the election, political parties were formed, including the PDP. Alex Ekwueme, a former vice president of the country, was the first party chairman, and Jerry Gana was the first party secretary. The party had a broad membership drawn from traditional chiefs, academics, and businessmen and proved especially popular with the army, as some 100 retired senior officers joined, including Olusegun Obasanjo, a former military leader of Nigeria (1976–79) who joined the party soon after its inception. Under his guidance the PDP quickly became the country’s dominant party.
In the 1999 elections the PDP won a majority of seats in the legislature and Obasanjo was elected president. In the 2003 elections the party maintained a legislative majority and Obasanjo was reelected president. The PDP had an unofficial policy of rotating the presidency between candidates from the predominantly Christian south and the predominantly Muslim north. In 2007 the party’s candidate was Umaru Musa Yar’Adua, a Muslim and the governor of the northern state of Katsina. The vice presidential candidate was Goodluck Jonathan, a Christian and the governor of the southern state of Bayelsa. Yar’Adua was declared the winner of the 2007 presidential election, although international observers strongly condemned the election as being marred by voting irregularities and fraud.
In 2010 power shifted unexpectedly to Jonathan, who assumed the role of acting president in February after Yar’Adua fell ill; he was sworn in to the presidency following Yar’Adua’s death in May. Jonathan’s announcement in September about his intention to run in the 2011 presidential election generated much controversy leading into the PDP’s presidential primaries, held in January 2011. However, his overwhelming victory over his closest challenger, northerner and former vice president Atiku Abubakar, showed that Jonathan had considerable support, even in several of the northern states and in spite of the fact that his candidacy would be a deviation from the party’s unofficial rotation policy. Jonathan was victorious in the country’s 2011 presidential election, which was deemed largely free and fair by international observers.
As the 2015 elections grew closer, the longtime ruling party found itself in a weaker position: infighting had resulted in several members leaving the party; Jonathan’s administration was under fire for not doing enough to combat corruption or to eliminate the threat from the deadly Islamic insurgency led by Boko Haram in the northeastern parts of the country; and many Nigerians felt that general living conditions had not improved. Furthermore, in 2013 much of the perennially fragmented opposition had united to form one party, the All Progressives Congress (APC), and the APC chose a strong candidate, former military head of state Muhammadu Buhari, to face Jonathan in the 2015 presidential election. Buhari defeated Jonathan, signaling an end to the PDP’s grip on the presidency, which it had held since 1999. The party also lost its majority in the Senate and the House of Representatives to the APC in the legislative elections. In the 2019 elections the PDP chose Atiku Abubakar as its flag bearer, but he too was defeated by Buhari. The PDP also did not win a majority of seats in the Senate or House of Representatives.
