Social Democratic Party (SDP),  short-lived British political party that was formed in 1981 by a faction of the Labour Party in reaction to Labour’s domination by leftists and trade-union representatives. The Social Democrats claimed a central position within the British political spectrum, hoping to end what they perceived as a tendency for public policy to lurch from far-left to far-right as governments changed. In 1988 most members of the SDP acceded to a merger with the Liberal Party to form what is now called the Liberal Democratic Party.
The SDP began in January 1981 with the Limehouse Declaration, a statement of intent by four former Labour Cabinet ministers—Roy Jenkins, David Owen, William Rodgers, and Shirley Williams—to quit the leftward path that had lately been taken by Labour. The party was formally founded on March 26, including in its ranks 14 members of the House of Commons (all former Labour members but one, who had been a Conservative) and about 20 members of the House of Lords. Both Williams and Jenkins (the first party leader) won parliamentary seats in by-elections held in 1981 and 1982.
Within months of its formation, the SDP and the Liberal Party formed an Alliance (as their partnership came to be called). In the general election of 1983, the SDP returned 11.6 percent of the popular vote (out of an Alliance total of 25 percent). Following the election, Jenkins was replaced as party leader by Owen, whose relationship with Liberal leader David Steel proved to be considerably less harmonious than Jenkins’ had been. Aside from personal antipathies, the tension was caused partly by Owen’s desire to take economic and industrial policy further to the right and partly by the Liberals’ refusal to acknowledge Owen’s right to be the “prime minister-designate” at the next general election—a concession that had been made to Jenkins in 1983. The rivalry of the “two Davids” was widely regarded as contributing to a disappointing general election result in 1987. After the election, Steel called for a full merger of the two parties. This call was rejected by Owen, by most Social Democratic members of Parliament, and by the party’s National Committee. Nevertheless, 57 percent of the party’s special conference delegates voted in favour of a merger—a decision later confirmed by the ordinary membership. Owen resigned and attempted to maintain a “continuing SDP” with two supporters in the House of Commons. The unification process was completed in 1988, and Owen’s rump of stalwarts all lost or resigned their parliamentary seats in 1992.
The SDP was in many ways a party in the classic mold of European social democracy. It championed a mixed economy (in particular, the German concept of the “social market economy”), but it also rejected Labour’s tradition of granting the trade unions an influential position within the industrial sphere. The SDP was especially notable for the strength of its commitments to electoral reform, European integration, and the decentralization of the British state.
The SDP provided its individual members with a number of significant incentives for participation. Members played a direct elective role in the selection of local candidates and party leaders, and they could attend or be represented on policy bodies such as the party’s Consultative Assembly or the Council for Social Democracy. However, as a counterbalance to popular participation, no resolution emanating from the latter body could become official party policy unless ratified by the Policy Committee, the membership of which was deliberately made up of party leaders and members of Parliament.
