tyrant, Greek tyrannos,  a cruel and oppressive ruler or, in ancient Greece, a ruler who seized power unconstitutionally or inherited such power. In the 10th and 9th centuries bce, monarchy was the usual form of government in the Greek states. The aristocratic regimes that replaced monarchy were by the 7th century bce themselves unpopular. Thus, the opportunity arose for ambitious men to seize power in the name of the oppressed.
The best-known tyrannies were those founded by Cypselus at Corinth and Orthagoras at Sicyon about 650 bce. There were tyrants also in Asiatic Greece, the most famous of whom was Thrasybulus of Miletus (c. 600). The tyrants often sprang from the fringe of the aristocracy; for example, the mother of Cypselus belonged to the ruling clan of the Bacchiads, but his father did not. The nature of the public discontent that provided them with a following may have varied from place to place. At Sicyon, Cleisthenes, who ruled from about 600 to about 570 and was the most successful of the Orthagorids, expressed or exploited the resentment felt by the non-Dorian and underprivileged element in society toward those who claimed descent from the Dorian invaders. Some historians have supposed that the introduction of the hoplite phalanx early in the 7th century led to the development of a class of substantial farmers, who served in the phalanx and supported the tyrants as their champions against the aristocracies. But although the tyrants may have made use of hoplite tactics, substantial farmers were probably a conservative, not a revolutionary, force, and there is no reason to suppose that farmer-hoplites developed class consciousness.
Tyrants eventually came to be considered oppressive, especially by their rivals for political power. Cypselus’s son Periander, whose powerful reign at Corinth lasted about 40 years, came to be regarded as a typically bad tyrant. The Corinthian tyranny fell in the late 580s soon after he died.
Sparta, which had developed a constitution under which all citizens were soldiers and theoretically equal, avoided tyranny. Peisistratus established a tyranny at Athens in the middle of the 6th century; his son Hippias was expelled by King Cleomenes I of Sparta in 510. This may be taken as the end of the “age of tyrants” but not the end of tyranny. The Persians preferred to keep tyrants in charge of the Greek cities of Anatolia, which they conquered about 540.
In the west, where military autocracy easily took root, the popularity of Gelon of Syracuse rested to a great extent on his defeat of the Carthaginians at Himera in 480; his brother and successor, Hieron, patron of Pindar and others, won a celebrated victory over the Etruscans at Cumae in 474. In 405 Dionysius I of Syracuse, the most powerful of all tyrants, first established his rule during the crisis of another Carthaginian invasion.
In the Hellenistic period some tyrants rested their power on class feeling; others were foreign nominees, such as the tyrants supported by the Macedonian kings in the Peloponnese in the 3rd century. The phenomenon continued as long as Greece was free. The great tyrants were notable patrons of the arts and conspicuous builders. They often aided in the transition from narrow aristocracy to more-democratic constitutions, but the Greeks in principle chafed under their illegal autocracy. Tyranny thus early acquired a bad name, and tyrannicides such as Harmodius and Aristogiton, who killed the tyrant Hippias’s brother and possible coruler Hipparchus at Athens, received the highest honours.
