Ulster Unionist Party (UUP),  oldest and traditionally most successful unionist political party in Northern Ireland, though its influence waned dramatically after the Good Friday Agreement (1998). It was the party of government in the province from 1921 to 1972. The UUP had strong links with the British Conservative Party for many years and followed its leadership in the U.K. Parliament until the mid-1970s, after which point it maintained weaker links with the Conservatives until the mid-1980s. Its leader from 1995 to 2005 was David Trimble, who in 1998 was corecipient of the Nobel Prize for Peace with Social Democratic and Labour Party leader John Hume. However, in the early 21st century its support among unionists in Northern Ireland dropped, and in the 2010 British general election it failed to win any seats.
The UUP evolved from the Ulster Unionist Council, which was founded in 1905 to resist the inclusion of the historical province of Ulster in an independent Ireland, and the Unionist Party, whose initial focus was on the continued union of all of Ireland with Great Britain. From the creation of Northern Ireland in 1921 until direct rule by the British beginning in 1972, the UUP formed every provincial government, holding substantial majorities in Stormont, the parliament of Northern Ireland, and in seats for Northern Ireland in the British Parliament. With the rise of the Roman Catholic civil rights movement and sectarian violence in the 1960s and conciliatory gestures toward Northern Ireland Catholics and the government of Ireland by UUP Prime Minister for Northern Ireland Terence O’Neill, dissident elements left the party to form other organizations, notably the hard-line Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), cofounded in 1971 by Ian Paisley.
In 1973 the UUP secured 24 seats in the newly created Northern Ireland Assembly, though it remained divided between those who favoured sharing power with the nationalist SDLP and those who did not. Conflict over the provisions of the Sunningdale Agreement (1973), which called for a Council of Ireland to coordinate policies between Northern Ireland and the Irish republic, prompted the resignation of Northern Ireland Prime Minister Brian Faulkner and the collapse of the governing Executive. In 1979 the UUP won only one of three seats for Northern Ireland in the European Parliament and finished behind the DUP and the SDLP. In general elections in 1983, however, the UUP significantly outpolled the DUP, taking 11 of 17 provincial seats in the British Parliament. The party’s strong presence in Parliament was an advantage in the early 1990s, when the Conservative government in Britain was forced to rely on UUP support to maintain its slim majority.
Between 1921 and 1969 the UUP had four leaders, two of whom—James Craig (1921–40) and Basil Brooke (1946–63)—served for nearly 20 years. In contrast, from 1969 to the end of the 1990s the party had five leaders, two of whom—James Chichester Clark (1969–71) and Faulkner (1971–74)—were in office for only three years. This relatively rapid turnover was indicative of the problems brought to the party by prolonged political violence and by direct rule of Northern Ireland by Britain.
The Anglo-Irish Agreement of 1985 was a blow to Northern Ireland’s unionists, because it established a consultative role for the government of Ireland in the affairs of Northern Ireland through the Anglo-Irish Secretariat. The UUP and other unionists denounced the agreement, and UUP members of Parliament resigned their seats over the issue (though 14 were returned in by-elections in 1986). The party organized mass protests and boycotts of local councils and filed a lawsuit challenging the legality of the agreement. However, these efforts—which were joined by the DUP—failed to force abrogation of the agreement, and the UUP decided to participate in new negotiations on the constitutional future of Northern Ireland in 1990–93. After Republican and Loyalist forces declared cease-fires in 1994, the UUP reluctantly joined discussions with the British and Irish governments and other Northern Ireland political parties.
At first the UUP insisted on the decommissioning (disarming) of the Irish Republican Army (IRA) before it would consent to full participation in talks including Sinn Féin, the IRA’s political wing. In 1997 the decommissioning issue was set aside, the IRA renewed its 1994 cease-fire, and multiparty talks were reestablished, though the UUP continued to avoid direct talks with Sinn Féin until 1999. In April 1998 the UUP and seven other parties approved the Good Friday Agreement (Belfast Agreement) on steps leading to a new power-sharing government in Northern Ireland. However, dissidents in the UUP, including UUP members of Parliament, rejected the agreement, and the party struggled to maintain unity during the agreement’s implementation. Particularly divisive was the issue of whether to cooperate with Sinn Féin given the IRA’s failure to begin decommissioning.
In elections to the new Northern Ireland Assembly held in June 1998, the UUP won 28 of 108 seats and, as the largest party, headed a coalition government with the DUP, the SDLP, and Sinn Féin. Owing to conflict over the role of Sinn Féin, the Executive Committee—the power-sharing executive body drawn from the Assembly—was not constituted until December 1999 and was dissolved in February 2000 for a period of four months until the IRA agreed to allow international inspections of its weapons. Trimble, the UUP’s leader, served as Northern Ireland’s first minister, and UUP ministers directed three government departments.
As opposition to the Good Friday Agreement mounted among Northern Ireland’s Protestant community, the party faced internal division and a strong electoral challenge from the DUP. During the campaign for the British elections of 2001, Trimble attempted to appeal to unionists who were angry at his dealings with Sinn Féin by threatening to resign as Northern Ireland’s first minister if the IRA persisted in its refusal to decommission. Nevertheless, the UUP lost a large share of the vote to the hard-line DUP. Trimble resigned as first minister in July 2001 but later secured an agreement on decommissioning. He was reelected as first minister in November, despite two votes cast against him by UUP members, which were indicative of the deep divisions within the party and the unionist community (the post of first minister subsequently was suspended in 2002). In 2003 the UUP was supplanted as the largest unionist party in the Northern Ireland Assembly, and in 2005 it captured only a single seat in the British House of Commons to the DUP’s nine.
Shortly thereafter Trimble resigned as party leader and was succeeded by Reg Empey.At the general election of 2010, the UUP lost its last remaining seat in the House of Commons and Empey resigned. He was succeeded by Tom Elliott, who tried to rebuild and redefine the party within the changing unionist landscape. Although the UUP won just 16 seats in the Northern Ireland Assembly elections in May 2011—down two from its 2007 total—the party’s performance was better than expected. Elliott stepped down after just 18 months, and he was replaced as party leader by former news broadcaster Mike Nesbitt in March 2012.
In advance of the 2015 British general election, Nesbitt orchestrated a pact with DUP leader Peter Robinson that saw the two unionist parties present a single candidate in four constituencies. It was a successful strategy, and the UUP won two seats, regaining its representation in the House of Commons. In the 2016 election for the Assembly, the UUP held on to its l6 seats. That total dropped to 10 seats in the March 2017 snap election, though the loss was mitigated by the Assembly’s overall reduction from 108 seats to 90. The June 2017 snap election for the British Parliament took a heavier toll on the UUP, which lost both of its seats in the House of Commons. The party failed to regain them in another snap election, in 2019.
The UUP seeks to maintain Northern Ireland’s union with Britain and to protect the British citizenship of Northern Ireland’s residents. It is generally recognized as the political expression of law-abiding middle- and upper-class Protestants in Northern Ireland. Although the UUP’s structure incorporates a wide variety of political opinion, it is politically conservative, maintaining strong links to Britain’s Conservative Party. British initiatives in Northern Ireland since 1972 have strained this historical relationship, however. Although the UUP retained its membership in the National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations after direct rule was imposed in 1972, the decision by British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher to sign the Anglo-Irish Agreement of 1985 led to the party’s formal withdrawal from the National Union the following year. But in February 2009 the UUP and the Conservative Party agreed to contest the next election, in 2010, on a joint ticket as “Ulster Conservatives and Unionists–New Force” (UCUNF).
The Ulster Unionist Council, the UUP’s governing body, is a loose amalgam of nearly 1,000 delegates from local UUP branches, UUP youth and women’s associations, and its representatives in local government and the British Parliament. The Orange Order, a Protestant social organization loyal to the British crown, also sends delegates to the council. The council meets at least once a year to elect officers and approve policies formulated by party leaders. The Executive Committee, a smaller group of delegates and party officers, manages the affairs of the council.
