United States presidential election of 1892,  American presidential election, held on November 8, 1892, in which Democrat
      
        Grover Cleveland
       defeated Republican incumbent 
        Benjamin Harrison
      . In winning, Cleveland became the first former president to be restored to the office.

        Harrison’s first term as president provoked widespread discontent. Despite the narrowness of his victory in 1888, the Republican Congress promptly pushed through a series of partisan measures, and resulting legislation such as the McKinley Tariff Act (1890)—which substantially raised duties on most imports—was met with frustrated charges that Harrison was too closely aligned with the country’s wealthy elite. Another congressional act, under which millions of dollars of surplus funds were allocated to pensions for Civil War veterans, was seen as wasteful. By 1892 the Democrats had won back the House of Representatives, and, with dwindling support from Republican political bosses, Harrison’s political future was in doubt. In early June, shortly before the opening of the Republican National Convention in Minneapolis, Minnesota, past presidential candidate 
          James G. Blaine
         resigned as Harrison’s secretary of state in the hopes of securing the party’s nomination once again. Harrison, however, managed to stave off Blaine’s challenge, as well as an unexpected groundswell of support for former Ohio representative 
          William McKinley
        , in the first round of balloting. Delegates replaced Vice Pres. 
          Levi Morton
         on the ticket with journalist 
          Whitelaw Reid
        , who had recently served as U.S. ambassador to France.

        Since leaving the White House in 1889, Cleveland had worked for a New York City law firm. His decision to run for president for a third time was motivated in part by his opposition to the growing 
          Free Silver Movement
        , which sought to stimulate inflation and thereby alleviate the debts of farmers in the West through the unlimited coinage of silver. (The Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890, the passage of which had been urged by several Western states, had already required the government to purchase 4.5 million ounces of silver each month.) While he personally backed the gold standard, Cleveland mainly desired that the Democratic Party resist the sway of free-silver advocates. With few other promising candidates and the benefit of his prominent stature, he found considerable support at the party’s convention in Chicago in late June, easily winning the nomination over David B. Hill, who had succeeded him as governor of New York, and Iowa Gov. Horace Boies. The Democrats’ vice presidential candidate was 
          Adlai Stevenson
        , a former congressman from Illinois and an assistant postmaster general during Cleveland’s first term.
With the platforms of both major parties endorsing a moderate approach to bimetallism, the
          Populist Party
        , which had arisen from an alliance of agrarian reformers, emerged for some voters as an appealing alternative. In addition to demanding free and unlimited silver, the party championed a host of other measures designed to strengthen political democracy and to give farmers economic parity with business and industry. 
          James B. Weaver
        , a former presidential candidate for the Greenback-Labor Party, won the Populist nomination in Omaha, Nebraska, in early July.
Neither Harrison nor Cleveland campaigned much, in part out of respect for Harrison’s wife, who was ill for much of the year and died two weeks before the election. As the Democrats’ primary stump speaker, Stevenson notably emphasized the party’s opposition to the Federal Elections Bill (1890)—a measure that aimed to protect voting rights for African Americans by allowing the federal government to monitor state and local elections—in an attempt to attract support from white Southerners who might otherwise have been drawn to the Populists. In addition, the race was undoubtedly affected by violent labour strikes in July at silver mines in Coeur d’Alene, Idaho, and at Andrew Carnegie’s steelworks in Homestead, Pennsylvania. (See Coeur d’Alene riots and Homestead Strike.) The incidents, which had been triggered by wage cuts for workers, were viewed by many as evidence that Harrison’s high-tariff policy was unfriendly to labour.
In the end, Cleveland won the popular vote by some 380,000 votes and managed 277 electoral votes to Harrison’s 145—the most decisive win in a presidential contest in two decades. Weaver, for his part, garnered 22 electoral votes, all from states west of the Mississippi River. Cleveland’s victory proved to be somewhat Pyrrhic, though, as the country soon plunged into an economic depression that he struggled to overcome.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1888. 
        For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1896.
The results of the 1892 U.S. presidential election are provided in the table.
