United States presidential election of 1992,  American presidential election held on Nov. 3, 1992, in which Democrat Bill Clinton defeated incumbent Republican Pres. George Bush. Independent candidate Ross Perot secured nearly 19 percent of the vote—the highest percentage of any third-party candidate in a U.S. presidential election in 80 years.
Typically, incumbent presidents face little opposition in securing renomination, but Bush faced a stiff early challenge from conservative commentator Pat Buchanan. At the Republican National Convention in 1988, Bush had pledged to the delegates that he would resist any tax increases, giving his famous “read my lips” pledge. But in 1990, in an attempt to cope with a soaring budget deficit, Bush reneged on that pledge, earning him the enmity of his conservative supporters and the distrust of many voters who had backed him in 1988. Buchanan led an insurgent campaign against Bush, capturing nearly 37 percent of the vote in the New Hampshire primary. Despite the challenge, Bush went on to win the Republican nomination, though his candidacy was wounded.
The Democratic race was intense. With Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin running, the major Democratic candidates skipped the Iowa caucuses. The front-runner appeared to be Clinton, but other candidates, in particular former California governor Jerry Brown and former Massachusetts senator Paul Tsongas, hoped to secure the nomination. Just before the New Hampshire primary, Clinton’s campaign was nearly derailed by widespread press coverage of his alleged 12-year affair with an Arkansas woman, Gennifer Flowers. In a subsequent interview watched by millions of viewers on the television news program 60 Minutes, Clinton and his wife admitted to having marital problems. Clinton’s popularity soon rebounded, and, though Tsongas won in New Hampshire, Clinton scored a strong second-place showing—a performance for which he labeled himself the “Comeback Kid.” Clinton would nearly sweep the Southern primaries held on March 10—the so-called Super Tuesday—and by mid-March Tsongas would withdraw from the contest. Still, Brown continued to challenge Clinton, who had not amassed the requisite number of delegates to secure the Democratic nomination until June 2, when he defeated Brown in California and several other states.
With Clinton suffering from personal scandals and facing a tough primary race and with Bush weakened by a faltering economy, the conditions were ripe for a third-party bid. In February, while a guest on CNN’s Larry King Live, billionaire businessman Ross Perot announced that he would run for president if supporters would file petitions enabling him to be on the ballot in all 50 states. Perot initially earned widespread popularity, particularly among voters dissatisfied with traditional party politics. He reached out to both Democrats and Republicans, hiring former operatives from each party to advise his campaign. Polls in May and June showed Perot leading both Clinton and Bush, but in July, with Clinton’s support increasing on the eve of the Democratic National Convention, Perot unexpectedly dropped from the race.
Clinton chose as his running mate Tennessee Sen. Al Gore—a curious choice, as both hailed from the South. But, with Gore’s centrist credentials added to those of Clinton’s, the move was politically astute, inoculating the Democrats against charges of being tax-and-spend liberals and, in particular, weak on defense (Gore had been one of only 10 Democratic senators to authorize the use of force against Iraq in 1991 in the Persian Gulf War). The campaign seemed likely to be a battle between the Clinton-Gore team and that of Bush and his vice president, Dan Quayle, and Clinton-Gore maintained a sizeable lead over the incumbent ticket. In September, however, Perot returned to the campaign trail and selected former admiral James Stockdale as his vice presidential running mate. Although Perot’s support began low—particularly as many former supporters did not warm to his second candidacy—Perot, spending $65 million of his own money and with his opposition to the North American Free Trade Agreement (supported by both Bush and Clinton), his focus on eliminating the country’s budget deficit and national debt, and his nontraditional campaign, in which he focused on 30-minute infomercial-style advertisements and appeared on the stump to deliver speeches only rarely, saw his support increase as election day neared.
Clinton, on the strength of his middle-of-the-road approach, his apparent sympathy for the concerns of ordinary Americans (his statement “I feel your pain” became a well-known phrase), and his personal warmth, ultimately was able to defeat Bush and Perot, winning 43 percent of the vote to Bush’s 37.4 percent and Perot’s 18.9 percent. In the electoral college, Clinton’s victory was more dramatic: he captured 370 electoral votes to Bush’s 168, thus ending 12 years of Republican control of the presidency.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1988. For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1996.
The results of the 1992 U.S. presidential election are provided in the table.
