United States presidential election of 1836,  American presidential election held in 1836, in which Democrat
      
        Martin Van Buren
       defeated several 
        Whig Party
       candidates led by 
        William Henry Harrison
      .

        As Pres. 
          Andrew Jackson
        ’s second term drew to a close, he unofficially anointed his vice president, Martin Van Buren, as the standard-bearer of the Democratic Party. Although Van Buren lacked Jackson’s personal charisma, he was considered a skilled politician, and in May 1835 he was unanimously nominated as the party’s presidential candidate at a national convention in Baltimore, Md. Rep. 
          Richard M. Johnson
         of Kentucky—a military hero during the War of 1812—was chosen as the vice presidential nominee despite objections from some delegates regarding his long-term intimate relationship with a slave.

        While Jackson had effectively galvanized a base of supporters over the course of his presidency, he also provoked considerable opposition. Specifically, his assertive response to the nullification crisis in South Carolina in 1832–33 drew the ire of some states’ rights defenders, especially in the South, and his swift withdrawal of government funds from the Bank of the United States later in 1833 alienated advocates of nationalist economic policies. By 1834 several anti-Jackson factions, including the National Republican Party and the Anti-Masonic Party, had coalesced into the Whig Party. The Whigs had no unifying platform, however, and in the absence of a national convention, Whig presidential candidates were put forward by various state conventions and legislatures. This decentralized approach resulted in the emergence of four nominees—former Ohio senator and U.S. ambassador William Henry Harrison, Tennessee Sen. Hugh L. White, Massachusetts Sen. 
          Daniel Webster
        , and North Carolina Sen. Willie P. Mangum—each of whom served as the sole Whig presidential candidate on the ballot for a state or group of states.
With multiple candidates, the upstart Whig Party was successful at attracting support from disparate regions of the country. White in particular was able to harness Southern slaveholders’ growing distrust of Northern politicians—such as Van Buren, a New Yorker—whom they suspected might be sympathetic to the incipient abolition movement. Some Democrats charged that the Whigs, by running several nominees at once, aimed to prevent any one candidate from attaining a majority of electoral votes, which would thereby force the decision to the House of Representatives. However, this does not appear to have been a deliberate strategy.
While the popular-vote tallies were close, Van Buren was ultimately able to maintain his party’s hold on the presidency, with a total of 170 electoral votes. Harrison, who had demonstrated a populist appeal through active campaigning, won 73 electoral votes, followed by White with 26. (Webster collected only Massachusetts’s 14 votes, and Mangum picked up South Carolina’s 11.) On the vice presidential side of the ticket, continued opposition to Johnson prevented him from reaching an electoral majority. He subsequently won the office by defeating Harrison’s running mate, New York Rep. Francis Granger, in a Senate vote.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1832. 
        For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1840.
The results of the 1836 U.S. presidential election are provided in the table.
