United States presidential election of 1920,  American presidential election, held on November 2, 1920, in which Republican 
        Warren G. Harding
       defeated Democrat 
        James M. Cox
       in a landslide.
Well before the campaign was officially under way, it became apparent that the 1920 election would be a referendum on the policies of Pres. Woodrow Wilson. Wilson’s second term as president had attracted much criticism, beginning with the reversal of his 1916 campaign promise to keep the country out of what would later become known as World War I. His failure to involve congressional voices in his negotiation of the Treaty of Versailles (1919), the postwar peace settlement, alienated members of both parties. His subsequent refusal to compromise with Republicans who objected to the 
          League of Nations
        , which the treaty established, led to the collapse of the treaty’s ratification and stoked a contentious debate on the subject of internationalism. Furthermore, in 1919–20 the Wilson administration raised the ire of progressives by siding against labour in several high-profile strikes and leading mass deportations of suspected radicals.
In the state primary elections the Republicans fielded a number of promising candidates, including Gen. Leonard Wood, Illinois Gov. Frank O. Lowden, and California Sen. Hiram Johnson. None emerged with enough delegates to capture the nomination, however, and the scene therefore shifted to the Republican National Convention, held in Chicago in early June. When the convention deadlocked after several rounds of balloting, party leaders—supposedly in a smoke-filled room at the Blackstone Hotel—turned to the genial Harding, an Ohio senator, as a compromise candidate. Harding eventually landed the nomination, and Massachusetts Gov. 
          Calvin Coolidge
        , who had gained prominence for his role in quashing the Boston Police Strike (1919), was selected as his running mate.
The Democrats also entered their convention with uncertainty, in part because Wilson—secretly hoping, despite his unpopularity and failing health, to win a third nomination—had not appointed a standard bearer. Wilson’s reluctance to abandon office was particularly crippling to his son-in-law, Treasury Secretary William G. McAdoo, who was viewed as an early favourite but could not publicly seek the nomination. Meeting in San Francisco in late June–early July, convention delegates considered McAdoo and Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer before ultimately deciding on James M. Cox, the governor of Ohio. The vice presidential nominee was 
          Franklin D. Roosevelt
        , then age 38, who resigned his post as the assistant secretary of the Navy to focus on the campaign.
Harding ran a “front porch” campaign from his home in Marion, Ohio, during which he emphasized conservatism as the guiding principle of his candidacy. In addition to advocating for lower taxes and limited immigration, he famously issued a call for a return to “normalcy” amid the social and political upheavals of the time. Harding, in line with the Republican Party platform, firmly rejected membership in the League of Nations. The platform argued that it was possible to preserve peace “without the compromise of national independence, without depriving the people of the United States in advance of the right to determine for themselves what is just and fair when the occasion arises, and without involving them as participants and not as peacemakers in a multitude of quarrels, the merits of which they are unable to judge.” It also was highly critical of both the war effort and the peace negotiations, charging that the previous Democratic administration had been “unprepared” either for the war or for winning the peace.
Cox and Roosevelt, meanwhile, toured the country to promote the Democratic platform, which officially endorsed the League of Nations as well as a bevy of progressive causes. The Democrats’ political and financial organization was in disarray, however, and they experienced internal dissension over Prohibition and other issues. More significantly, perhaps, the Democratic platform was simply out of step with the war-weary, disillusioned mood of the country in 1920. In contrast to the Republicans, the Democratic platform advocated membership in the League of Nations “as the surest, if not the only, practicable means of maintaining the permanent peace of the world and terminating the insufferable burden of great military and naval establishments.” Late attempts by Cox to paint Harding as corrupt and Harding voters as traitorous were unsuccessful.
To the surprise of few, Harding won the election handily, tallying 404 electoral votes to Cox’s 127. The margin in the popular vote was 60.3 percent to 34.1 percent, which remains the widest differential in history. (Several minor candidates—most prominently the Socialist Eugene V. Debs, who was imprisoned at the time—collected the remainder of votes.) Republicans interpreted the resounding victory as a mandate to reverse Wilson’s progressive policies at home and his internationalism abroad.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1916.
        For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1924.
The results of the 1920 U.S. presidential election are provided in the table.
