United States presidential election of 1840,  American presidential election held in 1840, in which Whig candidate William Henry Harrison defeated incumbent Democratic Pres. Martin Van Buren.
By the election of 1840 the two-party system had become firmly entrenched in United States politics, with the Whigs trying to unseat the incumbent Democrats, who had controlled the White House since the election of 1828. The first Whig national convention, held in December 1839, had chosen Harrison over Sen. Henry Clay of Kentucky largely because of Harrison’s military record. In Harrison the Whigs believed they had found a new Andrew Jackson, attractive as a war hero and a frontiersman. To pull in Southern Democrats, the Whigs nominated John Tyler of Virginia for vice president. The third Democratic national convention unanimously renominated Van Buren, one of the founders of the party. His running mate, Richard Johnson, was not formally renominated but became the de facto candidate.
Energetic and systematized hoopla surrounded the campaigns of both candidates, with massive rallies on both sides. Pamphlets and party newspapers were widely distributed, and committees and clubs were set up to interact directly with voters. At the time party platforms were still not the norm, but each party’s views were strongly felt—and much repeated. The greatest ideological divide came from views of governmental responsibility. Democrats stressed their interest in a restricted role for the federal government, while Whigs called for a strong central government. Capitalizing on the country’s depressed economic state, the Whigs emphasized Harrison’s simple lifestyle over Van Buren’s relative decadence. He became, as a result, the first “packaged” presidential candidate, depicted as a simple soul from the backwoods. The campaign deliberately avoided discussion of national issues and substituted political songs, partisan slogans, and appropriate insignia: miniature log cabins and jugs of hard cider were widely distributed to emphasize Harrison’s frontier identification, and the cry of “Tippecanoe and Tyler too” rang throughout the land, recalling Harrison’s dramatic triumph at the Battle of Tippecanoe 29 years earlier.
Strong campaigning by the Whigs led to an overwhelming victory for Harrison. With the highest voter turnout to date, Harrison won 234 electoral votes to Van Buren’s 60. He was the oldest man, at age 67, ever elected president up to that time. Harrison delivered his inaugural address, which lasted nearly two hours, in a cold drizzle, wearing no gloves or overcoat. He contracted a cold that later developed into pneumonia, and, after one month’s service, he became the first president to die in office.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1836. For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1844.
The results of the 1840 U.S. presidential election are provided in the table.
