United States presidential election of 1824,  American presidential election held in 1824, in which John Quincy Adams was elected by the House of Representatives after Andrew Jackson won the most popular and electoral votes but failed to receive a majority.
Beginning in 1796, caucuses of the political parties’ congressional delegations met informally to nominate their presidential and vice presidential candidates, leaving the general public with no direct input. The subsequent demise in the 1810s of the Federalist Party, which failed even to nominate a presidential candidate in 1820, made nomination by the Democratic-Republican caucus tantamount to election as president. This early nomination system—dubbed “King Caucus” by its critics—evoked widespread resentment, even from some members of the Democratic-Republican caucus. In the election of 1820, during the period often termed the “Era of Good Feelings,” James Monroe ran unopposed, winning 231 of the 235 electoral votes (Adams received one, and three other votes were not recorded).
By 1824 the King Caucus system had fallen into such disrepute that only one-fourth of the Democratic-Republican congressional delegation took part in the caucus, which nominated Secretary of the Treasury William Crawford of Georgia. (Crawford had only narrowly been defeated in the caucus by Monroe in 1816.) Crawford’s nomination seemed unusual, given that he had suffered a stroke in 1823 and that Adams and Jackson were more popular figures in the party. Jackson, a military hero from Tennessee, was nominated by the Tennessee state legislature in 1822 and was joined in the contest by Adams, from Massachusetts and an able secretary of state under Monroe, and Kentuckian Henry Clay, the speaker of the House of Representatives, who was viewed as the candidate of the West. John C. Calhoun of South Carolina abandoned a bid for the presidency, instead choosing to run as the vice presidential nominee for both Adams and Jackson.
The 1824 election was the first in which a large majority of electors were chosen by voters rather than by appointment by state legislatures. Calling what ensued a “campaign” might be an overstatement, however, because the candidates did not actively campaign on their own behalf. Rather, advocates of the candidates mobilized to spread the word and turn out their base of supporters. When the votes were tallied, Jackson received more than 150,000 votes, while Adams finished second with some 108,000. Clay and Crawford were a distant third and fourth, respectively, in the popular vote. Jackson received 99 electoral votes, winning outright in Alabama, Indiana, Mississippi, New Jersey, North Carolina, South Carolina, Pennsylvania, and Tennessee while taking some electoral votes in Illinois (3), Louisiana (3), Maryland (7), and New York (1). Adams captured 84 electoral votes, running strongly in particular in New England; he won all the electoral votes of Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont, carried 26 of New York’s 36, and won a handful from Delaware (1), Illinois (1), Louisiana (2), and Maryland (3).
With Crawford picking up 41 electoral votes and Clay 37, no candidate received a majority, however, and the House of Representatives would therefore choose among the top three leading candidates, as dictated by the Twelfth Amendment. Clay was thus eliminated from contention, but as speaker of the House he would play a large role in the ensuing election, in which each state would cast only one vote. Crawford’s illness precluded him from being a major factor, so the presidency was largely a battle between Adams and Jackson.
Jackson staked his claim to the presidency by arguing that he had led both the popular and electoral vote tallies. But, while Jackson largely stayed out of negotiations with members of Congress, Adams actively sought their votes and even had a private meeting with Clay. In the event, on Feb. 9, 1825, Adams was elected president by the House of Representatives on the first ballot, winning 13 states to Jackson’s 7 and Crawford’s 4. Kentucky’s delegation, which had received direction from the state legislature to vote for Jackson, instead plumped for Adams, being swayed (as were some members in some other delegations) by Clay. Soon after Adams’s inauguration, Clay was appointed secretary of state, which led Jackson’s supporters to denounce an alleged deal between Adams and Clay as the “Corrupt Bargain.” Although Adams won in 1824, Jackson got his revenge in 1828 when he defeated Adams to capture the presidency.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1820. For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1828.
The results of the 1824 U.S. presidential election are provided in the table.
