United States presidential election of 1808,  American presidential election held in 1808, in which Democratic-Republican candidate 
        James Madison
       defeated Federalist
      
        Charles Cotesworth Pinckney
      .
Deciding not to run for reelection, Pres. Thomas Jefferson unofficially anointed James Madison, his secretary of state and fellow Virginian, as his successor. As an architect of the U.S. Constitution and Jefferson’s principal adviser, Madison appeared to be an ideal presidential candidate. However, widespread dissatisfaction with the 
          Embargo Act
         of 1807—a foreign-policy maneuver contrived by Jefferson and Madison that had had unintended deleterious effects on the U.S. economy—led to fractiousness within the Democrat-Republican Party. At the party’s congressional nominating caucus in January 1808, Madison emerged triumphant despite opposition from supporters of former foreign minister James Monroe and Vice Pres. 
          George Clinton
        . Clinton, who had boycotted the caucus, was nominated to continue as vice president, in part to undermine his presidential ambitions.
Meanwhile, the Federalist Party criticized the Embargo Act even more forcefully and accused Madison of deliberately working against American interests. At the party’s caucus in September, Gen. Charles C. Pinckney of South Carolina was selected as the presidential nominee, and former U.S. ambassador and New York senator Rufus King was nominated for vice president—the same ticket the Federalists had put forth in 1804.
Although the Federalists found favour in New England, a traditional party stronghold where the local mercantile industry had been economically crippled by the Embargo Act, the Democrat-Republicans’ superior political organization and numerous newspaper endorsements provided them with a broader base of support. In the end, Madison earned a decisive victory in the contest, with 122 electoral votes to Pinckney’s 47. Clinton, who was reelected vice president, managed an additional six votes for president from his home state of New York. While the Federalists achieved greater electoral success than they had in the previous election, carrying all states in New England except Vermont, the overall results confirmed the ascendancy of the Democrat-Republican Party.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1804.
        For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1812.
The results of the 1808 U.S. presidential election are provided in the table.
