United States presidential election of 1832,  American presidential election held in 1832, in which Democratic incumbent Andrew Jackson defeated National Republican candidate Henry Clay with 219 electoral votes to Clay’s 49.
Though Jackson was still a popular leader as he approached the end of his first term in office, his administration was fractured by a personal conflict with his vice president, John C. Calhoun. His advocacy of the dissolution of the electoral college and of rotation of office in the federal government earned him further ire from strict constitutionalists.
Jackson’s opponents hoped to further embarrass him by posing a new dilemma. The charter of the Bank of the United States was due to expire in 1836. The president had not clearly defined his position on the bank, but he was increasingly uneasy about how it was then organized. More significant was the fact that large blocs of voters who favoured Jackson were openly hostile to the bank. In the summer of 1832, Jackson’s opponents rushed through Congress a bill to recharter it. The move, spearheaded by Kentucky senator and former speaker of the House Clay, who would become his challenger for the presidency, forced Jackson to choose between signing the measure and alienating supporters or vetoing it and appearing to be a foe of sound banking. Jackson ultimately vetoed the bill on July 10, 1832. His opponents raged that a failure to renew the charter would have devastating consequences for the economy. However, Jackson’s excoriation of the bank’s reputation as a bastion of entrenched power was well received by voters.
In addition to running against Clay, Jackson was opposed by former U.S. attorney general William Wirt of Maryland, a candidate for the Anti-Masonic Party, the first third party. The Anti-Masons opposed both Jackson and Clay for their Masonic affiliations. The Anti-Masons held a convention—the first of its kind—in late 1831 in order to select their candidates. The other contending parties followed suit, ushering in the convention system. The National Republicans nominated Clay for president and John Sergeant for vice president, while the Democrats chose former secretary of state Martin Van Buren to replace Calhoun as Jackson’s vice president. Though the National Republicans attempted to paint Jackson’s positions as unconstitutional, his reform agenda remained popular, and he won a second term by a wide margin.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1828. For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1836.
The results of the 1832 presidential election are provided in the table.
