United States presidential election of 1940,  American presidential election held on Nov. 5, 1940, in which Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt defeated Republican Wendell L. Willkie. By becoming the first president to win a third term, Roosevelt broke the two-term precedent established by the country’s first president, George Washington.
The Republican Party, which had been defeated in landslide elections to Roosevelt in 1932 and 1936, had a number of leading contenders for the nomination early in 1940, including Thomas E. Dewey, a U.S. attorney in New York, Sen. Arthur H. Vandenberg of Michigan, and Sen. Robert A. Taft of Ohio. Vandenberg lost the Wisconsin and Nebraska primaries to Dewey in April and had receded as a favourite by the time the Republicans met in Philadelphia on June 24–28 to select their party standard bearer. Dewey and Taft finished atop the first ballot, but Dewey had failed to secure the 501 delegates necessary to win. Wendell L. Willkie, a lawyer who had been a Roosevelt delegate at the 1932 Democratic convention, emerged as a dark-horse candidate. By the fourth ballot Willkie had taken the lead, and on the sixth ballot, after Michigan shifted its votes to Willkie, he secured the Republican nomination. The convention then nominated Charles McNary, the party’s leader in the U.S. Senate, for the vice presidency. The Republican platform opposed participation in foreign wars, urged a strong national defense, demanded a slash in federal expenditures, and criticized Roosevelt’s concentration of power in the executive branch.
Roosevelt, first elected in 1932 during the height of the Great Depression, was initially reluctant to stand for a third term, owing to Washington’s two-term precedent. But, following the outbreak of World War II in Europe and with the potential for further U.S. involvement and the Democrats unable to find a suitable replacement, he began to hint that he would accept the party’s presidential nomination in 1940. At the Democratic National Convention, which met on July 15–18 in Chicago, Roosevelt was nominated on the first ballot. Roosevelt chose as his running mate Secretary of Agriculture Henry A. Wallace, but his nomination was subject to strong opposition, particularly from conservative delegates. Roosevelt hinted that he would withdraw his acceptance of the nomination if Wallace failed to secure the vice presidential nomination. In the end, Wallace was confirmed as the convention’s vice presidential selection, winning the votes of about three-fifths of the delegates (House speaker William Brockman Bankhead won the backing of nearly one-third of the delegates).
In the general election campaign, discussion centred most prominently on World War II and its relationship to the United States. Still, no fundamental differences were voiced by the two principal candidates on the subject. Both favoured a vigorous defense program and all possible aid to the United Kingdom “short of war.” Roosevelt had the advantage of position, which enabled him to counter verbal attacks with dramatic action—as when he announced that 50 over-age destroyers would be given to Britain in exchange for the lease of certain sites for naval bases (a plan that later became the lend-lease program). Although Willkie criticized the manner in which it was arranged, he did not disapprove of the substance of the program.
On domestic issues there was almost as little avowed disagreement. Willkie declared himself in favour of retaining the main features of the New Deal legislation, promising only that, if he was elected, he would give it more efficient and impartial execution.
By and large, the newspaper editorial pages lined up in favour of Willkie, including many that had previously backed Roosevelt. Still, a general disinclination to change leadership amid crisis probably weighed heavily on the minds of voters—much more so than the perceived deep-seated opposition to a third term for a president. In the end, Roosevelt won 54.7 percent of the vote and 449 electoral votes, a landslide by any definition but lower than the totals he had amassed in 1932 and 1936. Willkie received 44.8 percent and 82 electoral votes, carrying 10 states: Colorado, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Michigan, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Vermont.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1936. For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1944.
The results of the 1940 U.S. presidential election are provided in the table.
