United States presidential election of 1828,  American presidential election held in 1828, in which Democrat
      
        Andrew Jackson
       defeated National Republican
      
        John Quincy Adams
      .
The results of the 1828 U.S. presidential election are provided in the table.

        The election of 1828 was arguably one of the most significant in United States history, ushering in the era of political campaigns and paving the way for the solidification of political parties. The previous election, of 1824, had seen John Quincy Adams become president although his opponent Andrew Jackson had earned the most electoral votes. Because no candidate won a majority of the electoral vote, however, that election was decided by the House of Representatives in Adams’s favour after fellow candidate and Speaker of the House Henry Clay (who finished fourth) threw his support behind Adams. Adams subsequently appointed Clay his secretary of state, giving merit to rumours of a “corrupt bargain” in the eyes of Jackson supporters. During the contested election of 1824, followers of Henry Clay and John Quincy Adams began calling themselves National Republicans, and backers of Andrew Jackson emerged as Democratic Republicans. By the election of 1828, the Jacksonians had become known simply as the Democrats. Unlike previous elections, in which the parties’ congressional delegations would generally gather to nominate a candidate (this had failed to coalesce support around a single candidate among the Democratic-Republicans in 1824), this election was the first in which a majority of states held conventions to endorse a candidate.
By 1828 selection of presidential electors was being decided by the voters in all but two states, and public opinion was becoming more important than ever before. Jackson’s supporters established pro-Jackson newspapers and helped to distribute information and election material. Both sides organized rallies, parades, and other public events to promote their chosen candidate.
Personalities and slander played a large part in the 1828 election. Jackson and his wife, Rachel, despite their long marriage, had been vilified in campaign pamphlets as adulterers. News of Jackson’s proclivities for dueling and gambling became embellished and widespread. The mudslinging was just as fierce from Jackson’s supporters, portraying Adams not only as a “corrupt bargainer” but also as an unscrupulous aristocrat who had misappropriated tax dollars. In the end, with 178 electoral votes to Adams’s 83, Jackson became the first president to gain office by a direct appeal to the mass of voters rather than through the support of a recognized political organization.
For the results of the previous election, see United States presidential election of 1824. 
        For the results of the subsequent election, see United States presidential election of 1832.
