White Revolution,  aggressive modernization program implemented in Iran in 1963 and continued until 1979. The reforms, undertaken by Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi, upended the wealth and influence of the traditional landowning classes, altered rural economies, and led to rapid urbanization and Westernization. The program was economically successful, but the benefits were unevenly distributed, while changes to social norms and traditional institutions were pervasive.
The program occurred amid a turning point in the development of the Iranian state. Industrial expansion had been promoted by the Pahlavi regime, while political parties that resisted the shah’s absolute consolidation of power had been silenced and pushed to the margins. In 1961 the shah dissolved the 20th Majles (Iran’s legislative assembly) and cleared the way for the land reform law of 1962. Under this program, the landed minority was forced to give up ownership of vast tracts of land for redistribution to small-scale cultivators. The former landlords were compensated for their loss in the form of shares of state-owned Iranian industries. Cultivators and workers were also given a share in industrial and agricultural profits, and cooperatives began to replace the large landowners in rural areas as sources of capital for irrigation, agrarian maintenance, and development.
The land reforms were a mere prelude. The White Revolution, a far more ambitious program of social, political, and economic reform, was put to a plebiscite and ratified in 1963. These reforms eventually redistributed land to some 2.5 million families, established literacy and health corps to benefit Iran’s rural areas, further reduced the autonomy of tribal groups, and advanced social and legal reforms that furthered the emancipation and enfranchisement of women. In subsequent decades, per capita income for Iranians skyrocketed, and oil revenue fueled an enormous increase in state funding for industrial development projects.
Land reform, however, was soon in trouble. The government was unable to put in place a comprehensive support system and infrastructure that replaced the role of the landowner, who had previously provided tenants with all the basic necessities for farming. The result was a high failure rate for new farms and a subsequent flight of agricultural workers and farmers to the country’s major cities, particularly Tehrān, where a booming construction industry promised employment. The extended family, the traditional support system in Iranian culture, deteriorated as increasing numbers of young Iranians crowded into the country’s largest cities, far from home and in search of work, only to be met by high prices, isolation, and poor living conditions.
Many Shiʿi leaders criticized the White Revolution as well, holding that liberalization laws concerning women were against Islamic values. More important, the shah’s reforms chipped away at the traditional bases of clerical power. The development of secular courts had already reduced clerical power over law and jurisprudence, and the reforms’ emphasis on secular education further eroded the former monopoly of the ulama in that field. (Paradoxically, the White Revolution’s Literacy Corps was to be the only reform implemented by the shah to survive the Islamic revolution, because of its intense popularity.) Most pertinent to clerical independence, land reforms initiated the breakup of huge areas previously held under charitable trust (vaqf). These lands were administered by members of the ulama and formed a considerable portion of that class’s revenue. The most notable critic from this class was Ruhollah Khomeini, whose theories of clerical governance and network of government dissidents later facilitated the overthrow of the shah in the Islamic revolution of 1979 and thereby ended the White Revolution.
