Acouchy,  (genus Myoprocta), incorrectly spelled acouchi or acuchi,  either of two species of South American rodents that resemble the small tropical-forest-dwelling hoofed animals of Africa and Asia (see royal antelope; chevrotain). Weighing 1 to 1.5 kg (2.2 to 3.3 pounds), acouchys are 30 to 39 cm (12 to 15 inches) long, with a very short (4 to 8 cm), pencil-thin tail with white hairs on the underside and at the tufted tip. The legs are long and slender, and the three-toed hind feet end in hooflike claws. The coarse fur of the red acouchy (Myoprocta acouchy) is dark chestnut red or orange on the sides of the body and legs and black or dark red on the rump; underparts range from dark red to orange. Upperparts of the green acouchy (M. pratti) are covered by grizzled fur, each hair of which has several alternating black and yellow bands, giving the animal an overall green or olive-coloured appearance. Underparts are pale orange, sometimes with white patches.
Both species live in mature tropical-lowland rainforest of the Amazon River basin from Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru to western and northern Brazil and the Guianas. Acouchys are terrestrial, active during the day, and usually solitary, bearing litters of one to three young. They eat fruit, seeds, and seedlings and bury nuts in the forest floor throughout their home ranges. Acouchys do not dig shelters but will use cavities constructed by other mammals, particularly armadillo burrows. During the night they rest in leaf nests inside hollow logs on the forest floor. When alarmed, acouchys flee, emitting birdlike whistles and sometimes covering long distances by jumping with both hind feet simultaneously, similarly to the escape behaviour of small African forest antelopes (duikers).
Acouchys are related to agoutis (genus Dasyprocta), and both are classified in the family Dasyproctidae of the rodent suborder Hystricognatha. Some authorities assign acouchys to a subfamily (Dasyproctinae) within the agouti family, Agoutidae.
