Anomalure,  (family Anomaluridae),  any of seven African species of rodents comprising the large anomalures (genus Anomalurus), pygmy anomalures (genus Idiurus), and flightless anomalure (genus Zenkerella). All live in tropical forests, and the large and pygmy anomalures are the only gliding mammals in Africa.
Anomalures have lightly built skeletons and slender bodies with long limbs and strong, curved claws. The eyes are large, and the fur is dense and silky. Two rows of prominent, overlapping, keeled scales cover the underside of the long tail near its base; the rest of the tail is covered by long hair, which gives it a bushy, tufted appearance. The gliding anomalures have broad, fur-covered membranes formed from skin and muscle. Small membranes extend between the neck and wrists, and larger ones span the tail and hind limbs, but the most expansive are the side membranes connecting the forelimbs and hind limbs. The front part of each side membrane is supported by a cartilaginous strut attached to the elbow joint. This strut differs from a similar structure in flying squirrels that originates from the wrist bones. By extending their limbs, anomalures transform themselves into a gliding platform that they control by manipulating the membranes and tail. The curved claws and tail scales help stabilize the animal when it rests on vertical surfaces.
Large and pygmy anomalures are nocturnal and nest in hollow trees, entering and exiting through holes located at various heights along the trunk. Colonies of up to 100 pygmy anomalures live in some trees. Large anomalures gnaw bark and then lick the exuding sap; they also eat flowers, leaves, nuts, termites, and ants. Pygmy anomalures eat oil palm pulp and insects but also gnaw bark, possibly to obtain sap. A flightless anomalure has been recorded eating termites on a tree trunk, but little else is known about the habits of this rare species.
The largest of the seven species is Pel’s anomalure (A. pelii), with a body 40 to 46 cm (16 to 18 inches) long and a tail of nearly the same length. The little anomalure (A. pusillus) is about half the size of Pel’s and has a proportionally shorter tail. The pygmy anomalures (I. macrotis and I. zenkeri) are smaller still, ranging from 7 to 10 cm in body length, not including their long tails (9 to 13 cm). The flightless anomalure (Z. insignis) is about 20 cm long and has a tail slightly shorter than its body.
Though often called scaly-tailed flying or flightless squirrels, anomalures are not squirrels (family Sciuridae), nor are they even closely related. Rather, family Anomaluridae is classified with spring hares (family Pedetidae) in a separate suborder, Anomaluromorpha. This, however, is an artificial arrangement uniting groups for which evolutionary relationships to other rodents are unknown. In fact, anomalures are not closely related to any living rodents. Their nearest relatives are extinct species, represented only by fossils, that lived in Africa between the Late Eocene (37.2 million to 33.9 million years ago) and Early Pliocene (5.3 million to 3.6 million years ago) epochs.
