Blackbuck,  (Antilope cervicapra),  an antelope (family Bovidae) indigenous to the plains of India. The blackbuck is an antelope of the same tribe (Antilopini) that includes gazelles, the springbok, and the gerenuk. What sets the blackbuck apart from the rest is the adult male’s horns, which are long (50–61 cm [20–24 inches], the record being 71.5 cm [28.1 inches]), spirally twisted, V-shaped, and covered with pronounced ridges nearly to the tips. In addition, there is a striking contrast between the black-and-white coloration of mature male blackbucks and the reddish yellow coloration of females and immature males—a much greater contrast than is found in any of the blackbuck’s tribal relatives.
Male blackbucks weigh 34–45 kg (75–100 pounds) and stand 74–88 cm (29–35 inches) at the shoulder. Females are not much smaller, weighing 31–39 kg (68–86 pounds) and having shoulder heights only a few centimetres shorter than the males. Females also have the same white markings as males, including circular eye patches, mouth, underside, inner legs, and rump patch. The only obvious difference between females and immature males is the presence of horns. Even black males, which are most colourful at the end of the monsoon season, begin to fade in midwinter after the annual molt and turn quite brown by early April when hot weather returns. In fact there is one southern Indian population in which the males never turn black. Nevertheless, male blackbucks are still darker than females and immature males.
Blackbucks are primarily grazers and frequent open short grassland, but they can survive in semidesert where there is sufficient vegetation, and they often frequent nearly barren salt pans. However, they avoid woodland and shrubland. They prefer green grass but browse when grass is sparse. Blackbucks in the semidesert of Rajasthan have been observed to drink twice a day. They are active in daytime, tolerate the hottest sun, and seek shade for only two to three hours at midday.
Blackbuck once lived on open plains over the whole Indian subcontinent, but their numbers and range have been drastically reduced as the human population has grown. The total blackbuck population, estimated at 80,000 in 1947, was down to 8,000 by 1964, but it has since recovered to 25,000 in protected areas. Late in the 19th century, in relatively well-watered savannas of East Punjab, aggregations of 8,000–10,000 were reported. Now groups larger than 30–50 are uncommon, consisting of bachelor males, females and young with or without a territorial male, and maternity herds of females guarding concealed young.
With a six-month gestation period, blackbucks can produce two young a year. Breeding occurs year-round, but the main birth and rutting peaks occur in February and March, with a secondary peak at the end of the monsoon in August and September. Only territorial males breed; they defend properties as small as 8 hectares (20 acres), but they do this for only a few weeks. Rutting bucks pursue and herd females, approaching with prancing steps, a curled tail, and their swollen preorbital glands everted while emitting throaty grunts. Territories are demarcated with dung middens and sticky black preorbital secretions deposited on grass stems and bushes.
Blackbucks rely mainly on eyesight to avoid capture. Fast as any antelope, the only predator they cannot outrun is the cheetah, which was once used by the Mughals for the sport of coursing blackbucks and gazelles. The main predators now—pariah dogs and jackals—feed mainly on fawns.
