bonobo,  (Pan paniscus), also called pygmy chimpanzee,  ape that was regarded as a subspecies of the chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) until 1933, when it was first classified separately. The bonobo is found only in lowland rainforests along the south bank of the Congo River in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Closely resembling the chimpanzee in both physical appearance and mode of life, the bonobo is more slender, with longer limbs, a narrower chest, and a rounder head with a less-protruding face. Bonobos are not much smaller than chimpanzees: males weigh about 39 kg (86 pounds) and females about 31 kg, but both are the same height, standing 115 cm (3.8 feet) tall when erect.
Bonobos feed mainly in trees and descend to the ground to move to other trees. They eat mostly fruits (which they often share with one another) and other vegetation, such as herbs and roots. In some places, food is washed in streams. The diet is supplemented by invertebrates such as caterpillars and earthworms. In rare instances, they have been observed eating bats, flying squirrels, and even young duikers (small antelopes). Unlike chimpanzees, bonobos do not hunt monkeys but instead play with and groom them. Furthermore, the phenomena of infanticide, cannibalism, and lethal invasion seen among chimps have never been observed among bonobos. Relationships between separate communities also differ—individuals often intermingle. Adult males do not intermingle but, unlike chimpanzees, are not hostile. The egalitarian and peaceful bonobo society might have evolved as a result of reduced competition due to the abundance of food in their habitats.
Bonobos are active during the day and move on all fours by knuckle walking. They make beds from leafy branches, but, in the wild, tool use is mostly limited to leaf umbrellas and branch dragging during intimidation displays. They form communities usually numbering from 30 to more than 100 individuals occupying a home range area of 22–60 square km (8.5–23 square miles). Each community is in turn composed of “parties,” groups of 6–15 individuals that forage together but whose membership is continually changing. Bonobo females and their young form the core of most groups, and males tend to follow the lead of mature females. Females unite against adult males, and mothers help their adult sons to promote their dominance rank. Thus, although adult males are larger in size than adult females, the former cannot be said to dominate the latter. Males groom and share food least frequently with other males, whereas females groom and share food mostly with other females. Males and females, old and young, mate and use a variety of sexual behaviours to promote social bonding. Female bonobos are sexually active for more of the time than their chimpanzee counterparts; they bear offspring at roughly five-year intervals and resume copulating with males within a year of giving birth. Bonobos sometimes mate in a face-to-face position, which is rarely seen among chimpanzees.
Bonobos are among humanity’s closest relatives. Genetic analysis suggests that the line leading to modern humans ( Homo sapiens) and the lineage containing bonobos and chimpanzees diverged between about 6.5 million and 9.3 million years ago. Genetic studies also suggest that bonobos and chimpanzees diverged from each other about 1.7 million years ago.
The number of bonobos in the wild is shrinking because of human destruction of forests and illegal hunting of bonobos for meat. The International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources considers the bonobo to be an endangered species; at the end of the 20th century, the estimated population was fewer than 40,000. Surveys conducted in the early 21st century suggest that bonobo populations have continued to decline, falling to slightly more than 20,000 individuals by 2016.
