Bulldog bat,  (family Noctilionidae),  either of two tropical Central and South American bats that are among the few bats that routinely forage low over water. They have full lips and a flat, squarish muzzle very similar to that of a bulldog. Bulldog bats have long, narrow wings and long, pointed ears, their most distinctive feature being their large hind feet. Wide and flat with long, hooklike claws, they are well adapted to snatching prey from the surface of still water.
The lesser bulldog bat (Noctilio albiventris, formerly N. labialis) is about 9 cm (3.5 inches) long with a wingspan of 40–44 cm (15.7–17.3 inches). The greater bulldog, or fisherman, bat (N. leporinus) is considerably larger, with a length of 11–12 cm (4.3–4.7 inches) and a wingspan of up to 70 cm (27.5 inches). Greater bulldog bats weigh about twice that of the lesser. The short fur of both ranges in colour from brown to reddish or orange; the scientific name of the lesser bulldog bat, N. albiventris, indicates its whitish belly. An oily substance that acts as a water repellent covers the wings and large tail membrane of both species; both also swim well.  Bulldog bats are widespread in tropical lowlands, where they roost in colonies during the day. The greater bulldog bat specializes in catching fish for food; the lesser feeds mostly on insects.
Greater and lesser bulldog bats employ a variety of hunting strategies. They use sound (see echolocation) to detect small ripples in the water created by fish or fluttering insects on the surface. The bat then uses its hind feet to seize and carry off the victim. Occasionally, when prey density is high or when the bats return to areas where they have hunted successfully before, they will drag their claws through the water for several metres, catching prey at random without using echolocation. Insects are also taken in mid-air with a wing or the tail membrane. After capture, the prey is transferred to the mouth, briefly chewed, then stored in the large cheek pouches characteristic of these bats.
The two Noctilio species constitute the entire family Noctilionidae, although the name bulldog bat is sometimes also given to the bats of the family Molossidae (see free-tailed bat).
