Chipmunk,  (genus Tamias),  any of 25 species of small, striped, terrestrial squirrels with large internal cheek pouches used for transporting food. They have prominent eyes and ears, a furry tail, and delicate claws. All are active only during the day, and all but one are North American, occurring from southern Canada to west-central Mexico. Body length among most species ranges from 8 to 16 cm (3.1 to 6.3 inches) and tail length from 6 to 14 cm (2.4 to 5.5 inches).
Chipmunks are basically pygmy squirrels adapted to exploiting the resources of rocky terrain and forest understories. They scamper along the ground but are also expert climbers. As a group they are an ecologically versatile genus. Different species can be found from sea level to 3,900 metres (12,800 feet) in environments defined by large rocks, boulders, and cliffs. They inhabit various forest types, from timberline slopes and rock-bordered alpine meadows downward through coniferous and deciduous forests to dry scrublands and sagebrush deserts.
The eastern chipmunk (Tamias striatus), common to the deciduous forests of eastern North America, is the largest. Weighing 70–142 grams (2.5–5 ounces), it has a body 14–19 cm (5.5–7.5 inches) long and a shorter tail (8–11 cm [3.1–4.3 inches]). The fur is reddish brown and is broken by five dark brown stripes running lengthwise down the body. These alternate with two gray-brown stripes and two whitish stripes. The smallest chipmunk is the least chipmunk (T. minimus), which weighs about half as much as the eastern chipmunk. The Hopi chipmunk (T. rufus) lives among the buttes and canyonlands of the American Southwest and is remarkably adept at climbing sheer rock faces and overhangs. The Uinta chipmunk (T. umbrinus), which lives in montane forests of the western United States, is much like a tree squirrel in its habits. In addition to denning in burrows, it regularly sleeps and nests in trees, where it sometimes raises young in tree cavities or abandoned bird nests. The only Old World species is the Siberian chipmunk (T. sibiricus), which ranges from the White Sea of northwestern Russia eastward through Siberia to northern Japan and south to China.
The chipmunks’ call is a shrill chirring or chipping. They relish seeds, berries, and tender plants, but they also eat fungi, insects and other arthropods, and sometimes carrion. They stuff seeds and nuts into their cheek pouches and carry them to a burrow to be stored for later use. As most chipmunks do not accumulate significant fat during the fall, they depend upon this cached food during the winter. Although they experience periods of torpor, chipmunks occasionally emerge on sunny, windless winter days. They were not considered to be true hibernators, but studies indicate that the eastern chipmunk’s body temperature ranges from 35 to 41 °C (95 to 105.8 °F) during activity and drops to 5–7 °C (41–44.6 °F) during torpor—a difference that characterizes true hibernators. Two to eight (rarely nine) young are born in spring or summer after about a month’s gestation. A second litter, usually smaller, is often produced in regions with long summers.
Chipmunks are members of the squirrel family (Sciuridae) within the order Rodentia. Although most classifications acknowledge a single genus of chipmunks, Tamias, some separate the species into the genera Tamias, Eutamias, and Neotamias.
