Cloud rat, also called cloudrunner,  any of six species of slow-moving, nocturnal, tree-dwelling rodents found only in Philippine forests. Giant cloud rats belong to the genus Phloeomys (two species), whereas bushy-tailed cloud rats are classified in the genus Crateromys (four species).
Also called slender-tailed cloud rats, both species of Phloeomys live on the island of Luzon and weigh from 1.5 to more than 2 kg (3.3 to 4.4 pounds). Their bodies range in length from 30 to 50 cm (12 to 20 inches), not including a furred tail that is about as long as the body. Phloeomys pallidus, found in northern Luzon, has long, dense, soft fur of cream or pale gray interrupted by black or brown markings. It is easily distinguished from P. cumingi, which has short, dark brown fur. P. cumingi lives in southern Luzon and on the offshore island of Catanduanes. Both species are found from lowlands to mountains, where they nest in hollow trees and feed on tender young leaves. One young per year is usual.
Three of the four species of Crateromys were first described by scientists during the 1980s and ’90s, the most recent being the Panay Island cloud rat (C. heaneyi) in 1996. Additional undiscovered species may live on other Philippine islands. All cloud rats are intimately tied to old-growth tropical forests, and most populations are in danger owing to overhunting and deforestation. Three of the four Crateromys species have long, soft, thick fur that can be wavy or straight. The long, bushy tail is a unique feature among Old World rats and mice (subfamily Murinae). The Luzon bushy-tailed cloud rat (C. schadenbergi) is fairly common in the mountain forests of northern Luzon, but this is the only island on which it is found. It is the largest of the genus, with a body length of 35 to 39 cm, and is polymorphic in fur colour—that is, individuals may be all black, all white, or some pattern of black, white, and brown.
The bushy-tailed cloud rat of Panay Island (C. heaneyi) is a smaller, brown version of C. schadenbergi measuring 25 to 35 cm long with a tail longer than its body. The Dinigat bushy-tailed cloud rat (C. australis) is about the same size as C. heaneyi and is found only on Dinagat Island, north of Mindanao. It has tawny fur on the head and back and an orange-brown belly.
With a body length of 25 cm, the Ilin bushy-tailed cloud rat (C. paulus) is the smallest of the group, with short, coarse, brown fur, a cream-coloured underside, and a short, hairy, tricoloured tail. It was found on Ilin Island, off the southern coast of Mindoro, but may already be extinct on Ilin because of extensive deforestation.
Ecological information exists for only the species from Luzon and Panay. The Luzon bushy-tailed cloud rat inhabits oak and pine forests, eating pine buds and bark and building stick nests in the crowns of trees. The Panay Island bushy-tailed cloud rat dens in tree trunks, in cavities among tree roots, and inside large tree ferns. Its diet consists of leaves, fruits, and seeds. Single young have been reported for both species, but pairs of young have been observed among the Panay Island species.
All cloud rats belong to the “true” mouse and rat family Muridae within the order Rodentia. They are closely related to Luzon tree rats (Carpomys) and hairy-tailed rats (Batomys), both of which are also endemic to the Philippines.
