Degu,  (genus Octodon),  one of four species of ratlike South American rodents found primarily on the lower western slopes of the Andes Mountains. It is one of the most common mammals of central Chile at elevations up to 1,200 metres (3,900 feet), where it prefers open grassy areas near shrubs, rocks, and stone walls.
Degus have a large head, large eyes, and moderate-sized, nearly hairless ears. They weigh 170 to 300 grams (6 to 10.6 ounces) and have a body 25 to 31 cm (9.8 to 12.2 inches) long and a shorter, black-tipped tail of 8 to 13 cm. Long, comblike bristles project over claws on the hind feet. The soft, thick fur of the upperparts is yellowish brown, and there is a pale yellow spot above and below each eye. The underparts are creamy yellow; some individuals exhibit a pale neck band.
Degus are active during the day, especially in the morning and late afternoon. They are colonial and excavate elaborate burrow systems comprising several chambers with main corridors running beneath rocks and shrubs. Near the burrow openings they accumulate piles of sticks, stones, and dung, which may mark territorial boundaries or ownership of nesting sites. Degus travel considerable distances from their burrows to find food. With tail erect, they run to feeding sites through networks of tunnels and along surface paths. Foraging on the ground and also climbing into the branches of shrubs and small trees, degus eat leaves and bark, seeds, green grass, and fruit. They do not hibernate and are active throughout the year, storing food in their burrows for winter. Degu colonies consist of extended family groups. The females bear a litter of 1 to 10 young at least once a year after a gestation period of about three months. Several females in the same social group may raise their young in a common burrow. Adults are known to carry grass to the young in the nest.
The moon-toothed degu (Octodon lunatus) lives along coastal Chile, apparently replacing O. degus in areas where thicket habitat is common. Bridges’s degu (O. bridgesi) dwells in forests along the base of the Andes from extreme southern Argentina to central Chile. The Mocha Island degu (O. pacificus) is found only in forest habitat on an island off the coast of central Chile; it was not classified as a different species until 1994. Because their habitats are being cleared for agriculture, both the Mocha Island and the Bridges’s degu are endangered.
All four degu species belong to the family Octodontidae, a member of the suborder Hystricognatha within the order Rodentia. Their closest relatives are rock rats (genus Pithanotomys), viscacha rats (Octomys, Pipanacoctomys, Salinoctomys, and Tympanoctomys), the coruro (Spalacopus), and the mountain degu, or chozchoz (Octodontomys). Tuco-tucos (Ctenomys) are in the same family. Octodonts are among some of the earliest South American rodents preserved as fossils, with an evolutionary history extending back to the Late Oligocene Epoch (28.5 million to 23.8 million years ago).
