eland,  (genus Taurotragus),  either of two very large, oxlike African antelopes of the spiral-horned antelope tribe (Tragelaphini, family Bovidae), which also includes the bushbuck and the kudus. The giant, or Derby, eland (Taurotragus derbianus) inhabits woodlands filled with the broad-leaved doka tree in the northern savanna from Senegal to the Nile River. The common, or Cape, eland (T. oryx) ranges over the woodlands, plains, mountains, and subdeserts of eastern and southern Africa. The eland is the largest of all antelopes.
Bulls of both species attain shoulder heights of 150–180 cm (59–71 inches) and weigh nearly one ton. Males mature at seven years and continue to add bulk with age, whereas females are mature by four years and remain much slimmer, with a shoulder height of 120–150 cm (47–59 inches) and a weight of 317–470 kg (699–1,036 pounds).
The common eland is tawny with up to 12 white torso stripes and dark markings, which include foreleg garters, a short dorsal crest and neck mane, and the tuft of the hock-length tail. Colour is paler with indistinct markings in the southern subspecies (T. oryx oryx). A dewlap, present in both sexes, grows long and pendulous in bulls, which also turn darker and develop a thick, black forehead tuft. The horns are straight with one or two screwlike spirals; horns are usually longer and thinner in females.
The giant eland is reddish brown with a blackish neck and vertical white striping. It has large, rounded ears. Its horns are heavier and more widely divergent than those of the common eland; they stretch up to 123 cm (48 inches) long in bulls.
The giant eland is known to form herds of up to 60 animals, but it is more elusive and less sociable than the common eland, which sometimes aggregates in herds of hundreds on open plains (up to 500 in Serengeti National Park). The average, however, is a dozen or less, and herd membership is very fluid. Large herds invariably include numerous calves, whose strong mutual attraction forces mothers to remain in attendance. Though bulls often accompany female herds, they commonly associate in separate bachelor herds, which occupy smaller home ranges (50 square km [19 square miles], compared with 400 square km [154 square miles] for females in one Kenyan study) and denser woodland. Senior bulls often wander alone seeking mating opportunities, announcing themselves by the loud clicking of their forelegs as they walk.
Elands are both browsers and grazers. They feed mainly on green grass during the rains and then switch to the foliage of dicots during the dry season. Both sexes use their horns to break off branches too high to grasp with their lips and tongue.
The common eland has been domesticated in South Africa and Russia. In parks where they are well protected, bulls become quite tame. Paradoxically, the eland is usually the shyest of all African antelopes, possibly because bulk makes it short-winded: elands can trot for hours and are prodigious high jumpers (they spring over one another and 2-metre [7-foot] fences effortlessly), but they cannot sustain a gallop. Their size offers protection from other predators, and females with calves mount a group defense against lions, unlike most other antelopes.
The highly endangered western giant eland (T. derbianus derbianus) has been reduced to at most a few hundred animals. Without effective protection in its last refuges in Senegal’s Niokolo-Koba National Park and an adjacent game reserve, the only hope for this subspecies’ survival is a captive breeding program.
