Enaliarctos,  extinct genus of mammals that contains the oldest known member of Pinnipedia, the group that contains living seals, sea lions, and walruses. Enaliarctos is made up of five species, which lived from the late Oligocene Epoch (some 29 million years ago) into the Miocene Epoch (23 million to 5.3 million years ago). The oldest of the five, E. barnesi and E. tedfordi, were found in rocks of the Yaquina Formation of Oregon that could be as old as 29.3 million years. A third species called E. mealsi, which is also the best-known of the group, is known from rocks in central California that are approximately 23 million years old. E. mealsi was shaped like a modern sea lion but weighed only 73 to 88 kg (161 to 194 pounds).
Enaliarctos evolved as a fish predator in the diverse marine communities off the western coast of North America. Similar to living pinnipeds, Enaliarctos had hind limbs that were specialized as flippers, and the vertebral column was specialized for strong flexion and extension. Together these characteristics contributed to the animal’s strong swimming ability. Like living sea lions but unlike living seals, Enaliarctos was also capable of using its hind limbs for locomotion on land. The closest nonpinniped relatives of Enaliarctos were animals with semiaquatic otterlike specializations, such as Puijila, that lived during the Miocene.
The transition from a semiaquatic lifestyle, where terrestrial locomotion is a necessary part of life, to a fully aquatic one allowed pinnipeds to develop extremely specialized skeletons and other structures. Pinnipeds were so specialized that early paleontologists placed them in their own mammalian order. Today, however, Enaliarctos is classified in the order Carnivora, a group that includes bears, dogs, cats, raccoons, and weasels. The aquatic marine specializations of the pinnipeds evolved in the eastern Pacific at the end of the Oligocene, a time when ocean circulation patterns were adjusting to the isolation of Antarctica from other southern continents and the narrowing of the gap that separated North and South America. The changes in oceanic circulation resulted in the upwelling of deep waters off the western coast of North America. The continued upwelling, in turn, increased the region’s biological productivity so much that a large diverse marine community developed.
