Four-eyed opossum,  (genus Philander),  any of seven species of South American marsupials (family Didelphidae, subfamily Didelphinae) that get their name from the white to cream-coloured spot above each eye. The gray four-eyed opossum (Philander opossum) is the most widespread, occurring from Mexico to Bolivia and Brazil. The Orinoco four-eyed opossum (P. deltae) occurs in the delta of the Orinoco River in Venezuela. Anderson’s four-eyed opossum (P. andersoni) is found in the northwestern Amazon basin from Venezuela to northern Peru and adjacent Brazil. Mondolfi’s four-eyed opossum (P. mondolfii) is found in Venezuela and eastern Colombia. McIlhenny’s four-eyed opossum (P. mcilhennyi) is restricted to the western Amazon basin of Peru and Brazil and occurs together with the gray four-eyed opossum. The southeastern four-eyed opossum (P. frenatus) is known from southeastern Brazil south to Paraguay and Argentina. Olrog’s four-eyed opossum (P. olrogi) occurs in Peru and Bolivia.
These seven species are similar in size; adults vary from 40 to 80 cm (16 to 32 inches) in total length and weigh up to 700 grams (1.5 pounds). The tail, slightly longer than the head and body, is black over the basal half to two-thirds of its length; though covered in short hair, the tail appears naked except for the extension of body hair onto the basal 5–6 cm (2–2.5 inches). Obvious differences between species are mainly in the proportions of the skull and the colour and length of the fur. The gray and southeastern four-eyed opossums usually have dark faces and pale gray bodies; black species have dark brown to black fur, short in Anderson’s four-eyed opossum and long (especially along the back and at the base of the tail) in McIlhenny’s four-eyed opossum.
Nocturnal, mainly terrestrial, usually solitary, and omnivorous, four-eyed opossums consume a wide variety of fruits, birds, reptiles, amphibians, small mammals, and insects and other invertebrates, as well as carrion. Females have five to nine teats in a well-developed pouch (marsupium). Litter sizes from two to seven are known, and the gray four-eyed opossum has at least two litters a year.
