Fur seal,  any of several eared seals of the family Otariidae valued for the quality of their fur.
The northern fur seal (Callorhinus ursinus) is a migratory inhabitant of northern seas, breeding in summer on the Pribilof, Komandor (Commander), and other islands. Prized for its chestnut-coloured underfur, it is a gregarious, vocal animal that feeds on fish and other marine animals. The adult male is deep brown in colour with a grayish mane and grows to about 3.1 metres (10 feet) in length and 300 kg (660 pounds) in weight; the female is dark gray and grows to about 1.5 metres (5 feet) and 60 kg (130 pounds). In 1911, after more than a century of extensive slaughter, the northern fur seal was placed under protection. By the late 20th century there were thought to be some one million northern fur seals, but this number was declining. The overfishing of its prey and environmental fluctuations were believed to be partly responsible.
The eight species of southern fur seals (Arctocephalus) are distributed in the Southern Hemisphere, except for a herd of Guadalupe fur seals (A. townsendi) on Guadalupe Island off the northwest coast of Baja California. Southern fur seals are gray to brown or black in colour with chestnut-coloured underfur. Length averages about 1.2–1.8 metres (4–6 feet), but the South African, or Cape, fur seal (A. pusillus) and the Australian fur seal (A. pusillus doriferus) grow to lengths and weights of about 2.5 metres (8 feet) and 300 kg in the male, 1.8 metres and 120 kg (265 pounds) in the female. Like the northern form, southern fur seals are gregarious and carnivorous. By the late 1970s about 14,000 South American fur seals (A. australis) were being harvested annually. Other species, including the once-numerous New Zealand fur seal (A. forsteri), the Galapagos fur seal (A. galapagoensis), and the Juan Fernandez fur seal (A. philippii), all of which were hunted nearly to the point of extinction, have been protected by law.
The harp seal is a fur-bearing northern seal of a different family (Phocidae).
