guanaco,  (Lama guanicoe),  South American member of the camel family (Camelidae, order Artiodactyla) that is closely related to the vicuña (Vicugna vicugna), alpaca (V. pacos), and llama (Lama glama), which are known collectively as lamoids. The guanaco ranges from sea level to the snow line (0–4,500 metres [0–14,000 feet] in altitude) throughout the Andes from Peru and Bolivia southward to Tierra del Fuego and other islands. It is the wild ancestor of the llama.
The guanaco, like the vicuña, lives in small bands of females usually led by a male. The adults stand about 110 cm (43 inches) at the shoulder and weigh about 90 kg (200 pounds). Both sexes are coloured pale brown above and white below and have a grayish head.
The soft downy fibre covering of the young, or guanaquito, constitutes about 10 to 20 percent of the fleece and belongs to the group of textile fibres called specialty hair fibres. Guanaco fibre, introduced for textile use in the mid-1900s, is valued for its rarity and soft texture and is used for luxury fabrics; it is considered to be finer than alpaca but coarser than vicuña. The pelts, especially of the guanaquito, resemble those of the red fox (Vulpes vulpes) and are used by the fur industry, which provides the textile industry with waste fibre remaining after processing.
Genetic studies recognize two subspecies: a northern subspecies, L. guanicoe cacsilensis, and a southern subspecies, L. guanicoe guanicoe. Guanaco populations number more than one million adults in total, and most are found in Argentina and Chile. Although the guanaco is listed as a species of least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, populations in the northern part of the animal’s range have declined substantially as a result of habitat loss and competition with other grazing animals, and the governments of Peru, Paraguay, and Bolivia consider the guanaco an endangered species.
Llamas appear to have been bred from guanacos and have been used as beasts of burden starting about 6,500 years ago. Most taxonomies separate guanacos and llamas into distinct species, but some authorities classify both animals as subspecies of L. glama.
