Hare,  (genus Lepus),  any of about 30 species of mammals related to rabbits and belonging to the same family (Leporidae). In general, hares have longer ears and longer hind feet than rabbits. While the tail is relatively short, it is longer than that of rabbits. The vernacular names hare and rabbit are frequently misapplied to particular species. Jackrabbits of North America, for example, are actually hares, while the hispid hare (Caprolagus hispidus) of Nepal and India is a rabbit, and the mouse hare is another name for the pika. Pikas, rabbits, and hares constitute the mammalian order Lagomorpha.
Hares are the largest lagomorphs. Depending on the species, the body is about 40–70 cm (16–28 inches) long, with feet up to 15 cm (5.9 inches) long and ears up to 20 cm (7.9 inches) that apparently help dissipate excess body heat. Although usually gray-brown throughout the year, hares living in northern latitudes may turn white in winter (in the far north some remain white all year). One such “varying hare” is the smallest member of genus Lepus, the snowshoe hare (L. americanus) of North America. Most Lepus species have very high rates of reproduction, with multiple large litters being produced each year. Young hares (leverets) are typically born fully furred and with their eyes open and are able to hop a few minutes after birth. Throughout their range, hares are important in the diets of various carnivorous birds, mammals, and reptiles. One of the more dramatic ecological patterns known is the boom-and-bust cycle of snowshoe hare populations in the boreal forests of North America. Populations peak every 8–11 years and then sharply decline, with densities decreasing up to 100-fold. Predation is believed to be responsible for this regular pattern. Lynx populations correlate with those of the snowshoe hare but with a one- to two-year time lag. Lynx eat increasing numbers of hares as they become more common, but, owing to the high rate of predation, lynx numbers drop following the resultant crash in the number of hares. Once hare populations begin to recover, lynx numbers build again, and the cycle is repeated. As hares are almost exclusively herbivorous, they can also dramatically damage natural vegetation or crops when their populations are high. Like rabbits, hares provide people with food and fur. 
Hares are the most widespread lagomorph genus, occupying most of North America, Europe, Asia, and Africa. A typical species is the European hare (L. europaeus) of central and southern Europe, the Middle East, and Asia westward into Siberia. The mountain hare (L. timidus) of Asia, the Arctic hare (L. arcticus), and the snowshoe hare live in the far north. Several species of jackrabbit (including L. californicus and L. alleni) are found in the extensive deserts of North America. Many species are abundant throughout their range, including the European hare, which has been introduced into many places, including South America, New Zealand, and Australia, where it has become a pest. In contrast, several hares are endangered, such as the Tehuantepec jackrabbit (L. flavigularis) of southern Mexico, the broom hare (L. castroviejoi) of northern Spain, and the Hainan hare (L. hainanus), which lives on Hainan Island off the coast of southern China.
