Kob,  (Kobus kob),  small, stocky African antelope (tribe Reduncini, family Bovidae) that occurs in large numbers on floodplains of the northern savanna. The kob ranges from Senegal in the west to the Ethiopian border in the east and southward into western Uganda and eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. There are three distinct subspecies: the western kob (Kobus kob kob), the Uganda kob (K. kob thomasi), and the white-eared kob (K. kob leucotis) of eastern South Sudan.
The kob resembles a heavier impala. Its stocky build with strong legs and overdeveloped hindquarters make for a powerful bounding gallop but not for the fleetness and endurance of slimmer plains antelopes. Females are slender compared with males, which have thick necks and bulging muscles. At 94 kg (207 pounds), bucks weigh one-third more than does and stand 8 cm (3 inches) taller (90–100 cm [35–39 inches]). Armed with heavily ridged lyre-shaped horns 40–69 cm (16–27 inches) long, males stand out in a crowd of hornless females; they also have darker coats that enhance the white throat patch, underparts, eye rings, and insides of ears. Sexual dimorphism reaches its extreme in the white-eared kob, with males the colour of ebony. Male Uganda kob are a rich reddish brown with bold black stripes fronting their legs.
The kob avoids wetlands while remaining dependent on floodplain grassland near water. It prefers open habitat with short, green pasture. Large numbers of kob permanently reside on extensive plains—e.g., in Uganda’s Queen Elizabeth National Park. They congregate on the highest, driest ground with the shortest, greenest grass during the rains and move downslope into the greenbelts of tall perennial grasses as the dry season progresses. The white-eared kob, formerly numbering in the hundreds of thousands, migrates over a large portion of the Nile floodplain in eastern South Sudan.
Traditional breeding arenas, or leks, are found on floodplains where kob aggregate, reaching densities of 40–60 animals per square kilometre (100–160 animals per square mile). The kob is one of only three antelopes (along with the lechwe and topi) known to form high-population-density breeding arenas. Surrounded by conventional territories of about 50 hectares (124 acres), “permanently” occupied by males competing for herds of 5–40 females and young, an arena is a lawn of short grass or trampled bare ground where 30–40 territorial males crowd together in a space the size of a single conventional territory. Mixed herds including hundreds of females and young and bachelor males circulate around the arenas, and most females come to an arena to breed on their day of estrus. Males are attracted by the females to the arenas, but females are probably guided by the accumulation of estrogen-rich urine deposited by earlier visitors to run the gauntlet of eagerly displaying rams and to home in on just a few centrally located courts. Breeding is year-round in most kob populations, but white-eared kob breed during migration on temporary arenas.
Gestation is about eight months, and calves hide for up to six weeks. Living in herds on open plains, kob are hard for stalking predators (big cats) to approach. When pursued by hyenas or wild dogs, they seek refuge in the nearest body of water. See also Kobus.
