Liger,  offspring of a male lion and a female tiger. The liger is a zoo-bred hybrid, as is the tigon, which is the result of mating a male tiger with a female lion. The liger and the tigon possess features of both parents, in variable proportions, but are generally larger than either. It is thought that most, if not all, male ligers and tigons are sterile. The females, however, on occasion, may be able to produce young. The terms liger and tigon are portmanteaus of the words lion and tiger.
Ligers tend to be larger and heavier than members of their parent species. Biologists suggest that the liger’s large size, or “growth dysplasia,” results from the absence of certain growth-limiting genes. Female lions mate with several male lions throughout their lives, so the genes of a male lion are adapted to maximize the growth of his offspring, since his offspring may be required to compete with those of other males produced by the same lioness. The genes of female lions, however, are adapted to cancel or dampen the effects of the growth-maximizing genes of male lions, so lions remain within a given size range. Tigers, on the other hand, have no such competitive mating strategy, and many biologists argue that tigresses do not possess the growth-limiting adaptations of their lioness counterparts. As a result, the influence of the growth-maximizing adaptations provided by male lions is greater, which allows ligers to become larger than their parents. However, for tigons, growth-limiting genes are found in both male tigers and female lions, so their offspring possess an abundance of these genes, which accounts for their smaller size.
The largest ligers often grow to lengths of more than 3.3 metres (10.8 feet) and weigh more than 400 kg (900 pounds); however, there are reports of some individuals weighing more than 1,000 kg (1 metric ton [about 2,200 pounds]). Tigons, in contrast, tend to be the same size or smaller than their parents, because the growth-limiting genes are carried by both parents.
Although lions and tigers may mate in the wild, they are separated by geography and behaviour, and thus all known ligers stem from accidental mating between lions and tigers as well as from directed breeding efforts that have occurred while in captivity. The first known breeding of a lion and a tigress in captivity likely occurred sometime during the late 1700s. Roughly 100 ligers and fewer than 100 tigons are thought to exist. Many national governments and animal-rights organizations view the practice of breeding lions and tigers as unethical, because ligers often acquire birth defects that result in death shortly after birth and are prone to obesity and abnormal growth that places stress on their internal organs. In addition, ligers and tigons have problems interacting with members of their parent species because their behavioral traits often manifest as a mix of the habits of both species rather than either one or the other (see also animal social behaviour). Other opponents of liger breeding point out that ligers often take up valuable space in zoos that could be better used as habitat for endangered species.
