Loris,  (subfamily Lorisinae),  any of about 10 species of tailless or short-tailed South and Southeast Asian forest primates. Lorises are arboreal and nocturnal, curling up to sleep by day. They have soft gray or brown fur and can be recognized by their huge eyes encircled by dark patches and by their short index fingers. They move with great deliberation through the trees and often hang by their feet, with their hands free to grasp food or branches. Lorises are related to the pottos and angwantibos of Africa; together they constitute the family Lorisidae.
The two species of slender loris (the red slender loris [Loris tardigradus] and the gray slender loris [L. lydekkerianus]) of India and Sri Lanka are about 20–25 cm (8–10 inches) long and have long slender limbs, small hands, a rounded head, and a pointed muzzle. Slender lorises feed mostly on insects (predominantly ants) and are solitary. The female usually bears a single young after five or six months’ gestation.
The eight slow lorises (genus Nycticebus) are more robust and have shorter, stouter limbs, more-rounded snouts, and smaller eyes and ears. The smallest species, the pygmy slow loris (N. pygmaeus), is restricted to forests east of the Mekong River and is about 25 cm (about 10 inches) long; the larger Sunda slow loris N. coucang inhabits peninsular Malaysia and the Indonesian island of Sumatra. This species and other members of the genus, which occur in other parts of Southeast Asia, are about 27–37 cm (about 11–15 inches) long. Slow lorises move more slowly than slender lorises; they feed on insects and other small animals and on fruit and other parts of vegetation. The females bear one (sometimes two) young after about six months’ gestation.
Lorises are often hunted for food, used in traditional medicines, or collected for the pet trade. Many species are vulnerable to habitat loss as their living space is converted into agricultural or grazing land. According to the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), all species except the gray slender loris are considered threatened. Both subspecies of the red slender loris—(L. tardigradus nycticeboides and L. tardigradus tardigradus)—have been classified as endangered since 2004. Several species of slow loris are also threatened with extinction, including the Sunda slow loris and the Bengal slow loris (N. bengalensis)—both of which were classified as endangered in 2015—and the Javan slow loris (N. javanicus), which was classified as critically endangered in 2013.
