Lynx,  (genus Lynx),  any of four species of short-tailed cats (family Felidae) found in the forests of Europe, Asia, and North America. The Canada lynx (Lynx canadensis) and the bobcat (L. rufus) live in North America. The Eurasian lynx (L. lynx) and the Iberian lynx (L. pardinus) are their European counterparts. The Iberian lynx is the most endangered feline; as of 2013 possibly fewer than 300 individuals remained in the mountainous scrubland of southern Spain.
Lynx are long-legged, large-pawed cats with tufted ears, hairy soles, and a broad, short head. The coat, which forms a bushy ruff on the neck, is tawny to cream in colour and somewhat mottled with brown and black; the tail tip and ear tufts are black. In winter the fur is dense and soft, with hairs up to 10 cm (4 inches) long, and is sought by humans for trimming garments. Most lynx range in size from about 80 to 120 cm (about 32 to 47 inches) long, without the 10- to 20-cm (4- to 8-inch) tail, and stand about 60 cm (24 inches) tall at the shoulder. Weight typically ranges from 10 to 20 kg (22 to 44 pounds), though Eurasian lynx are often larger. In all species males are larger than females.
Nocturnal and silent except during the mating season, lynx live alone or in small groups. They climb and swim well and feed on birds and small mammals. The bobcat and the Eurasian lynx will take larger prey such as deer. The Canada lynx depends heavily on the snowshoe hare (Lepus americanus) for food, and its population increases and decreases regularly every 9 or 10 years, relative to the population of its prey.
Lynx breed in late winter or early spring, and a litter of one to six young is born after a gestation period of approximately two months. Three species have life spans of at least 13 years in the wild, but most Eurasian lynx rarely live longer than 10–12 years.
The coat of the bobcat (L. rufus), or bay lynx, ranges from yellow and gray to reddish brown in colour, with the darker pelage occurring more frequently during the summer. The coat also harbours dark streaks and spots, and the short tail, for which the bobcat is named, is banded with a black tip. The bobcat, roughly the size of a large domestic cat, is the smallest lynx.  It weighs 9–12 kg (about 20–26 pounds) and stands 45–58 cm (18–23 inches) tall at the shoulder, and most individuals grow up to 65–70 cm (26–28 inches) in length; however, some as small as 47 cm (about 19 inches) long and as large as 125 cm (about 49 inches) have been sighted.
The habitat of the bobcat is primarily in the continental United States, except for the agricultural heartland of the Midwest and parts of the East Coast, where they were hunted aggressively during the first half of the 20th century. The species also inhabits Mexico as far south as the states of Oaxaca and Baja California Sur and is found as far north as southern Canada. Despite thousands of bobcats being harvested annually in the United States for the commercial fur trade, population numbers have not declined appreciably. The U.S. population is thought to be in excess of several hundred thousand, and the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species has classified the bobcat as a species of least concern.
The Canada lynx (L. canadensis) is similar to the bobcat in appearance but can be identified by its longer legs, wider feet, longer ear tufts, and more prominent black-tipped tail. The weight of an adult ranges from 8.0 to 17.3 kg (about 18 to 38 pounds), and its length ranges from 67 to 107 cm (about 26 to 42 inches). On average its height at the shoulder is 61 cm (24 inches).
The Canada lynx is also listed as a species of least concern by the IUCN, but it is considered to be a threatened species in the United States. At present the species is found in the boreal forests throughout Canada (except Nova Scotia) and in the U.S. states of Washington, Idaho, Montana, Minnesota, New Hampshire, and Maine in habitats coincident with that of the snowshoe hare. In the southern part of its range, however, the Canada lynx’s diet is more diversified: it preys on carrion and possibly even young ungulates.
Canada lynx have been hunted and trapped for their fur for hundreds of years, but the levels of northern populations have remained fairly stable over time. Southern populations, especially those in the conterminous United States, are threatened by habitat loss and fragmentation from logging and agricultural conversion, and many individuals are victims of vehicle strikes or are captured in traps meant for other species. Reintroduction programs begun in the early 21st century, in which groups of animals were released in other parts of the Rocky Mountains, have met with moderate success.
