macaque,  (genus Macaca),  any of more than 20 species of gregarious Old World monkeys, all of which are Asian except for the Barbary macaque of North Africa. Macaques are robust primates whose arms and legs are of about the same length. Their fur is generally a shade of brown or black, and their muzzles, like those of baboons, are doglike but rounded in profile, with nostrils on the upper surface. The tail varies between species and may be long, of moderate length, short, or absent. Size differs between the sexes and between the species; males range in head and body length from about 41 to 70 cm (16 to 28 inches) and in weight from about 2.4 kg (5.3 pounds) in females and 5.5 kg in males of the smallest species, the crab-eating macaque (Macaca fascicularis), to a maximum of about 13 kg in females and 18 kg in males of the largest species, the Tibetan macaque (M. thibetana).
Macaques live in troops of varying size. The males dominate the troop and live within a clear but shifting dominance rank order. The ranking of females is longer-lasting and depends on their genealogical position. Macaques are somewhat more arboreal than baboons but are equally at home on the ground; they are also able to swim. Depending on the species, they live in forests, on plains, or among cliffs and rocky terrain. Macaques are omnivorous, and they possess large cheek pouches in which they carry extra food. Breeding occurs year-round in some (mostly tropical) species, but, among those living outside the tropics, it is seasonal. Single young are born after about six months’ gestation and become adult at four years. Macaques are considered highly intelligent but may be bad-tempered as adults.
The seven species of short-tailed macaques on the Indonesian island of Sulawesi (Celebes) vary in appearance from the distinctive crested black macaque (M. nigra) at the northern end of the island to the less-specialized Moor macaque (M. maura) in the south. Most of the Sulawesi species are in danger of extinction. Crab-eating, or long-tailed, macaques (M. fascicularis) of Southeast Asia have whiskered brown faces; they live in forests along rivers, where they eat fruit and fish for crabs and other crustaceans. Rhesus monkeys (M. mulatta) are native to northern India, Myanmar (Burma), Southeast Asia, and eastern China, formerly as far north as Beijing.
The Formosan rock macaque (M. cyclopis) is closely related to the rhesus monkey and lives only in Taiwan. Japanese macaques, or snow monkeys (M. fuscata), are larger, more muscular, and shaggy-haired with pink faces and very short furry tails. These monkeys are important figures in myths and folktales and are seen in representations of the Buddhist adage “See no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil.”
Liontail macaques, or wanderoos (M. silenus), are black with gray ruffs and tufted tails; an endangered species, they are found only in a small area of southern India. Closely related to liontails are the pigtail macaques (M. nemestrina), which carry their short tails curved over their backs. Inhabiting rainforests of Southeast Asia, they are sometimes trained to pick ripe coconuts. Another close relative is the bokkoi (M. pagensis), found only on the Mentawai Islands of Indonesia.
Stump-tailed macaques (M. arctoides) are strong, shaggy-haired forest dwellers with pink or red faces and very short tails. Another short-tailed species is the Père David’s macaque (M. thibetana), which lives in mountain forests of southern China; it is sometimes called the Tibetan macaque but is not in fact found there. Often confused with the stump-tail, Père David’s macaque is in fact more closely related to the longer-tailed Assam macaque (M. assamensis) from the eastern Himalayan foothills and northern Myanmar. The bonnet monkey (M. radiata) and the toque macaque (M. sinica), from southern India and Sri Lanka, respectively, have hair on the top of the head that grows from a central whorl, in contrast to the short hair of the forehead and temples.
The genus Macaca is a primate classified in the family Cercopithecidae (Old World monkeys), along with baboons, mangabeys, guenons, langurs, and colobus monkeys.
Macaques in general are the monkeys most widely used in biomedical research. In the 1950s crab-eating macaques were used extensively in studies that led to the development of the polio vaccine. In addition, crab-eating macaques and rhesus monkeys, in particular, have played important roles in cloning. Scientists first cloned a rhesus monkey through a process called embryonic cell nuclear transfer in 2001, and in 2018 the crab-eating macaque became the first primate cloned using the process of somatic cell nuclear transfer.
