Mangabey,  any of nine species of slender, rather long-limbed monkeys of the genera Cercocebus and Lophocebus, found in African tropical forests. Mangabeys are fairly large quadrupedal monkeys with cheek pouches and deep depressions under the cheekbones. Species range in head and body length from about 40 to almost 90 cm (16–35 inches) and weigh up to about 11 kg (24 pounds) in males and 6 kg (13 pounds) in females; the tail is about as long as the head and body. Mangabeys are highly social animals. They communicate vocally with one another through the use of a specialized vocal sac, and sometimes these vocalizations can be quite loud, especially from males. Mangabeys feed on seeds, fruit, and leaves. Their large front teeth enable them to bite into fruit that is too tough-coated for other monkeys.
Mangabeys of the genus Cercocebus are short-haired with speckled pale grayish brown to dark gray fur; they have light-coloured eyelids, often bright white. They spend much of their time on the ground and usually carry their long, tapering tails forward over their backs. The white-collared or red-capped mangabey (C. torquatus), the largest species, lives in west-central Africa and is gray with a white “collar” around the neck and a red crown. The white-naped mangabey (C. lunulatus) is restricted to a small region between the Nzo-Sassandra river system in Côte d’Ivoire and the Volta River in Ghana. The sooty mangabey (C. atys), a dark, uniformly gray species with a pale face, is found from the Nzo-Sassandra river system westward to Senegal. Four paler, browner species live in Central and East Africa: the agile mangabey (C. agilis), a slender monkey that has a small whorl of hair on the front of the crown and lives in Congo (Kinshasa) north of the Congo River westward into Gabon; the golden-bellied mangabey (C. chrysogaster), which lacks a whorl and has a bright golden orange underside and is restricted to the region south of the Congo River; the Sanje mangabey (C. sanjei), discovered quite unexpectedly in 1980 living in the Udzungwa Mountains and Mwanihana forest of Tanzania; and the Tana River mangabey (C. galeritus), a small species that has long crown hair diverging from a part and is found only in forests along the lower Tana River in Kenya. The Tana River mangabey, which numbers only 100–1,000 and is in danger of extinction, lives alongside rivers, where it benefits from periodic flooding to feed on fungi, insects, and seedlings. It lives in small troops with one or two males as well as several females and young. The troops move across open grassland between small patches of gallery forest—an unusual practice for mangabeys. In the morning and the evening, the males produce loud spacing calls consisting of a series of deep whoops that rise into screeches.
Mangabeys of the genus Lophocebus spend more time in the trees than Cercocebus and are long-haired with unspeckled black fur. They do not have white eyelids, and they carry their tails more upright, usually in a curve or question-mark shape. The gray-cheeked mangabey (L. albigena) is found from eastern Nigeria eastward into Uganda; it has a gargoylelike face with thinly haired gray or white cheeks and scruffy hair on the crown. Living in dispersed troops of several males and females, they rest between feeding bouts characteristically sprawled along branches or in tree forks. The black mangabey (L. aterrimus) has long curved gray whiskers on the cheeks and a coconut-like crest on the crown; it replaces the gray-cheeked species south of the Congo River. A little-known subspecies of the black mangabey, Opdenbosch’s mangabey (L. aterrimus opdenboschi) has a shorter crest, and the thick straight cheek whiskers are black like the body; it is confined to a few gallery forests on the rivers south of the Congo. The kipunji (Rungwecebus kipunji) was initially placed in the genus Lophocebus after its discovery in 2005; however, molecular analyses performed in 2006 determined that R. kipunji was more closely related to baboons than to mangabeys.
Mangabey classification at the species level and the affinities between many species remain unclear. Mangabeys are placed in different genera because it is realized that they are not closely related to each other, but each genera has its nearest affinities with other groups of the family Cercopithecidae (Old World monkeys): genus Cercocebus is closely related to mandrills and drills, whereas Lophocebus is closely related to baboons and geladas.
The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) classified several mangabey species as endangered, including the red-capped mangabey, the Sanje mangabey, and the white-naped mangabey. The Tana River mangabey, whose decline is largely caused by ongoing habitat loss, is classified as a critically endangered species.
