monotreme,  (order Monotremata),  any member of the egg-laying mammalian order Monotremata, which includes the amphibious platypus (family Ornithorhynchidae) and the terrestrial echidnas (family Tachyglossidae) of continental Australia, the Australian island state of Tasmania, and the island of New Guinea.
Monotremata is the most ancient living order of mammals. In addition to being egg layers (oviparous), members of this order share primitive skeletal features such as the shoulder girdle and skull characteristics that have been lost in other living mammals. Relationships to other mammalian groups have been difficult to determine because of the puzzling combination of primitive features and specialized characteristics, a phenomenon known as mosaic evolution. Certain features of the skull appear to link monotremes to the extinct early mammal groups. Other evidence, particularly genetic data, places Monotremata close to more-advanced mammals, namely marsupials.
Monotremes are very highly modified for their particular ecological niches. The platypus is a semiaquatic carnivore-insectivore, and the echidnas have a specialized diet of small invertebrates such as ants, termites, and worms. The name Monotremata means “one-holed,” in reference to the fact that both sexes have only one opening at the rear of the body, which is used for both reproduction and excretion.
Various mammals of the Mesozoic Era (251 to 65.5 million years ago) with more-advanced shoulder girdles (including a multituberculate) have recently been discovered, indicating that the monotreme shoulder girdle developed before the shoulder girdles of some other mammalian groups. None of the theories of monotreme relationships has been universally accepted, although the subject is of great interest to scientists who study mammalian evolution.
Included within the monotreme order are two families known only from early in the Cretaceous Period (145.5 to 65.5 million years ago) in Australia: the platypus-like Steropodontidae, represented by a single species (Steropodon galmani), and the uniquely specialized Kollikodontidae, which is also represented by a single species (Kollikodon ritchiei). Both are known only from opalized jaw fragments. The strange rounded cusps on the molar teeth of K. ritchiei were a surprise to paleontologists, suggesting that Cretaceous monotremes may have been more diverse and widespread than previously thought and may in fact have been the dominant mammals in the Australian sector of the ancient supercontinent of Gondwanaland. The Cretaceous discoveries bring the number of families within the order to four.
The oldest fossil platypus is recorded from the Paleogene Period (65.5 to 23 million years ago) of South America, providing evidence that during this time platypuses were distributed from Australia through Antarctica to South America.
Although the fossil record extends back to the early Cretaceous, origins of the group undoubtedly lie much farther back in time. Anatomic evidence such as the shoulder girdle suggests an origin perhaps as long ago as the middle of the Jurassic Period (199.6 to 145.5 million years ago).
Many researchers agree that the primitive features in monotremes reflect an ancient origin. Any attempt to determine the relationships of monotremes must take into account these primitive retentions. This is problematic in that either these archaic features reflect an origin far removed from that of living placental and marsupial mammals or else a mechanism must be found to explain how these features could be possessed by a group that is closely related to mammals without these traits.
