Muridae,  (family Muridae),  largest extant rodent family, indeed
the largest of all mammalian families, encompassing more than 1,383 species of the “true” mice and rats. Two-thirds of all rodent species and genera belong to family Muridae. The members of this family are often collectively called murids, or muroid rodents.
The 300 genera of muroid rodents are classified within 18 subfamilies, but more than 200 of them (and nearly 1,000 species) belong to only two subfamilies—Sigmodontinae (New World rats and mice) and Murinae (Old World rats and mice). Two other subfamilies (Arvicolinae and Gerbillinae) include approximately 250 additional species, with the remaining 14 subfamilies accommodating various other genera, some of which consist of a single species.
Not all specialists agree on the number of subfamilies or that all of these should be included within Muridae. For instance, some assemblages, such as blind mole rats and bamboo rats, are very distinctive and have been treated in the past as separate families. The Malabar spiny tree mouse was originally described as a kind of dormouse (Myoxidae) but was reclassified as a murid similar to blind tree mice. Many subfamilies, including hamsters, were formerly considered as part of a family separate from Muridae, but these groups are now most often viewed as muroid subfamilies. Inclusion of these subfamilies emphasizes their closer evolutionary relationships to one another than to any other group of rodents, but such affinity could also be expressed by recognizing each as a separate family and then bringing them together within a larger category, the superfamily Muroidea. This would be satisfactory if each group could be clearly demonstrated to have a common ancestor (i.e., to be monophyletic). Some groups are known to be monophyletic (hamsters, voles, African pouched rats, gerbils, Old World rats and mice, African spiny mice, platacanthomyines, zokors, blind mole rats, and bamboo rats). Other groups, however, cannot be classified with certainty and may or may not be a hodgepodge of unrelated genera and species (New World rats and mice, dendromurines, and Malagasy rats and mice). Also unresolved are the affinities of subfamilies containing only one genus (mouselike hamsters, the maned rat).
Pending better resolution of the relationships between these problem groups, some specialists prefer to retain them as subfamilies within Muridae, but others still separate them as families under the umbrella of Muroidea. Fossil evidence may support the single-family arrangement because clearly diagnosable groups of living species, such as mole rats and bamboo rats, lose their distinction when their lineages are traced far back in time. Whether recognized as the family Muridae or the superfamily Muroidea, the living members of these 18 groups show an impressive range of variation in body form, locomotion, and ecology.
