Mustelid,  (family Mustelidae),  any of about 55 species of ferrets, polecats, badgers, martens, otters, the wolverine, and other members of the weasel family. Historically, skunks have also been included in Mustelidae, but genetic analyses suggest that they belong to a separate family of their own (Mephitidae). Mustelids are fur-bearing carnivores that inhabit terrestrial and aquatic regions throughout the world, except Australia, Antarctica, and most oceanic islands. Many, such as the American mink (Neovison vison), are trapped or raised commercially for their pelts.
Most mustelids are fairly small. The least weasel (Mustela nivalis), which measures 11–26 cm (4–10 inches) long and weighs only 25 grams (0.9 ounce), is the smallest. The largest is the sea otter (Enhydra lutris) at about 1 metre (3.3 feet) long and a weight of 25–45 kg (55–99 pounds). The largest terrestrial mustelid is the wolverine (Gulo gulo), found in the northern United States and throughout Canada and northern Europe. It measures up to 1.2 metres in length and can weigh up to 20 kg or more.
Many mustelids have a long tube-shaped body, short legs, and a strong, thick neck with a small head. All possess well-developed anal scent glands. The five digits on each foot are equipped with sharp nonretractile claws. Males are usually larger than females; among some weasels males are almost twice as large. A tubular body does not retain heat as well as a stockier body of the same weight and is therefore associated with higher metabolism. As a result, mustelids are very active and inquisitive in their constant search for prey.
Most mustelids are strictly carnivorous, but a few include plant matter, mostly fruits or berries, in their diet. Dentition is characterized by strong canine teeth and sharp molars and premolars. Some mustelids have specialized diets. Clawless otters (genus Aonyx) specialize on crustaceans (especially crabs) and mollusks, whereas other otters (genus Lutra) are primarily fish eaters. Specialization even occurs between sexes in the weasels (genus Mustela), in which males consume larger prey than females owing to their larger size.
Mustelids are mostly solitary except for Eurasian badgers (Meles meles), sea otters (Enhydra lutris), and some northern river otters (Lontra canadensis). In solitary species, association between males and females during the mating season is brief. Mating occurs mostly in the spring, and in many species ovulation is induced during copulation. Delayed implantation of the fertilized egg occurs in many mustelids. Females raise the young alone. Only the least weasel produces two litters yearly; other species produce annually. In most mustelids, young become sexually mature at about 10 months of age. Mustelids evolved from North American and Eurasian forms in the early Oligocene Epoch, some 30 million years ago.
