opossum, also spelled possum,  any of slightly more than 100 species of New World marsupial mammals in the orders Didelphimorphia, Paucituberculata (see rat opossum), and Microbiotheria (see monito del monte). These marsupials, along with their relatives in Australasia, were formerly grouped together in the order Marsupialia (now a cohort including several orders). The word opossum is based on the Algonquian word apasum, meaning “white animal”—in reference to the Virginia opossum of North America. Some Australasian marsupials also are called possums (see phalanger).
The only opossum species occurring north of Mexico is the Virginia opossum (Didelphis virginiana), which ranges from lower eastern Canada and Puget Sound southward to Costa Rica; other members of that genus are found in South America. The Virginia opossum may grow to 100 cm (40 inches) in length (including the tail) and is about the size of a house cat. Its coarse coat varies from grayish white (in northern regions) to nearly black (in warm regions). It has a pointy white face, beady black eyes, round black ears, and a stout body. The opossum’s nearly hairless, scaly, prehensile tail is about half the animal’s total length. There are five sharp-clawed toes on each front foot. The innermost toe on each hind foot is clawless and opposable and can be used for grasping branches. The animal has 50 teeth.
The Virginia opossum eats almost anything, including insects, small mammals, eggs, nestlings, fruit, and sometimes cultivated crops. Opossums have adapted to a variety of habitats, but, being largely arboreal, they are absent from treeless dry areas. Their dens are often found in a hollow tree or under stumps and roots.
The Virginia opossum is prey for foxes, birds of prey, coyotes, and snakes; however, it has developed some novel adaptations that increase its chances of survival. If surprised while on the ground, the opossum may feign death—hence the expression “playing possum.” The animal also possesses a protein in its blood called lethal toxin-neutralizing factor (LTNF), which has been shown to detoxify a wide variety of poisons, including the venom produced by snakes, bees, and scorpions. The flesh of the Virginia opossum was once enjoyed as food in the southern United States, where opossum hunting was a popular fall and winter sport.
The Virginia opossum breeds from midwinter to late autumn. One litter is produced annually in cooler regions, but two litters are the rule in warmer regions. After only 12–13 days of gestation (average 12.5 days), an opossum may have as many as 25 young; the average number is usually 7 or 8. The young are born blind, naked, and grublike and weigh only 0.13 gram (0.0046 ounce). Using their clawed forelimbs, they instinctively struggle toward the mother’s fur-lined pouch; those that reach the pouch seek out a nipple—there usually are 13 of them—and achieve a firm oral grip as the nipple swells. Some newborns never succeed in entering the pouch, and others die because there are more young born than there are teats to serve them. Virginia opossum young remain attached to the nipple for seven to eight weeks, after which they are either carried in the pouch or—when too large for the pouch—carried clinging to the mother’s fur. At this time the young may be left in a den while the mother forages. Virginia opossums are fully weaned and independent at about 100 days of age. The folklore that the opossum gives birth through its nose probably comes from the female’s habit of putting her face into the pouch to clean it just before giving birth.
The common opossum (Didelphis marsupialis) occurs from Mexico through Central America and into South America as far as the central Amazon basin. The big-eared opossum (D. aurita) is similar to the common opossum and occurs from eastern and southern Brazil to northern Argentina. Other close relatives include three species of white-eared opossums: D. albiventris in eastern Brazil and south through eastern Bolivia, Paraguay, Uruguay, and northern Argentina; D. imperfecta in Venezuela and the Guianas; and D. pernigra, found in the Andes from western Venezuela south into Bolivia.
The water opossum, or yapok (Chironectes minimus), a carnivorous opossum found from Mexico to Argentina, is the only marsupial adapted to a semiaquatic life: it has webbed hind toes, dense oily fur, and a pouch opening that can be tightened to keep the young dry. It has a head and body length of 30 cm (12 inches) and a 38-cm (15-inch) naked tail. The water opossum’s dark upperparts are broadly striped.
Woolly opossums include three genera: Caluromys, with three species and found from southern Mexico into Brazil, the Glironia, known from a single species in the Amazon basin of Brazil, southern Colombia, eastern Ecuador, eastern Peru, and northeastern Bolivia; and Caluromysiops, with a single species found in eastern Peru and western Brazil. Considered the most primitive of American marsupials, the monito del monte (Dromiciops australis) is found in Chile and Argentina. The seven species of gray four-eyed opossum (Philander) and the brown four-eyed, or rat-tailed, opossum (Metachirus nudicaudatus) get their name from the large pale spots over each eye. One species (Philander opossum) of the gray four-eyed opossum and the brown four-eyed opossum are found in both Central and South America; they have large heads and long tails, and the latter species is pouchless.
The thick-tailed opossums (Lutreolina), three species of South America east of the Andes, are found chiefly in marshes and along watercourses but may enter cities. As long as 70 cm (28 inches), including its 30-cm (12-inch) tail, these opossums resemble large weasels and are fiercely carnivorous.
Among the smallest opossums are the small-eyed short-tailed opossums of the genus Monodelphis (20 recognized species) of South America (one, M. melanops, is found in Panama); some are only 11 cm (4 inches) long including the tail.
The most abundant members of the opossum family are the more than 56 species of mouse, or murine, opossums, which are found from northern Mexico into Argentina.
