Rat kangaroo,  any of the 11 living species of Australian and Tasmanian marsupials constituting the families Potoroidae and Hypsiprymnodontidae, related to the kangaroo family, Macropodidae. Other potoroids are known only as fossils; the Potoroidae were already separated from the Macropodidae by the late Oligocene Epoch, some 25 million years ago.
Rat kangaroos differ from other kangaroos in skull and urogenital anatomy and jaw musculature and in having large canine teeth. They also develop more rapidly within the mother’s pouch than other kangaroos do. All are rabbit-sized or smaller and have prehensile tails, which they use to grasp nesting material for transport to the nest site. Rat kangaroos live in undergrowth. Most species are active at night (except the musky rat kangaroo, which is active during the day), foraging for grass, tubers, and, especially, underground fungi; some also eat grubs and worms.
The four species of short-nosed rat kangaroos, or bettongs (genus Bettongia), have pinkish noses and short ears. The Tasmanian, or eastern, bettong (B. gaimardi) has gray fur along its back and white fur on its chest and abdomen, along with a crest of black hair along its white-tipped tail. The species is restricted to eastern Tasmania, but at one time it also occurred on the southeastern mainland of Australia.  The brush-tailed bettong, or woylie (B. penicillata), has a similar crest, but the tail tip is not white; it is found in several small isolated pockets in Western Australia.  The burrowing rat kangaroo, or boodie (B. lesueur), which has a thicker, non-crested tail, is the only member of the kangaroo group to dig burrows. It was formerly widespread in South and Western Australia but is today restricted to a few offshore islands. The Northern bettong (B. tropica) has pale gray fur with a whitish underside. It inhabits a handful of small patches of northeastern Queensland. The Tasmanian bettong and the burrowing bettong are listed as near threatened and the woylie and the northern bettong as endangered on the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species.
The potoroos (Potorous) have shorter tails and ears and pointier faces than other rat kangaroos have.  The long-nosed potoroo (P. tridactylus) lives in the underbrush of forests in Tasmania and on the eastern mainland from the border between South Australia and Victoria to southern Queensland. A closely related species, Gilbert’s potoroo (P. gilbertii), of southwestern Australia, was long thought to be extinct, but in the 1990s a tiny population was rediscovered near Albany, Western Australia.  Another Western Australian species, the broad-faced potoroo (P. platyops), has been listed as an extinct species on the IUCN Red List since 1982.  The largest species, the long-footed potoroo (P. longipes), was described in 1980; it is very rare, and the IUCN considers it an endangered species. The long-footed potoroo’s habitat is limited to a handful of forested areas in northeastern Victoria and southeastern New South Wales.
The rufous rat kangaroo (Aepyprymnus rufescens) is the largest of the rat kangaroos. Its fur is red-tinged with a faint whitish hip stripe. It attains a length of up to 90 cm (36 inches) and may weigh 3.5 kg (7.7 pounds). It lives in tussock grass country in open woodlands, from eastern Queensland to eastern New South Wales.
Confirmed sightings of the desert rat kangaroo (Caloprymnus campestris), which lived in the Queensland–South Australia border region, have not occurred since 1935, and the IUCN has considered the species extinct since 1994. The species was a pale buff colour and was known as a very fast leaper, with long hind legs and very short forelegs.
The musky rat kangaroo (Hypsiprymnodon moschatus) inhabits the tropical rainforests of northeastern Queensland. The only member of Hypsiprymnodontidae, it is more primitive than any potoroid or macropodid in that it retains the first digit of the hind foot and a small lateral incisor in the lower jaw. Unlike members of other kangaroo families, it bears twins instead of single young.  The musky rat kangaroo is dark brown and is the smallest rat kangaroo species, measuring only 40 to 50 cm (15.7 to 19.7 inches) long, including the tail. Adults weigh up to 700 grams (1.5 pounds). Unlike its relatives, the musky rat kangaroo is mainly active during the day. It does not hop but scurries on all fours.
All members of the Potoroidae and Hypsiprymnodontidae, being small and ground-living, are vulnerable to predation, particularly by foxes, which were first introduced into Australia in the 1850s.  This is why all species, except perhaps the rufous rat kangaroo, have much-reduced ranges or are extinct; only on offshore islands where there are no foxes, the largest of which is Tasmania, are potoroids still numerous.
