reindeer,  (Rangifer tarandus), in North America called caribou,  species of deer (family Cervidae) found in the Arctic tundra and adjacent boreal forests of Greenland, Scandinavia, Russia, Alaska, and Canada. Reindeer have been domesticated in Europe. There are two varieties, or ecotypes: tundra reindeer and forest (or woodland) reindeer. Tundra reindeer migrate between tundra and forest in huge herds numbering up to half a million in an annual cycle covering as much as 5,000 km (3,000 miles). Forest reindeer are much less numerous.
Large males can stand more than 1.2 metres (3.9 feet) tall at the shoulder and exceed 250 kg (550 pounds) in weight; females are slightly smaller. Reindeer have deeply cloven hoofs so the feet can spread on snow or soft ground; they are also good swimmers. Colour varies from whitish in winter to brown in summer. Heavy guard hairs are hollow, which increases the coat’s insulating properties. Antlers with up to 44 points can grow to 1.4 metres long in males; this is the only deer species in which females also have antlers.
Reindeer mature as yearlings if their nutrition is good, though males cannot compete for females until their fourth autumn, when their antlers and body mass (which are correlated) have grown sufficiently large. The rut occurs in October and lasts only 11 days. Tundra males, aggregated with thousands of females for the fall migration, assess other males’ antler size visually and thus generally avoid serious fights. Forest reindeer, on the other hand, defend discrete harems and fight harder. In both varieties a single calf is born in May or June after a gestation of seven and a half months. The calf grows rapidly on its mother’s milk, which is richer than that of any other ungulate. After one month it can eat fresh plant growth, and by three months it can survive if the mother dies, but normally weaning takes place at five to six months. Half of all calves born may be killed by wolves, bears, and lynx. Longevity is about 15 years in the wild, 20 in captivity.
Eurasian and American forest reindeer live in family groups of 6 to 13, with seasonal ranges of 500 square km (190 square miles) or less. Tundra reindeer spend winter dispersed in forests but aggregate in spring to migrate onto the tundra; in fall they mass again to return to the forest. Summer food is grass, sedges, green leaves of shrubs and new growth of larch, willow, and birch; mushrooms are sought in late summer. In winter, metabolism slows, and reindeer rely on high-carbohydrate lichens called reindeer moss, which they reach by digging craters in the snow. The calf follows its mother and shares this food. The reindeer survive on this low-protein diet by recycling urea (normally a waste product) within the digestive system and making use of its nitrogen. Females keep their antlers all winter, which enables them to defend feeding craters from each other as well as males, which shed their antlers soon after the rut.
There are about 3.5 million caribou in North America and perhaps 1 million wild reindeer in Eurasia, mostly in Russia. Nearly 3 million domestic reindeer live in northern Europe. They are important to traditional herders such as the Sami (Lapps) of Scandinavia and Russia, who exploit them as pack and draft animals and for meat, milk, and hides; the antlers are carved into tools and totems. The herdsmen use boats to direct herds to offshore islands in summer. In the forests of the Da Hinggan region of northeastern China, the Evenk people use reindeer as pack animals and as mounts, and small numbers of Tsaatan (Dhukha) herders in northern Mongolia utilize the reindeer they keep in a variety of ways.
Of the nine subspecies recognized, two are forest ecotypes, one living in North America and the other in Eurasia. Fossil evidence from Alaska indicates that they evolved during the late Pliocene Epoch (3.6 million to 2.6 million years ago). During the last glaciation (see ice age) more than 11,700 years ago, they were hunted by the Clovis people of New Mexico and by many early Stone Age tribes in southern Europe.
