Rice rat,  (genus Oryzomys),  any of 36 nocturnal species of small rodents found from the United States southward through tropical and portions of subtropical South America. Rice rats have soft fur, with tawny to grayish brown upperparts and paler underparts. Their tails are sparsely haired and vary in length depending upon the species. Body size also varies. Among the smallest is Oryzomys alfaroi, from southern Mexico to western Ecuador, with a body up to 12 cm (4.7 inches) long and a slightly shorter tail; among the largest is O. angouya, found in eastern Brazil, Paraguay, and southern Argentina, with a body length up to 20 cm and a much longer tail.
When the rice rat genus was first named and described scientifically in 1858, it included only the marsh rice rat (O. palustris), a pest of rice plantations in the southeastern United States during the colonial period. This species is now most commonly found in coastal marshes (an environment similar to inundated rice fields) and also occurs in forest clearings of grass and scrub as well as wet meadows in foothills of the Appalachian Mountains. One of the few nonforest species in the genus, marsh rice rats are good swimmers and nimble climbers in marsh grasses or shrubs, where they construct globular nests. They are opportunistic feeders, eating seeds, succulent parts of grasses, invertebrates, small vertebrates, and carrion.
Additional species will undoubtedly be discovered as South American rodents become better studied. Two were described as recently as 1998—one from Ecuador in the Andes Mountains, the other from northeastern Brazil. Nearly all members of the genus live in tropical and subtropical forests. Many occur only at low elevations, but a few are restricted to cloud forests in the mountains of southern Mexico, Central America, and the Andes. Certain rice rats are indigenous to particular biogeographic regions; for example, O. megacephalus and O. yunganus are restricted to lowland tropical rainforests of the Amazon Basin, and O. bolivaris is found only in very wet tropical forests of the Trans-Andean region. Much has been learned about the ecologies of some species with extensive geographic ranges and high population densities, such as O. megacephalus. Others, such as Thomas’s rice rat (O. dimidiatus) from southeastern Nicaragua, are rare and are found only in one or two places, and most aspects of their natural histories are unknown.
Several related genera are also sometimes referred to as rice rats, including arboreal rice rats (Oecomys), dark rice rats (Melanomys), small rice rats (Microryzomys), and pygmy rice rats (Oligoryzomys), among others. All belong to the subfamily Sigmodontinae of the “true” mouse and rat family Muridae within the order Rodentia.
