Roan antelope,  (Hippotragus equinus),  one of the largest and most formidable African antelopes (family Bovidae) and a member of the tribe Hippotragini, the so-called horse antelopes.
The roan is a powerfully built animal with long, sturdy limbs and a thick neck that looks thicker because of an upstanding mane and a beard. The head is long and narrow with a wide gape, framed by long, tasseled ears. Named for its colour, the roan is reddish gray to reddish brown, with a striking black-and-white facial mask. The sexes look much alike, standing 126–150 cm (50–59 inches), but males are heavier (280 kg [620 pounds] versus 260 kg [570 pounds] for females) and have thicker, sickle-shaped horns 55–99 cm (22–39 inches) long, 10–20 percent longer than those of females.
The geographical range of the roan extends across broad-leaved deciduous woodlands in the northern savanna and throughout most of the southern savanna. A grazer and browser whose preferred habitat includes lightly wooded savanna, it also frequents floodplains and montane grasslands. It is mysteriously absent from Africa’s eastern miombo woodlands and has become scarce in its southernmost range (especially in South Africa). Formerly common in West Africa, it has been eliminated from many areas by settlement and poaching. Its preference for relatively open habitat, along with its size and sedentary (nonmigratory) habits, make this species especially vulnerable.
Like most antelopes, the roan is sociable and territorial. Females live in herds of 6–20 plus their offspring; herds of 35 or more are no longer common. The size of home ranges varies greatly, from as small as 239 hectares (590 acres) at normal density (4 roan per square km) to as large as 100 square km (39 square miles). Males defend territories as small as 100 hectares (247 acres) at normal density. Where roan are few and far between, bulls can accompany female herds that range widely, thereby enjoying a monopoly denied males with territorial neighbours. Herd composition changes from hour to hour as members come and go, but all who share the same home range belong to the same social unit, and perhaps most are related, as female offspring settle in the maternal home range. Males, though, are evicted and forced by territorial males to disperse as subadults; these associate together in small bachelor herds until mature at six years of age. Females breed at two years, calve at three years, and thereafter produce young at roughly 10.5-month intervals (gestation 9–9.5 months). After a 2–3 week hiding stage, calves join the maternal herd, where they associate with other juveniles in creches. Resting juvenile subgroups are often left behind when the rest of the herd moves, making them vulnerable prey for leopards. However, roan have been known to kill lions that failed to overpower them immediately. Their curved horns and a sideways stabbing technique, together with an aggressive temperament, make the roan antelope unusually formidable.
