Shrew,  (family Soricidae),  any of more than 350 species of insectivores having a mobile snout that is covered with long sensitive whiskers and overhangs the lower lip. Their large incisor teeth are used like forceps to grab prey; the upper pair is hooked, and the lower pair extends forward. Shrews have a foul odour caused by scent glands on the flanks as well as other parts of the body.
Shrews are small mammals with cylindrical bodies, short and slender limbs, and clawed digits. Their eyes are small but are usually visible in the fur, and the ears are rounded and moderately large, except in short-tailed shrews and water shrews. Tail length varies among species, some being much shorter than the body and others appreciably longer. The sexes are not immediately distinguishable, as the testes are retained in the male’s abdominal cavity and do not descend. The brain’s cerebral hemispheres are small, but the olfactory lobes are prominent, which reflects less intelligence and manipulative ability but an enhanced sense of smell. The 26 to 32 white or red-tipped teeth are not replaced during the animal’s life (milk teeth are shed before birth).
Most shrews are active all year and by day and night, with regular periods of rest. They eat primarily insects and other invertebrates but also take small vertebrates, seeds, and fungi. North American short-tailed shrews (genus Blarina) and Old World water shrews (genus Neomys) produce toxic saliva for immobilizing prey. Shrews have high metabolic rates and may consume more than their own weight in food daily; they cannot survive for more than a few hours without eating. As a result, shrew life consists largely of a frenetic search for food. Terrestrial shrews have acute senses of hearing, smell, and touch. They probe in litter and soil with their muzzle and dig out any invertebrates detected by smell and by their sensitive whiskers. Large prey is pinned with the front feet but grabbed by the mouth and manipulated with the flexible muzzle, with food being pushed sideways as it is chewed. Amphibious species depend almost entirely on touch to detect prey underwater. Shrews emit clicks, twitters, chirps, squeaks, churls, whistles, barks, and ultrasonic sounds in contexts of alarm, defense, aggression, courtship, interactions between mother and young, and exploration and foraging. Shrews have 2 to 10 blind, hairless young in one or more annual litters; gestation lasts up to 28 days. The mother is attentive and occasionally relocates, carrying the young by the neck or pushing them along to the new nest. When the young are old enough, they may form a chain, each grasping the base of the tail of the one ahead, trailing behind the mother as she escapes from disturbances or relocates. This behaviour is called caravanning.
Shrews are found throughout North America to northwestern South America, Africa, Eurasia, and island groups east of mainland Asia to the Aru Islands on the Australian continental shelf. They have adapted to a wide variety of environments, inhabiting tundra, coniferous, deciduous, and tropical forests, savannas, humid and arid grasslands, and deserts. More than 40 percent of the living species (145 of 325) are indigenous to Africa, with 16 species being recorded from one location in southeastern Central African Republic. The Asian house shrew (Suncus murinus) has been introduced into parts of Arabia, Africa, Madagascar, and some Pacific and Indian Ocean islands.
The common Eurasian shrew (Sorex araneus) represents the average size of most species, weighing up to 14 grams (0.5 ounce) and having a body 6 to 8 cm (2 to 3 inches) long and a shorter tail (5 to 6 cm). One of the smallest mammals known is the pygmy white-toothed shrew (Suncus etruscus) of Eurasia and North Africa, weighing between 1.2 and 2.7 grams (0.04 to 1 ounce) and having a body 4 to 5 cm (1.6 to 2 inches) long and a shorter tail (2 to 3 cm [0.8 to 1.2 inches]). Among the largest is the armoured shrew (Scutisorex somereni) of equatorial Africa, which weighs up to 113 grams (about 4 ounces) and has a body 12 to 15 cm (4.7 to 5.9 inches) long and a tail 8 to 10 cm (3.1 to 3.9 inches) long. The short, dense, soft fur of shrews ranges from gray to black, with either slightly paler tones or white on the underparts. Some species of Sorex are tricoloured, having a dark brown back, grayish brown sides, and grayish undersides. The piebald shrew (genus Diplomesodon) is white with gray along the head and back.
Body form is similar in all shrews, but modifications in anatomical details reflect different lifestyles. For example, most shrews live on the ground, but some tropical species, such as the forest musk shrews (genus Sylvisorex) of Africa and white-toothed shrews (genus Crocidura) of Asia also forage and travel in bushes, vines, and small trees beneath the forest canopy. These species have long feet and toes and a tail much longer than the body.
Other shrews are adapted for burrowing. These are the North American short-tailed shrews (genus Blarina), Kenyan shrews (genus Surdisorex), the Asian mole shrew (Anourosorex squamipes), and Kelaart’s long-clawed shrew (Feroculus feroculus) of Sri Lanka. All have minute eyes obscured by the fur, very small ears also hidden in the fur, long digging claws on the forefeet, and short tails. They construct and forage within subsurface burrows, spending only limited time on the surface.
Water shrews have especially small eyes (covered with skin in genus Nectogale). These are amphibious species that den on land and forage in water. A bizarre and unexplained specialization is shown by the African Scutisorex somereni. It has additional and enlarged lumbar vertebrae interlocked by numerous bony spines, forming a flexible and very strong backbone. This shrew can support the weight of a person.
