Sika,  (Cervus nippon),  small, forest-dwelling deer of the family Cervidae (order Artiodactyla), which is native to China, Korea, and Japan, where it was long considered sacred. (Sika means “deer” in Japanese.) It is farmed in China for its antlers, which are used in traditional medicine.
Mature males of the smallest forms, the southern sikas, stand 80–86 cm (31–34 inches) at the shoulder and weigh about 80 kg (180 pounds). Males of the largest forms, the northern sikas, such as Dybowski’s sika (C. nippon hortulorum), stand approximately 110 cm (40 inches) at the shoulder and weigh 110 kg (240 pounds). Females weigh about 60 percent as much as males. Their coats are reddish brown and spotted in summer and dark brown and sometimes without spots in winter. There is considerable geographic variation in size, coat characteristics, and colour. All have fairly long tails and a white rump patch rimmed by long white hair that can be flared wide in alarm. All mature stags grow a neck ruff in fall. The four-tined antlers of older stags may exceed 85 cm (33 inches) in length in the north and 70 cm (28 inches) in the south.
Males form territories during the mating season in September and October and advertise their position and social status with shrill rutting calls. Although more primitive than the closely related red deer and elk, sikas are quite similar in social behaviour to the elk. Males of both species advertise vocally during the rut, spray their bodies with urine in a similar manner, dig similar rutting pits, and court females in a similar fashion. Elk, however, are much more showy. Sikas are more sensitive to the cold than the red deer, which live at higher latitudes and altitudes. Sikas are short-winded and run to hide in thickets, to which they are closely bound, despite being quite gregarious. Sikas compete aggressively for food and have broad eating habits. (They can subsist on fairly fibrous forages.) They occupy diverse habitats over a great range of altitudes and latitudes; their only ecological requirements are cover, plenty of forest edge, and rainy, short winters. Sikas are excellent swimmers. They are hardy and quite disease-resistant.
A review of sika taxonomy has revealed that many descriptions of these animals were based on skins bought in markets or on specimens from captive populations in China. In addition, domesticated sikas are widely distributed, which has led in mainland Asia to the blurring of geographic differences between subspecies. In Japan subspecific differences may be more meaningful, but even there sikas have been widely transplanted. Sikas have been introduced in many localities outside their native ranges, primarily in Europe, New Zealand, North America, and Europe, where they have hybridized with red deer.
