Spider monkey,  (genus Ateles),  large, extremely agile monkey that lives in forests from southern Mexico through Central and South America to Brazil. In spite of its thumbless hands, this lanky potbellied primate can move swiftly through the trees, using its long tail as a fifth limb. The seven species of true spider monkeys are classified in the genus Ateles. The woolly spider monkey, or muriqui, which is a close relative but not a true spider monkey, is placed in the genus Brachyteles.
Spider monkeys weigh about 6 kg (13.2 pounds) and are 35–66 cm (14–26 inches) long, excluding the heavily furred tail, which is longer than the body. The coat, of variable length and fineness, ranges among the several species from gray to reddish, dark brown, or black. Most have a black face with white eye rings, but some have a flesh-coloured face.
The monkeys live in bands numbering up to 35 animals but forage in smaller groups, roaming the highest branches during the day. They feed most intensively early in the day, relishing fruit supplemented by nuts, seeds, buds, flowers, and leaves as well as spiders and bird eggs. They do not normally descend from the trees. They will leap or drop spread-eagled from one tree to another. Spider monkeys are dextrous with their tail as well as their hands. They pick up objects with the tail, and they hang from branches by using the tail alone.
Spider monkeys that are shot with arrows while being hunted for food sometimes remove the arrows with their hands and attempt to stem the bleeding. Wary of humans, they will break off tree branches and try to drop them on intruders, and they bark like terriers when approached. Spider monkeys also produce a variety of other sounds. When separated from other members of their group, they call to one another in a whinnying voice like a horse. They are also capable of prolonged screams.
Single young are born in seclusion after a gestation period of about 139 days and are dependent on the mother for a year. Time between births ranges from two to five years.
According to the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species, all true spider monkey species are threatened. Most are endangered, and two of these—the brown-headed spider monkey (A. fusciceps), which is found from eastern Panama through northwestern Ecuador, and the variegated, or brown, spider monkey (A. hybridus), which inhabits northeastern Colombia and northwestern Venezuela—are listed as critically endangered. Spider monkeys are widely hunted for food by local people. Consequently, some of their population decline has been attributed to hunting pressure. However, habitat loss resulting from logging and land clearing is also thought to play a significant role. Spider monkeys are susceptible to malaria and are used in laboratory studies of the disease.
