Virginia opossum,  (Didelphis virginiana),  the only marsupial (family Didelphidae, subfamily Didelphinae) found north of Mexico. The Virginia opossum occurs from southern Canada to northern Costa Rica. Populations in western Canada and along the Pacific coast south to northern Baja California, Mexico, originated as introductions from the eastern United States. The Virginia opossum (Didelphis virginiana) and the common opossum (D. marsupialis) can be found together in eastern and southern Mexico and in Central America.
Male Virginia opossums may grow to 100 cm (40 inches) but average about 76 cm (30 inches) in total length (including the tail); females average about 72 cm (28 inches). The size of a house cat, males average about 3 kg (6.6 pounds), females about 2 kg (4.4 pounds). The Virginia opossum is the only member of the genus that stores body fat, and older males may exceed 6 kg (13.2 pounds) in the fall of the year. Virginia opossums have a long head and pointed snout, rounded naked ears, and a scaly, nearly hairless, prehensile tail that is about half of their total length. Their fore and hind feet have five toes, all with sharp claws except for the clawless, thumblike, opposable innermost toe on the hind feet. The Virginia opossum, like all members of the family Didelphidae, has 50 teeth, and the last premolar  is the only tooth that is replaced (that is, preceded by a milk tooth) in the adult.
Its ears, eyes, eye rings, and feet and the basal one-third to one-half of the naked tail are black. The toes and the tips of the ears usually are white in northern populations and black in Mexico and Central America. The face is white in northern populations and dusky brown or blackish in populations from Texas southward but always with a white cheek patch—a characteristic used to identify this species where it occurs together (sympatry) with the common opossum. The coarse coat of long guard hair overlying the shorter, dense underfur may be either pale gray (gray phase) or mainly black (black phase). Rare in the north, black-phase individuals are more common in the southern United States and farther south. The albinotic colour phase is a rare and unusual colour pattern, often misinterpreted as albino (true albinos have white fur and pink eyes and skin), in which the fur is white but the colour of the eyes, eye rings, feet, and basal portion of the tail is dark brown or black.
Virginia opossums eat almost anything, including fruit, insects, earthworms, eggs, nestlings, birds, reptiles, amphibians, small mammals, and carrion. They commonly prey on snakes, including poisonous species, and are immune to pit viper venom. Able climbers, opossums occupy a variety of habitats as long as water is available. They den under stumps, in hollow trees and logs, and in buildings and rock piles. They seem to prefer holes in the ground dug by other animals, such as woodchucks. If caught on the ground and not able to escape, a Virginia opossum may become catatonic. Most body functions remain normal, but the animal appears to be unconscious or dead. This behaviour has given rise to the expression “playing possum.” Fat opossums were once a popular food in the southern United States, and possum hunting was a popular sport. Although they are still trapped, their fur has a low market value.
The Virginia opossum breeds from December through August, depending on the latitude. Two litters per year are normal, but in colder northern regions the young from the second litter rarely survive the winter. Gestation is 12–13 days. As many as 25 young may be born in each litter, but the maximum number raised by the mother is determined by the number of teats (normally 13) in the pouch, and the average number of pouch young is usually 7 or 8. Born blind and naked and weighing about 0.13 gram (0.0046 ounce) apiece, these tiny, larvalike young crawl upward using their forelimbs as they seek the mother’s fur-lined pouch. Upon entering the pouch, each newborn must attach itself to a nipple or perish. Each pouch young remains firmly attached to the nipple for the first 50–55 days of life. Thereafter, until weaned and independent, the young either travel in the pouch or cling to the fur of their mother’s back. A short time after the first litter becomes independent, the female breeds again. Each of the female’s nipples, which have become enlarged and elongated by the first litter, develops a small projection (papilla) to which the newborn from the second litter attaches.
The myth that the opossum gives birth through its nose probably begins from the female’s habit of licking the pouch and surrounding fur just before the young are born. In addition, the birth canal is divided, and the male has a bifurcated penis—an anatomical curiosity that is responsible for a myth that opossums breed through the nostrils and that reinforces the false belief that females give birth through the nose. The notion that the mouth of the young fuses to its mother’s nipple is also false. Transverse plates develop on the roof of the mouth to anchor the young to the nipple. If the mouth is not carefully detached from the nipple before the young can open its mouth on its own, the skin of the nipple may be torn and bleed—hence the notion that the mouth and nipple had grown together.
The life span of Virginia opossums is short. Most reproductive females are under a year of age, and few live long enough to breed a second year. The oldest documented free-living Virginia opossum was a three-year-old male from Maryland.
