Viscacha,  any of four species of slender yet fairly large South American rodents similar to chinchillas. They have short forelimbs, long hindlimbs, and a long, bushy tail. The soft fur is long and dense, and the soles of the feet have fleshy pads.
The three species of mountain viscachas (genus Lagidium) live in the Andes Mountains from central Peru southward to Chile and Argentina, usually at altitudes between 4,000 and 5,000 metres (13,000 and 16,000 feet). They have very long ears and resemble long-tailed rabbits. Mountain viscachas weigh up to 3 kg (6.6 pounds) and have a body length of 30 to 45 cm (about 12 to 18 inches). Fur on the upperparts is dark gray to brown, often with a dark stripe down the back; the underparts are white, yellow, or gray. The blackish tail is slightly shorter than the body and is tipped with black or reddish brown. Inhabiting dry, sparsely vegetated rocky cliffs, outcrops, and slopes, these rodents are poor diggers but are agile on the rocks, where they eat grasses, mosses, and lichens. Nonaggressive and gregarious, mountain viscachas sometimes form large colonies and spend most of the day among rocks and ledges. The approach of a predator is heralded with loud, abrupt birdlike whistles. At night the viscachas shelter in deep rock crevices and narrow stony tunnels. Females give birth two or three times a year. One young per litter is born after a gestation of about three months.
The plains viscacha (Lagostomus maximus) lives on sparse grasslands, or Pampas, in Argentina, Paraguay, and southeastern Bolivia at altitudes up to nearly 3,000 metres. It resembles a huge guinea pig, with a large, blunt head, a body length of 47 to 66 cm, and a short tail (15 to 20 cm). Females weigh up to 4.5 kg and males up to 8 kg. Coarse guard hairs mingle with soft underfur. Upperparts vary from dark gray to pale brown; underparts are white. Broad black and white stripes—including a moustache—mark the face. There are four large, strong digits on the front feet but only three on the hindfeet. Unlike mountain viscachas, the plains viscacha is nocturnal. It is colonial and digs elaborate burrow systems called vizcacheras with its forelegs, pushing the soil away with its nose and marking the entrances with piles of anything it can carry, including sticks, stones, bones, dung, and other objects. Although it will eat any vegetation, seeds and grasses are preferred, which makes the viscacha a pest to ranchers, especially because the burrows are hazardous to both humans and livestock. Plains viscachas are fast and, when pursued, alternate their running with sharp turns and long leaps. Gestation takes about four months, and litters contain one to four young, though two is usual.
Viscachas belong to the family Chinchillidae, a member of the suborder Hystricognatha within the order Rodentia. Mountain viscachas are actually more closely related to chinchillas than they are to the plains viscacha, which is classified in a different subfamily (Lagostominae, rather than Chinchillinae). Extinct ancestors of the plains viscacha are represented by fossils from the Early Miocene Epoch (23.8 million to 20.5 million years ago) in South America; fossil relatives of mountain viscachas and chinchillas have not yet been found.
