Woodrat,  (genus Neotoma),  any of 20 species of medium-sized North and Central American rodents. Some species are commonly known as “packrats” for their characteristic accumulation of food and debris on or near their dens. These collections, called “middens,” may include bones, sticks, dry manure, shiny metal objects, and innumerable items discarded by or stolen from humans.
The bushy-tailed woodrat (Neotoma cinerea), often called a packrat, is among the largest and most common woodrats, weighing up to 600 grams (about 1.3 pounds) and having a body length of up to 25 cm (nearly 10 inches). Its slightly shorter tail is longhaired and bushy, which is unique within the genus. The Arizona woodrat (N. devia) is one of the smallest, weighing less than 132 grams and having a body length of up to 15 cm. Its tail, measuring up to 14 cm long, is more typical in being densely haired but not bushy. Woodrats’ eyes are large, their protruding ears are nearly bald, and their feet are white. The long, thick, soft fur varies among species from gray to reddish brown above and from white to rust-coloured on the underparts. Some populations of the desert woodrat (N. lepida) and the white-throated woodrat (N. albigula) are black (melanistic).
Woodrats are nocturnal and active year-round. Generally solitary, they range from the Yukon and westernmost Northwest Territories throughout most of the United States south to western Honduras. They populate a broad spectrum of habitats, including desert plateaus and mountains, the southern Great Plains, and many types of forest (eastern deciduous, piñon-juniper, coniferous, boreal, and tropical thorn and scrub). All woodrats are vegetarian, and three species exhibit dietary specialization: Stephen’s woodrat (N. stephensi) subsists almost entirely on juniper sprigs, and N. albigula and N. lepida feed mostly on prickly pear, cholla cacti, and yucca plants.
At the simple extreme of woodrat nest construction is that of the Allegheny woodrat (N. magister). Although it is merely a cup made of plants, the rat protects it with a small pile of sticks among boulders on a cliff ledge or inside a cave. The most elaborate configuration is the huge stick nest of the dusky-footed woodrat (N. fuscipes), which can be more than a metre (3.3 feet) high and is built on the ground, on rocky slopes, or in tree canopies. Other woodrats live in moderately large structures built at the bases of cacti, bushes, or trees, in caves, on rock-strewn slopes, or on ledges. Structures in arid sites protected from rain become very hard owing to the high mineral content of the woodrat’s urine, which is used as cement. Such middens remain intact for thousands of years. By analyzing the preserved plants in these ancient dens, ecologists and paleontologists can reconstruct plant communities and climate over the last 40,000 years in the southwestern United States.
Woodrats are usually common within their ranges, but Allegheny woodrat populations are declining, possibly because of forest defoliation by gypsy moths and infestation by parasites. Two species endemic to islands in the Gulf of California—N. anthonyi of the Todos Santos Islands and N. bunkeri of Isla Coronados—are probably extinct owing to the depletion of native vegetation and the introduction of domestic cats.
Woodrats belong to the subfamily Sigmodontinae of the mouse family (Muridae) within the order Rodentia. Fossils trace their history to the Late Miocene Epoch (11.2 million to 5.3 million years ago) of North America.
