schizophrenia,  any of a group of severe mental disorders that have in common symptoms such as hallucinations, delusions, blunted emotions, disordered thinking, and a withdrawal from reality. Persons affected by schizophrenia display a wide array of symptoms. In the past, depending on the specific symptomatology, five subtypes of schizophrenia were recognized. Because of their extensive overlap in symptomatology, these subtypes are no longer considered separate diagnostic categories but often are still considered by many physicians when diagnosing schizophrenia.
The simple or undifferentiated subtype of schizophrenia typically is characterized by an insidious and gradual reduction in external relations and interests. The patient’s emotions lack depth, and ideation is simple and refers to concrete things. There are a relative absence of mental activity, a progressive lessening in the use of inner resources, and a retreat to simpler or stereotyped forms of behaviour.
The hebephrenic or disorganized subtype of schizophrenia is typified by shallow and inappropriate emotional responses, foolish or bizarre behaviour, false beliefs (delusions), and false perceptions (hallucinations).
The catatonic subtype is characterized by striking motor behaviour. The patient may remain in a state of almost complete immobility, often assuming statuesque positions. Mutism (inability to talk), extreme compliance, and absence of almost all voluntary actions are also common. This state of inactivity is at times preceded or interrupted by episodes of excessive motor activity and excitement, generally of an impulsive, unpredictable kind.
The paranoid subtype, which usually arises later in life than the other subtypes, is characterized primarily by delusions of persecution and grandeur combined with unrealistic, illogical thinking, often accompanied by hallucinations.
The residual subtype is typically distinguished by the lack of distinct features that define the other types and is considered a less severe diagnosis. Individuals diagnosed with the residual type generally have a history of schizophrenia but have reduced psychotic symptoms.
The different subtypes of schizophrenia are not mutually exclusive, and persons affected by schizophrenia may display a mixture of symptoms that defy convenient classification. There may also be a mixture of schizophrenic symptoms with those of other psychoses, notably those of the manic-depressive group.
Hallucinations and delusions, although not invariably present, are often a conspicuous symptom in schizophrenia. The most common hallucinations are auditory: the patient hears (nonexistent) voices and believes in their reality. Patients with schizophrenia are subject to a wide variety of delusions, including many that are characteristically bizarre or absurd. One symptom common to most patients with schizophrenia is a loosening in their thought processes; this syndrome manifests itself as disorganized or incoherent thinking, illogical trains of mental association, and unclear or incomprehensible speech.
Schizophrenia crosses all socioeconomic, cultural, and racial boundaries. Worldwide it affects about 0.33–0.75 percent of individuals. Schizophrenia is the single largest cause of admissions to mental hospitals and accounts for an even larger proportion of the permanent populations of such institutions. The illness usually first manifests itself in the teen years or in early adult life, and its subsequent course is extremely variable. About one-third of all schizophrenic patients make a complete and permanent recovery, one-third have recurring episodes of the illness, and one-third deteriorate into chronic schizophrenia with severe disability.
Various theories of the origin of schizophrenia have centred on anatomical, biochemical, psychological, social, genetic, and environmental causes. No single cause of schizophrenia has been established or even identified; however, there is strong evidence that a combination of genetic and environmental factors plays an important role in the development of the disease. Researchers have found that rare inherited genetic mutations occur three to four times more frequently in people with schizophrenia compared with healthy people. These mutations typically occur in genes involved in neurodevelopment, of which there are hundreds. In addition, many small-effect genetic variants have been identified on various chromosomes in persons with schizophrenia, including chromosomes 6 and 22. In the case of chromosome 6, it is thought that the interaction of these variants—many of which occur in a region of the chromosome that contains the major histocompatibility complex, a group of genes associated with regulating responses of the immune system—contributes to some 30 percent of cases of the illness. A similar polygenic pattern, in which many minor genetic variants interact to give rise to disease, has been found in persons with bipolar disorder. This knowledge sheds light on the enormous complexity of mental disorders associated with genetic factors. Today scientists continue to investigate the mechanisms by which genetic mutations give rise to biochemical abnormalities in the brains of people suffering from schizophrenia. Stressful life experiences may trigger the disease’s initial onset.
Schizophrenia is associated with various physiological changes in brain structure and function. These changes are especially pronounced in the regions of the prefrontal cortex and the medial and superior temporal lobes, which serve key roles in the processing of episodic memory, short-term memory, and auditory information. In general, relative to healthy individuals, persons with schizophrenia have reductions in gray matter in these brain regions. These reductions are in turn attributed to declines in the density of synapses, or connections between neurons. Synapses allow neurons to communicate with one another and thereby facilitate cognition, memory formation and storage, and information processing. The loss of synaptic density in the prefrontal cortex and temporal lobes is suspected of underlying various symptoms of schizophrenia, including declines in decision-making ability and in the ability to plan and remember.
There is no cure for most patients with chronic schizophrenia, but the disease’s symptoms can in many cases be effectively treated by antipsychotic drugs given in conjunction with psychotherapy and supportive therapy. For example, therapies involving antipsychotic drugs and estradiol (the most active form of estrogen) have proved effective in reducing certain psychotic symptoms in postmenopausal women with schizophrenia. In addition, there is some evidence that estradiol treatment can reduce psychotic symptoms, such as delusions and hallucinations, in premenopausal women. Hormone therapy has become an important area of schizophrenia research because decreased estrogen levels in women affected by the disease are associated with an increased occurrence of severe psychotic symptoms. In addition, estradiol therapy has the potential to enable doctors to prescribe lower doses of antipsychotics, which can have harmful side effects (e.g., abnormalities in heart function, movement disorders). See mental disorder: Types and causes of mental disorders.
