stroke, also called apoplexy,  sudden impairment of brain function resulting either from a substantial reduction in blood flow to some part of the brain or from intracranial bleeding. The consequences of stroke may include transient or lasting paralysis on one or both sides of the body, difficulties in speaking or eating, and a loss of muscular coordination. A stroke may cause cerebral infarctions—dead sections of brain tissue.
Aging is one of the greatest risk factors for stroke, with the risk increasing significantly after age 55. Other major risk factors include hypertension (high blood pressure), smoking, high cholesterol, diabetes, obesity, heart disease, excessive alcohol consumption, physical inactivity, and heritable defects. Chronic stress, which increases cortisol levels that in turn lead to increases in blood pressure and blood cholesterol, can also raise the risk of stroke. In addition, stroke is more common in men than in women, and the risk of death from stroke is higher in African Americans than in Caucasians. This difference is primarily due to the higher prevalence of hypertension in African Americans.
Some people are predisposed to stroke because of genetic factors. For example, some persons with the inherited blood disorder sickle cell anemia have a significantly increased risk of stroke. Certain genetic variations not otherwise known to be associated with inherited disease also have been associated with risk. For example, variations on chromosomes 1, 6, and 19 have been related to risk of intracerebral hemorrhage.
The most common cause of stroke is a blood clot (thrombus) that has formed within a blood vessel of the brain. A blood clot also can lodge in an artery supplying brain tissue after originating in another portion of the body and traveling to the brain. This is known as an embolism. A myocardial infarction (heart attack), damage to a heart valve, and an irregular heartbeat called atrial fibrillation can cause blood clots that may reach the brain. Both types of clots reduce or stop the flow of blood to brain cells. During the early stages of stroke from a blood clot, the condition may be further complicated by the leakage of blood and fluid into the surrounding areas (edema).
Stroke can also occur as a result of atherosclerosis, the buildup of fatty deposits on artery walls. Atherosclerosis can cause intermittent insufficiency in the flow of blood due to spasm of the arteries, which can rupture, or the sludging of the blood as it passes through segments of vessels that have been narrowed by fatty deposits.
A hemorrhagic stroke, involving intracranial bleeding, may occur after an artery ruptures, usually as a result of a weakening of the arterial wall because of atherosclerosis or because of a thinning of the wall along with bulging (aneurysm), often due to hypertension.
Transient ischemic attacks, or mini-strokes, result when long, thin arteries penetrating deep into the brain become blocked by atherosclerosis, causing areas of surrounding tissue to lose their blood supply. The tissue may then wither, creating minute holes, called lacunes. A succession of transient ischemic attacks over the years can riddle the brain, causing dementia.
The initial onset of stroke may be massive in its effects, producing widespread paralysis, inability to speak, coma, or death within a short time, usually within several hours or days. On the other hand, the onset may be manifested by a series of transient ischemic attacks during which the patient may experience weakness and numbness of an arm, a leg, or a side of the face. There may be temporary difficulty in speech, confusion, or visual disturbances. Transient ischemic attacks may recur many times, but they are usually followed eventually by more widespread and permanent paralysis.
The groups of muscles and nerves involved are a direct reflection of the artery and brain tissues involved. If the left side of the brain (the dominant side for most persons) is affected, there is a paralysis of the right side of the body because most of the nerves cross to the opposite side of the body from their origin in the brain. However, the combinations of signs and symptoms are innumerable.
Precise history and physical examination, especially for neurological changes, are essential to differentiate stroke from a tumour and from brain injury resulting from other causes. Differential diagnosis is carried out by examining the spinal fluid for evidence of blood and by performing diagnostic imaging (as by computed tomography [CT] scan).
A critical step in the diagnostic process is to determine whether the stroke is due to a thrombus, an embolism, or a hemorrhage. Anticoagulant drugs, such as tissue plasminogen activator (e.g., alteplase or reteplase), are widely used in the treatment of stroke due to thromboses or emboli; however, such drugs are contraindicated when the stroke is due to hemorrhage. A stroke may have both a clotting and a significant hemorrhagic factor present, which can present further difficulties. Many strokes are due to closure of one of the two carotid arteries that supply the brain after passing up the sides of the neck from the aorta. If the closure involves only a small segment, surgery may be attempted to remove the obstruction or to insert a graft or synthetic bypass.
Many persons who have a stroke live for years after the event. Early and persistent efforts for rehabilitation are essential, including physical, occupational, and speech therapy. These therapies typically begin within a day or two after the stroke. Several pharmacological agents and other treatment strategies to enhance the recovery of brain and motor function in stroke patients have been investigated. For example, clinical trials testing the antidepressant Prozac (fluoxetine) in combination with physiotherapy have indicated that the drug can enhance the recovery of motor function in some patients. Cortical stimulation, in which the area of the brain responsible for motor control is stimulated by electrical pulses sent from an implanted device, has met with mixed success in severely compromised stroke patients.
