Annelid, phylum name Annelida, also called segmented worm,  any member of a phylum of invertebrate animals that are characterized by the possession of a body cavity (or coelom), movable bristles (or setae), and a body divided into segments by transverse rings, or annulations, from which they take their name. The coelom is reduced in leeches, and setae are lacking a few specialized forms, including leeches. A major invertebrate phylum of the animal kingdom, the annelids number more than 9,000 species distributed among three classes: the marine worms (Polychaeta), which are divided into free-moving and sedentary, or tube-dwelling, forms; the earthworms (Oligochaeta); and the leeches (Hirudinea).
Annelids are found worldwide in all types of habitats, especially oceanic waters, fresh waters, and damp soils. Most polychaetes live in the ocean, where they either float, burrow, wander on the bottom, or live in tubes they construct; their colours range from brilliant to dull, and some species can produce light. The feather duster (Manayunkia speciosa) inhabits the Great Lakes and some rivers of the United States. The polychaetes include more than 6,000 known species, which are about evenly divided between free-moving and tube-dwelling forms. The oligochaetes number about 3,250 known species. Oligochaetes, including earthworms, burrow into soil; certain small oligochaetes are found in fresh water, and a few are marine, usually inhabiting estuarial or other shallow waters. Leeches, which number about 300 species, inhabit freshwater or humid environments and are carnivorous or parasitic on other organisms—e.g., all marine leeches are parasitic on fish.
The length of annelids varies from a fraction of an inch to more than six metres (about 20 feet). The width may exceed 2.5 centimetres (about one inch) in the contracted state. Free-moving polychaetes and earthworms include the largest species. Leeches attain lengths of about 0.4 metre in the contracted state.
The body of free-moving polychaetes (see figure) consists of a head, or prostomium, which may bear two or more eyes; a preoral segment, with such appendages as antennae, tentacles, and palpi (fleshy sensory projections); a trunk divisible into distinct segments; and a tail, or pygidium, which may bear anal cirri (fleshy projections) or plaques and a terminal anus. Each body segment following the second segment (peristome) usually has paired parapodia; i.e., fleshy, lateral outgrowths used in feeding, locomotion, or breathing. The parapodia, generally prominent in free-moving polychaetes, bear bundles of setae, which can be extended, and aciculae (needlelike structures), which are used for support.
The heads of sedentary polychaetes (see figure) may be distinct or indistinct. Forms with a distinct head generally lack head appendages. Branchiae, or gills, which serve for respiration and as food-gathering organs, are well-developed in many of the tube-dwelling forms. Some have tentacles at the anterior (front) end, and gills arise from the dorsal (upper) surface of a few anterior segments. In these species food is gathered by the tentacles and respiration is confined to the gills. The rest of the body is divided into thoracic and abdominal regions. Parapodia, if present, are generally simple lobes; frequently the setae project directly from the body wall. Many sedentary polychaetes construct tubes made from a substance secreted from cells that constitute the epidermis, or skin. Tubes may consist of calcium carbonate, parchment, or mucus, to which sediment adheres. The anus is at the posterior tip. Tube dwellers generally have an external fecal groove along which fecal material passes forward. Eyes are occasionally present on gills, along the sides of the body, or on the pygidium in sedentary forms that do not live in tubes.
The body of oligochaetes is uniformly segmented and has conspicuous segmental lines. The prostomium is usually a simple lobe overhanging the mouth and lacking appendages. The microscopically small eyes are scattered over the body. The clitellum, a saddle-shaped thickening of the body wall, is present at sexual maturity. The anus is at the posterior tip. Setae generally arise from the ventral (lower) surface of the body.
