Arachnid,  (class Arachnida),  any member of the arthropod group that includes spiders, daddy longlegs, scorpions, and (in the subclass Acari) the mites and ticks, as well as lesser-known subgroups. Only a few species are of economic importance—for example, the mites and ticks, which transmit diseases to humans, other animals, and plants.
Arachnids range in size from tiny mites that measure 0.08 mm (0.003 inch) to the enormous scorpion Hadogenes troglodytes of Africa, which may be 21 cm (8 inches) or more in length. In appearance, they vary from short-legged, round-bodied mites and pincer-equipped scorpions with curled tails to delicate, long-legged daddy longlegs and robust, hairy tarantulas.
Like all arthropods, arachnids have segmented bodies, tough exoskeletons, and jointed appendages. Most are predatory. Arachnids lack jaws and, with only a few exceptions, inject digestive fluids into their prey before sucking its liquefied remains into their mouths. Except among daddy longlegs and the mites and ticks, in which the entire body forms a single region, the arachnid body is divided into two distinct regions: the cephalothorax, or prosoma, and the abdomen, or opisthosoma. The sternites (ventral plates) of the lower surface of the body show more variation than do the tergites (dorsal plates). The arachnids have simple (as opposed to compound) eyes.
The cephalothorax is covered dorsally with a rigid cover (the carapace) and has six pairs of appendages, the first of which are the chelicerae, the only appendages that are in front of the mouth. In many forms they are chelate, or pincerlike, and are used to hold and crush prey. Among spiders the basal segment of the chelicerae contains venom sacs, and the second segment, the fang, injects venom. The pedipalps, or palps, which in arachnids function as an organ of touch, constitute the second pair of appendages. In spiders and daddy longlegs the pedipalps are elongated leglike structures, whereas in scorpions they are large chelate, prehensile organs. Among spiders the pedipalps are highly modified as secondary sexual organs. The basal segment is sometimes modified for crushing or cutting food. The remaining four pairs of appendages are walking legs, though the first of these pairs serves as tactile organs among the tailless whip scorpions (order Amblypygi); it is the second pair that functions as such among the daddy longlegs. Among the spiderlike ricinuleids (order Ricinulei), special copulatory organs are located on the third pair of legs. Some mites, particularly immature individuals, have only two or three pairs of legs.
In many arachnids the cephalothorax and abdomen are broadly joined, while in others (such as spiders) they are joined by a narrow stalklike pedicel. The abdomen is composed of a maximum (in scorpions) of 13 segments, or somites. The first of these may be present only in the embryo and absent in the adult. In some orders a mesosoma consisting of seven segments and metasoma of five may be distinguished, while in others a few posterior segments may form a postabdomen (pygidium). In general, except for the spinnerets of the spiders, the abdomen has no appendages. In some groups it is elongated and distinctly segmented; in others it may be shortened, with indistinct segmentation. Postanal structures vary in both appearance and function. The scorpions have a short stinger with a swollen base enclosing a poison gland, and the whip scorpions (order Uropygi) and micro whip scorpions (order Palpigradi) have long whiplike structures of unknown function.
