Beard worm,  (family Siboglinidae), also called beardworm or siboglinid,  any of a group of polychaetes (marine worms) constituting the family Siboglinidae. Beard worms live sedentary lives in long protective tubes on the seafloor throughout the world. The common name beard worm refers to the beardlike mass of pinnate (featherlike) tentacles borne at the anterior end of many species. An intestine, which forms in embryos, disappears as development progresses. Males and females are generally similar in appearance. Beard worms are the only multicellular animals that have neither a mouth nor an anus in their adult stage.
Siboglinids were first classified in the early 20th century. The first species, Siboglinum weberi, described in 1914 by French biologist Maurice Caullery and placed in the family Siboglinidae, came from the seas of the Malay Archipelago, and the second species, Lamellisabella zachsi,  which came from the Sea of Okhotsk, was described in 1933. In 1937 a class called Pogonophora was established for Lamellisabella. In 1955 a close affinity between Siboglinum and Lamellisabella was proved, and the members were placed in the phylum Pogonophora. However, beard worms were reexamined using DNA sequencing techniques in the late 1990s, and by 2001 the pognophorans, as well as the species of the phylum Vestimentifera, were placed back in the family Siboglinidae. Some 34 genera and roughly 120 species are ascribed to the family. Beard worms are thought to have diverged from other groups of annelids more than 500 million years ago, during the Cambrian Period (541 million to 485.4 million years ago).
Beard worms usually inhabit marine waters to depths that exceed 1,000 metres (3,280 feet) along continental slopes and near spreading centres, hydrothermal vents, methane seeps, and other regions of undersea volcanic activity. Some species have been found at depths of less than 100 metres (66 feet), while others have been found in deeper waters ranging from 7,000 to 10,000 metres (22,900 to 32,800 feet). Several species inhabit deep-sea trenches of the Pacific and the Indian oceans, and many genera have a discontinuous distribution.
The tentacles, probably used during feeding, vary in number according to body size. The tentacles are long processes containing blood vessels and are continuous with the body cavity, or coelom. Rows of very thin single-celled units called pinnules are found on the tentacles. The pinnules, which extend into the intertentacular cavity formed by the free or fused tentacles, intermesh to form a filter. Beside each pinnule base is a ciliary tract. In each intertentacular region, ciliary tracts produce a current of water that carries in microorganisms and other nutrients; these are filtered through the pinnule filter. Digestive enzymes probably are secreted by gland cells located at the pinnule bases. Water leaves by an opening at the base of certain tentacles. The digested food may be absorbed by the pinnules. The pinching off of small food particles in the outer layers of the pinnules during a process known as pinocytosis also has been observed. Direct penetration of amino acids from seawater into the tentacles also has been reported to take place.
Reproduction is sexual. Eggs, which have a high yolk content, are laid by the female in the anterior part of the tube. Males release sperm packets into the water, and some settle into the tubes of female beard worms before breaking down into sperm. Fertilization and early development to formation of a swimming larva also occur in these tubes. Cleavage leads to the formation of a bilaterally symmetrical embryo. A cell layer called the endoderm first is represented by a few yolk-rich cells, which form a primary intestine; the intestine disappears as the yolk is utilized. Both mouth and anus fail to develop. A secondary body cavity is formed by separation of coelomic pockets from the primary intestine. The embryo develops into a larva having two ciliary belts and three body segments.
The wormlike body varies in length from several centimetres to 2.5 metres (8.2 feet) and in diameter from 0.06 millimetre to 4 cm (0.002 to 1.57 inches). Lamellibrachia barhami is one of the largest species. The body consists of three segments: two small anterior regions are called protosome and mesosome; the long trunk section is called the metasome. Each segment has its own coelom. The small protosome bears tentacles. The mesosome contains a structure known as a bridle, also called a frenulum, a pair of oblique cuticular ridges that extend backward to meet in the midventral line. The bridle supports the protruding worm on the edge of its tube. The metasome is divided into two sections by a pair of parallel ridges called belts; these have rows of small platelets containing minute teeth. One part of the metasome, in front of the belts, has a groove bordered by low folds.
The protective tube is submerged in mud at the lower end in most species; the very thin tubes of Sclerolinum, however, pierce pieces of sunken wood. The tube, secreted by special glands, contains a hard substance called chitin. Although the animals never leave their tubes, they are able to move inside them.
The body wall consists of an outer layer of epidermal cells covered by a cuticle. Beneath the epidermal cells is a layer of longitudinal muscle cells. The nervous system, found within the epidermis, forms an almost continuous network. There are no sense organs. The circulatory system consists of two long vessels: in one, blood flows forward; in the other, backward. At the base of the tentacles, the vessel through which blood flows forward is differentiated into a muscular heart, which serves to push blood into the tentacle vessels. The blood contains the pigment hemoglobin. The excretory system consists of a pair of nephridia, or coelomoducts, which connect the body cavity with the exterior.
The reproductive system consists of a pair of sexual glands that lie in the trunk. In females, ovaries are found in the anterior part of the metasome, while the sexual openings, or oviducts, are found in the middle of the body. In males, the testes are located in the posterior part of the body, and the sexual openings, called sperm ducts, in the anterior part. Numerous capsules containing sperm form in the sperm ducts of the males.
