Bivalve,  (class Bivalvia),  any of more than 15,000 species of clams, oysters, mussels, scallops, and other members of the phylum Mollusca characterized by a shell that is divided from front to back into left and right valves. The valves are connected to one another at a hinge. Primitive bivalves ingest sediment; however, in most species the respiratory gills have become modified into organs of filtration called ctenidia. In keeping with a largely sedentary and deposit-feeding or suspension-feeding lifestyle, bivalves have lost the head and the radular rasping organ typical of most mollusks.
Bivalves range in size from about one millimetre (0.04 inch) in length to the giant clam of South Pacific coral reefs, Tridacna gigas, which may be more than 137 centimetres (54 inches) in length and weigh 264 kilograms (582 pounds). Such an animal may have a life span of about 40 years.
The shell morphology and hinge structure are used in classification. In most surface-burrowing species (the hypothetical ancestral habit) the shells are small, spherical or oval, with equal left and right valves. In deeper-burrowing species the shells are laterally compressed, permitting more rapid movement through the sediments. The shells of the most efficient burrowers, the razor clams Ensis and Solen, are laterally compressed, smooth, and elongated. Surface-burrowing species may have an external shell sculpture of radial ribs and concentric lines, with projections that strengthen the shell against predators and damage.
A triangular form, ventral flattening, and secure attachment to firm substrates by byssal threads (byssus; proteinaceous threads secreted by a gland on the foot) have allowed certain bivalves to colonize hard surfaces on wave-swept shores. The byssus is a larval feature that is retained by adults of some bivalve groups, such as the true mussels (family Mytilidae) of marine and estuarine shores and the family Dreissenidae of fresh and estuarine waters. Such a shell form and habit evolved first within sediments (endobyssate), where the byssus serves for anchorage and protection when formed into an enclosing nest. Other bivalves have used the byssus to attach securely within crevices and thus to assume a laterally flattened, circular shape. The best example of this is the windowpane shell Placuna. This form has allowed the close attachment of one valve to a hard surface, and although some groups still retain byssal attachment (family Anomiidae), others have forsaken this for cementation, as in the true oysters (family Ostreidae), where the left valve is cemented to estuarine hard surfaces. Some scallops (family Pectinidae) are also cemented, but others lie on soft sediments in coastal waters and at abyssal depths. By limiting shell thickness (which reduces weight), smoothing the shell contours (which reduces drag), and assuming an aerofoil-like leading edge, such scallops can awkwardly swim several metres at a time.
In other species, such as the clams, the foot has become modified for rapid and effective digging, and the folds of the mantle tissue have developed into long siphons. Both these features allow the animals to burrow deeply within sand, mud, and other substrates (even into wood and rock). They are protected from predators within such substrata but are still able to feed and breathe using their long siphons.
Bivalve shell and body form is thus intimately related to habitat and the relative degree of exposure to predation. From the simple burrowing, equivalve ancestor, the various bivalve groups have repeatedly evolved an elongated, triangular or circular shell; thus, similar body adaptations have been responses to similar modes of life.
Most bivalves are marine and occur at all depths in or upon virtually all substrates. In shallow seas, bivalves are often dominant on rocky and sandy coasts and are also important in offshore sediments. They occur at abyssal and hadal depths, either burrowing or surface-dwelling, and are important elements of the midoceanic rift fauna. In addition, bivalves bore into soft shales and compacted muds but may be important also in the bioerosion of corals. Bivalves thus occur at all latitudes and depths, although none are planktonic. There are also estuarine bivalves, and two important families, the Unionidae and Corbiculidae, are predominantly freshwater with complicated reproductive cycles. There are no terrestrial bivalves, although some high-intertidal and freshwater species can withstand drought conditions.
To be expected within a class comprising more than 15,000 living species, abundance varies considerably. Commensal and parasitic species are small, often highly host-specific, and comprise some of the rarest animals. Others, such as cockles and clams on soft shores and mussels and oysters on rocky coasts, can occur in densities high enough that they dominate entire habitats and assume important roles in nutrient cycles.
