Brush-footed butterfly,  (family Nymphalidae), also called four-footed butterfly,  any of a group of butterflies (order Lepidoptera) that are named for their characteristically reduced forelegs, which are frequently hairy and resemble brushes. The insects’ alternative name derives from the fact that there are only four functional, or walking, legs.
Most species have a wingspan of 35–90 mm (1.5–3.5 inches) and white, yellow, or brown wings with contrasting markings and undersurfaces often with duller, more protective coloration. Common nymphalids include the anglewings, mourning cloaks, and thistles (subfamily Nymphalinae); heliconians and fritillaries (subfamily Heliconinnae); and viceroy butterflies (subfamily Limenitidinae). Most nymphalid larvae are brightly coloured and have knobby projections (tubercules), horns, and branching spines. The naked pupae, or chrysalids, hang head downward.
Adult anglewings show seasonal dimorphism, with the autumnal generation being hairy and lighter-coloured. Some also exhibit sexual dimorphism, with the female being less conspicuous than the male. Most species have a silvery spot on the undersurface of each hindwing. The spiny larvae feed on elm and birch trees, hops, and nettles.
The buckeye butterfly (Junonia coenia), a member of the Nymphalinae subfamily, is distinguished by two eyespots on the upper side of each of its forewings and hindwings and by two orange cell bars on the upper sides of the anterior portion of the forewings. Its body colour is brown. Its range extends from southern Canada and the United States to southern Mexico. Adults feed primarily on the nectar of flowers, such as those of chicory, knapweed, dogbane, and aster.
The mourning cloak (Nymphalis antiopa), known as the Camberwell beauty in England, overwinter as adults. The larvae, often known as spiny elm caterpillars, are gregarious in habit and feed principally on elm, willow, and poplar foliage.
The thistle butterfly (Vanessa) is named for its principal larval host plant. Some species, such as the painted lady (V. cardui), migrate during adulthood, traveling in large groups.
The name fritillary is applied to several nymphalid genera. The large fritillaries, or silverspots, belong to the genus Speyeria and usually have silver markings on the undersides of the wings. Many of the smaller fritillaries are members of the genus Boloria. Many fritillary larvae are nocturnal and feed on violet leaves.
The viceroy (Basilarchia archippus or Limenitis archippus) is known for its mimetic relationship with the monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus). The two species resemble one another in their coloration, and both are distasteful to predators. Viceroy larvae feed on willow, aspen, and poplar foliage and retain in their bodies toxic compounds from it; those species of plants produce salicylic acid, a bitter-tasting compound best known for its use in the preparation of aspirin and other pharmaceutical products. (The monarch acquires its bad taste as a caterpillar, when it feeds on milkweeds, which produce toxic compounds known as cardenolides that are stored in the insect’s body.) Through their shared coloration, it is believed that the viceroy and monarch derive protection from predatory attack. The viceroy can be distinguished from the monarch by its smaller size and by a black transverse band on each hindwing.
