Caddisfly,  (order Trichoptera),  any of a group of mothlike insects that are attracted to lights at night and live near lakes or rivers. Because fish feed on the immature, aquatic stages and trout take flying adults, caddisflies are often used as models for the artificial flies used in fishing.
Adult caddisflies are commonly 3 to 15 millimetres (0.118 to 0.590 inch) in length. Their anterior wings usually range from 4 to 20 millimetres in length, providing wing spans of 8 to 40 millimetres. The wings at rest are folded rooflike and cover the top of the body. One family (Hydroptilidae), commonly known as microcaddis, are only 1.5 millimetres in length, with anterior wings of 2 to 5 millimetres. Caddisfly wings either are covered with hairs or have hairs on the veins. The posterior wings are often broader than the anterior wings.
Caddisflies are widely distributed in freshwater habitats throughout the world. The larva of one marine species, Philanisus plebeius, occurs in intertidal zones of New Zealand and southern Australian coasts. The larva of one terrestrial European species, Enoicyla pusilla, lives in damp leaf litter, while one or two other species occur in brackish water. Approximately 7,000 species of caddisflies are known.
Eggs, in masses numbering up to 800, are laid within a jelly that swells on contact with water. A female may wash off a partially extruded egg mass by dipping her abdomen into water during flight, or she may place the mass on stones in the water or on aquatic plants just above the water.
Young larvae hatch within a few days. Depending on the species, larvae may be herbivorous, carnivorous, or omnivorous. In some species the larvae form webs of debris for protection, while others form a funnel-like web between stones in running water to catch food. Some protect their bodies with cases, whereas others spin protective lairs or are free-living. They produce silk from glands on the lower lip (labium), and many herbivorous species spin tubular protective cases that are open at both ends and enlarge as the larvae grow. Sand grains or vegetable debris are added to cases to provide protection and rigidity. In case-bearing forms, the head and thorax protrude from the case, which is pulled along by the abdomen. Undulating movements of the enclosed larvae circulate water to provide oxygen for respiration. Larvae of one species (Triaenodes bicolor) swim by means of long, slender, hair-fringed posterior legs, dragging their cases through the water.
Prior to the last molt before the pupal stage, the larva attaches the case to some solid object and closes both ends for further protection, leaving only water circulation holes. The larva pupates inside the larval case, which then becomes a cocoon, or inside a specially constructed cocoon. After two or three weeks the pupa bites its way out of the cocoon and swims or crawls to the water surface, using its hair-fringed middle pair of legs. Caddisfly adults sometimes emerge in large numbers, often forming swarms. Caddisflies live several weeks and usually mate on vegetation or rocks surrounding water. There is generally one complete generation per year.
Caddisflies are aquatic insects associated with a wide range of freshwater habitats. Oxygen concentration, associated with water velocity, is important to their larvae, as is the chemical content of the water. In fact, certain species have been used as biotic indicators of pollution. Although most larvae feed on aquatic plants, algae, diatoms, or plant debris, a few are predatory on other aquatic insects, crustaceans, and mollusks, and a few are omnivorous. The larvae play an important role in the aquatic community, reducing plant growth and disposing of animal and plant debris. Most adult caddisflies are incapable of feeding on solids and instead imbibe nectar from flowers. One species pollinates an Alpine flower as it feeds.
Sponges and algae grow on the protective cases, and protozoans and mites grow on the larvae of some species. Two hymenopterans parasitize caddisflies. The parasitic wasp seeks its host underwater and lays its eggs inside the caddisfly larval case. The parasitic larva devours the caddisfly larva and remains inside the case to pupate, after which the adult parasite overwinters in the case and emerges in the early summer. Caddisflies are important as food for other animals. Freshwater fish, particularly trout, and eels feed on larvae and swimming pupae. Trout, birds, lizards, frogs, spiders, dragonflies, and bats feed on adults. Day flight of caddisflies includes stationary swarming, usually centring around some obvious object on the shore, or mobile swarming, in which the swarms seem to move haphazardly. However, most species fly at night and are strongly attracted to light. Warm moist nights are particularly conducive to caddisfly flight.
Trichopteran adults are characterized by four wings that bear hairs on the membrane or prominent veins, or both. The head and thorax are also usually hairy. The antennae are long and slender and are usually about the length of the anterior wing, but they may be longer than the wingspan. Mouthparts have nonfunctional mandibles but well-developed maxillary and labial palpi (or sensory appendages). The hypopharynx is modified to form a sucking tongue for imbibing fluids. Various sensory and scent organs may occur on the head or wings. Each of the three thoracic segments bears a pair of walking legs. Several of the 10 abdominal segments may bear lateral filaments (or cerci), often with complicated external genitalia terminally in males, sometimes with prominent ovipositors in females. Spermatozoa are transferred either directly or in spermatophores (capsules transferred to females).
