Cirripede,  any of the marine crustaceans of the infraclass Cirripedia (subphylum Crustacea). The best known are the barnacles. Adult cirripedes other than barnacles are internal parasites of marine invertebrates such as crabs, jellyfish, and starfish, and have no common name. Nearly 1,000 cirripede species have been described.
Barnacles and their allies, the parasitic infraclass Ascothoracida and superorder Rhizocephala, are highly modified, sedentary marine crustaceans. Barnacles usually have a calcareous shell made up of a number of articulated plates. The infraclass Cirripedia is divided into two superorders, Acrothoracica and Thoracica. Members of the Acrothoracica are known as burrowing barnacles because they burrow into calcareous substrates (e.g., limestone, corals, and mollusk shells). The acrothoracicans are recognized as fossils primarily by their burrows, and, while their record extends back into the Devonian Period, they are particularly well represented in the Cretaceous Period, when they burrowed into a greater variety of shell-bearing invertebrates than do their modern representatives.
The principal superorder, however, is the Thoracica. It includes the goose and acorn barnacles. Thoracicans range from 1 millimetre (0.04 inch) to more than 10 centimetres (4 inches) in diameter and from less than one to more than 500 grams (0.04 to 17.6 ounces).
There are two types of sessile barnacle: symmetrical and asymmetrical. The two symmetrical sessile barnacles are the extinct suborder Brachylepadomorpha (Brachylepas) and the extant suborder Balanomorpha, or acorn barnacles (e.g., Balanus, Semibalanus, and Chthamalus). An acorn barnacle is a conical, sessile animal whose soft body is contained within a cavity protected by an outer wall. This wall comprises an even number of calcareous plates cemented to the substratum. An opening at the top can be closed by two pairs of plates (an operculum) through which feathery, jointed legs (cirri) can be extended into the water to capture small drifting plants and animals (plankton).
The balanomorphs are now the dominant shallow-water barnacles. Species are found in almost all habitats, from equatorial to polar regions, from estuarine waters and the highest intertidal zones to depths of 2,000 metres (6,560 feet) or more. Several groups of commensal balanomorphs have formed symbiotic associations with a variety of hosts, but only a few are known to have become fully parasitic. The most primitive living genera, such as Chionelasmus and Catophragmus, appeared in the late Mesozoic Era (251 million to 65.5 million years ago) and early Paleogene Period (65.5 million to 23 million years ago). Modern representatives are distributed throughout the world in refugial situations, such as abyssal hydrothermal springs.
The third suborder of sessile barnacles, the Verrucomorpha, or wart barnacles, differs from the first two suborders in having the plates of the wall and operculum asymmetrically arranged. With the exception of a primitive genus, Neoverruca, found to be associated with abyssal hydrothermal springs at 3,600 metres in the western Pacific, the simple, asymmetrical shell wall and operculum of verrucomorphs are remarkably similar. While the verrucomorphs apparently radiated in relatively shallow-water seas of the Cretaceous Period, their modern representatives primarily inhabit the deep sea, where they range to depths of more than 4,000 metres.
Pedunculate barnacles are similar to the sessile barnacles in having the principal part of the body contained within a protective covering, or wall. They differ from acorn barnacles in that the plates do not form a separate wall and operculum and in having the wall and the cirri it contains elevated above the substratum by a peduncle. The peduncle contains the ovaries and some musculature; it may or may not be armoured by calcareous plates, as in Pollicipes and Lepas, respectively. Goose barnacles are probably the most commonly observed pedunculate cirripedes.
Pedunculate barnacles occupy a wide variety of substrates. At least half the living species are symbiotic to some degree, and a few have become fully parasitic. In general, however, pedunculate barnacles have not formed as intricate symbiotic relationships as have a variety of balanomorphs. The pedunculate barnacles are fairly well represented in the fossil record, especially in the Mesozoic, but the earliest records date back to the Cambrian Period (542 million to 488.3 million years ago) and the Silurian Period (443.7 million to 416 million years ago).
There are two parasitic groups: the superorder Rhizocephala, found primarily on decapod crustaceans, and the infraclass Ascothoracida, found on echinoderms and cnidarian corals.
There are about a dozen important species of sessile and pedunculate barnacles that foul ships and submerged portions of marine installations, such as pier pilings, oil platforms, floats, buoys, and mooring cables. The presence of barnacles on these structures increases drag and weight, causing problems such as decreased fuel efficiency. Barnacles may also increase corrosion of metals, even stainless steel. Antifouling paints contain toxins (usually heavy metals) and are designed to slough off with age. Low- and high-frequency sound waves may effectively inhibit settling. Ships and shore installations that circulate seawater for various purposes may have problems with lines clogged by fouling organisms. Various methods of prevention or removal, such as back-flushing with heated water or flushing with chemicals or fresh water, have been used successfully.
Barnacles are used as food in some countries. In Portugal and Spain a local intertidal pedunculate barnacle, Pollicipes pollicipes, is served in gourmet restaurants and occasionally becomes locally depleted. Two related species in the eastern Pacific, P. polymerus and P. elegans, from the northeastern and tropical eastern Pacific, respectively, are often imported as substitutes. Indians of the American Pacific Northwest consume the large sessile barnacle Balanus nubilus, and the inhabitants of Chile eat yet another large balanid species. In Japan barnacles are used as fertilizer.
The cement by which barnacles attach themselves to the substratum sets under water and even sticks to plastics with low surface tensions. It has been investigated because of its unusual properties and possible use as a dental cement.
In the western British Isles during the Middle Ages a prevalent myth involving barnacles purported to explain the annual appearance of certain geese in the fall. Because these geese were arriving from their summer breeding grounds north of the Arctic Circle, they were not observed to breed locally. At the same time, fall gales often blew ashore driftwood fouled by the pedunculate barnacle Lepas. The barnacle myth correlated these occurrences; namely, according to the myth, the barnacles, which appeared to grow out of wood steeped in seawater, were actually developing geese, and, indeed, goose feathers (the barnacles’ cirri) could be seen within. Further, since these geese were believed to have come from shellfish rather than flesh, they could be eaten on fasting days. The Swedish botanist Carolus Linnaeus was aware of the myth, for he named the genus Lepas (“Shellfish”) and the local species L. anatifera and L. anserifera (“duck-bearing” and “goose-bearing,” respectively), and these pedunculate barnacles continue to be called goose barnacles.
In general, barnacles are simultaneous hermaphrodites (that is, each individual has both male and female reproductive systems). Although some species are known to self-fertilize if no partners are present, most shallow-water species cross-fertilize, by means of internal fertilization. In species in which populations are sparsely distributed, a hermaphrodite may be accompanied by one or more small “complemental” males, or the larger individual may develop into a female whereby a smaller individual attaching to it becomes a “dwarf” male. When the male occupies a fairly exposed position on its partner, it resembles the juvenile and is capable of feeding. When, through coevolution, males have come to be protected by the partner in one way or another, the dwarf male is variously reduced, some to the extent of being little more than a sac containing the testes.
Adjacent individuals in normally hermaphroditic populations do not simultaneously cross-fertilize; rather, they alternate male and female roles over time. The individual acting as a female lays eggs inside the mantle cavity shortly after molting. Secretions associated with egg laying include a pheromone to which adjacent individuals respond by extending the probosciform penis toward the source. Barnacles acting as males are able to inject spermatozoa into the mantle cavity of an individual as far as seven shell diameters away. Hundreds of eggs contained in this mantle cavity are fertilized at one time; usually several batches are laid each year by adults that may live as long as 30 years. The eggs undergo spiral cleavage, and the developing embryos are retained until the first larval stage, called the nauplius. In some species, however, the naupliar stages are passed in the egg, and a cyprid larva is released into the plankton.
The nauplius larva of crustaceans has three pairs of cephalic limbs, all of which aid in swimming while the second two are further involved in feeding. Cirripede and rhizocephalan nauplii differ from those of other crustaceans, including the Ascothoracida, in having conspicuous horns on either side near the front on the head. These horns have perforated tips and are provided with large secretory cells, but their function has yet to be determined. In other respects, the nauplius larvae resemble those produced by copepods and many other crustaceans.
Shortly after they hatch from the egg membranes and are expelled from the mantle cavity, the weak-swimming nauplii molt and begin to feed, primarily on phytoplankton. The nauplii continue to grow and molt for about two weeks, after which the sixth nauplius stage is reached. At this point a profound metamorphosis takes place, resulting in a nonfeeding, relatively strong-swimming cyprid larva. The cyprid must find a suitable surface upon which to settle within a few days, or it will die of starvation. Substrate selection is based largely on light, chemical, and tactile stimuli. Typically, large numbers of cyprids attach close to each other and to adults of the same species with obvious reproductive advantages.
The cyprid swims with six pairs of thoracic limbs (the cirri of the adult). Gregarious forms are attracted by tactile stimuli to established members or to their remains, while commensal and parasitic species, many of which are host-specific, also use chemical stimuli to detect a suitable host. When ready to attach, the cyprid explores using its first antennae, the ends of which stick to the substratum by a temporary cement. When an appropriate place is found, similar glands secrete a permanent cement. The cyprid then undergoes metamorphosis into a juvenile barnacle, and it can never again alter its location.
Metamorphosis of a cyprid is complicated, some parts being temporarily or permanently lost, others modified and rotated, and still others appearing anew. The swimming legs of the cyprid develop into the feeding appendages (cirri) of the adult. The first juveniles of pedunculate barnacles are pedunculate, but pedunculate stages have been virtually eliminated from the development of modern sessile barnacles.
The rhizocephalans have an unusual life cycle. A cyprid destined to become a female seeks out a host, such as a crab, and attaches where the cuticle is thin, usually on a gill or at the base of a seta. The cyprid metamorphoses, and all body parts, except certain cells and organ rudiments of the head, are discarded. When this process is completed, a hollow, ventral stylet is, depending upon the species, forced either directly into the host or into the host after passing through one of the cyprid’s first antennae. Once in the host’s body, the cells and organ rudiments migrate into a central position beneath the gut, where they then send out rootlike absorption processes to all parts of the crab’s body. The presence of the parasite not only castrates the host but it also feminizes a male host during subsequent molts both in morphology and behaviour.
Once the parasite has established itself internally, a hollow, mushroomlike reproductive body develops and perforates the ventral cuticle of the host between the thorax and the abdomen. There it enlarges to fill the space where the crab normally broods its eggs, and there the crab cares for the parasite as if it were its own eggs.
If a rhizocephalon cyprid destined to be a male finds the freshly erupted female, it attaches near the brood chamber and undergoes a similar metamorphosis into a minute cell mass surrounded by a thin cuticle. The cell mass migrates into the female’s brood chamber, where it finds a special pocket, or male-cell receptacle. It discards the cuticle as it enters the receptacle and differentiates into a mass of spermatozoa. Fertilization occurs when the eggs are laid, and the developing larvae are retained in the cavity until hatching. When the rhizocephalan is ready to release the larvae, the crab starts a ventilating motion with its abdomen, just as it would if it were releasing its own larvae, dispersing the parasite’s larvae into the prevailing currents.
Larval dispersal depends upon the time spent and the behaviour of the various stages, as well as on favourable currents while in the plankton, prior to cyprid settlement. Larvae do not remain in the plankton for more than a few weeks, and larval dispersal is generally limited to less than 1,000 kilometres (620 miles). Species, however, are found on oceanic islands isolated by much greater distances, in part because some benthic barnacles occasionally attach to larger animals such as fish and whales as well as to floating objects such as wood, kelp, and pumice.
Still other barnacle species develop a symbiotic relationship with an organism, such as a whale, turtle, sea snake, or jellyfish (ectocommensal), and their distributions tend to approximate those of their hosts. In some instances, however, the distribution of the barnacle is only a small portion of that enjoyed by its host, indicating that other factors limit its range.
In the open ocean the larvae of the pedunculate barnacle Lepas seek out objects generally large enough to support the weight of the numerous adults (e.g., driftwood). There is one species, however, that selects small objects (e.g., feathers, bits of tar). After metamorphosis the cement glands of this species secrete a multichambered gas-filled float of its own. Floating objects attract other planktonic organisms, such as copepods and small fish, on which the barnacles feed.
It has been said that a barnacle is a shrimplike crustacean that attaches by the top of its head and then kicks food into its mouth with its feet. This likely tongue-in-cheek definition actually distinguishes barnacles from their allies and gives a fair idea of how the animal operates. Furthermore, a sedentary way of life requires protection from many biological and physical situations that can readily be avoided by their motile, free-living counterparts.
A thin, chitinous cuticle covers the appendage-bearing portion of the body, including the cirri, mouthparts, and lining of the mantle cavity. This portion of the exoskeleton is molted periodically, the process being controlled by hormones.
The tissues and organs of barnacles are bathed by blood, which contains dissolved hemoglobin in some species. In contrast to that of most crustaceans, however, the blood circulates in a generally closed system. Blood pressure extends and distends the stalk in pedunculate barnacles; the relatively long cirri, which are curled while at rest; the trunk of the body that supports the cirri; and the probosciform penis. The principle pair of plates covering over the mantle opening is provided with a transverse adductor muscle and discrete retractor muscles.
The nervous system, ladderlike in some primitive pedunculate barnacles, is condensed in scalpellomorphans and sessile barnacles into a single mass. The second antennae are present in nauplii but lost in cyprids. The first antennae are used by the cyprid in settling, but become buried in the permanent cement following attachment. The lateral, compound eyes of the cyprid are shed with metamorphosis. The nauplius median eye is generally retained in the adult as a photoreceptor. In sessile barnacles the bilateral parts of the median eye separate and migrate laterally to thin places under the anterior pair of opercular plates, where they function better in the shadow reflex. This reflex results in the rapid withdrawal of the cirri, which are otherwise vulnerable to predation, especially by fish.
Food gathered by the posterior cirri is collected and passed to the mouthparts by anterior cirri modified to act as maxillipeds. As it is pushed under an upper lip and into the mouth, the food is masticated by the two pairs of spiny maxillae and then by toothed mandibles. Salivary glands generally empty on the second maxillae and provide secretions that stick the food particles together and transport them to the mouth.
As in most crustaceans, a short foregut leads to a spacious midgut, or stomach, usually provided with a pair of digestive pouches, or ceca. The midgut is followed by a relatively long hindgut that passes the length of the trunk to the anus located between the last pair of cirri. The acrothoracicans have a grinding “gastric mill,” derived from the chitinous lining of the foregut; it is renewed after being discarded during molting.
Maxillary glands are well-developed in adults, where they open just behind the base of the second pair of maxillae. Barnacles are also able to sequester heavy metals and brominated compounds as nodules in the wall of the midgut.
As noted above, the circulatory system is a modification of the relatively simple, open system seen in crustaceans. In barnacles, pumping has largely been assumed by the somatic musculature, and in mature and advanced forms a nearly closed system of walled vessels has developed. Gas exchange can take place across any of the thin cuticular surfaces of the body, and many small barnacles lack discrete respiratory organs.
The cirri form excellent respiratory structures when the animals are feeding, and water can be circulated in and out of the mantle cavity by pumping movements of the body when the cirri are withdrawn and the aperture to the exterior is not completely closed. Some pedunculate barnacles have straplike organs, called filamentary appendages, extending from the body wall. On the other hand, most sessile barnacles have a pair of broad, often wrinkled extensions of the mantle wall, called branchiae. These and filamentary appendages are considered respiratory organs.
Ovaries are located in the stalk of pedunculate barnacles and its homologue or in the basal lining of the mantle cavity in sessile barnacles. Paired oviducts pass posteriorly to the bases of the first cirri (the most anterior position for genital openings in any crustacean), where each is joined by an oviductal gland before emptying into the mantle cavity. The oviductal gland secretes a tacky elastic substance that mixes with eggs as they are laid and holds them in one or two discrete masses called ovigerous lamellae.
Testes are situated in the trunk. Paired sperm ducts pass posteriorly below and to the sides of the gut before each expands into a seminal vesicle. An ejaculatory duct enters the base of the probosciform penis, situated between the last pair of legs, and runs its length. The penis may be clothed with fine setae, randomly distributed or arranged in discrete rows, or modified into simple or complex spines and hooks.
The nondistensible penis of ascothoracidans is a less-extensive modification of the seventh pair of trunk limbs seen in more primitive crustaceans. It is used to inject spermatozoa into special chitinous seminal receptacles in the bases of the trunk limbs of the female, where they are stored until the eggs are laid. The probosciform penis of acrothoracicans and ordinary barnacles injects the spermatozoa into the mantle cavity of the female, or a hermaphrodite acting as a female, at the time the eggs are being laid.
Although sites of neurosecretory and glandular hormone production have not been identified in barnacles, molting and metamorphosis are controlled by hormones. Two insect molting hormones have been identified in barnacles.
The Cirripedia belong to the Maxillopoda, an ancient radiation of relatively small, primarily marine crustaceans (e.g., Branchiura, Facetotecta, Tantulocarida, Ascothoracida, and Rhizocephala). Many maxillopods are wholly parasitic. Of the six nonparasitic subclasses the Orstenocarida and Skaracarida are extinct (Cambrian), and the Mystacocarida are generally restricted to a narrow band of the marine interstitial environment. On the other hand, of the primarily nonparasitic groups, the Ostracoda and Cirripedia, ranging from the Cambrian Period, and the Copepoda are diverse and occupy a wide variety of aquatic habitats. Of the nonparasitic groups, only the mystacocarids and cirripedes are exclusively marine.
Because of marked similarities in their nauplius and cyprid larval forms, it has generally been considered that the Cirripedia gave rise to the highly modified parasitic Rhizocephala. This view has been appealing because two parasitic pedunculate barnacles draw nutrients from their hosts by a root system, which, if not homologous with that of the Rhizocephala, at least indicates how the rhizocephalans could have evolved from a parasitic barnacle. The mode of host penetration by a stylet near the area of the cyprid mouth and the composition of the injected material, however, suggest that the Rhizocephala evolved from a biting rather than a filter-feeding ancestor and therefore more likely represent a sister group than a derivative of the Cirripedia.
Although the parasitic Ascothoracida is placed by some authorities within the Cirripedia because of a similar body plan, they have a nonprobosciform median penis and seminal receptacles, as well as trunk limbs used solely for swimming, that show no indication of ever having been involved in filter feeding. Furthermore, their nauplius larvae lack frontolateral horns, and their cypridlike larvae (often more than one stage) not only are capable of feeding with biting mouthparts but also possess distinctive prehensile first antennae that lack cement glands. Some authorities do not include the ascothoracidans within Cirripedia but rather place Ascothoracida into its own infraclass. The Ascothoracida share, however, a common nonparasitic ancestor with the parasitic Rhizocephala and Cirripedia.
A comparable nonparasitic ancestor was apparently shared by the Tantulocarida since a median nonprobosciform penis occurs on the same segment as in ascothoracids. While the posterior portion of the trunk in the Branchiura is too reduced to be instructive along these lines, the Ostracoda and the extinct Ostenocarida have a pair of penes and a pair of unmodified legs in the same position, respectively, and therefore are apparently nearer the stem of this Cambrian radiation. The Copepoda, Mystacocarida, and extinct Skaracarida, while lacking male genitalia and other features, such as a carapace and lateral eye, apparently also stem from near the base of this radiation in the Cambrian Period.
Few Paleozoic barnacles are known. The acrothoracicans, or rather characteristic burrows made by them, appear in the Devonian Period, but what they were like before they acquired the ability to burrow is unknown. The lightly armoured pedunculate barnacles Priscansermarinus and Cyprilepas appear earlier, in the Cambrian and Silurian periods, respectively, and what could pass for contemporary pedunculate barnacles, Praelepas and Illilepas, appear in the Carboniferous Period. The first resembles heteralepadomorphs (genera without a trace of calcareous or primordial chitinous plates), and, other than being uncalcified, the last two resemble lepadomorphans Lepas and Ibla, respectively.
Heavy calcareous (calcitic) armament first appears in the Scalpellomorpha in the early Mesozoic Era (251 million to 65.5 million years ago), and by the close of the early Mesozoic the three sessile groups—Brachylepadomorpha, Verrucomorpha, and Balanomorpha—appear in order. The most primitive sessile group, the Brachylepadomorpha, died out by the Miocene Epoch (23 million to 5.3 million years ago), and the asymmetrical sessile Verrucomorpha became pretty much restricted to the deep sea by that time. The Balanomorpha radiated up through the Tertiary, and it is largely on the basis of their remains that Charles Darwin noted that the present epoch could go down in the fossil record as the age of barnacles. It is evident, however, that there was a greater diversity of shallow-water barnacles in the Miocene than there is today.
Some authorities rank the cirripedes as an order. The Rhizocephala, although closely related by larval similarities (including nauplii with frontolateral horns and a cyprid with prehensile first antennae provided with cement glands), are not included in the Cirripedia by some researchers. Some authorities no longer include the Ascothoracida in the Cirripedia. The Ascothoracida have nauplii that lack horns, cypridlike larvae whose first antennae, while prehensile, lack cement glands, and males that have a nonprobosciform median penis.
Evidence from relatively recently discovered fossil and living taxa indicates that the Maxillopoda quite possibly include two natural lineages stemming from a common ancestor in the Cambrian. If the definition of the Thecostraca, which presently includes the Facetotecta, Ascothoracida, Rhizocephala, and Cirripedia, were expanded to include all the maxillopodan groups also having a carapace and lateral eyes (Tantulocarida, Ostracoda, Branchiura, and Ostenocarida), and if the Copepodoida (originally equivalent to the Maxillopoda) were restricted to include the maxillopodan groups without a carapace and lateral eyes (Copepoda, Mystacocarida, and Skaracarida), it would likely better reflect the relationships within the class.
