Flatworm, also called platyhelminth,  any of the phylum Platyhelminthes, a group of soft-bodied, usually much flattened invertebrates. A number of flatworm species are free-living, but about 80 percent of all flatworms are parasitic—i.e., living on or in another organism and securing nourishment from it. They are bilaterally symmetrical (i.e., the right and left sides are similar) and lack specialized respiratory, skeletal, and circulatory systems; no body cavity (coelom) is present. The body is not segmented; spongy connective tissue (mesenchyme) constitutes the so-called parenchyma and fills the space between organs. Flatworms are generally hermaphroditic—functional reproductive organs of both sexes occurring in one individual. Like other advanced multicellular animals, they possess three embryonic layers—endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm—and have a head region that contains concentrated sense organs and nervous tissue (brain). Most evidence, however, indicates that flatworms are very primitive compared with other invertebrates (such as the arthropods and annelids). Some modern evidence suggests that at least some flatworm species may be secondarily simplified from more complex ancestors.
The phylum consists of four classes: Trematoda (flukes), Cestoda (tapeworms), Turbellaria (planarians), and Monogenea. It should be noted that some authorities consider Monogenea, which contains the order Aspidogastrea, to be a subclass within the class Trematoda. Members of all classes except Turbellaria are parasitic during all or part of the life cycle. Most turbellarians are exclusively free-living forms. More than 20,000 flatworm species have been described.
Although some platyhelminths (flatworms) are free-living and nondestructive, many other species (particularly the flukes and tapeworms) parasitize humans, domestic animals, or both. In Europe, Australia, and North and South America, tapeworm infestations of humans have been greatly reduced as a consequence of routine meat inspection. But where sanitation is poor and meat eaten undercooked, the incidence of tapeworm infestations is high. In the Baltic countries much of the population is infested with the broad tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium latum); in parts of the southern United States a small proportion of the population may be infested with the dwarf tapeworm (Hymenolepis nana). In Europe and the United States the beef tapeworm (Taenia saginata) is common because of the habit of eating undercooked steaks or other beef products.
Parasites in immature stages (larvae) can cause serious damage to the host. A larval stage of the gid parasite of sheep (Multiceps multiceps) usually lodges in the sheep brain. Fluid-filled hydatid cysts (i.e., sacs containing many cells capable of developing into new individuals) of Echinococcus may occur almost anywhere in the body of sheep. In humans, hydatids of the liver, brain, or lung are often fatal. Infestation occurs only where people live in close association with dogs that have access to infested sheep for food.
Thirty-six or more fluke species have been reported as parasitic in humans. Endemic (local) centres of infection occur in virtually all countries, but widespread infections occur in the Far East, Africa, and tropical America. Many species are ingested as cysts, called metacercariae, in uncooked food—e.g., the lung fluke Paragonimus westermani found in crayfish and crabs, the intestinal flukes Heterophyes heterophyes and Metagonimus yokogawai and the liver fluke Opisthorchis sinensis in fish, and the intestinal fluke Fasciolopsis buski on plants. Free-swimming larvae (called cercariae) of blood flukes penetrate the human skin directly. In humans these parasites and others listed below cause much misery and death. Control of certain flukes through the eradication of their mollusk hosts has been attempted but without much success.
Schistosomiasis (bilharziasis) is a major human disease caused by three species of the genus Schistosoma, known collectively as blood flukes. Africa and western Asia (e.g., Iran, Iraq) are endemic centres for S. haematobium; S. mansoni also is found in these areas, as well as in the West Indies and South America. In the Far East, S. japonicum is the important blood fluke.
Among domestic animals, the sheep liver fluke (Fasciola hepatica) may cause debilitating and fatal epidemics (liver rot) in sheep. These animals become infected by eating metacercariae encysted on grass. Monogenea are common pests on fish in hatcheries and home aquariums.
Most turbellarians are less than five millimetres (0.2 inch) long, and many are microscopic in size. The largest of this class are the planarians, which may reach 0.5 metre (about 20 inches) in length. Trematodes are mostly between about one and 10 millimetres (0.04 to 0.4 inch) long; members of some species, however, may grow to several centimetres. The smallest cestodes are about one millimetre (0.04 inch) long, but members of a few species exceed 15 metres (50 feet) in length. The Monogenea range in length from 0.5 to 30 millimetres (0.02 to 1.2 inches). Aspidogastrea are from a few millimetres to 100 millimetres in length.
In general, free-living flatworms (the turbellarians) can occur wherever there is moisture. Except for the temnocephalids, flatworms are cosmopolitan in distribution. They occur in both fresh water and salt water and occasionally in moist terrestrial habitats, especially in tropical and subtropical regions. The temnocephalids, which are parasitic on freshwater crustaceans, occur primarily in Central and South America, Madagascar, New Zealand, Australia, and islands of the South Pacific.
Some flatworm species occupy a very wide range of habitats. One of the most cosmopolitan and most tolerant of different ecological conditions is the turbellarian Gyratrix hermaphroditus, which occurs in fresh water at elevations from sea level to 2,000 metres (6,500 feet) as well as in saltwater pools. Adult forms of parasitic flatworms are confined almost entirely to specific vertebrate hosts; the larval forms, however, occur in vertebrates and in invertebrates, especially in mollusks, arthropods (e.g., crabs), and annelids (e.g., marine polychaetes). They are cosmopolitan in distribution, but their occurrence is closely related to that of the intermediate host or hosts.
