Gladiator bug,  (order Mantophasmatodea), also called African rock crawler or heelwalker,  any of approximately 15 species of insects found only in certain regions of Africa, the common name of which is derived from their stout appearance and predatory behaviour. These insects have modified raptorial legs that give them the ability to grasp their prey. While some species attack and capture prey equal to their own size, other species are slow-moving and capture smaller prey. Many of these insects are nocturnal, emerging only at night to hunt and feed. Most species are light to reddish brown, although some species may be light green or dark brown, and others may have black or red spots. The gladiator bugs superficially resemble mantids (family Mantidae) and walkingsticks (family Phasmatidae), although they are easily distinguished by their unique long, thin antennae and their tendency to hold the last segment of their legs up in the air, making them appear as though they are walking on their heels (hence the alternate name heelwalker). Adults of known species range in overall body length from a minimum of 5.8 mm (0.2 inch) in Adicophasma spinosa (known from Baltic amber) to 32.0 mm (1.3 inch) in Tyrannophasma gladiator, the largest of the gladiator bugs. All extant species occur in the hot, dry environments of Tanzania in East Africa or the Karoo-Namib region of southern Africa.
Named in 2002, Mantophasmatodea was the first new order of insects to be described since 1914. This order was initially based on three specimens discovered in 2001 by German biologist Oliver Zompro when he was studying stick insects. The oldest specimen was identified in Baltic amber dating to the Eocene Epoch and was estimated to be 45 million years old. The other two specimens had been collected in southern Africa in 1909 and 1950. The order currently contains 15 species. Although the occurrence of extant species in Africa and fossil species in Baltic amber may seem unusual, this biogeographic connection has been found in other lineages of insects.
All described species share the general appearance of a stout body with long, thin antennae. Adults of all species are wingless. The number, density, and length of spines on the legs and body vary considerably among species. Other characteristics used to separate species include the shape of the head, the size and shape of the compound eyes, and the presence or absence of tubercles (small, raised bumps) on the front of the head between the base of the antennae and the compound eyes. Most species are nocturnal, with few diurnal species. The diurnal species Mantophasma zephyra (West wind gladiator) is nearly always green in colour and has lateral stripes that are yellow in males and white in females. Both males and females of M. zephyra have been reported to “drum” by striking their abdomen on a substrate to produce vibrations to locate, communicate with, and attract a potential mate. All extant species of gladiator bugs are predacious. For example, the raptorial fore- and mid-legs of T. gladiator allow it to capture prey equal in size to itself, whereas Praedatophasma maraisi is slow-moving and has been reported to capture prey crawling on the ground.
The name Mantophasmatodea is based on the superficial resemblance of specimens to both mantids (family Mantidae) and walkingsticks (family Phasmatidae). However, recent phylogenetic studies using both morphological features and genetic data from deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequence analyses have shown that this order is most closely related to species in the order Grylloblattodea (ice bugs) found in North America. Interestingly, Grylloblattodea was the last insect order to be described (1914) prior to the discovery of Mantophasmatodea.
A recent phylogenetic study has placed the Mantophasmatodea and Grylloblattodea in the clade Xenonomia (from Greek xenos, “outsider,” and onoma, “name”) since both orders have names relating them to long-standing orders to which they have no phylogenetic relationship.
