Grasshopper,  any of a group of jumping insects (suborder Caelifera) that are found in a variety of habitats. Grasshoppers occur in greatest numbers in lowland tropical forests, semiarid regions, and grasslands. They range in colour from green to olive or brown and may have yellow or red markings.
The grasshopper senses touch through organs located in various parts of its body, including antennae and palps on the head, cerci on the abdomen, and receptors on the legs. Organs for taste are located in the mouth, and those for smell are on the antennae. The grasshopper hears by means of a tympanal organ situated in the first segment of the abdomen, which is attached to the thorax. Its sense of vision is in the compound eyes, while change in light intensity is perceived in the simple eyes (or ocelli). Although most grasshoppers are herbivorous, only a few species are important economically as crop pests.
The femur region of the upper hind legs is greatly enlarged and contains large muscles that make the legs well adapted for leaping. The male can produce a buzzing sound by rubbing toothlike ridges on the hind femurs against a raised vein on each closed front wing.
Some grasshoppers are adapted to specialized habitats. The South American grasshoppers of Pauliniidae spend most of their lives on floating vegetation and actively swim and lay eggs on underwater aquatic plants. Grasshoppers generally are large, with some exceeding 11 cm (4 inches) in length (e.g., Tropidacris of South America).
In certain parts of the world, grasshoppers are eaten as food. They are often dried, jellied, roasted and dipped in honey or ground into a meal. Grasshoppers are controlled in nature by predators such as birds, frogs, and snakes. Humans use insecticides and poison baits to control them when they become crop pests.
The short-horned grasshopper (family Acrididae, formerly Locustidae) includes both inoffensive nonmigratory species and the often-destructive, swarming, migratory species known as locust. The meadow grasshopper and the cone-headed grasshopper are other examples of members of Acrididae.
The pygmy grasshopper (family Tetrigidae) is sometimes called the grouse, or pygmy, locust.
