Hermit crab,  any crab of the families Paguridae and Coenobitidae (order Decapoda of the class Crustacea). These crabs use empty snail shells (e.g., whelk or periwinkle) or other hollow objects as a shelter for partial containment and protection of the body. Their bodies lack a hard protected carapace; without a shell they are extremely vulnerable to predators.
Hermit crabs, worldwide in distribution, occur in sandy- or muddy-bottomed marine waters and occasionally on land and in trees. The soft abdomen is asymmetrical, usually curling to the right. There are two pairs of antennae and five pairs of legs. The first pair of legs is modified to form chelae, or pincers—the right one usually larger—that are shaped so as to cover the shell entrance when the animal is inside. The crab walks on its second and third pairs of legs and uses its shorter fourth and fifth pairs to grip the central column of the snail shell.
Abdominal appendages on the female carry the eggs, which are held there until they hatch; the young pass into the water as swimming larvae. The larvae eventually metamorphose into small crabs, at which time they must search for their own shells. As the crab grows and becomes too large for its shell, it must find and move into a larger one. The availability of suitable shells is often limited, so competition among hermit crabs for shells of the proper size and in good condition is intense.
Some hermit crabs live in the tubes of plant stems. Semiterrestrial, tropical species of Coenobita inhabit sections of bamboo stems, broken coconut shells, and other articles, in addition to seashells. Pylocheles, a deepwater crab of the Indian Ocean, lives in bamboo sections; Xylopargus, found in West Indian waters at depths of 180 to 360 metres (600 to 1,200 feet), lives in hollow cylinders of wood. Other species make homes in coral, sponge, or the empty tubes formed by polychaete tubeworms.
Some species live in close association with other animals. Pagurus (Eupagurus) bernhardus, a common, bright red hermit crab of European and North American coastal waters, often carries one or more anemones on its shell. The robber crab, native to islands of the South Pacific, is a terrestrial species that has discarded the shell-dwelling habit.
Pagurus pollicaris, a large hermit crab of the Atlantic coastal waters of North America, is reddish brown and about 10 to 12 cm (4 to 5 inches) long. P. longicarpus, a much smaller hermit crab, occurs in shallow U.S. Atlantic coastal waters.
