heteropteran,  any member of the insect order Heteroptera, which comprises the so-called true bugs. (Some authorities use the name Hemiptera; others consider both the heteropterans and the homopterans to be suborders of the Hemiptera.) This large group of insects, consisting of more than 40,000 species, can be recognized by an X-shaped design on the back, which is formed by the wings at rest. A combination of features—sucking mouthparts adapted to pierce plant or animal tissues and a hardened gula (underside of the head)—separate the heteropterans from all other insect orders. Although most species of Heteroptera are terrestrial, a few are aquatic. Some species, which feed on plant juices, are serious pests of cultivated crops. Other species are predacious and benefit humans by destroying various pests. There also are heteropterans that act as carriers of disease.
Heteropterans can be divided into three large groups on the basis of general habitat: the water-dwelling Hydrocorisae (water boatmen, backswimmers, water scorpions, giant water bugs, and creeping water bugs); the surface-swimming and shore-dwelling Amphibicorisae (water striders, marsh and water treaders, shore bugs, and velvet water bugs); and the Geocorisae, a large group of land bugs (plant bugs, bedbugs, assassin bugs, anthocorid bugs, lace bugs, ambush bugs, stinkbugs, burrower bugs, stilt bugs, and fire bugs).
Like any other biologically successful group of organisms, the heteropterans are prolific and diverse and have adapted to a variety of habitats. They range in length from more than 100 mm (3.9 inches) to less than 1 mm (0.039 inch) and have invaded habitats from dry land to water. One of the few insect groups with aquatic adults capable of obtaining adequate oxygen from the water, heteropterans include the only insect species that spend their lives on oceans far from land. Some heteropterans are nourished by blood of animals ranging from mites to humans. Others feed from the sap of plants as diverse as giant redwoods and algae. Some suck surface fluids (e.g., nectar), some pierce tissues to suck sap or blood, and others obtain nourishment from dried seeds. Many forms live on open surfaces and escape enemies by running, flying, or remaining inconspicuously motionless. Some seek food and shelter in natural crevices, and others actively burrow into the soil or seek out the nests of animals.
Heteropterans are most abundant in the tropics, decreasing in both individuals and species to limits northward beyond the Arctic Circle and southward almost to the Antarctic Circle. Every major landmass harbours different species, and migrations to new habitats may be aided by natural agents (e.g., wind, birds, floating debris) or by humans. Although heteropterans have been carried throughout the world, only a few species have become established in many lands. Unique among insects are some water striders (Gerridae), which are at home on the open ocean between approximately 40° north latitude and 40° south latitude and may not approach land for several generations.
More than 40,000 species of heteropterans are known. Most families containing 150 or more species are represented in every zoogeographic region. Two exceptions are the Phymatidae (ambush bugs), with no species known in Australia or the Pacific Islands, and the Plataspidae, with no New World species. Families with the fewest species have the most restricted ranges: Aphylidae, Hyocephalidae, and Lestoniidae are restricted to Australia and contain among them only five species. The Velocipedidae of the Orient and the Vianaididae of the American tropics number four species each. In general, zoogeographic restriction is most evident at the subfamily, tribal, and generic levels.
Heteropterans have complex and important roles in the balance of nature. The majority of them occupy an intermediate position in the ecological food chain; they use food producers (plants) and serve as food sources for parasites and other animals. A few species utilize plant-feeding insects as food.
Heteropterans often serve as food for humans and other animals. In some Latin American countries eggs of certain aquatic bugs are collected by providing submerged mats of hollow reeds or straws as egg-laying sites; the eggs are then dried and made into cakes. Chickens, turkeys, hogs, and other domestic stock consume available heteropterans. Aquatic bugs are an important food source for fish. Wild birds and mammals, from the wrens and shrews to the turkey and grizzly bear, utilize available heteropterans in their diets.
Species that attack unwanted plants and feed on the eggs, immature stages, and adults of injurious insects include most assassin bugs, nabid bugs, anthocorid bugs, stinkbugs, and plant bugs. These heteropterans are used in biological control of noxious weeds and injurious insects.
