Ladybug,  (family Coccinellidae), also called ladybird beetle,  any of approximately 5,000 widely distributed species of beetles (insect order Coleoptera) whose name originated in the Middle Ages, when the beetle was dedicated to the Virgin Mary and called “beetle of Our Lady.”
Ladybird beetles are hemispheric in shape and usually 8 to 10 mm (0.3 to 0.4 inch) long. They have short legs and are usually brightly coloured with black, yellow, or reddish markings. The colour of the wing covers and number of spots vary among species. The pattern of the nine-spotted ladybird beetle (Coccinella novemnotata), which has four black spots on each reddish orange wing cover (elytron) and one shared spot, is an example of the typical colour pattern of ladybird beetles.
The life cycle requires about four weeks, so that several generations are produced each summer. The long, slender, soft-bodied larvae, which are usually gray with blue, green, red, or black spots, feed on other insects and insect eggs. The larvae pass through four growth stages and then attach to some object and pupate in their last larval skin. Large groups of ladybird beetles usually hibernate together each winter at the same location.
Clusters of ladybird beetles are often gathered and sold to farmers and gardeners to control such insect pests as aphids, scales, and mites. The Australian ladybird beetle, or vedalia beetle (Rodolia cardinalis), was brought to western North America to help combat an outbreak of cottony-cushion scale (Icerya purchasi), which threatened to ruin citrus orchards. Both the larvae and adults of the convergent ladybug (Hippodamia convergens) are important aphid predators.
Although most ladybird beetles and their larvae are carnivorous, several feed on plants and are quite destructive. Two of these are the squash beetle (Epilachna borealis) and the Mexican bean beetle (E. varivestis).
The familiar children’s rhyme “Ladybug ladybug, fly away home / Your house is on fire, your children do roam” was a reference to the burning of the hop vines in England that took place following the harvest and cleared the fields but also killed numerous ladybird beetles. In folk medicine ladybird beetles have been prescribed as remedies for colic, measles, and toothaches.
