lobster,  any of numerous marine crustaceans (phylum Arthropoda, order Decapoda) constituting the families Homaridae (or Nephropsidae), true lobsters; Palinuridae, spiny lobsters, or sea crayfish; Scyllaridae, slipper, Spanish, or shovel lobsters; and Polychelidae, deep-sea lobsters. All are marine and benthic (bottom-dwelling), and most are nocturnal. Lobsters scavenge for dead animals but also eat live fish, small mollusks and other bottom-dwelling invertebrates, and seaweed. Some species, especially of true and spiny lobsters, are commercially important to humans as food.
The lobster has a rigid, segmented body covering (exoskeleton) and five pairs of legs, one or more pairs of which are often modified into pincers (chelae) with the chela on one side usually larger than that on the other. Lobsters have compound eyes on movable stalks, two pairs of long antennae, and several pairs of swimming legs (swimmerets) on the elongated abdomen. A flipperlike muscular tail is used for swimming; flexure of the tail and abdomen propel the animal backward.
The true lobsters (Homaridae) have claws (chelae) on the first three pairs of legs, with very large claws on the first pair. They have a distinct rostrum, or snout, on the carapace, which covers the head and thorax, or midsection. The American lobster (Homarus americanus) and the Norway lobster, also known as Dublin Bay prawn and scampi (Nephrops norvegicus), are the most valuable species and are often marketed alive; people eat the heavily muscled abdomen and claws. True lobsters are found in all but polar seas and the greater depths. H. gammarus, the European lobster, a dark greenish animal, occurs on rocky bottoms of the European Atlantic coast and the Mediterranean Sea. H. capensis, of the waters around South Africa, grows to 10 or 13 cm (4 to 5 inches) and is of little commercial value.
H. americanus, found in waters from Labrador to North Carolina, sometimes dwells in shallow water but is more abundant in deeper water down to 366 metres (1,200 feet). Lobsters caught in shallow water weigh about 0.45 kg (about one pound) and are about 25 cm (about 10 inches) long. They are caught usually in lobster pots—cages baited with dead fish. In deeper water, they weigh about 2.5 kg (about 5.5 pounds) and are often caught by trawling. Exceptionally large specimens may weigh 20 kg (40 pounds). The American lobster is often marketed alive. It is commonly blackish green or brownish green above and yellow orange, red, or blue underneath. The red colour of cooked lobsters is caused by immersion in hot water.
Females are ready to lay eggs when about five years old. Males transfer sperm to females in summer, but eggs are not fertilized until spring. A female lays 3,000 or more eggs, which remain attached to her swimmerets until they hatch several months later. Unlike adults, the larvae, about 1 cm (0.4 inch) long, swim freely for about 12 days and then descend to the bottom, where they remain. The life span of some lobsters in the wild may be as long as 50 years, with the oldest individuals living 100 years or more. Young lobsters are preyed upon especially by dogfish, skates, and cod. Humans are the principal predators of adult lobsters.
Unlike true lobsters, spiny lobsters (Palinuridae), so called because of their very spiny bodies, do not have large claws. People eat the abdomen, which is marketed as lobster tail. The antennae are long. Most species live in tropical waters; Palinurus elephas, however, is found from Great Britain to the Mediterranean Sea. Two palinurid species are commercially important in the Americas: Palinurus interruptus, the California spiny lobster of the Pacific coast, and P. argus, the West Indian spiny lobster, from Bermuda to Brazil. P. interruptus attains lengths of about 40 cm (16 inches); P. argus about 45 cm (18 inches). Jasus lalandei, the commercially important South African rock lobster, occurs in waters around South Africa.
The mainly tropical slipper lobsters (Scyllaridae) are rather flat and clawless, with antennae flattened into broad plates. Most species are short and small and of little economic importance. Deep-sea lobsters (Polychelidae) are soft, weak animals with claws; some are blind. None is commercially important.
