Millipede,  (class Diplopoda),  any member of the arthropod class Diplopoda, distributed worldwide and commonly grouped with several other classes as myriapods. The approximately 10,000 species live in and eat decaying plant matter; some injure living plants, and a few are predators and scavengers. The characteristic feature of the group is the presence of diplosomites, double trunk segments formed from the fusion of two segments. They have as many as 200 pairs of legs—two pairs on each diplosomite except for the first (head) segment, which is legless, and the next three segments, which each contain one pair of legs. In addition, each diplosomite (except for the first four) contains two pairs of internal organs (i.e., two pairs of ganglia and two pairs of heart arteries). The head contains antennae, simple eyes (ocelli), and only a single maxilla. The length ranges from 2 to 280 mm (0.08 to 11 inches). The number of segments also varies, ranging from 11 to more than 100 in some species. All but one order of millipedes are armoured with calcareous dorsal plates. In defense, they do not bite; most tuck head first into a tight coil with the exoskeleton exposed, and many secrete a pungent, toxic liquid or gas from lateral glands.
The class includes myriapods common to many gardens, such as Julus (sometimes spelled Iulus) terrestris, a 25-mm (1-inch) species native to Europe and introduced into North America, and smooth-bodied forms often called wireworms. Some millipedes lack eyes and are brightly coloured; an example is the 25-mm greenhouse millipede (Oxidus gracilis). One of the most common and conspicuous forms is the 100-mm (4-inch) black-and-red Narceus americanus of southeastern U.S. forests. The giant African millipede (Archispirostreptus gigas), which is native to subtropical Africa, is the largest extant species, achieving lengths up to 280 mm (11 inches). The extinct invertebrate Arthropleura, a relative of centipedes and millipedes, lived during the Carboniferous Period (359.2 million to 299 million years ago) and ranks among the largest insects ever described; estimates from fossil armour segments suggest that the species could have grown to more than 2 metres (6.6 feet) in length.
