Mollusk, also spelled mollusc,  any soft-bodied invertebrate of the phylum Mollusca, usually wholly or partly enclosed in a calcium carbonate shell secreted by a soft mantle covering the body. Along with the insects and vertebrates, it is one of the most diverse groups in the animal kingdom, with nearly 100,000 (possibly as many as 150,000) described species. Each group includes an ecologically and structurally immense variety of forms: the shell-less Caudofoveata; the narrow-footed gliders (Solenogastres); the serially valved chitons (Placophora or Polyplacophora); the cap-shaped neopilinids (Monoplacophora); the limpets, snails, and slugs (Gastropoda); the clams, mussels, scallops, oysters, shipworms, and cockles (Bivalvia); the tubiform to barrel-shaped tusk shells (Scaphopoda); and the nautiluses, cuttlefishes, squids, and octopuses (Cephalopoda).
Typical molluscan features have been substantially altered, or even lost, in many subgroups. Among the cephalopods the giant squids (Architeuthis), the largest living invertebrates, attain a body length of eight metres (more than 26 feet); with the tentacle arms extended, the total length reaches to 22 metres. Other cephalopods exceed a length of one metre. Many of the remaining molluscan classes show a large variation in size: among bivalves the giant clam (Tridacna) ranges up to 135 centimetres (four feet) and the pen shell (Pinna) from 40 to 80 centimetres; among gastropods the sea hares (Aplysia) grow from 40 to 100 centimetres and the Australian trumpet, or baler (Syrinx), up to 60 centimetres; among placophores the gumshoe, or gumboot chiton (Cryptochiton), achieves a length up to 30 to 43 centimetres; and, among solenogasters, Epimenia reaches a length of 15 to 30 centimetres. Finally, gastropods of the family Entoconchidae, which are parasitic in echinoderm sea cucumbers, may reach a size of almost 1.3 metres. In contrast, there are also minute members, less than one millimetre (0.04 inch) in size, among the solenogasters and gastropods.
The mollusks have adapted to all habitats except air. Although basically marine, bivalves and gastropods include freshwater species. Gastropods have also adapted to land, with thousands of species living a fully terrestrial existence. Found on rocky, sandy, and muddy substrata, mollusks burrow, crawl, become cemented to the surface, or are free-swimming.
Mollusks are found worldwide, but there is a preponderance of some groups in certain areas of the world. The close association of many molluscan groups with their food source—whether by direct dependence on a specific food supply (e.g., plant-eating, or herbivores) or by involvement in food chains—limits their geographic distribution; for example, bivalves of the family Teredinidae (shipworms) are associated with wood. In general, cold-water regions support fewer species.
Mollusks are of general importance within food chains and as members of ecosystems. Certain species are of direct or indirect commercial and even medical importance to humans. Many gastropod species, for example, are necessary intermediate hosts for parasitic flatworms (class Trematoda, phylum Platyhelminthes), such as the species that cause schistosomiasis in humans. Most bivalves contribute to the organic turnover in the intertidal (littoral) zones of marine and fresh water because, as filter feeders, they filter up to 40 litres (10 gallons) of water per hour. This filtering activity, however, may also seriously interfere with the various populations of invertebrate larvae (plankton) found suspended and free-swimming in the water. One species, the zebra mussel (Dreissena polymorpha), is regarded as a particularly harmful exotic invader. Carried from Europe in ship ballast water, zebra mussels were taken to the Great Lakes in 1986. To date, they have caused millions of dollars in commercial damage by clogging the water pipes of power plants and cooling systems. They are driving many native freshwater bivalve species to extinction.
Many gastropods, bivalves, and cephalopods are a source of food for many cultures and therefore play an important role in the fishing industries of many countries. Many shell-bearing molluscan species are also used to fabricate ornaments and are harvested for the pearl and mother-of-pearl industries.
