Neuropteran,  (order Neuroptera),  any of a group of insects commonly called lacewings because of the complex vein patterns in the wings, giving them a lacy appearance. In a strict sense, the order Neuroptera includes only the lacewings. However, two other closely related insect groups are frequently included in classification schemes as neuropterans. These are the snakeflies (Raphidiodea), so called for their body shape, and the dobsonflies and alderflies (Megaloptera). For completeness of discussion, all three groups are described in this article, but they are considered to be three separate orders.
All three orders may have evolved from an early mecopteran (scorpionfly) ancestral stem, prior to the Trichoptera–Lepidoptera offshoot. Carnivorous insects of varied structure and habit, both freshwater and terrestrial members of the three orders, are widely distributed with the exception of the snakeflies (which are confined to the Northern Hemisphere). Many members are important in the biological control of other insects and mite pests. Some are “flies” of interest to anglers. Some of the most elegant and dainty insects are lacewings. There are more than 500 species of alderflies and dobsonflies, 80 species of snakeflies, and 4,000 species of lacewings.
The size of lacewings varies from 1.5 to more than 35 mm (0.059 to more than 1.377 inches) in length and 2 to more than 50 mm in anterior wing length. Lacewings are characterized by their many-veined wings and appear delicate, whereas dobsonflies and alderflies, while similar in general appearance, have wings that appear heavier than those of lacewings. Most species in these groups are 15 to 30 mm in body length, with anterior wing length varying from 20 to more than 50 mm. Snakeflies are of medium size, 10 mm or more in body and anterior wing length, with wings similar to those of lacewings.
The Megaloptera and Raphidiodea differ from the Neuroptera in that adults have prognathous (directed forward) mouthparts and biting larval mandibles. Neuropteran adults have hypognathous (directed downward) mouthparts and unique piercing–sucking larval jaws composed of the mandibles (directed downward) plus maxillae.
Neuropteran eggs may be laid loosely in light soil, cemented directly to a surface, or cemented on the end of a stalk produced by glands in the female’s reproductive system. During the cementing process, the female places the tip of the abdomen on a surface and begins to exude a viscid fluid. She then raises her abdomen slowly to draw the fluid into a slender filament. The fluid rapidly hardens, and the egg is attached by its posterior end to the top of the stalk.
Larvae hatch after 5–14 days unless the egg is in the overwintering stage. In some families a thickened portion of cuticle is used by the larva to break the egg, whereas in others the egg simply splits. There are generally three larval stages in Neuroptera. The first lasts a few days, the second a few days or for the winter months, while the third varies, depending on the species, from weeks to months.
Neuropteran larvae are carnivorous and free-living with the exception of the aquatic family Sisyridae, which has larvae that are parasitic on freshwater sponges. Typically, a neuropteran larva sucks out the contents of its prey, leaving only a hollow skin. Although many lacewing larvae are nocturnal and need no camouflage, other species carry debris on bodies adapted for this purpose. In one family debris floats onto the hairs and is caught, while in another the larva takes debris in its jaws and places it on its back. In still another family larvae lie lightly covered in the soil. The larvae of antlions dig conical pits in light, dry soil or sand. They vigorously throw out soil with their heads, then lie in the pit, body covered and jaws ready to grasp an ant or any other prey that may fall in. Should a captive attempt to escape by climbing a pit wall, the antlion will use its head to toss soil at it, causing the prey to fall back into the pit.
The neuropteran larva spins a double cocoon by exuding whitish or yellowish silk through its anus. First, a loosely woven cocoon is spun and fastened to a surface. Then the larva spins a second tightly woven cocoon inside the first. This double construction is typical of neuropterans. The walls of the two cocoons may be closely spaced or apart, depending on the species. The larva may spend the prepupal stage of several days or months within the cocoon before the pupal molt occurs. The limbs of the pupa are free (exarate). In a few species the pupa bursts from the cocoon, but most species use their functional mandibles to chew an exit hole. Adults appear either as the pupa leaves the cocoon or after it has reached a suitable position. Some species have two or more broods a year, although the life cycle does not exceed 12 months. Mating may occur anytime during the lifespan of the adult female, and in some species she retains fertilized eggs in her body until weather conditions are suitable.
Megalopteran females lay eggs above water level in masses of 3,000 or more. Larvae crawl into the water where they are very active. Commonly, alderfly larvae are associated with muddy bottoms of ponds and slow-moving streams, whereas dobsonfly larvae inhabit fast-flowing streams or rivers. The larvae are predaceous, usually nocturnal, and may leave the water to search for prey or to molt. Before pupation the larvae leave the water to form cells in damp, coarse soil beneath stones or debris. The pupa crawls from its earthen cell before the adult emerges. Raphidiodean females use slender ovipositors to lay eggs in the cracks of tree bark, and immature stages are found there.
Usually mating occurs at night. Sperm are passed either directly as spermatozoa or in a spermatophore that may project from the female after mating and be either wholly or partially eaten by her. While megalopterans lay eggs in masses of several thousands, raphidiodeans lay them singly, and neuropterans lay 600 or 700 singly, separately in groups, or in batches.
All of the larvae and adults are carnivorous and predaceous (except the parasitic Sisyridae), devouring enormous numbers of mites, insect eggs and larvae, ants, thysanopterans, psocopterans, and homopterans. For example, chrysopids consume large numbers of aphids and are a potent natural control mechanism. Larval feeding is continuous except during molts. Adults may also feed on dead insects, and females may feed on their own eggs and on spermatophores. The neuropteran family Sisyridae may have evolved from the closely related family Osmylidae whose larvae probe streamside mosses for prey.
Megalopteran larvae, a source of food for freshwater fish, are used as bait by anglers. Spiders capture both adults and terrestrial larvae in their webs. Neuropteran eggs and larvae are preyed upon by other neuropterans, other predaceous insects (e.g., coccinellid, or ladybird beetle, larvae, ants), birds, and bats.
