Owlet moth,  (family Noctuidae), also called miller,  large worldwide group of more than 20,000 species of triangular, stout-bodied nocturnal lepidopterans. The family Noctuidae includes some of the world’s largest moths; wingspans in this diverse group range from 0.8 to 30.5 cm (0.3 to 12 inches). Although most have dull protective coloration, some tropical species are bright and iridescent.
Owlet moths are mainly night fliers, and many are attracted to lights. Hearing organs on the thorax consist of a tightly stretched membrane that is protected by an expanded hood. Most adults, using their well-developed mouthparts, feed on fruits, sap, nectar, or other sweet fluids. Large numbers of some species seasonally invade temperate areas from the tropics.
The larvae vary considerably in size, and in appearance they range from dull to colourful and from smooth to hairy. Many species feed on foliage and seeds, whereas others bore through stems and fruits; a few prey on scale insects. Larvae of some species known as cutworms feed at night on such plants as corn (maize), grasses, tomatoes, and beans, severing roots and stems near ground level. Larvae of other species may eat foliage or fruits, whereas others (e.g., the glossy cutworm [Crymodes devastator]) live underground and feed on plant roots. The larvae of Pseudaletia unipuncta, called armyworms, travel along the ground in large groups, destroying corn, small grains, sugarcane, cotton, and other crops. (The name armyworm is also generally applied to caterpillars of several other lepidopteran species that may move to new feeding grounds in large groups.) The corn earworm, the larval stage of a cosmopolitan moth (Helicoverpa zea), is also known as the cotton bollworm, tomato fruitworm, or vetchworm. The tobacco budworm is the common name of Heliothis virescens. Many larvae pupate underground in loosely woven cocoons, while others make strong silken cocoons incorporating wood chips, larval hairs, and other material.
The family Noctuidae is divided into many separate families by some authorities, but, like all butterflies and moths, owlet moths are classified in the order Lepidoptera.
