oyster,   any member of the families Ostreidae (true oysters) or Aviculidae (pearl oysters), bivalve mollusks found in temperate and warm coastal waters of all oceans. Bivalves known as thorny oysters (Spondylus) and saddle oysters (Anomia) are sometimes included in the group.
True oysters have been cultivated as food for more than 2,000 years. Pearl oysters also have long been valued for the precious pearls that develop in them. (See also pearl.)
The two valves of the oyster shell, which differ in shape, have rough surfaces that are often a dirty gray. The upper valve is convex, or higher at the middle than at the edges. The lower valve, fixed to the bottom or to another surface, is larger, has smoother edges, and is rather flat. The inner surfaces of both valves are smooth and white.
The valves are held together at their narrow ends by an elastic ligament. A large central muscle (adductor muscle) serves to close the valve against the pull of the ligament. As the valves are held slightly open, tiny hairlike structures (cilia) on the gills draw water inward by means of wavelike motions. Two to three gallons may pass through the oyster in an hour. Minute organic particles, filtered from the water, serve as food.
Oysters, in turn, are eaten by birds, sea stars, and snails, as well as by fishes. The oyster drill (Urosalpinx cinenea), a widely occurring snail, drills a tiny hole through the oyster shell, then sucks out the living tissue.
Like other bivalves, most oysters are either male or female, although hermaphroditism also occurs. Ostrea edulis exhibits a phenomenon called sequential hermaphroditism, in which an individual alternates sexes seasonally or with changes in water temperature. Oysters breed in the summer. The eggs of some species are released into the water before fertilization by the sperm; the eggs of others are fertilized within the female. The young are released as ciliated larvae known collectively as veligers, which swim for several days before permanently attaching themselves to a site and metamorphosing. Edible oysters are ready for harvesting in three to five years.
True oysters (family Ostreidae) include species of Ostrea, Crassostrea, and Pycnodonte. Common Ostrea species include the European flat, or edible, oyster, O. edulis; the Olympia oyster, O. lurida; and O. frons. Crassostrea species include the Portuguese oyster, C. angulata; the North American, or Virginia, oyster, C. virginica; and the Japanese oyster, C. gigas. Pearl oysters (family Aviculidae) are mostly of the genus Meleagrina, sometimes called Pinctada or Margaritifera.
O. edulis occurs from the coast of Norway to waters near Morocco, through the Mediterranean Sea, and into the Black Sea. It is hermaphroditic and attains lengths of about 8 cm (about 3 inches). O. lurida, of the Pacific coastal waters of North America, grows to about 7.5 cm (3 inches). C. virginica, native to the Gulf of Saint Lawrence to the West Indies and about 15 cm (6 inches) long, has been introduced into Pacific coastal waters of North America. Up to 50,000,000 eggs may be released by the female at one time. Commercially, C. virginica is the most important North American mollusk. C. angulata occurs in coastal waters of western Europe. C. gigas, of Japanese coastal waters, is among the largest oysters, attaining lengths of about 30 cm (1 foot). Like C. virginica, the Sydney rock oyster (Crassostrea commercialis) changes sex; born male, it changes to female later in life. It is the most economically important Australian edible oyster.
Oysters are shucked and eaten raw, cooked, or smoked. Popular varieties include the blue point and lynnhaven—forms of C. virginica (harvested, respectively, from the Blue Point, Long Island, and Lynnhaven Bay, Va., regions); as well as the colchester of Britain and the marennes of France. The colchester and marennes are forms of O. edulis.
Pearls are formed in oysters by the accumulation of nacre, the material lining the oyster shell, around a solid piece of foreign matter that has become lodged inside the shell. Pearls formed in edible oysters are lustreless and of no value. The best natural pearls occur in a few Oriental species, particularly Meleagrina vulgaris, native to the Persian Gulf. This species is found mainly at depths of 8 to 20 fathoms (48 to 120 feet). Pearls are taken mostly from oysters more than five years old. Cultured pearls are grown around bits of mother-of-pearl inserted manually into the oyster. Most cultured pearls are grown in Japanese or Australian coastal waters.
