Termite,  (order Isoptera),   any of a group of cellulose-eating insects, the social system of which shows remarkable parallels with those of ants and bees, although it has evolved independently. Even though termites are not closely related to ants, they are sometimes referred to as white ants. Phylogenetic studies have shown that the closest relative to the termite is the cockroach; for this reason termites are sometimes placed in the order Dictyoptera, which also contains the mantids.
Termites, which number about 2,750 species, are distributed widely, reaching their greatest abundance in numbers and species in tropical rainforests around the world (see video). In North America termites are found as far north as Vancouver, British Columbia (Zootermopsis), on the Pacific coast, and Maine and eastern Canada (Reticulitermes) on the Atlantic coast. In Europe the northern limit of natural distribution is reached by Reticulitermes lucifugus on the Atlantic coast of France, although an introduced species, Reticulitermes flavipes, occurs as far north as Hamburg, Germany. The known European species of termites have a predominantly Mediterranean distribution and do not occur naturally in Great Britain, Scandinavia, Switzerland, Germany, or northern Russia. In the Far East Reticulitermes speratus ranges as far north as South Korea, Peking, and northern Japan. Termites occur also in the Cape region of South Africa, Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand.
In addition to naturally occurring termites, many species have been inadvertently transported by humans from their native habitats to new parts of the world. Termites, particularly Cryptotermes and Coptotermes, have been accidentally transported in wooden articles such as shipping crates, boat timbers, lumber, and furniture. Because dry-wood termites (e.g., Cryptotermes species) live in small colonies in wood and tolerate long periods of dryness, they can survive in seasoned wood and furniture and can easily be transported over long distances. Members of the family Rhinotermitidae (e.g., Coptotermes) require access to moisture and cannot survive prolonged dry periods. Coptotermes formosanus, widely distributed in Japan, Taiwan, and South China, has been introduced into Sri Lanka (Ceylon), the Pacific islands, South Africa, East Africa, Hawaii, California, and the southern United States. C. formosanus is unusual for the family in that it can survive without direct soil contact as long as a moisture source is present. In the United States the species has been found to have well-established colonies in the upper reaches of buildings, using small leaks in the roof as a moisture source. A termite native to the United States, Reticulitermes flavipes, was found in the hothouses of the Royal Palace in Schönbrunn, in Vienna, and the species was reported and described in that location before it was discovered in the United States. The termites presumably had been shipped from North America in wooden containers of decorative potted plants.
Termites are important in two ways. They are destructive when they feed upon, and often destroy, wooden structures or vegetable matter valuable to humans. Introduced species, because they are not so well equipped as native species to adapt to changes in their new environments, tend to seek shelter in protected, man-made environments such as buildings and thus are likely to become the most serious pests, causing significant damage to houses and wooden furnishings. Some termites feed on living plant materials and can become serious crop pests. Termites are also extremely beneficial in that they help to convert plant cellulose into substances that can be recycled into the ecosystem to support new growth.
Although only about 10 percent of the 2,750 known termite species have been reported as pests, many of these cause severe and extremely costly damage. For effective control, it is essential to determine whether the pest is a subterranean or a wood-dwelling species, as treatment methods differ.
Subterranean termites are dependent on contact with soil moisture and normally reach the wood in man-made structures through the foundations. The most common traditional control used around a structure is to flood a shallow trench with an insecticide and cover it with soil. Insecticides also are useful around cracks and crevices in foundations. A recent development has been to establish permanent monitoring stations around the perimeter of a foundation. When termites are discovered in a station, the wooden “bait” is replaced with a cellulose material containing a chitin inhibitor that is consumed by the foraging workers and returned to the colony and fed to others. This material disrupts normal formation of the exoskeleton (cuticle) of molting workers (the only caste capable of molting), resulting in death of the workers and, eventually, the rest of the colony. Construction and design practices that can prevent the initial entry of subterranean termites into a structure include the use of pressure-treated wood, treated concrete foundation blocks, and reinforced concrete foundations that extend at least 15.2 cm (6 inches) above the ground and have no cracks or contact with any outside wood. Removal of scrap lumber from building sites will also reduce the termite population.
Dry-wood termites nest in the wood on which they feed and do not invade a structure from the soil. Because their colonies are within the structure, they are difficult to control. Preventive measures include the use of chemically treated wood in building construction and the use of paint or other durable finish to seal cracks in wood surfaces. Fumigation is the most effective method for eliminating a dry-wood termite infestation. Another method is to place insecticide into small holes drilled into galleries of infested wood.
