Grace Kelly, original name in full Grace Patricia Kelly, also called (from 1956) Princess Grace of Monaco or French Princesse Grace de Monaco,  (born November 12, 1929, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, U.S.—died September 14, 1982, Monte Carlo, Monaco), American actress of films and television, known for her stately beauty and reserve. She starred in 11 motion pictures before abandoning a Hollywood career to marry Rainier III, prince de Monaco, in 1956.
Kelly was born into a wealthy Irish Catholic family in Philadelphia; her father was John B. Kelly, a gold-medal winning oarsman, and her uncle was the playwright George Kelly. She was educated in convent and private schools before attending the American Academy of Dramatic Arts in New York City in 1947. She worked as a photographer’s model to pay her tuition. After several seasons of acting in summer stock, Kelly made her Broadway debut in November 1949 in August Strindberg’s The Father. She was cast in a number of television dramas in the early 1950s. In 1951 she made her big-screen debut, appearing in a minor role in Fourteen Hours. The following year she gave a breakthrough performance as Gary Cooper’s Quaker wife in High Noon.
Kelly’s next film was John Ford’s Mogambo (1953), in which she starred as a young bride who falls in love with a big-game hunter (played by Clark Gable) who has also caught the interest of a former showgirl (Ava Gardner). For her performance, Kelly received her first Academy Award nomination. She earned further acclaim for The Country Girl (1954), a screen version of Clifford Odets’s play. Cast against type as the dowdy wife of an alcoholic actor (portrayed by Bing Crosby), Kelly won an Oscar for best actress.
Despite such notable works, Kelly’s most memorable roles were arguably those in a series of classic Alfred Hitchcock films. She first worked with the director in Dial M for Murder (1954), in which she played an adulterous wife whose husband (Ray Milland) plots to have her killed. That year she also starred in Rear Window, cast as the girlfriend of a photographer (James Stewart) who becomes convinced that his neighbour has committed murder. In To Catch a Thief (1955), Kelly starred opposite Cary Grant. The romantic caper is noted for its ad-libbed scenes rife with double entendres between the two actors. Kelly was widely regarded as the perfect Hitchcock heroine, epitomizing what he called “sexual elegance.”
After making The Swan (1956) and High Society (1956), Kelly retired from the screen to marry Prince Rainier. The couple wed in a civil ceremony on April 18, 1956, and an opulent religious ceremony took place the following day; Kelly became princess of Monaco. The couple had three children—Caroline, Albert, and Stéphanie—and Princess Grace was active in charitable and cultural work. Although she repeatedly resisted attempts to lure her back into performing, she reportedly agreed to star in Hitchock’s Marnie (1964) before backing out of the project. However, she did lend her narration to one or two documentary films and gave occasional poetry readings. In addition, in 1976 she joined the board of Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corporation.
On September 13, 1982, Princess Grace suffered a stroke while driving on a winding road at Cap-d’Ail in the Côte d’Azur region of France. She lost control of the car, which plunged down a 45-foot (14-metre) embankment. The following day Princess Grace died. Her daughter Stéphanie, who was also in the automobile, suffered only minor injuries.
