Continental slope,  seaward border of the continental shelf. The world’s combined continental slope has a total length of approximately 300,000 km (200,000 miles) and descends at an average angle in excess of 4° from the shelf break at the edge of the continental shelf to the beginning of the ocean basins at depths of 100 to 3,200 metres (330 to 10,500 feet).
The gradient of the slope is lowest off stable coasts without major rivers and highest off coasts with young mountain ranges and narrow continental shelves. Most Pacific slopes are steeper than Atlantic slopes. Gradients are flattest in the Indian Ocean. About one-half of all continental slopes descend into deep-sea trenches or shallower depressions, and most of the remainder terminate in fans of marine sediment or in continental rises. The transition from continental crust to oceanic crust usually occurs below the continental slope.
About 8.5 percent of the ocean floor is covered by the continental slope-rise system. This system is an expression of the edge of the continental crustal block. Beyond the shelf-slope break, the continental crust thins quickly, and the rise lies partly on the continental crust and partly on the oceanic crust of the deep sea. Although the continental slope averages about 4°, it can approach vertical on carbonate margins, on faulted margins, or on leading-edge, tectonically active margins. Steep slopes usually have either a very poorly developed continental rise or none at all and are called escarpments.
Continental slopes are indented by numerous submarine canyons and mounds. The Blake Plateau off the southeastern United States and the continental borderland off southern California are examples of continental slopes separated from continental shelves by plateaus of intermediate depth. Slopes off mountainous coastlines and narrow shelves often have outcrops of rock.
The predominant sediments of continental slopes are muds; there are smaller amounts of sediments of sand or gravel.
 Over geologic time, the continental slopes are temporary depositional sites for sediments. During lowstands  of sea level, rivers may dump their sedimentary burden directly on them. Sediments build up until the mass becomes unstable and sloughs off to the lower slope and the continental rise. During highstands of sea level, these processes slow down as the coastline retreats landward across the continental shelf, and more of the sediments delivered to the coast are trapped in estuaries and lagoons. Still the process continues, albeit slowly, as sediments are brought across the shelf break by winnowing of the shelf surface and by advection. Slopes are sometimes scoured by such major ocean currents as the Florida Current that work to erode their surfaces. Off active major deposition centres, such as the Mississippi delta, slope sequences may accumulate through progradation, while the active slope front is continuously shedding sediments downslope by gravity processes.
