Junggar Basin, Chinese (Pinyin) Zhunga’er Pendi or (Wade-Giles romanization) Chun-ko-erh P’en-ti, conventional Dzungarian Basin,  extensive basin in the Uygur Autonomous Region of Xinjiang, northwestern China.
The basin is located between the Mongolian Altai Mountains, on the Sino-Mongolian border, to the north, and the Borohoro (Poluokenu) and Eren Habirga mountains, to the south; the latter run east and west immediately to the north of the Tien Shan (“Celestial Mountains”). To the east and southeast, respectively, the basin is bounded by the Baytag Bogd (Baytik) and Bogda mountains. The basin’s western limit is defined by the Dzungarian Alatau and Tarbagatay (Ta’erbahatai) mountain ranges, which separate it from the Lake Balqash depression in Kazakhstan.
The main pass through the western ranges is the so-called Dzungarian Gate (Junggar Men), which leads to Lake Alaköl and Lake Balqash in Kazakhstan. In the far north the Irtysh (Ertix) River drains into Lake Zaysan across the Kazakhstan border. Otherwise, the Junggar Basin is an area of internal drainage, with the rivers from the Altai draining into Lake Jili and those from the southern ranges draining into Lakes Manasi or Aibi (Ebinur) in the low-lying depression immediately southeast of the Dzungarian Gate. The whole depression lies between 1,650 and 3,300 feet (500 and 1,000 metres) above sea level, with a general slope from northeast to southwest, where Lake Aibi lies at an elevation of little more than 620 feet (190 metres).
The area is very dry and receives only 6–12 inches (150–300 mm) of precipitation annually. It also experiences great extremes of temperature. The surrounding mountains, however, receive much heavier precipitation, and many of the northern ranges and the Altai are forested. The east-central part of the basin is a desert (the Dzungarian Gobi) but is not totally barren. Surrounding it are zones of steppe (grassy plains) and semisteppe watered by seasonal watercourses that often drain into saline marshes. There are few rivers in the basin.
The population consists mostly of Uighurs and various Turkic or Mongol peoples. The only Chinese (Han) inhabitants are industrial workers and settlers on the southern oases and state farms.
