Leizhou Peninsula, Chinese (Pinyin) Leizhou Bandao or (Wade-Giles romanization) Lei-chou Pan-tao, conventional Luichow Peninsula,  peninsula, some 75 miles (120 km) from north to south and 30 miles (48 km) east to west, jutting out southward from the coast of Guangdong province, extreme southern China, and separated from the island province of Hainan by the 10-mile- (16-km-) wide Hainan Strait (Qiongzhou Haixia). The peninsula is curved; together with two large islands on the east coast, Naozhou and Donghai, it forms two bays, Leizhou to the south of the islands and Zhanjiang to the north. The largest city on the peninsula is Zhanjiang, which faces the bay of the same name. Administratively, the peninsula forms part of Zhanjiang municipality. The peninsula forms part of the eastern limit of the Gulf of Tonkin, and it takes its name from the ancient city of Leizhou (formerly Haikang) on the eastern coast, which was, until the rise of Zhanjiang in the 20th century, the chief city and the seat of the prefecture of Leizhou.
From 1898 to 1946 the French held a lease on an area of 325 square miles (842 square km) on the eastern coast, including the two bays and the two large islands. Usually referred to as Kwangchowan, it was called Kouang-Tchéou-Wan by the French. Its capital was at Zhanjiang, renamed Fort Bayard by the French. Occupied by the Japanese in World War II, it was returned to China by France in 1946.
The peninsula consists of undulating upland with a generally low relief, dropping in steps to the sea. It is mostly formed of basalt and geologically recent sedimentary rocks, with the cones of numerous extinct volcanoes about 825 feet (250 metres) high in the northern and southern sections of the peninsula. The climate is sharply differentiated between the eastern section, which receives more than 40 inches (1,000 mm) of precipitation annually, and the western, which receives considerably less. The whole area is much drier than the neighbouring mainland or Hainan, and the climate generally is tropical, with no true winter conditions; average January temperatures vary between 61 and 64 °F (16 and 18 °C), and June temperatures between 86 and 91 °F (30 and 33 °C). There is thus a high rate of evaporation. Forest belts have been planted since 1955 to diminish wind velocity across the peninsula and thereby reduce evaporation.
The area was originally forested, but almost all of the forest cover, except on the northern hills, was destroyed long ago. As a result, uncultivated areas have suffered from soil erosion and are mostly covered with rough savanna grassland, with shrubs and thickets growing in the valleys. The soil layer, always thin, has been completely washed away in places, often after grassland fires or overgrazing have destroyed the protective vegetation cover. The area is now under development as a national centre for tropical crops and aquaculture; less rice is grown in the area than in other parts of Guangdong. There are some mineral deposits, e.g., manganese and mercury.
The main cities are Zhanjiang, now an important port in southern China, Haikang on the east coast, and Xuwen, with its port, Hai’an, at the southern tip of the peninsula. In 2000 work was completed on a railway from the north that extends southward from Zhanjiang to Hai’an; from there, railway cars are transported by ferry across the Qiong Strait to Hainan.
