Liaodong Peninsula, Chinese (Pinyin) Liaodong Bandao or (Wade-Giles romanization) Liao-tung Pan-tao,  large peninsula jutting out in a southwesterly direction from the southern coastline of Liaoning province, northeastern China. It partly separates the Bo Hai (Gulf of Chihli) to the west from Korea Bay to the east, and, with the Shandong Peninsula to the south, it forms the Bo Hai Strait.
The Liaodong Peninsula is a part of a larger mountain belt, with a southwest-northeast axis, which continues in the Changbai Mountains of the Northeast (Manchuria)–North Korean border area. On the peninsula, the range is known as the Qian Mountains. The backbone of the peninsula consists of a number of parallel mountain ranges formed from ancient granites and shales. These mountains have been weathered into sharp peaks and ridges and are rarely more than 3,300 feet (1,000 metres) high, but the highest peak, Mount Buyun, reaches 3,710 feet (1,130 metres). Most of the southern part of the peninsula is gentler in relief, seldom exceeding 1,650 feet (500 metres) in height. The mountains are deeply dissected by a complex river system, which drains partly into the Yalu River to the east, partly into the Liao River to the west, and partly into the sea directly. The river valleys of the peninsula are narrow, with no large alluvial plains.
In winter the Liaodong Peninsula is somewhat warmer than the adjacent areas of northeastern China. It receives 20 to 30 inches (500 to 750 mm) of precipitation annually, about two-thirds of which occurs during the hot summer months (July to September); precipitation on the peninsula is, however, more variable than it is in the inland Liao River valley. The growing season lasts 200 days in most parts of the peninsula and 220 days in the extreme south. The area is home to many orchards, especially for apples, and other types of fruit farming. Wheat, corn (maize), and rice are also grown. Chestnut oaks are grown in the highlands for use in tussah silk production. Minerals include iron ore, gold, copper, and magnesite. Boron and salt are also mined. Near the southern tip of the peninsula lies the major city and port of Dalian (which includes the former ports of Dairen and Port Arthur). A north-south railway connects Dalian to Yingkou, at the western base of the peninsula, and continues beyond the peninsula to Shenyang. Dalian and other cities in the area grew rapidly in the late 20th and early 21st centuries.
