Mason-Dixon Line, also called Mason and Dixon Line,  originally the boundary between Maryland and Pennsylvania in the United States. In the pre-Civil War period it was regarded, together with the Ohio River, as the dividing line between slave states south of it and free-soil states north of it. The term Mason and Dixon Line was first used in congressional debates leading to the Missouri Compromise (1820). Today the Mason-Dixon Line still serves figuratively as the political and social dividing line between the North and the South, although it does not extend west of the Ohio River.
Between 1763 and 1767 the 233-mile (375-km) line was surveyed along the parallel 39°43′ N by two Englishmen, Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon, to define the long-disputed boundaries of the overlapping land grants of the Penns, proprietors of Pennsylvania, and the Calverts, proprietors of Maryland. The dispute arose over conflicting claims to the territory from the Delaware River westward. In 1632 King Charles I had granted Cecilius Calvert, 2nd Lord Baltimore, a charter to establish a colony north of Virginia to that point “which lieth under the Fortieth degree of north latitude” and westward to the source of the Potomac. In 1681 Charles II granted William Penn the area between 43° N and a line extending westward from “a Circle drawne [sic] at twelve miles distance from New Castle…” to “the beginning of the fortieth degree….” In 1682 Penn then received a grant in the Delaware peninsula, which Lord Baltimore claimed. In 1685 the crown ordered that territory to be divided equally, the western half going to Baltimore. After years of bitter controversy, in 1750 British Lord Chancellor Hardwicke ruled that the southern boundary of Pennsylvania should be a line running westward from the point at which the line dividing the Delaware peninsula was tangential to a circle with a radius of 12 miles (19 km) from the centre of Newcastle. 
Mason and Dixon resurveyed the Delaware tangent line and the Newcastle arc and in 1765 began running the east-west line from the tangent point, at approximately 39°43′ N. Along that line the surveyors set milestones brought from England, with every fifth stone in the eastern portion being a “crown stone” bearing the arms of Penn on one side and of Baltimore on the other. The line was completed in 1768 at a cost of $75,000. In 1779 Pennsylvania and Virginia agreed to extend the line westward to a point five degrees from the Delaware river, a line running north from that point to be the westward boundary of Pennsylvania. 
