sand dune,  any accumulation of sand grains shaped into a mound or ridge by the wind under the influence of gravity. Sand dunes are comparable to other forms that appear when a fluid moves over a loose bed, such as subaqueous “dunes” on the beds of rivers and tidal estuaries and sand waves on the continental shelves beneath shallow seas. Dunes are found wherever loose sand is windblown: in deserts, on beaches, and even on some eroded and abandoned farm fields in semiarid regions, such as northwest India and parts of the southwestern United States. Images of Mars returned by the U.S. Mariner 9 and Viking spacecrafts have shown that dunes are widely distributed on that planet both in craters and in a sand sea surrounding the north polar ice cap.
True dunes must be distinguished from dunes formed in conjunction with vegetation. The latter cover relatively small areas on quiet humid coastlands and also occur on the semiarid margins of deserts. True dunes cover much more extensive areas—up to several hundred square kilometres—primarily in great sand seas (ergs), some of which are as big as France or Texas. They also occur, however, as small isolated dunes on hard desert surfaces, covering an area of as little as 10 square metres (107 square feet). Areas of gently undulating sandy surfaces with low relief are classified as sand sheets. They commonly have a nearly flat or rippled surface of coarse sand grains and are only a few centimetres to metres thick. Minor sand sheets cover only a few square kilometres around the margins of dune fields. A few, such as the Selima Sand Sheet in southwestern Egypt and the northwestern Sudan, are probably almost as extensive as some of the great sand seas.
During the past two million years or so the conditions of very low rainfall under which true dunes form expanded beyond the margins of the Sahara and other present-day arid regions into areas that are now more humid. The best evidence for these changes is the presence of sand seas that are immobilized by vegetation. Dunes formed under similar climates in the geologic past and at certain times occupied deserts as extensive as modern ones. Rocks formed by the solidification of ancient sand seas occur, for example, in the walls of the Grand Canyon in the southwestern United States, in the West Midlands of England, and in southern Brazil.
An understanding of sand dunes requires a basic knowledge of their sands, the winds, and the interactions of these main elements. These factors will be treated in turn in the following sections.
Dunes are almost invariably built of particles of sand size. Clay particles are not usually picked up by the wind because of their mutual coherence, and if they are picked up they tend to be lifted high into the air. Only where clays are aggregated into particles of sand size, as on the Gulf Coast of Texas, will they be formed into dunes. Silt is more easily picked up by the wind but is carried away faster than sand, and there are few signs of dunelike bed forms where silt is deposited, for instance as sheets of loess. Particles coarser than sands, such as small pebbles, only form dunelike features when there are strong and persistent winds, as in coastal Peru, and these coarse-grained features are generally known as granule ripples rather than dunes. Larger particles, such as small boulders, can be moved by the wind only on slippery surfaces (e.g., ice or wet saline mud) and never form into dunes.
Common dune sands have median grain diameters between 0.02 and 0.04 cm (0.008 and 0.016 inch). The maximum common range is between 0.01 and 0.07 cm. Most dune sands are well sorted, and a sample of sand from a dune will usually have particles all of very similar size. The sand on sand sheets, however, is poorly sorted and often bimodal—i.e., it is a mixture of coarse sands, often about 0.06 cm in diameter, and much finer sands, as well as particles of intermediate size. Windblown sands, especially the coarser particles, are often rounded and minutely pitted, the latter giving the grains a frosted appearance when seen under a microscope.
Most windblown sand on the Earth is composed of quartz. Quartz exists in large quantities in many igneous and metamorphic rocks in crystals of sand size. It tends to accumulate when these rocks are weathered away because it resists chemical breakdown better than most minerals, which are taken away in solution. Most of the great sand seas occur in continental interiors that have been losing soluble material for millions of years; as a consequence, quartzose sandstones are common. These sandstones are eroded by rainwash and stream runoff, processes that are spasmodic but violent in deserts. The eroded products are transported to great interior basins where they are deposited. Such alluvial deposits are the sources of most windblown sand. Quartz also predominates in most coastal dune sands, but there usually are considerable mixtures of other minerals in dunes of this kind.
Dune sands not composed of quartz are rarer but not unknown. Near volcanic eruptions in Hawaii, some western states of the continental United States, and Tanzania, for example, dunes are built of volcanic ash particles. In many arid areas, gypsum crystals of sand size are deposited on the floors of ephemeral lakes as the water dries out; they are then blown like sand to form gypsum dunes. Gypsum dunes occur in the White Sands National Monument in New Mexico, as well as in northern Algeria and southwestern Australia.
