the Steppe,  belt of grassland that extends some 5,000 miles (8,000 km) from Hungary in the west through Ukraine and Central Asia to Manchuria in the east. Mountain ranges interrupt the steppe, dividing it into distinct segments, but horsemen could cross such barriers easily, so that steppe peoples could and did interact across the entire breadth of the Eurasian grassland throughout most of recorded history. 
Nonetheless, the unity of steppe history is difficult to grasp; steppe peoples left very little writing for historians to use, and Chinese, Middle Eastern, and European records tell only what happened within a restricted range across their respective steppe frontiers. Archaeology offers real but limited help (grave relics from chieftains’ tombs abound but, of course, say little about everyday life and leave political, military, and linguistic alignments to inference). As a result, until about 1000 ce, information concerning the rise and fall of steppe empires and the relation between events in the eastern and western portions of the steppe remains fraught with great uncertainty.
The lay of the land divides the Eurasian Steppe into two major segments. The first of these may be called the Western Steppe. It extends from the grassy plains at the mouth of the Danube River along the north shore of the Black Sea, across the lower Volga, and eastward as far as the Altai Mountains. The conventional division between Europe and Asia at the Ural Mountains is completely meaningless for steppe history and geography. The grasslands extend continuously south of the Ural Mountains on either side of the Ural River. The Western Steppe therefore constitutes one vast region, some 2,500 miles from east to west and between 200 and 600 miles from north to south. Within its bounds, a vast sea of grass made cross-country movement easy for anyone with a horse to ride. Rivers and streams cut through the grasslands, with trees growing along the banks. Streams flow slowly, trending, for the most part, either north or south and providing an easy mode of transport by river boat in summer and by sleigh in winter. Consequently, animal caravans and river transport made the steppe accessible to commerce even before modern roads and railroads transformed travel conditions.
Hot summers and cold winters divide the year into sharply contrasting seasons. Temperatures are slightly more extreme in the east, but a more critical variable is rainfall, which diminishes as the rain-bearing winds from the Atlantic become increasingly erratic east of the Don. These temperature and precipitation gradients make the Ukraine and adjacent parts of Romania far richer natural pastureland than the land farther east. Peoples of the Western Steppe therefore tended to migrate westward along the steppe, seeking better grass and milder temperatures, whenever political conditions allowed them to do so.
The second major segment of the Eurasian Steppe extends from the Altai Mountains on the west to the Greater Khingan Range on the east, embracing Mongolia and adjacent regions. It is higher, colder, and drier than the Western Steppe, with greater seasonal extremes of temperature than are found anywhere else in the world. Some 1,500 miles from east to west and about 400 to 500 miles from north to south, the Eastern Steppe is in every way a harsher land for human habitation than the Western Steppe. All the same, lower temperatures counteract lower precipitation by reducing evaporation, so that sparse grass does grow, at least seasonally, even where rainfall is only between 10 and 20 inches (250 and 500 millimetres) a year. At higher elevations precipitation increases, and the mountaintops accumulate snow caps from which streams descend into the dry lands below. Irrigated cultivation is possible along such streams. Oasis dwellers, whose skills and goods complemented those of pastoralists, played important roles in steppe history.
These geographical conditions meant that nomads of the Eastern Steppe, living as they did in one of the most severe climates of the Earth, were under constant temptation to move in one of two directions: either southward and eastward toward Manchuria and northern China or westward, passing between the Altai and Tien Shan along the valley of the Ili River and the shores of Lake Balkhash, toward the more inviting grasslands of the Western Steppe. Migrations and conquests funnelling through this Dzungarian Gate, as it is often called, gave the peoples of all the steppe a common history from the onset of horse nomadism. Warfare techniques, life-styles, religious ideas, artistic styles, languages, etc., spread widely across the steppes, never erasing local variations completely but making a single whole of the entire region in a more intimate way than the fragmentary records left by civilized scribes reveal.
Manchuria on the east and Hungary on the west are separated from the two main portions of the Eurasian Steppe by the Greater Khingan and Carpathian mountains, respectively, and are also distinguished by relatively benign climates favourable to agriculture. Hence, before modern times, a mixed economy of pastoral and agricultural activities had greater scope in Hungary and Manchuria than in the main areas of the steppe.
The same marginal participation in steppe history prevailed in the interior of Asia Minor, where open grassland, like that of the main portion of the steppe, was contiguous to similar grasslands in northern Syria and on southward into Arabia. On these southern grasslands arose another historically important style of nomad pastoralism that extended across the Red Sea deep into Africa as well. Since bypassing the Caucasus was easy for horsemen, movement from the northern to the southern grasslands occurred repeatedly. As a result, Eurasia’s two great pastoral traditions—Semitic in the south, Indo-European, Turkic, and Mongol in the north—met and mingled in Asia Minor and on steppe lands south of the Caucasus and therefore shared common traditions. In all likelihood, horses were first domesticated in the north, for example, but came to play important roles in Arabia and even in Africa; while the spread of Islam across the northern steppe attested to the impact of southern nomad ideals upon northerners.
