wetland,  complex ecosystem characterized by flooding or saturation of the soil, which creates low-oxygen environments that favour a specialized assemblage of plants, animals, and microbes, which exhibit adaptations designed to tolerate periods of sluggishly moving or standing water. Wetlands are usually classified according to soil and plant life as bogs, marshes, swamps, and other similar environments.
Wetlands and the subdiscipline of wetland ecology are a relatively new area of study in the field of ecology, primarily arising out of the laws and other regulations enacted during the 1970s. The term wetland, however, was first used formally in 1953, in a report by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) that provided a framework for a later publication concerning waterfowl habitat in the United States. Since then, wetlands have been variously defined by ecologists and government officials. No single, formal definition exists; however, the definition provided by the Ramsar Convention, an intergovernmental treaty signed in Ramsar, Iran, in 1971 to guide national and international wetland-conservation measures, is among the most widely referenced:
This definition is also broad enough to encompass open water used by birds—the concept that originally inspired the protection of wetlands and associated aquatic sites.
Evidence of the first wetland plants extends back to the Ordovician Period (485.4 million to 443.8 million years ago), when the first terrestrial plants, which were dependent on wet substrates, began to colonize the land. Wetland plants and the animals that depended on them continued to evolve, and the first marshes and swamps appeared during the Devonian Period (419.2 million to 358.9 million years ago). Swamps later dominated vast regions, such as the land that would become southern North America, during the Carboniferous Period (358.9 million to 298.9 million years ago), and parts of the Mesozoic and Cenozoic eras (252.2 million years ago to the present) were also characterized by the presence of extensive wetland habitats.
Wetland communities depend on access to liquid water. Throughout geologic history, water availability has varied according to prevailing local and global climate patterns, latitude, elevation, season, and distance from both water bodies and groundwater. As a result of this variability, wetland communities in different parts of the world are the product of different conditions.
Glaciation during the Pleistocene Epoch (2.6 million to 11,700 years ago) prepared several types of landscapes for the development of present-day wetlands. In glaciated regions, the movement of ice sheets scoured the landscape, and the weight of the ice depressed Earth’s crust below. Both processes created low-relief areas, such as the flat, scoured landscape of Canada’s Hudson Bay lowlands. This region, which hosts extensive wetlands that are fed by groundwater and precipitation, continues to experience isostatic uplift (a rebound in the land that follows a glacier’s retreat) that brings more of Hudson Bay’s bottom to the surface. Some of this new land has become vegetated, and the wetlands have expanded. As the Pleistocene glaciers retreated across the Northern Hemisphere, melt carved wide, flat valleys that are occupied today by major rivers and their associated wetlands and floodplains (flat land area adjacent to a stream). Uneven scouring of the landscape in some regions resulted in low spots that filled with melted snow and rainwater during particularly wet years. This process created the prairie pothole region of the Midwest and south-central Canada.
In some of the coldest parts of the world, wetlands are sustained by an impermeable layer of ice that remains in the soil throughout the year. This perennially frozen ground, or permafrost, prevents both the percolation of surface water into the ground and plant contact with mineral groundwater. About 20–22 percent of Earth’s land surface is close enough to a polar region or high enough in altitude to experience permafrost. Much of northern North America and Eurasia, as well as the Mongolian and Tibetan Plateaus, are affected by permafrost, and these regions host vast expanses of bogs, fens, and peatlands. North America possesses some of the most extensive bog and fen regions on Earth. In western Siberia, larch-spruce-birch forests form part of an enormous inland delta, which is the largest contiguous area of peatlands in the world. Asian plateaus in general host some of the most unusual high-altitude wetland ecosystems.
Some wetland areas were created in other ways during periods of low sea level, when water was locked in glacial ice. Following a drop in sea level, the coastal plain of the southeastern United States was formed by the deposition of sediment that eroded from landscapes upstream. Rising sea levels that followed the retreat of the glaciers reduced streamflow velocity, and many streams backed up. These changes resulted in the formation of a variety of depressional, flat, and riverine wetlands. In addition, the warming period that directly followed the most recent glacial episode (which ended approximately 11,700 years ago) was marked by rivers flowing with melted ice water, buried chunks of ice that melted and formed kettle lakes, large lakes that formed in low areas inland, sea margins that moved inland, and coastal water tables that generally rose with the sea. Wetlands subsequently developed along lake and coastal margins, in delta areas, and across floodplains.
Wetlands in nonglaciated regions, such as the tropics, were developed during periods characterized by slightly different climates and thus may be changing under present-day conditions. The peat swamp forests of Indonesia are built on peat up to 15 metres (about 50 feet) thick. The accumulation of this material occurred during a wetter period several thousand years ago. Although new peat is still forming in places and the region remains humid, the tropical climate of the present day is dry enough to allow the degradation of peat in some areas.
