Willow Palisade, Chinese (Pinyin) Liutiaobian or (Wade-Giles romanization) Liu-t’iao Pien (“Willow Branch Barrier”),  ditch and embankment built across parts of southern Northeast China (historically called Manchuria) and planted with willows during the early Qing dynasty (1644–1911/12).
Possibly from as early as 1000 bce, the Chinese (Han) inhabiting Manchuria primarily occupied a triangular area in the south, centring on the alluvial basin of the lower Liao River and the uplands of the Liaodong Peninsula. Willow walls or palisades were built along the western side of this area as early as the Ming dynasty (1368–1644). The Willow Palisade of the early Qing was constructed in two stages. During the first stage, a section called the Laobian (“Old Border”) was built as a 500-mile- (800-km-) long northeastward extension of the Great Wall from the terminus in eastern Hebei near Shanhaiguan, on the southwestern shore of Liaodong Bay, to create a barrier around southern Manchuria. From Shanhaiguan the palisade ran northeastward to Weiyuanbao, northeast of Shenyang; southeastward to Xinbin, on the Suzi River east of Shenyang; and finally southwestward to Fengcheng, northwest of Dandong and north of Korea Bay (near the eastern terminus of the Great Wall). During the second stage, the Xinbian (“New Border”) was built as a northeastward 150-mile (240-km) extension of the Laobian from Weiyuanbao to Fate, near the Sungari (Songhua) River north of the city of Jilin.
The portion of the Laobian from Shanhaiguan to Weiyuanbao together with the Xinbian separated the Manchu people and the Chinese living in southern Manchuria from the Mongols inhabiting the steppes to the west. The southern part of this barrier was also intended to prevent further Chinese migration into the Manchu homeland centred at Shenyang (which they called Mukden). The sections of the Laobian running southeastward from Weiyuanbao to Xinbin and then southwestward to Fengcheng separated the Manchu heartland, occupied primarily by Manchu but also by some Chinese, from nomadic groups to the north and Koreans to the east. For a period of time beginning in 1688, the Manchu rulers of the Qing dynasty required the Chinese to obtain authorization before crossing the palisade, particularly the southwestern portion of the Laobian, and prohibited them from settling in the Manchu homeland.
Parts of the western section of the Laobian were built on top of the preexisting Great Wall structures from the Ming period, and much of the rest of its length there paralleled the older wall. The remainder of the Laobian and all of the Xinbian typically shared a common design. The embankment was about 40 inches (1 metre) high and wide, a ditch being formed by these excavations. Along the top of the embankment willow branches were planted at intervals of about 13 inches (33 cm) in three parallel rows. As the branches grew into trees and spread their own branches to adjacent trees, a thick barrier of willows emerged. The Willow Palisade was more of a symbolic barrier than a physical one, unlike the Great Wall, which for centuries at a time actually kept foreigners out of the country. Today the Willow Palisade is no longer visible, except for occasional low mounds where the embankment once stood.
