Al Sharpton, in full Alfred Charles Sharpton, Jr.,  (born October 3, 1954, Brooklyn, New York, U.S.), American civil rights activist, politician, and minister who founded the National Action Network (1991) and later hosted a political talk show on MSNBC.
Sharpton began preaching at age four and became an ordained Pentecostal minister at age 10. In 1971 he founded a national youth organization that promoted social and economic justice for African Americans. He graduated from Tilden High School in Brooklyn in 1972 and briefly attended Brooklyn College. A colourful and popular figure in the African American community, he embarked upon controversial protests that gained wide coverage in the national media and sometimes precipitated confrontations with police. In 1991 Sharpton formed the National Action Network, a civil rights organization that promoted progressive policies, including affirmative action and reparations for African Americans for the enslavement of their ancestors.
In the 1990s Sharpton entered the political arena, unsuccessfully seeking the Democratic Party nominations for mayor of New York City and U.S. senator from New York state. In 2004 he campaigned unsuccessfully for the Democratic nomination for the U.S. presidency.
Sharpton subsequently began hosting a radio talk show. He also appeared frequently as a television commentator, and in 2011 he became host of a news-and-opinion show on the cable channel MSNBC. During this time, he remained active in the civil rights movement, and he notably organized the One Thousand Ministers March for Justice, which was held in 2017 on the 54th anniversary of the historic March on Washington; the event protested racism and the administration of Pres. Donald Trump. In 2020 Sharpton delivered a eulogy for George Floyd, an African American man whose death while in police custody sparked massive demonstrations nationwide.
Sharpton’s autobiography, Go and Tell Pharaoh (written with Anthony Walton), was published in 1996. His other books included Rise Up: Confronting a Country at the Crossroads (2020).
