Ernest Jones, in full Alfred Ernest Jones,  (born Jan. 1, 1879, Rhosfelyn, Glamorgan, Wales—died  Feb. 11, 1958, London, Eng.), psychoanalyst and a key figure in the advancement of his profession in Britain. One of Sigmund Freud’s closest associates and staunchest supporters, he wrote an exhaustive three-volume biography of Freud.
After receiving his medical degree (1903), Jones became a member of the Royal College of Physicians, London (1904), and held several successive hospital and clinical posts in that city. His interest shifted gradually from clinical medicine to neurology, psychiatry, and, ultimately, psychoanalysis. With Carl Jung he organized the first psychoanalytic congress at Salzburg, Austria (1908), where he first met Freud. That year he went to Canada, where he began a four-year period at the Toronto General Hospital and ventured into teaching psychoanalysis and experimenting with psychoanalytic techniques. Jones’s principal contributions to psychoanalytic theory developed from his application of psychoanalytic principles to anthropology, folklore, art, and literature. His famous essay (1910) explaining the character of Hamlet in terms of the Oedipus complex later was revised and published in book form as Hamlet and Oedipus (1949).
Jones was active in establishing the American Psychoanalytic Association (1911). He wrote monographs on the study of suggestion, symbolism, character formation, and obsessional neuroses; those works were collected in Papers on Psycho-Analysis (1913). After his return to London in 1913 he practiced psychoanalysis. He founded an institute and clinic as well as the International Journal of Psychoanalysis, which he edited until 1939. Largely through his efforts, the British Medical Association recognized psychoanalysis in 1929. During the 1930s, Jones helped many displaced German analysts to resettle in England and other countries. After the Nazi takeover of Austria in 1938, Jones played a critical role in enabling the ailing Freud and his family to go to London. From 1944 on he spent much of his time preparing his authoritative biography, The Life and Works of Sigmund Freud (1953–57).
