Alzheimer disease,  degenerative brain disorder that develops in mid-to-late adulthood. It results in a progressive and irreversible decline in memory and a deterioration of various other cognitive abilities. The disease is characterized by the destruction of nerve cells and neural connections in the cerebral cortex of the brain and by a significant loss of brain mass.
The disease was first described in 1906 by German neuropathologist Alois Alzheimer. By the early 21st century it was recognized as the most common form of dementia among older persons. An estimated 47.5 million people worldwide were living with dementia in 2016; that figure was expected to increase to 75.6 million by 2030.
There are three recognized stages of Alzheimer disease: preclinical, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and Alzheimer dementia. For clinical diagnosis the two most relevant stages are MCI and dementia. Recognition of the preclinical stage acknowledges that the Alzheimer disease process begins before symptoms are apparent and anticipates advances in diagnostic testing that may eventually enable diagnosis at the preclinical stage.
MCI often is subdivided into different types, namely amnestic and nonamnestic. One of the first symptom’s marking the transition from normal aging to Alzheimer disease is forgetfulness. This transitional stage represents amnestic MCI and is characterized by noticeable dysfunction in memory with retention of normal cognitive ability in judgment, reasoning, and perception. In nonamnestic MCI, impairments in cognitive functions related to attention, perception, and language predominate over deficits in memory. However, as MCI progresses to Alzheimer disease, memory loss becomes more severe, and language, perceptual, and motor skills deteriorate. Mood becomes unstable, and the individual tends to become irritable and more sensitive to stress and may become intermittently angry, anxious, or depressed. Those changes mark the transition to Alzheimer dementia, which in its advanced stages is characterized by unresponsiveness and loss of mobility and control of body functions; death ensues after a disease course lasting from 2 to 20 years.
About 10 percent of those who develop the disease are younger than 60 years of age. These cases, referred to as early-onset familial Alzheimer disease, appear to result from an inherited genetic mutation. The majority of cases of Alzheimer disease, however, develop after age 60 (late-onset) and usually occur sporadically—i.e., in individuals with no family history of the disease—although a genetic factor has been identified that is thought to predispose some of these individuals to the disorder. Rosacea, a chronic inflammatory condition of the skin, is also associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer disease, particularly among individuals age 60 or older.
The presence of neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in the brain are used to diagnose Alzheimer disease in autopsy. Neuritic plaques—also called senile, dendritic, or amyloid plaques—consist of deteriorating neuronal material surrounding deposits of a sticky protein called amyloid beta (or beta-amyloid). This protein is derived from a larger molecule called amyloid precursor protein, which is a normal component of nerve cells. Neurofibrillary tangles are twisted protein fibres located within nerve cells. These fibres consist of a protein, called tau, that normally occurs in neurons. When incorrectly processed, tau molecules clump together and form tangles.
Both neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, which also may be found in smaller amounts in the brains of healthy elderly persons, are thought to interfere in some way with normal cellular functioning. However, it is not known whether the plaques and tangles are a cause or a consequence of the disease. Research in animals suggests that amyloid-beta plaques form naturally in the brain in response to infection, serving to entrap microorganisms. The idea that amyloid beta serves as a natural antibiotic implies that Alzheimer disease may be in some way linked to brain infection, plaque formation being either excessive in older individuals or abnormal in some other way in persons who eventually develop Alzheimer disease.
Other features have been noted in the brains of many persons with Alzheimer disease. One of these features is a deficiency of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine; neurons containing acetylcholine play an important role in memory.
Abnormal insulin signaling in the brain has been associated with Alzheimer disease. Under normal conditions, insulin binds to insulin receptors, which are expressed in great numbers on the membranes of neurons, to facilitate neuronal uptake of glucose, which the brain depends upon to carry out its many functions. However, neurons in the brains of patients with Alzheimer disease have very few, if any, insulin receptors and therefore are resistant to the actions of insulin. As a result of the inability of insulin to bind to the neurons, it accumulates in the blood serum, leading to a condition known as hyperinsulinemia (abnormally high serum levels of insulin). Hyperinsulinemia in the brain is suspected to stimulate inflammation that in turn stimulates the formation of neuritic plaques. Abnormal insulin signaling in the brain has also been associated with nerve cell dysfunction and death, decreased levels of acetylcholine, and decreased levels of transthyretin, a protein that normally binds to and transports amyloid-beta proteins out of the brain.
Underlying genetic defects have been identified for both late- and early-onset cases of Alzheimer disease. The identification and characterization of these defects has provided important insight into the pathology of Alzheimer disease and has informed the development of new approaches to diagnosis and treatment.
A defect in a gene known as APP, which codes for amyloid precursor protein, may increase the production or deposition of amyloid beta, which forms the core of neuritic plaques. This gene, however, is thought to be responsible for only a very small percentage of all early-onset cases of the disease.
A defect in the gene that directs production of apolipoprotein E (ApoE), which is involved in cholesterol transport, may be a factor in the majority of late-onset Alzheimer cases. There are three forms of this gene—APOE2, APOE3, and APOE4—two of which, APOE3 and APOE4, are associated with an increased risk of disease and influence the age of onset of disease.
Studies employing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) have shown that individuals between ages 20 and 35 who carry the APOE4 variant frequently have increased activity in the hippocampus of the brain. This region plays a central role in the formation and recall of memories and is involved in the production of emotions. Scientists suspect that in some APOE4 carriers hyperactivity of the hippocampus early in life leads to this region’s later dysfunction, which contributes to the development of Alzheimer disease. Brain imaging using fMRI in young APOE4 carriers may be useful for identifying those carriers at greatest risk of disease.
Genetic screening to determine the status of a gene known as TOMM40 (translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane 40 homolog [yeast]) can be used to provide additional information about the risk of Alzheimer disease and to predict the age of onset. There are several forms of this gene, which differ in their length due to variations that influence the number of repeats of a specific base-pair segment within the gene sequence. In persons who have inherited variants of TOMM40, the occurrence of a long form of the gene, in conjunction with either APOE3 or APOE4, correlates with onset of the disease before age 80. In contrast, short forms of TOMM40 were found to correlate with onset of the disease after age 80.
Several other genes have been implicated in Alzheimer disease. Examples include CD33, which encodes a cell surface protein of the same name; PICALM, which encodes a protein involved in endocytosis (the cellular uptake of substances); and CD2AP, which encodes a protein that interacts with the cell membrane and may have a role in endocytosis.
