Amphibian chytridiomycosis,  a disease affecting amphibians, especially frogs, caused by the fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. B. dendrobatidis, known among herpetologists as the amphibian chytrid or simply Bd, has been implicated in the extinction or population decline of many amphibians around the world. The fungus was formally described in 1999 after it was isolated from infected captive poison frogs (such as the South American poison-arrow frog, Dendrobates auratus). It was the first chytridiomycete fungus known to infect vertebrates—its closest relatives being saprophytic fungi (that is, fungi that live off of dead matter) and other fungi that infect algae, plants, and invertebrates. At present, the disease is pandemic, and the fungus is regarded as an exotic or invasive species in most areas.
Early investigations into the disease suggested that Bd originated in populations of platanna (Xenopus laevis), an African clawed-frog species widely used in biological research. Evidence remained inconclusive until 2018, when a genomic study indicated that Bd had originated in a particularly diverse hot spot in the Korean peninsula, which contained several strains of the disease. Bd likely emerged in amphibian populations there sometime between 1898 and 1962 before spreading to other parts of the world through global food and pet trading networks.
Although humans likely cause the long-distance movement of Bd, once it has been introduced to an area, it spreads rapidly between amphibians by means of free-swimming infectious reproductive cells called zoospores. Once a zoospore has encountered a potential host, it encysts upon the surface of the skin and penetrates one of the host’s epidermal cells. Then the zoospore grows into a mature thallus that ultimately releases 40–100 zoospores over its 4–5-day life cycle. In species where Bd is highly pathogenic, as in those belonging to the genus Atelopus, the infection may cover most of the epidermis. As the skin degrades, gas exchange with the environment and electrolyte balance are disrupted. The infected animals eventually succumb to cardiac arrest due to significant reductions in sodium and potassium concentrations in their blood plasma.
Bd has become a global threat to amphibian biodiversity. According to published reports, it has infected members of more than 500 species. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has declared only 35 amphibian species as formally extinct since 1500 ce; however, some 130 additional species are presumed to have gone extinct in the wild since 1980. Approximately 90 of these modern extinctions have been attributed to Bd. Since most documented population declines and extinctions have occurred in either temperate or tropical montane regions, Bd is thought to survive and grow best under cool, moist conditions. In addition, it has appeared in habitats ranging from rainforest to desert, and it is present on all continents except Antarctica.
At local scales, Bd can have devastating effects on amphibian communities. For example, in El Cope, Panama—where Bd has been conclusively shown to infect local amphibian species—the disease occurred in 52 of the 70 described amphibian species in the area and caused a 90 percent reduction in overall amphibian density. Many experts suspect that Bd is at the root of similar damage at many other sites (such as Monteverde, Costa Rica, and the rainforests of Queensland, Australia), though it has not been proved to be the cause.
Evidence of the wider ecological implications of falling amphibian populations caused by Bd infection came to light in 2020. Frogs and other amphibians in the tropics are important food sources for snakes. A 2020 study that examined herpetological biodiversity in Panama noted that the rapid decline of frog populations there triggered a drop in snake biodiversity overall and reduced health among many surviving snake species (see also trophic cascade).
