arsenic poisoning,  harmful effects of various arsenic compounds on body tissues and functions. Arsenicals are used in numerous products, including insect, rodent, and weed killers, some chemotherapeutic agents, and certain paints, wallpaper, and ceramics.
Arsenic poisoning in humans most often results from the ingestion or inhalation of insecticides containing arsenious oxide, copper acetoarsenite, or calcium or lead arsenate. Exposure may be accidental, especially among children, or may be an occupational hazard, especially among agricultural workers handling insecticidal sprays and dusts. The sprayed fruits and vegetables, if not washed, may also bear enough arsenic to be potentially toxic to the consumer. Among industrial workers, arsine may be a source of accidental poisoning. Poisoning may also result from prolonged treatment with such medications as Fowler’s solution (potassium arsenate) and arsphenamine.
Arsenic is believed to exert its toxicity by combining with certain enzymes (the organic catalysts of the cell), thereby interfering with cellular metabolism.
Individual susceptibility to arsenic poisoning varies widely; some persons have been known to develop a tolerance to doses that would kill others. Poisoning may result from a single large dose (acute poisoning) or from repeated small doses (chronic poisoning). Symptoms of acute poisoning from swallowing arsenic include nausea, vomiting, burning of the mouth and throat, and severe abdominal pains. Circulatory collapse may occur and be followed by death within a few hours. In persons exposed to arsine, the outstanding effects are destruction of red blood cells and damage to the kidneys. With chronic exposure, the more common effects include gradual loss of strength; diarrhea or constipation; pigmentation and scaling of the skin, which may undergo malignant changes; nervous manifestations marked by paralysis and confusion; degeneration of fatty tissue; anemia; and the development of characteristic streaks across the fingernails. The criminal use of the colourless, tasteless compound arsenious oxide as a poison was common until chemical methods of detection were developed. Definitive diagnosis of arsenic poisoning is based on the finding of arsenic in the urine and in hair or nails.
The treatment of acute arsenic poisoning involves washing out the stomach and the prompt administration of dimercaprol (BAL).
