Ascariasis,  infection of humans and other mammals caused by intestinal roundworms of the genus Ascaris. In humans, ascariasis typically is caused by A. lumbricoides; the large roundworm of pigs, A. suum, can also cause illness in humans. Although persons infected with Ascaris worms often are asymptomatic, heavy infestation can cause severe complications, particularly in children, who may experience malnutrition, growth stunting, or intestinal obstruction. Ascariasis exists worldwide, affecting an estimated 807 million to 1.2 billion persons. It is most common in children, especially those living in rural and impoverished communities.
In humans, ascariasis involving A. lumbricoides develops following the ingestion of fertilized eggs that have contaminated foods or soil. In the small intestine the larvae are liberated and migrate through the intestinal wall, reaching the liver and then the lungs, where they may produce a host sensitization that results in lung inflammation and fluid retention. About 10 to 14 days later, the larvae pass through the alveolar walls in the airways of the lungs, migrate up the bronchi, and are swallowed. Returned to the small intestine, the larvae mature into egg-producing worms, which grow to some 15 to 35 cm (6 to 14 inches) in length. The adult worms can survive in the small intestine for 10 to 24 months. Males and females mate, resulting in the production of copious numbers of eggs—a single adult female can lay more than 200,000 eggs in one day. The eggs are excreted in human feces, beginning the infective cycle anew. Female worms can lay both fertilized and unfertilized eggs; only the former, once shed in human feces, are capable causing infection in humans.
For some individuals, the first sign of ascariasis is the presence of a live worm in the feces. Cough, fever, and abdominal discomfort can also occur. Abdominal pain may be a sign of severe infection.
The sanitary disposal of human excreta is the most-important preventive measure. Other means of prevention include hand-washing prior to handling food and thorough washing and cooking of raw vegetables. Treatment is by the use of anthelmintic drugs, including mebendazole and pyrantel pamoate.
