athlete’s foot, also called tinea pedis,  fungal infection of the feet, a form of ringworm. The skin areas most commonly affected are the plantar surface (sole) of the foot and the web spaces between the toes. It is estimated that at least 70 percent of all people will have a fungal foot infection at some point in their lives. Athletes may be at a slightly greater risk than other populations, because a major risk factor for infection is exposure of the feet to warm, moist communal environments, such as infected locker rooms and public showers. Other factors that predispose certain populations to infection are medical conditions such as hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating) and disorders of the immune system. Athlete’s foot is seen in males more commonly than in females and is uncommon prior to puberty.
Athlete’s foot is an infection caused by a type of fungus known as a dermatophyte. Able to infect only the top layer of dead keratin, dermatophytes affect the skin, hair shafts, and nails. Dermatophytes are classified into three genera: Trichophyton, Microsporum, and Epidermophyton. T. rubrum is the dermatophyte most commonly associated with athlete’s foot. Although other dermatophytes can also cause the condition, they are less frequently isolated from humans. Fungal spores from T. rubrum can live in human scales for 12 months and are therefore easily transmitted from person to person in locker rooms and public showers.
Fungal infections are frequently asymptomatic; however, some rashes are pruritic (itchy) and, if also infected with bacteria, can become painful. Athlete’s foot can be categorized into four main types: interdigital (toe webs), moccasin, vesicular (blisters), and ulcerative.
Interdigital infections may be dry or macerated (soft from being wet). The dry type of infection is typically scaly, erythematous (red), and fissured (cracked). In the macerated type, the skin within the toe web is white, moist, peeling, and sometimes fissured. The web between the fourth and fifth toes (the two outermost toes) is the most common site of interdigital infection, although any of the web spaces can be involved.
In moccasin-type infections, the area involved is limited to the soles and lateral portions of the feet. The leading edge of infection is a well-defined line of erythema (redness). It is dry, with a fine scale and hyperkeratosis (thickening of the epidermis). Moccasin-type infections are commonly bilateral (right and left sides).
In vesicular infections, the raised, erythematous leading edge of the rash contains vesicles (small fluid-filled blisters) or bullae (large fluid-filled blisters), which are a sign of acute inflammation. The presence of pus indicates secondary bacterial infection.
In ulcerative-type infections, the interdigital infection spreads to the dorsum (top) or plantar surface of the foot. They have characteristics similar to those of macerated infections and are usually secondarily infected with bacteria.
A definitive diagnosis of athlete’s foot is made by obtaining a skin scraping from the leading edge of inflammation. The skin typically is collected by using a scalpel blade to scrape skin scales onto a glass microscope slide. The skin scraping is then evaluated for the presence of hyphae (fungus strands) under microscopy, using potassium hydroxide (KOH) wet-mount preparation.
Athlete’s foot can usually be treated with topical antifungal medications, such as terbinafine (Lamisil) or miconazole (Micatin), which can be purchased over the counter. Prescription-strength topicals, such as clotrimazole, may also be used. Oral prescription medications such as fluconazole may be required for severe or resilient infections. If complicated with bacterial infection, antibiotics may also be necessary.
Warm, moist environments are ideal conditions for athlete’s foot. Tight, nonbreathable, or restrictive footwear causes excessive friction and sweating, which encourage fungal growth. Frequent changing of socks, the application of powder to absorb moisture, and the wearing of sandals in locker rooms and public showers are key for preventing infection. Socks are not effective locker-room wear for prevention.
