Bartter syndrome, also called potassium wasting syndrome,  any of several rare disorders affecting the kidneys and characterized primarily by the excessive excretion of potassium in the urine.
Bartter syndrome is named after American endocrinologist Frederic Bartter, who described the primary characteristics of the disorder in the early 1960s. Bartter examined two patients, both of whom had potassium deficiency (hypokalemia); abnormal increases in the number of cells (hyperplasia) of the juxtaglomerular apparatus of the kidneys; and high serum concentrations of a kidney enzyme known as renin. Bartter observed that these abnormalities were associated with resultant increases in angiotensin, a peptide produced when renin cleaves a substance in the blood plasma called angiotensinogen, as well as increases in the production of aldosterone, a steroid hormone secreted by the adrenal gland. Increased production of aldosterone was subsequently associated with excessive potassium excretion. Because increased production of aldosterone is a central finding of Bartter syndrome, the disorder is recognized as a form of secondary hyperaldosteronism.
The onset of Bartter syndrome is usually in infancy or in childhood and may result in short stature and intellectual disability. Several genetic defects, primarily affecting potassium and chloride transport in the renal tubules, have been associated with the syndrome. The discovery of these mutations, occurring in different genes, has led to the stratification of Bartter syndrome into three main categories: neonatal Bartter syndrome, appearing in utero between 24 and 30 weeks of gestation; classic Bartter syndrome, appearing in infancy or early childhood; and Gitelman syndrome, appearing in late childhood or in adulthood.
There are two different types of neonatal Bartter syndrome, and these are clinically indistinguishable, even though they arise from mutations in different genes. Type 1 is caused by mutation of the gene designated SLC12A1 (solute carrier family 12, member 1), whereas type 2 is caused by mutation of the gene KCNJ1 (potassium inwardly rectifying channel, subfamily J, member 1). These genes play fundamental roles in maintaining physiological homeostasis of sodium and potassium concentrations.
Classic Bartter syndrome, or type 3, is caused by mutation in the gene known as CLCNKB (chloride channel Kb), which functions in the reabsorption of chloride and hence sodium in the kidney tubules. Mutations underlying classic Bartter syndrome result in the loss of function of the encoded protein, thereby leading to excessive excretion of sodium in the urine. This form of the syndrome appears to be hereditary. There also exists infantile Bartter syndrome with sensorineural deafness, or type 4, which arises from a combination of variations in CLCNKB and CLCNKA (chloride channel Ka) or from variation of the gene called BSND (Bartter syndrome, infantile, with sensorineural deafness).
Gitelman syndrome is caused by mutations in SLC12A3 (solute carrier family 12, member 3), which encodes a protein that specializes in the transport of sodium and chloride into the kidney tubules, thereby mediating the reabsorption of these electrolytes and maintaining electrolyte homeostasis.
Bartter syndrome is diagnosed primarily on findings of increased potassium levels in the urine and increased concentrations of aldosterone and renin in the blood serum. Other findings may include metabolic alkalosis, which is a loss of acid from the body that arises from potassium and chloride depletion, and increased production and urinary excretion of prostaglandins, hormonelike substances that are derived from fatty acids. Diagnosis of Gitelman syndrome is based on findings similar to Bartter syndrome, as well as on hypomagnesemia, or abnormally low serum concentrations of magnesium, and hypocalciuria, or decreased levels of calcium in the urine.
Hypokalemia may be treated with potassium supplements, and additional supplements may be used to maintain sodium and other electrolyte concentrations. Other symptoms of Bartter syndrome may be reversed by drugs that inhibit the formation of prostaglandins, such as the anti-inflammatory agent indomethacin. Despite treatment, some patients may develop kidney failure.
