bipolar disorder, formerly called manic depression or manic-depressive illness,  mental disorder characterized by recurrent depression or mania with abrupt or gradual onsets and recoveries. There are several types of bipolar disorder, in which the states of mania and depression may alternate cyclically, one mood state may predominate over the other, or they may be mixed or combined with each other. Examples of types of the disorder, which encompass the so-called bipolar spectrum, include bipolar I, bipolar II, mixed bipolar, and cyclothymia.
A bipolar person in the depressive phase may be sad, despondent, listless, lacking in energy, and unable to show interest in his or her surroundings or to enjoy himself or herself and may have a poor appetite and disturbed sleep. The depressive state can be agitated—in which case sustained tension, overactivity, despair, and apprehensive delusions predominate—or it can be retarded—in which case the person’s activity is slowed and reduced, the person is sad and dejected, and he or she suffers from self-depreciatory and self-condemnatory tendencies.
Mania is a mood disturbance that is characterized by abnormally intense excitement, elation, expansiveness, boisterousness, talkativeness, distractibility, and irritability. The manic person talks loudly, rapidly, and continuously and progresses rapidly from one topic to another; is extremely enthusiastic, optimistic, and confident; is highly sociable and gregarious; gesticulates and moves about almost continuously; is easily irritated and easily distracted; is prone to grandiose notions; and shows an inflated sense of self-esteem. The most extreme manifestations of these two mood disturbances are, in the manic phase, violence against others and, in the depressive, suicide.
A bipolar disorder may also feature such psychotic symptoms as delusions and hallucinations. Depression is the more common symptom, and many patients never develop a genuine manic phase, although they may experience a brief period of overoptimism and mild euphoria while recovering from a depression.
Bipolar disorders of varying severity affect about 1 percent of the general population and account for 10 to 15 percent of readmissions to mental institutions. Statistical studies have suggested a hereditary predisposition to bipolar disorder, and that predisposition has now been linked to a defect on a dominant gene located on chromosome 11. In addition, bipolar disorder has been associated with polygenic factors, meaning that multiple, possibly thousands, of small-effect genetic variants can interact to give rise to the disease. Schizophrenia shares a similar polygenic component, suggesting that the two disorders may have a common origin.
In a physiological sense, it is believed that bipolar disorder is associated with the faulty regulation of one or more naturally occurring amines at sites in the brain where the transmission of nerve impulses takes place. Abnormal regulation that produces a deficiency of the amines appears to be associated with depression, and an excess of amines is associated with mania. The most likely candidates for the suspect amines are norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine).
Bipolar disorder requires long-term therapy. It is managed most effectively with a combination of medication, psychotherapy, and social support. Patients who are hospitalized during a severe bout of depression or mania often are given medications in an attempt to balance mood. Medications that may be used include lithium carbonate, antidepressants, anticonvulsants, and anxiolytics (antianxiety drugs). Once the patient’s mood has been stabilized, a long-term treatment strategy can be devised. Certain medications, such as lithium or antidepressants, may be used on a long-term basis and can help alleviate or even eliminate symptoms. Long-term pharmacological therapy often is supported with psychotherapy or group therapy. Shock therapy is reserved for persons whose mania or depression remains severe despite other forms of treatment and for women who are pregnant and therefore unable to take medications.
Bipolar disorder was described in antiquity by the 2nd-century Greek physician Aretaeus of Cappadocia and definitively in modern times by the German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin.
