botulism,  poisoning by a toxin, called botulinum toxin, produced by Clostridium botulinum bacteria. This poisoning results most frequently from the eating of improperly sterilized home-canned foods containing the toxin. Botulism also may result from wound infection. C. botulinum bacteria—which cannot survive in the presence of oxygen—normally live in the soil, where they form heat-resistant spores that may contaminate fresh food to be canned. The spores survive if the food is not cooked at 120 °C (248 °F) for a sufficient length of time; this temperature can be achieved with certainty only in commercial canning plants or in a pressure cooker (boiling is not reliable). Then, inside the sealed can, the spores germinate and release the bacteria, and, as the bacteria multiply, they secrete botulinum toxin, a protein that is one of the most potent poisons known. Unlike the clostridial spores, the toxin is readily destroyed by heat; it remains potent only if the contaminated food is not heated to at least 70 °C (158 °F) for two minutes before it is eaten.
Once ingested and absorbed, C. botulinum toxin damages the autonomic nervous system by blocking the release of acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter that allows muscle contraction. When the toxin is swallowed in food, it is absorbed rapidly and carried in the bloodstream to nerve endings in muscles. The toxin attacks the fine nerve fibrils and stops the impulse from passing along these fibres. No acetylcholine is released and the muscle cannot contract; it is paralyzed.
The first symptoms of botulism, nausea and vomiting, usually appear six hours or less after the contaminated food is eaten, depending upon the amount of toxin ingested. The poisoned person becomes tired and may complain of headache and dizziness. The muscles of the eyelid may be paralyzed, a sign that may appear within hours of eating the food. The vision is often blurred, and the affected person may see double. Next, the paralysis affects the muscles used for speech. The mucous membranes of the throat may become dry; the affected person may feel a constriction in the throat, soon associated with difficulty in swallowing and speaking; and a general muscle weakness soon occurs. The respiratory muscles become involved; about half the deaths from botulism result from paralysis of the respiratory muscles. The person remains conscious through most of the illness, until suffocation occurs. Death may come within a day, although people less severely poisoned may live for a week. Few who reach the stage of severe paralysis survive, although a person who survives the paralysis will recover completely. Infant botulism, which may result from feeding infants honey contaminated with the clostridial spores, exhibits symptoms such as constipation, poor feeding, and a weak cry; children under the age of one year should not be given honey because of this risk.
With early diagnosis, the chance of a person’s surviving is greatly enhanced by the prompt administration of botulism antitoxins, which contain equine antibodies that neutralize the toxin in the body. C. botulinum antitoxin is given in large doses intravenously, but it is doubtful that antitoxin can do anything to dislodge the toxin once it has reached the nerve fibrils. A chemical, guanidine hydrochloride, counteracts the action of C. botulinum toxin on nerve endings and has been used successfully in treatment, but it is itself a toxic substance that should be given only with great care. Paralyzed muscle can recover if the patient can be kept alive, and perhaps the best hope of survival in otherwise desperate cases lies in tube feeding, a tracheotomy (making an opening in the windpipe), and use of an artificial respirator.
