Bulimia nervosa, or bulimia,  eating disorder characterized by binge eating followed by inappropriate attempts to compensate for the binge, such as self-induced vomiting or the excessive use of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas. In other cases, the binge eating is followed by excessive exercise or fasting. The episodes of binge eating and purging typically occur an average of twice a week or more over a period of at least three months, and repetition of the cycle can lead to serious medical complications such as dental decay or dehydration.
Bulimia nervosa is one of two main classifications of eating disorders. The other is anorexia nervosa, which is characterized by extreme dieting, a refusal to maintain normal body weight, and subsequent emaciation; however, anorexia may also involve episodes of binge eating and purging. Individuals with bulimia nervosa, in contrast to anorexia nervosa, generally maintain a body weight near normal for their age, height, and sex. Both illnesses are accompanied by characteristic unhealthy weight-control methods and an intense fear of weight gain. Approximately 85–90 percent of the people diagnosed with bulimia nervosa are women. An estimated 1–3 percent of women in the United States suffer from bulimia nervosa at some time in their life. When the diagnostic criteria for bulimia nervosa are met, a qualified health care professional also will specify one of two types of the illness: purging type (episodes of binge eating are followed by self-induced vomiting or misuse of laxatives or enemas) or nonpurging type (episodes of binge eating are followed by fasting or excessive exercise).
Cases of binge eating followed by purging can be found in historical records, but bulimia nervosa was not officially recognized as a psychiatric disorder until 1980. The recognition of the diagnosis was due in large part to a dramatic increase in cases in the 1970s and ’80s. Experts often attribute the increase to the intense focus in the popular media on thinness as an ideal for young women and to a greater recognition of the condition by health care professionals. The “thin ideal” referred to by experts is most prevalent in affluent industrialized countries, and it is in these countries that bulimia is most common.
Bulimia nervosa usually begins in adolescence or early adulthood. Some of the factors that appear to contribute to the development of the disorder are genetic and biological factors, chronic dieting, a lack of awareness of internal feelings (including hunger and emotions), a self-image that is unduly influenced by weight and body shape, a family history of eating disturbance or body image complaints, and a tendency toward self-judgment based on external standards rather than internal evaluations. Other emotional disorders, including depression, substance abuse disorders, and certain personality disorders, often coexist with bulimia nervosa, but it is not clear whether these disorders are precursors to the illness.
Cognitive behaviour therapy is the most widely researched and apparently the most effective treatment for bulimia nervosa. Treatment with cognitive behaviour therapy involves nutritional education, normalization of eating patterns, and addressing dysfunctional thought processes such as perfectionist thinking, especially concerning appearance or diet. Also useful in treating bulimia nervosa are antidepressant medications and interpersonal psychotherapy, a psychological technique that focuses on changing the way in which the patient relates to other people. These two alternatives, however, are generally considered to be secondary treatments, because the benefits of antidepressant medications often last only as long as the medication continues to be taken, and interpersonal therapy produces beneficial results more slowly than cognitive behaviour therapy.
