carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS),  condition of numbness, tingling, or pain in the wrist caused by repetitive flexing or stressing of the fingers or wrist over a long period of time. Possibly the most common repetitive stress injury in the workplace, CTS is frequently associated with the modern office, where the computer has transformed the nature of the work people do with their hands and arms.
CTS is caused by pressure on the median nerve, a soft structure filled with fibres that carry nerve impulses back and forth between the hand and the spinal cord via the wrist joint. The wrist joint is formed by two rows of bones called the carpal bones (from Greek karpos, “wrist”). The carpal tunnel is a small passage almost completely surrounded by the carpal bones. On the inner, or palm, side of the wrist, the tunnel is enclosed by a tight band of fibrous tissue called the transverse carpal ligament. Through the tunnel run the median nerve, several blood vessels, and nine finger flexor tendons. The tendons are rodlike structures that transmit forces from muscles in the forearm to the fingers and enable the fingers to close, as when making a fist.
During movements of the fingers and wrist, the finger flexor tendons rub against the walls of the carpal tunnel and the median nerve itself. Although the tendons are lubricated by a special tendon lining and by synovial fluid, certain repetitive movements, especially in combination with forceful gripping, may cause swelling of the tendons or the sheaths surrounding them. Because there is little room for expansion within the tight confinement of the carpal tunnel, the result of swelling is that the softest tissues—the median nerve and blood vessels—become compressed or pinched. This pressure causes the numbness, tingling, and pain in the wrist and hand that are the primary symptoms of CTS. If pressure on the median nerve increases, affected individuals may experience a temporary loss of control of some of the hand muscles and difficulties in picking up or holding objects. They may also be awakened at night by pain in the hand.
CTS can occur in individuals who do repeated, forceful gripping and grasping hand motions—as in the use of clippers, pliers, or power drills—as a result of stress over the base of the palm, where the median nerve is protected only by the 3-mm- (0.1-inch-) thick transverse carpal ligament. Thus, individuals such as carpenters, painters, mechanics, knitters, and musicians tend to be at increased risk of CTS. Leaning the wrists on a desk or table while operating a computer can also place excessive pressure on the median nerve and may result in inflammation of the tendons and tissues surrounding the nerve. However, not all cases of CTS are work-related. Illnesses that cause tissue inflammation—for example, arthritis, gout, hypothyroidism, or diabetes mellitus—may affect the median nerve within the carpal tunnel. Swelling and bleeding associated with a fracture of the wrist may also put undue pressure on the nerve.
For cases of CTS caused by non-work-related problems, treatment is aimed at the underlying condition. If a case is caused by repetitive stress, then avoiding or reducing the activity responsible for the syndrome will often rapidly alleviate the symptoms. Frequent resting of the hand and recourse to stretching exercises for the hands, elbows, shoulders, and neck muscles will decrease symptoms over a period of time. The wearing of a brace or splint will support the wrist, relieve overworked wrist structures, and help to prevent reinjury of healing tissues. The taking of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications such as aspirin or ibuprofen will frequently reduce swelling of the tendon sheaths. More-serious cases can be relieved immediately by the injection of prescription steroidal drugs. Surgery is also sometimes necessary to correct the condition. Whether done as a traditional open incision or as less-invasive endoscopy, the surgery aims to relieve pressure within the carpal tunnel by cutting the transverse carpal ligament. Surgery can be performed on an outpatient basis, but healing and recovery can take weeks or months.
