Cerebral palsy,  a group of neurological disorders characterized by paralysis resulting from abnormal development of or damage to the brain either before birth or during the first years of life.
There are four types of cerebral palsy: spastic, athetoid, ataxic, and mixed. In the spastic type, there is a severe paralysis of voluntary movements, with spastic contractions of the extremities either on one side of the body (hemiplegia) or on both sides (diplegia). In spastic diplegia, spastic contractions and paralysis are usually more prominent in the lower extremities than in the arms and hands (Little diplegia), or only the legs may be affected (paraplegia). The cerebral damage causing spastic cerebral palsy primarily affects the neurons and connections of the cerebral cortex, either of one cerebral hemisphere (contralateral to paralysis), as in infantile hemiplegia, or of both hemispheres, as in diplegia.
In the athetoid type of cerebral palsy, paralysis of voluntary movements may not occur, and spastic contractions may be slight or absent. Instead, there are slow, involuntary spasms of the face, neck, and extremities, either on one side (hemiathetosis) or, more frequently, on both sides (double athetosis), with resulting involuntary movements in the whole body or its parts, facial grimacing, and inarticulate speech (dysarthria)—all of which increase under stress or excitement. Damage to the brain particularly affects the basal ganglia underlying the cerebral cortex.
Ataxic cerebral palsy is a rare form of the condition that is characterized by poor coordination, muscle weakness, an unsteady gait, and difficulty performing rapid or fine movements. If symptoms of two or more types are present, most often spastic and athetoid, an individual is diagnosed with mixed cerebral palsy.
Cerebral palsy does not necessarily include intellectual disability; many children affected with cerebral palsy are mentally competent. However, any cerebral disorder in early life may result in impairment, sometimes severe, of intellectual and emotional development. Epileptic attacks in the form of convulsive seizures, especially in the parts of the body affected by paralysis, occur in many children with cerebral palsy. In the spastic type of cerebral palsy, intellectual disability and epileptic attacks are particularly frequent. In the athetoid type, the incidence of severe intellectual disability is much lower, and occurrence of convulsive seizures is rare. Children affected with athetoid cerebral palsy may be perceptive and intelligent; however, because of the involuntary movements and dysarthria, they are often unable to communicate by intelligible words or signs.
The causes of cerebral palsy are multiple but basically involve a malfunctioning of the complex neuronal circuits of the basal ganglia and the cerebral cortex. Heredity plays only a small role. It may manifest itself in malformations of neurons, interstitial tissues, or blood vessels of the brain that may produce tumours, or it may express itself in an abnormal chemistry of the brain. More common causes of the condition are fetal diseases and embryonic malformations of the brain. Incompatibility of blood types of the mother and fetus, leading to severe jaundice at birth, may cause brain damage and cerebral palsy. Respiratory problems of the fetus during birth may indicate earlier brain damage. Pediatric infections, severe head injuries, and poisoning are other less common causes of cerebral palsy.
There is no cure for cerebral palsy; treatment includes medications that relax the muscles and prevent seizures. The basic program of treatment aims at the psychological management, education, and training of the child to develop sensory, motor, and intellectual assets, in order to compensate for the physical liabilities of the disorder.
