chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),  progressive respiratory disease characterized by the combination of signs and symptoms of emphysema and bronchitis. It is a common disease, affecting tens of millions of people and causing significant numbers of deaths globally. Sources of noxious particles that can cause COPD include tobacco smoke, air pollution, and the burning of certain fuels in poorly ventilated areas. In rare cases COPD is caused by a genetic defect that results in deficiency of an enzyme known as α1-antitrypsin, which is necessary for the physiological repair of lung tissue. Although primarily a lung disease, it is increasingly recognized that COPD has secondary associations, including muscle weakness and osteoporosis. Identifying and treating these secondary problems via pulmonary rehabilitation (supervised exercise) and other methods may improve the functional status of the lungs.
COPD is distinguished pathologically by the destruction of lung tissue, which is replaced by holes characteristic of emphysema, and by a tendency for excessive mucus production in the airway, which gives rise to symptoms of bronchitis. These pathological characteristics are realized physiologically as difficulty in exhaling (called flow limitation), which causes increased lung volume and manifests as breathlessness. Other early symptoms of the condition include a “smokers cough” and daily sputum production. Coughing up blood is not a feature of COPD and when present raises concern about a second, tobacco-related condition, particularly lung cancer. Patients with COPD are vulnerable to episodic worsening of their condition (called exacerbation). Exacerbations are triggered by infection, either bacterial or viral. Therefore, antibiotics, which work against bacteria, are not always required. Frequent exacerbations, particularly if severe enough to warrant hospital admission, indicate a poor prognosis.
The only therapeutic intervention shown to alter the course of COPD is removal of the noxious trigger, which can be accomplished in most cases by cessation of smoking. Treatments used in the early stages of disease include vaccination against influenza and pneumococcal pneumonia and administration of drugs that widen the airways (i.e., bronchodilators). Inhaled corticosteroids are commonly prescribed, especially for patients with frequent exacerbations. Short courses (typically five days) of oral corticosteroids are given for exacerbations but generally are not used in the routine management of COPD. A six–eight-week course of pulmonary rehabilitation often benefits patients who have symptoms despite inhaler therapy. This should be followed by a community/home maintenance program or by repeat courses every two years.
In COPD patients with low blood-oxygen levels, the prescription of home oxygen can reduce hospital admission and extend survival but does not alter the progression of lung disease. Some COPD patients do not find oxygen attractive, since they need to use it for 16 hours each day to derive benefit, which leads to further difficulties in mobility. In addition, oxygen is extremely flammable, and the prescription of oxygen for patients who smoke remains controversial because of the risk for explosion. Specialized centres can offer treatments for patients with advanced disease, including noninvasive ventilation and surgical options (i.e., lung transplantation and lung-volume reduction).
