Chronic granulomatous disease,  a group of rare inherited diseases characterized by the inability of certain white blood cells called phagocytes to destroy invading microorganisms.
Individuals born with this defect are vulnerable to many bacterial and fungal infections, particularly Staphylococcus aureus, Serratia marcescens, Escherichia coli, and Salmonella species. Recurrent infections can result in the formation of tumourlike masses called granulomas. Although these masses are not cancerous, they can cause serious disruption of bodily functions depending on where they arise; e.g., they can obstruct urine flow or the passage of food through the digestive tract. Other effects of chronic infection include enlarged lymph nodes and gingivitis (inflamed and swollen gums). Symptoms and signs of chronic granulomatous disease appear during infancy, although less severe cases also occur in children, adolescents, and adults.
The phagocytes affected in chronic granulomatous disease are important cellular components of the immune system. These cells, which include neutrophils and macrophages, normally help rid the body of invading microorganisms by engulfing and killing them through a process called phagocytosis (literally meaning “cellular eating”). The killing of ingested microorganisms is carried out with toxic compounds, such as hydrogen peroxide, which the phagocytes manufacture. In persons with chronic granulomatous disease, phagocytosis is impaired: the phagocytes can engulf microorganisms, but they cannot destroy them. This is because a genetic defect prevents the production of substances responsible for killing the microbes.
There are several genetic defects that cause chronic granulomatous disease, all of which impair the ability of phagocytes to make hydrogen peroxide. In about two-thirds of cases, the disorder is sex-linked—a defect occurs in a recessive gene on the X chromosome. (Males have only one X chromosome; thus, males are more likely to have the disease.) In the remaining one-third of cases, a gene on another chromosome is responsible for the disease, and two copies of the defective gene, one from each parent, must be inherited for the disease to arise (a type of inheritance called autosomal recessive). The incidence of the disease overall is about 1 in 1,000,000.
Although chronic granulomatous disease was once almost invariably fatal, recent advances in diagnosis and treatment have improved the prognosis. Treatment currently consists of preventive long-term administration of antibiotics. Additional prophylactic treatment with gamma interferon seems to further reduce the incidence of infection. Gene therapy shows promise for correcting the genetic defect in some individuals.
