Colorectal cancer,  disease characterized by uncontrolled growth of cells within the large intestine (colon) or rectum (terminal portion of the large intestine). Colon cancer (or bowel cancer) and rectal cancer are sometimes referred to separately. Colorectal cancer develops slowly but can spread to surrounding and distant tissues of the body.
Like most cancers, colorectal cancers have multiple causes, many of which remain unknown. Some cases appear to be inherited, while others seem to occur randomly or to have nongenetic causes. Approximately 95 percent of colorectal cancers involve the glandular cells in the wall of the colon and are called adenocarcinomas (see carcinoma). Other colorectal cancers may begin among hormone-producing cells, immune cells, or underlying connective tissue.
Several factors increase the risk of developing the disease. In general, colorectal cancer becomes more common with increasing age; 90 percent of cases are diagnosed in people age 50 or older. However, the malignancy also occurs with some frequency among persons under age 50. A family history of colorectal cancer—specifically, forms such as familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), Gardner syndrome, and hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC)—can predispose an individual to developing colorectal cancer. Each of these conditions is caused in part by a known genetic mutation. In addition, Ashkenazi Jews have a slightly higher incidence of colorectal cancer due to a mutated gene, and there exists a gene mutation that increases risk of colorectal cancer in people of European descent but does not increase risk in people of Japanese descent. This latter mutation, discovered in 2008, was the first to provide evidence of ethnic differences in genetic susceptibility to colorectal cancer.
Chronic inflammatory bowel diseases such as Crohn disease or ulcerative colitis are associated with colorectal cancer, as is the presence of a large number of noncancerous polyps along the wall of the colon or rectum. Other risk factors include physical inactivity and a diet high in fats. Those who have previously been treated for colorectal cancer are also at increased risk of recurrence. Certain gut bacteria, including species of Fusobacterium, have been implicated in colorectal cancer; Fusobacterium are present at increased levels in colorectal cancer patients and can trigger inflammatory responses associated with tumour growth and progression.
Because colorectal cancer is a disease of the digestive tract, many of the symptoms are associated with abnormal digestion and elimination. Symptoms include episodes of diarrhea or constipation that extend for days, blood in the stool, rectal bleeding, jaundice, abdominal pain, loss of appetite, and fatigue. Because these symptoms accompany a variety of different illnesses, a physician should be consulted to determine their cause.
Diagnoses of colon and rectal cancers are made by means of several techniques. During a digital rectal exam, the physician inserts a gloved finger into the rectum and feels its surface for abnormalities. A fecal immunochemical test (FIT) may also be used to detect the presence of blood in the stool. FIT tests can be completed at home and then mailed to a laboratory for testing. Results are sent to the patient’s physician. If colorectal cancer is suspected, the patient may undergo further screening with a procedure known as a colonoscopy.
In order to examine the rectum more carefully, a physician may use a narrow, flexible tube called a sigmoidoscope to look at the lining of the rectum and the end of the colon. Colonoscopy uses a similar device to examine the entire colon. A biopsy may also be conducted in which abnormal tissue is removed by using the colonoscope and then examined under a microscope for signs of cancer. An X-ray procedure called a double-contrast barium enema may be used. Barium sulfate is used to coat the colon, and the colon is filled with air. A series of X rays are then taken, and the resulting high-contrast images indicate any abnormalities present.
If cancer is found, the degree to which it has spread (metastasized) from the colon or rectum is determined. Biopsies may be conducted of surrounding tissues, or one of several imaging techniques may be used to detect metastasis. Techniques include rectal ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and X-ray or computed tomography (CT) scans.
Once colorectal cancer has been diagnosed, its stage is then determined to indicate how far the cancer has progressed. Stage 0 colorectal cancer is also called carcinoma in situ and is confined to the lining of the colon or rectum. Stage I cancers have spread into the connective tissue beneath the lining or into the underlying muscle layer. Stage II cancers have spread completely through the wall of the colon or rectum but have not invaded nearby lymph nodes. Stage III colorectal cancer has reached nearby lymph nodes, and stage IV cancers have spread to distant structures such as the lungs, liver, bones, or reproductive organs.
Colorectal cancer patients have an excellent five-year survival rate when the disease is detected early, and those who reach this stage often go on to live long, healthy lives. Approximately two-thirds of patients with local metastases survive for five or more years, but in cases where cancer is detected late and has spread to distant regions of the body, the five-year survival rate is very low.
Colorectal cancer is treated by surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation. The method used depends on the site of the cancer and the degree to which it has spread. For cancers localized to the colon or rectum, surgery is usually all that is required. For early-stage colon cancer, a colonoscope may be used to remove the cancerous tissue. Other early cancers require a surgical resection, whereby the portion of the colon containing the cancerous tissue is removed along with surrounding tissue and nearby lymph nodes and the remainder of the colon is repaired.
Rectal cancers may be treated by removing only the cancerous polyp or polyps, the cancer plus surrounding tissues, or larger sections of the rectum. Some cancers may be removed by burning them in a procedure called electrofulguration. In cases where the lower portion of the rectum is involved, a colostomy may be required, whereby the surgeon creates an artificial opening for the removal of waste. If colorectal cancer has spread to surrounding tissues such as those of the uterus, prostate, liver, kidneys, or bladder, more extensive surgery may be required to remove all or part of these organs.
Both colon and rectal cancers may be treated with radiation, using either external beams or surgically implanted radioactive pellets. Radiation is usually used in conjunction with surgery—either before the surgery to shrink tumours or following surgery to destroy small amounts of remaining cancerous tissue. Chemotherapy may also be indicated for treatment of colorectal cancers, especially when cancer has spread to other parts of the body but also as an adjuvant therapy to primary surgery and radiation. Side effects of both radiation and chemotherapy may include vomiting, diarrhea, and fatigue.
A lifestyle that includes regular exercise and a diet low in fats and high in fibre helps to prevent colorectal cancer. Early detection is important in preventing the development of advanced colorectal cancer. Some medical societies recommend regular screening by a physician after the age of 50.
Multiple studies have shown that the pain-reliever aspirin can effectively lower the risk for colorectal cancer in some persons and even reduce mortality rates for those already diagnosed with the disease. A report published in 2010 that analyzed data on aspirin use and cancer risk in different study groups over a 20-year period revealed that consistent use of low-dose aspirin (75–300 mg) lowered the risk for colon (bowel) cancer by as much as 25 percent. Long-term use of low-dose aspirin was also associated with a significant reduction in mortality from this form of the disease.
