Concussion,  a temporary loss of brain function typically resulting from a relatively mild injury to the brain, not necessarily associated with unconsciousness. Concussion is among the most commonly occurring forms of traumatic brain injury and is sometimes referred to as mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI), where “mild” describes the severity of the initial physical injury, which is not life-threatening. The term concussion, however, is also often used in reference to more-severe brain injuries, including those involving a loss of consciousness. Some of the most-common causes of concussion include motor-vehicle accidents, bicycle accidents, falls, and sports-related injuries. Although research suggests that sports- and recreation-related concussions are common in children, many injured youths do not receive proper care.
Individuals with concussions may not remember what happened immediately before or after their injury. Symptoms of a concussion include slurred speech, confusion, impaired muscle coordination, headache, dizziness, and nausea. Recovery from an uncomplicated concussion is almost always complete. However, sustaining multiple concussions or a moderate or severe concussion has been associated with long-lasting effects on the brain. Studies of retired athletes who sustained concussions in early adulthood have linked those injuries to reduced memory performance and bradykinesia (slowness of movement) in later life. Furthermore, there is evidence indicating that severe concussion may be associated with the eventual onset of mild cognitive impairment and chronic traumatic encephalopathy.
According to the consensus statement of the 2012 International Conference on Concussion in Sport, concussion is defined “as a complex pathophysiological process affecting the brain, induced by biomechanical forces.” Concussion typically occurs following direct impact to the head, though impact to other areas of the body can result in a concussion if the force is transmitted to the head. The resulting impairment to brain function generally is short-term, resolving on its own within about 7–10 days, and it is typically a functional rather than a structural impairment, associated with normal computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies. Prolonged recovery or worsening of symptoms may be indicative of more-severe injury, such as an intracerebral lesion.
An individual may present with any of a number of signs and symptoms after sustaining a concussion. Signs and symptoms may include headache, vomiting, nausea, sensitivity to light or sound, ringing in the ears, difficulty concentrating, memory loss of events both before and after the concussion, unsteady balance, slurred speech, glassy-eyed staring, loss of consciousness, feeling foggy or slow, emotional changes, and visual changes such as blurry vision, “seeing stars,” or double vision.
In the acute setting, such as for athletes who are injured on the playing field, the individual is evaluated initially for consciousness. A person who is unconscious following a blow to the head or a concussive force elsewhere to the body generally is assumed to have a cervical spine injury and is managed for that condition. If the individual is conscious, cognition is assessed; for example, the person may be asked to describe details of the current situation (e.g., the game, in the case of an athlete). The person may also be asked about the symptoms related to the concussion. Physical examination is focused on neurologic assessment, with special attention to the person’s ability to balance and follow instructions or answer questions and observation for changes in personality or emotions that are out of the ordinary for the situation (e.g., laughing following injury in a motor-vehicle accident).
Following on-site evaluation and first-aid care, an individual with a concussion typically is referred for further assessment. In the case of athletes, a licensed health care provider may perform additional evaluation on the sidelines by using the Sport Concussion Assessment Tool (SCAT), the first version of which was developed during the 2004 Second International Conference on Concussion in Sport. SCAT is a standardized tool used by medical professionals that combines various earlier concussion-evaluation tools.
The assessment of cognitive function in military personnel affected by war-related injuries follows a model similar to the one used for initial postinjury assessment in sports. Service members suspected of having a concussion undergo initial assessment with a neuropsychological test, such as the Military Acute Concussion Evaluation (MACE). The test is administered on the battlefield or ideally within 12 hours of injury in order to assess cognitive impairment in the acute phase, providing a baseline for the individual. Battlefield conditions, logistical challenges of battles (e.g., remote locations or lengthy durations), and the physical and psychological stress of war, however, present unique challenges to the immediate assessment of traumatic brain injuries in service members. Moreover, personnel who may have experienced concussive impact but do not have open wounds may not undergo initial cognitive assessment; whether they eventually are diagnosed depends on their course of symptoms.
Among civilians and athletes, if the first assessment is in an office-based setting, the physician collects a history of the patient’s concussion and any prior concussions. Typically, thorough neurological assessment and evaluation of cognitive function are undertaken. A postconcussion symptom checklist with grading of the common symptoms related to concussions may be used to assess the individual’s present condition and to follow up on that person’s improvement over time.
In the vast majority of sports-related concussions, results of neuroimaging studies such as CT and MRI scans are normal. Indications for considering further neuroimaging include worsening neurological status, recurrent vomiting, focal neurologic findings on physical exam, and loss of consciousness. Further imaging may also be warranted in a person whose symptoms do not improve over a 10-day period (in most cases, symptoms of concussion resolve within that amount of time). There is no consensus as to how long an individual should have been unconscious to require neuroimaging. Various sources suggest loss of consciousness for at least 30 to 60 seconds before the physician or other health care provider considers further neuroimaging.
Following the resolution of symptoms, a neuropsychological test may be administered to the patient. Neuropsychological testing may take place in computerized or pencil-and-paper form. The results may be compared with a previously obtained baseline for the individual.
Symptomatic individuals require rest, from both physical and cognitive activities. School-age children may require a reduced study load, prolonged time for test taking, and even a stay at home for a period of time to allow for sufficient cognitive rest. Individuals must also refrain from activities that could result in a second impact to the head or body, including activities such as playing sports, climbing on playgrounds, and riding bicycles. Athletes typically do not return to physical activity until their symptoms have resolved.
In general, athletes are advised to not return to physical activity if they are still suffering from any symptoms of concussion. Once symptoms have resolved, it is recommended that the athlete follow a stepwise return-to-play rehabilitation protocol that lasts about one week. If athletes do not experience a return of symptoms following each step, they can progress to the next step. If they have a return of their symptoms, they are advised to wait an additional 24 hours and then repeat the same step in the protocol before moving on. The steps in the rehabilitation protocol progress from light activity to sport-specific training to participation in noncontact training drills (e.g., passing drills in ice hockey). The final step is participation in full-contact practice. 
Some individuals who have experienced a concussion have a prolonged course of symptoms, persisting beyond three to four weeks, resulting in a condition known as postconcussive syndrome. The syndrome is characterized symptomatically by recurrent headaches, impaired memory, alcohol intolerance, depression, ringing in the ears, anxiety, loss of libido, sensitivity to light, dizziness, and difficulty in concentrating and balancing. The development of postconcussive syndrome does not appear to be related to the severity of the concussion. Persons with postconcussive syndrome may need to be treated with medication to control their symptoms and may benefit from formal neuropsychological assessment.
Second-impact syndrome is a very rare condition characterized by diffuse cerebral swelling, potentially culminating in death, that is thought to occur when an individual sustains a second concussion when not fully recovered from the first one. There has been debate, however, as to whether the syndrome actually exists. Cerebral swelling can occur following head injury, and in most reported cases of second-impact syndrome described, it is unclear whether diffuse cerebral swelling observed at autopsy was due to a solitary hit or multiple hits to the head.
Preventive measures can help reduce the likelihood of concussions. Such measures include modifications to sports equipment, such as changing helmet designs; more-effective rule enforcement or the development of new rules to limit hits to the head (e.g., in sports such as ice hockey and gridiron football); and the education of players, coaches, officials, and families about concussions.
