Cramp,   painful, involuntary, and sustained contraction of muscle, most common in the limbs but also affecting certain internal organs. Examples of cramping include menstrual cramps and spasms of the circular muscles of the bowel (irritable colon), blood vessels (vasospasm), and pylorus of the stomach (pylorospasm; the pylorus is the opening from the stomach to the intestine).
Cramps of the muscles of the extremities may occur in a variety of circumstances. Overexertion in cold water is responsible for swimmer’s cramp of the legs or stomach, and the accompanying severe pain and temporary paralysis may lead to drowning unless the individual is rescued immediately. Severe cramp in the calf of a leg can awaken people from a sound sleep. The origin may be overstretching or strain of the affected muscle on the previous day, unconscious tensing of the muscle during sleep, or, especially in older individuals, poor circulation. Toe cramps are usually less painful than leg cramps. 
Menstrual cramps, which involve contractions of the uterine muscle, occur before or during menstruation and may last from several hours to a day. They occur most commonly in younger women who have not had children. Heat cramps in the muscles of the extremities or abdomen stem from loss of salt after periods of profuse perspiration. Overexertion in a hot environment usually is responsible for this condition.
Professional or occupational cramp is a functional spasm affecting certain muscles that are used constantly in a daily occupation. At first there is a gradually increasing difficulty, or clumsiness, in making the movements required for the work at hand. Writers, for example, cannot move the pen or pencil with freedom, and the typist loses his dexterity in finding the right key on the keyboard. Painters, pianists, and tailors and seamstresses are other candidates for occupational cramp. Cramping usually fails to occur when the same muscles are employed in tasks not associated with the occupation, suggesting a psychological basis for the disorder. Indeed, there are many neurological, reflex, and psychological causes for muscle cramps.
Cramps are particularly bothersome in victims of Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s chorea. Tetany (q.v.) is a severe form of cramping that is noticed first in muscles located in the extremities.
