Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD),  rare fatal degenerative disease of the central nervous system. CJD occurs throughout the world at an incidence of one in every one million people. Among certain populations, such as Libyan Jews, rates are somewhat higher.
The disease was first described in the 1920s by the German neurologists Hans Gerhard Creutzfeldt and Alfons Maria Jakob. CJD is similar to other neurodegenerative diseases such as kuru, a human disorder, and scrapie, which occurs in sheep and goats. All three diseases are types of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, so called because of the characteristic spongelike pattern of neuronal destruction that leaves brain tissue filled with holes.
CJD, as well as other spongiform encephalopathies, is caused by an unusual pathogenic agent called a prion. A prion is a deviant form of a normally harmless protein found in the brains of mammals and birds. As prions replicate—by converting normal forms of the protein into their abnormal shape—they accumulate within nerve cells, causing neurodegeneration.
CJD commonly occurs in adults between ages 40 and 70, although some young adults have been stricken with the disease. Both men and women are affected equally. The onset of the disease is usually characterized by vague psychiatric or behavioral changes, which are followed within weeks or months by a progressive dementia that is often accompanied by abnormal vision and involuntary movements. The disease is usually fatal within a year of symptom onset.
There are three major types of CJD: familial (fCJD), sporadic (sCJD), and acquired (aCJD). Both sCJD and aCJD may be further divided into subtypes. The most common sCJD subtype is sCJDMM1. Subtypes of aCJD include iatrogenic (iCJD) and variant (vCJD) forms of the disease (kuru is sometimes considered a third subtype of aCJD).
Acquired CJD, which occurs through infection with the prion protein, accounts for only 1 percent of all CJD cases. Sporadic (i.e., occurring at random) forms account for the majority of cases—at least 85 percent. In these cases it is unclear what molecular process causes the prion protein to appear in the first place. The protein may arise from a mutation incurred as the body ages or as a result of a spontaneous conversion in the protein’s shape.
Between 5 and 15 percent of CJD cases show a familial pattern of inheritance. In these inherited cases a mutation in a gene designated PRNP), which encodes the prion protein PrP, is passed from parent to child in a dominant fashion (i.e., only one of the two copies of the gene that are inherited—one from each parent—need be mutated for disease to occur). More than 50 different mutations in PRNP have been identified. While some of these mutations cause CJD, others cause Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker syndrome and fatal familial insomnia. In addition, mutations have been identified that do not cause disease but may render individuals more susceptible to infection with the prion. These latter mutations may be involved in some of the sporadic incidences of the disease.
There is no evidence that a person with CJD is contagious. The rare cases of the disease that arise from human-to-human transmission are considered forms of iCJD (essentially physician-induced CJD), having been caused by exposure to the prion during medical procedures. Such accidental transmission has occurred in corneal transplants, through the use of contaminated medical or surgical instruments, and through the transfusion of contaminated blood products, including prion-infected plasma. Transmission also may have occurred through the injection of growth hormone derived from human pituitary glands.
Although human-to-animal prion transmission has been demonstrated in the laboratory, researchers are not sure whether prions that cause disease in one species can give rise to a prion disease in humans. Concern about this type of transmission increased in the mid-1990s when a number of young adults in Great Britain developed a new variant form of CJD (vCJD, or nvCJD). There is increasing evidence that these cases resulted from the consumption of tissues (notably nerve tissue) contaminated with the prion that causes bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), or mad cow disease.
Chronic wasting disease, which is caused by a prion that occurs in elk and deer, is similar in nature to BSE. Although there have been no cases of animal-to-human transmission of this prion, researchers suspect that eating contaminated tissues of deer and elk could give rise to another variant form of CJD. As a result, scientists have been monitoring cases of CJD in areas where chronic wasting disease is endemic.
Diagnosis of CJD typically entails spinal tap, electroencephalography, and other procedures to assess neurological function in order to rule out conditions that might produce similar symptoms. Diagnosis is confirmed through brain biopsy, in which a small section of tissue is removed from the brain and examined in a laboratory.
Scientists are developing tests capable of detecting prions in cerebrospinal fluid and blood. Such tests could enable early diagnosis and improve prion screening for blood transfusions.
There is no known cure for CJD, nor can the progression of the disease be delayed by medication or surgery. Hence, treatment is supportive, being aimed primarily at minimizing pain and discomfort.
