Deafness on Martha’s Vineyard,  phenomenon in which a disproportionate percentage of the population living on Martha’s Vineyard, an island off the southeastern coast of Massachusetts, U.S., was affected by a hereditary form of deafness. The overall rate of Vineyard deafness peaked in the 19th century at an estimated 1 in every 155 islanders, which far exceeded the rate of deafness in the American population generally.
Vineyard deafness appeared as complete deafness at birth with no associated anomalies. It was caused by a recessively inherited genetic mutation that was traced to Kent county, England. Emigrants from that region, some of whom came specifically from an area called The Weald, settled on Martha’s Vineyard in the late 17th century. It is thought that a history of genetic relatedness among some parents, combined with intermarriage on the island, contributed to the spread of the genetic defect that caused Vineyard deafness.
Individuals with Vineyard deafness used a highly developed sign language, probably based on a language brought from Kent. Sign language was a necessary part of daily life for both the deaf and those who could hear. Many hearing islanders learned sign language in childhood and used it regularly throughout their lives to communicate with deaf individuals and sometimes with one another.
With no communication barrier, deaf individuals were fully integrated into island life, making livings as fishermen and farmers and participating in social, civic, and religious activities. There was no “deaf” society—no activities exclusive to the deaf. Indeed, to have had a separate social network, deaf islanders would have had to exclude spouses, family, and neighbours.
The number of deaf Vineyarders began to decline in the late 19th century, when increasing numbers of islanders began to marry individuals who were not from the island and who did not carry the inherited trait. The last individual affected by Vineyard deafness who used the island’s unique sign language died in 1952.
