Deaf-blindness,  disability in which an individual has both a hearing impairment and a visual impairment. Deaf-blind individuals form a highly heterogeneous group, in which hearing and visual impairments are expressed to varying degrees.
An individual is diagnosed with a hearing impairment if he or she has a hearing loss greater than 30 decibels in at least one ear. There are different types of hearing loss. A conductive hearing loss consists of damage to or obstruction of the outer or middle ear. A sensorineural hearing loss is caused by damage to the inner ear or the auditory nerve. A mixed hearing loss is diagnosed when an individual has both a conductive and a sensorineural hearing loss. Cortical deafness is caused by damage to the auditory cortex of the brain. A hearing loss of any kind can range from mild to profound. A conductive hearing loss can often be aided with hearing aids or surgery. These means of treatment are ineffective, however, for combined conductive and cortical hearing loss, due to nerve damage associated with the latter, which causes distortions of sound.
According to the World Health Organization, a visual impairment may be defined as visual acuity of 20/70 to 20/400 after correction. Worse than 20/400 constitutes blindness (in some places, the cutoff for legal blindness is 20/200). A visual impairment can be caused by damage to the eye itself, damage to the visual nerve, or damage to the visual cortex in the brain.
The causes of deaf-blindness vary greatly among the population of deaf-blind individuals. A genetic syndrome known as Usher syndrome is the most frequent genetic cause of deaf-blindness. However, other genetic syndromes, such as CHARGE syndrome and Goldenhar syndrome, can also cause the condition. Other causes include illnesses or diseases of the pregnant mother or her child (e.g., rubella, meningitis, cytomegalovirus, and tumours) or accidents (e.g., head injury). A combination of any of the causes mentioned above is also possible. For example, an individual may be born deaf because of a genetic syndrome and may later lose vision as a result of an accident or illness. Deaf-blindness is also associated with premature birth.
The type of hearing and vision loss can vary, depending on the underlying cause of deaf-blindness. For example, individuals who experience vision and hearing loss secondary to Goldenhar syndrome are most likely to have a conductive hearing loss and damage to the eyes due to anomalies in the structure of the skull. By contrast, individuals who had meningitis tend to have a sensorineural hearing loss and a vision loss due to damage to the visual nerve.
Deaf-blindness must also be viewed from a cultural perspective. Similar to their medical backgrounds, deaf-blind individuals’ cultural identities vary greatly. Depending on the age at which an individual became deaf and blind, he or she may be inclined to associate with and may feel closest to other similarly affected deaf-blind individuals. This similarity is often based on the preferred method of communication used within the different groups. Individuals in the blind community and the mainstream community are likely to use spoken language as their main means of communication, whereas individuals in the deaf community are likely to communicate by using a signed language. The deaf-blind community is the community with the most diverse communication methods. Some may use a signed language, whereas others may use a spoken language. Others may use writing, braille, or Tadoma (i.e., tactile speechreading), whereas still others may use a combination of all these.
Research on the deaf community has yielded a wealth of knowledge about deaf culture as a minority culture. Deaf individuals tend to view themselves as members of a linguistic minority within society and often do not view themselves as disabled. Members of the deaf community tend to have a number of characteristics in common: they share a physical attribute (i.e., their deafness) and tend to identify as members of the deaf community; many deaf individuals are proud of their language (e.g., American Sign Language), which is commonly used in poetry and art; and deaf individuals also display a number of culturally characteristic behaviours, the most pronounced of which are possibly behaviours that attract attention, such as stomping feet, waving arms, tapping on the shoulder, or flashing lights.
Individuals who were born blind or became blind early and later became deaf are more likely to use spoken language as their main means of communication. Because of their hearing loss, they might later add some signs, finger spelling, Tadoma, or other forms of manual communication (e.g., printing on the palm) to aid in communication. These individuals tend to identify with and therefore associate primarily with the blind community, with the mainstream community, or with the disabled community, and they may also associate with the deaf-blind community.
Individuals who were born deaf or become deaf early and later become blind are likely to use a signed language as their main communication method and therefore associate with other members of the deaf community. Because of their ties to the deaf community, they are likely to be involved with deaf culture and may later also become involved in the deaf-blind community. Some deaf individuals who became blind, however, may feel ostracized by the deaf community, and thus they may withdraw and associate primarily with the deaf-blind community.
The individuals who were born deaf-blind are likely to associate with any of several communities, including the deaf community, the blind community, the deaf-blind community, the disabled community, and mainstream society. Which groups individuals are drawn to depends largely on the severity of their hearing and vision losses, on the community in which they grew up, on the type of schools they attended, and on which language they prefer to use. For example, individuals who consider their deafness to be the most important aspect of their identity and who use a signed language are likely to associate with the deaf community, whereas individuals who have significant amounts of residual hearing and vision and primarily rely on spoken language will associate mostly with mainstream society.
The individuals who spent most of their lives as sighted and hearing persons and then suddenly became deaf-blind may feel disoriented regarding culture and community membership. They likely spent much of their lives in mainstream society and used spoken language to communicate. As deaf-blind individuals, however, they may need to learn alternate methods of communication, and, depending on which options they choose and prefer, they may join any of the communities. This group is especially likely to be drawn to either the deaf-blind community or the disability community, because in both of these communities a diversity of communication options seems to be accepted, allowing these individuals full participation and access.
