Delayed puberty,  failure of the physical development of the reproductive system by the normal stage or period of life when a child transforms into an adult capable of procreation. In girls, puberty is considered to be delayed if no pubertal development has occurred by age 13 or 14, and girls who have not menstruated by age 16 are considered to have primary amenorrhea. In boys, puberty is considered to be delayed if no pubertal development has occurred by age 14.
In girls, delayed puberty and primary amenorrhea may be subdivided according to associated changes in stature. If the affected girl is short, the likely causes are gonadal dysgenesis (Turner syndrome) or hypopituitarism (with both gonadotropin and growth hormone deficiency). Gonadal dysgenesis results from the absence of a sex chromosome or other abnormality of a sex chromosome. In affected girls the gonads are streaks of fibrous tissue and contain no follicles, and these girls may have a variety of congenital anomalies, including a webbed neck, a shieldlike chest, or a small jaw. If the affected girl’s stature is normal, the likely causes are gonadotropin-releasing hormone deficiency (sometimes with an absence of the sense of smell, called Kallman syndrome), gonadotropin deficiency, chronic illness, or excessive exercise. However, in many cases there is no cause to be found (idiopathic or constitutional delay in puberty). Very rarely, the cause is decreased estrogen synthesis, which may be due to the absence of the aromatase enzyme that converts androgens to estrogens or due to the presence of defective estrogen receptors. In the latter disorder, estrogen is produced, but the receptors to which it must bind in order to act are missing or abnormal.
Some girls with normal stature have normal pubertal development but primary amenorrhea. Affected girls may have anomalous development of the uterus or vagina so that menstrual bleeding cannot occur. This may be due to testicular feminization in genetic males. Testicular feminization is caused by a mutation in the gene for the androgen receptor that prevents testosterone from acting on its target tissues. Affected patients have female external genitalia, a short vagina (but no uterus), breast development, and other features of estrogen action.
Similar to girls, the causes of delayed puberty in boys are variable. If the boy’s stature is short, the likely cause is hypopituitarism (with both gonadotropin and growth hormone deficiency). If the boy’s stature is normal, the likely causes are deficiency of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (sometimes with Kallman syndrome), deficiency of gonadotropin, chronic illness, and primary gonadal disorders. However, in many cases no cause is found (idiopathic or constitutional delay in puberty). Primary gonadal disorders include absence of the testes, cryptorchidism, Klinefelter syndrome, enzymatic defects in testosterone biosynthesis, and testicular resistance to the action of luteinizing hormone. Klinefelter syndrome is a chromosomal disorder in which there is one or occasionally more than one X chromosome, and it is characterized by small testes, breast enlargement, decreased testosterone production, and increased serum gonadotropin concentrations.
The treatment of delayed puberty depends on the specific cause, and in some cases treatment is not necessary. When the cause is diagnosed and treated, most affected children will progress through puberty and do not experience adverse long-term effects. However, if diagnosis and treatment are delayed in patients with a severe disorder of delayed puberty that is not associated with malnutrition, the epiphyseal centres of the bones may remain open, allowing linear growth to continue. These individuals often become tall with unusually long legs and long arms, a body type referred to as eunuchoid habitus. Disorders of delayed puberty are treated with testosterone in boys and estrogen or progesterone in girls. These hormones stimulate the development of secondary sex characteristics.
