Disability management,  discipline concerned with reducing the impact of disability on individuals and employers. The term disability management commonly is used in three areas: work and work discrimination, symptom and condition management, and resource management.
Within the area of work, disability management typically refers to a field of practice that has focused on how employers manage disability overall within the workplace, including issues such as preventing disability, returning to work after a disability event, providing reasonable accommodations within the work site, and cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness analyses of the management services. Certified disability management specialists are prepared to deal with various work-related disability issues.
A major focus of disability management is on the evaluation of discrimination in the workplace experienced by disabled people. Workplace discrimination can negatively affect disabled individuals and the disability community—as well as employers, who may be sued for disparities in treatment between disabled and nondisabled individuals. The field of disability management also focuses on organizational health, or how disability influences costs, benefits, and productivity within work sites as organizational units.
The term disability often is used to refer to a disease or disorder, whether a chronic medical condition (e.g., diabetes, heart disease, arthritis, or multiple sclerosis) or a broader impairment (e.g., a physical, cognitive, mental, or sensory disorder), that affects a person’s capacity to function. The term management in this context refers to how people who are living with disability control their symptoms and use treatments. Research in disability management focuses on how people respond to symptoms and control them in emergency and acute situations as well as over their lifetime; on treatment strategies for managing symptoms; and on the relative outcomes, effectiveness, and long-term impact of treatments, primarily related to quality of life and cost issues as framed within a medical approach.
The focus on condition or impairment management includes self-care management—a person’s ability to manage everyday self-care in the home given specific conditions or a long-term disability. Self-care is often linked with overall health-promotion strategies, including nutrition and exercise to maintain or prevent declines in function. Intervention programs are based on a range of strategies, including self-care rehabilitation within traditional rehabilitation settings; community-based health-promotion groups or intervention programs; telerehabilitation, in which rehabilitation or medical professionals consult remotely with clients on specific self-care issues in the home; and the use of learning modules for specific client populations. Most programs focus on specific groups, such as people living with diabetes, asthma, chronic heart conditions, or back pain. The focus in this application is on finding effective strategies to help people manage themselves within the home setting and on preventing or decreasing the use of costly emergency medical care, long-term care, or institutionalization services. The approach centres on self-efficacy and the development of active problem-solving skills. A peer mentor approach, in which patients learn from others who have been through a disability experience, has also been emphasized in the management of disabling conditions.
Resource management as it applies to disabilities focuses on the right of disabled persons to live in the community and have access to equitable supportive resources. This area of disability management views disability as the oppression of a minority group by societal and environmental barriers, including barriers in access to community living resources. Thus, resource management involves finding, accessing, controlling or coordinating, and troubleshooting supportive resources, including affordable and accessible housing, personal attendant services, transportation, assistive technology, and other supports for community living.
Disability management of resources places emphasis on self-advocacy skills and on collective activism to change systems, assert civil rights, and improve societal conditions and opportunities for the disability community as a minority group. Resource management has been emphasized within centres for independent living and other disability activism organizations, and it has been used increasingly as a model approach within the delivery of home and community-based waiver programs to support transition out of institutions and long-term community living choices.
