Eye disease,  any of the diseases or disorders that affect the human eye.
This article briefly describes the more common diseases of the eye and its associated structures, the methods used in examination and diagnosis, and the factors that determine treatment and prognosis. The first part deals with conditions affecting the orbit, lids, and external eye, and the second focuses on diseases of structures within the eyeball, or globe. Later sections deal with injuries, ocular conditions associated with systemic disease, disorders of vision, methods of examining the eye, and devices for correcting visual defects. For more information about the medical specialty dealing with the diagnosis and treatment of eye diseases, see ophthalmology; for more information about the health care profession concerned with the eye, see optometry.
The orbit is the bony cavity in the skull that houses the globe of the eye (eyeball), the muscles that move the eye (the extraocular muscles), the lacrimal gland, and the blood vessels and nerves required to supply these structures. The remaining space within the orbit is filled with a fatty pad that acts as a cushion for the eye and allows free movement of the globe. With aging, this pad of fat tends to atrophy so that the globe recedes, causing a more sunken appearance of the eye that is often seen in elderly people.
Since the bone that separates the orbit from the nose and the nasal sinuses is rather thin, infection sometimes spreads from the nasal sinuses into the orbit, causing the orbital tissue to swell and the eye to protrude. This condition, called orbital cellulitis, is serious because of the possibility that the infection may spread into the cranial cavity via the pathways of the cranial nerves that reach the eye through the posterior orbit. Infections can also spread to the cranial cavity by way of the blood vessels that lie within the orbit. Prompt administration of appropriate antibiotics in most cases eliminates such infections. However, surgical drainage of orbital abscesses (pockets of pus surrounded by areas of tissue inflammation) may be required. Sterile (noninfectious) inflammatory conditions such as Graves ophthalmopathy (eye disease caused by thyroid dysfunction) also affect the orbit.
The lacrimal glands, the small glands that secrete the watery component of tears and are located behind the outer part of each upper lid, are rarely inflamed but may become so as a complication of viral infection, such as in mumps or mononucleosis (caused by Epstein-Barr virus). Inflammations of the lacrimal sac are much more common. The lacrimal, or tear, sac lies in a hollow at the inner corner of the eye in the front part of the nasal wall of the orbit; under normal conditions, tears run along the margins of the eyelids toward the nose and are drained through two tiny holes (called puncta) connected by small tubes to the upper part of the lacrimal sac. The lower part of the sac is connected to the nose by the nasolacrimal duct, and infection may ascend this passage from the nose and cause an acute painful swelling at the inner corner of the eye (called dacryocystitis). Blockage of the nasolacrimal duct prevents the passage of tears into the nose and results in a watery eye. Such a blockage, which is often accompanied by chronic inflammation in the lacrimal sac, is usually treated in infancy with a simple massaging technique. However, if the problem persists, a procedure to open or stent the tear passageway can be performed to relieve the obstruction. If this approach also fails, a different operation can be undertaken in which a new opening from the lacrimal sac to the nasal cavity is made.
Tumours in the orbit are comparatively rare and may arise from within the orbit, as an extension from nearby sinuses, or as a metastasis from a distant tumour. Tumours arising within the orbit include lacrimal gland tumours, lymphoid tumours, vascular tumours, and tumours of the optic nerve, among others. Such tumours may be benign or malignant. Orbital tumours can cause a slow and gradual protrusion or displacement of the eye, which may prevent ocular movements from being coordinated with those of the normal eye. If this occurs, the images of the two eyes, which are normally fused, may separate and give rise to double vision (diplopia).
The chronic inflammation of the lid margins known as blepharitis is a common and potentially distressing condition. The inflammation may be mild, causing simple redness of the lid margin with scaling of the skin, or it may be severe, causing intense irritation and burning along with eyelash destruction and distortion. Blepharitis tends to be associated with greasiness of the skin and with dandruff. The skin of the lids is particularly sensitive to allergic processes, and itching, scaling, and redness of the lids are common reactions to drugs or cosmetics applied to the eye of a sensitized person.
Another common inflammatory condition of the lid is a sty, in which inflammation of particular oil glands or lash follicles occurs along the lid margin. Sties originating in the lash follicles are usually infectious and start as a painful swelling of the lid. At first it may be difficult to find a localized lesion, but soon one area becomes more swollen, and, as pus forms, a yellow point may be seen near the lid margin. A rather similar appearance can be produced by an inflammation of the tiny glands in the inner eyelid, called meibomian glands, that open onto the lid margin. Since the glands are embedded in tough fibrous tissue, the pain and reaction may be more severe than in a sty of the lash follicle. Examination of the internal surface of the lid often shows a red, velvety area with a central yellow spot through which pus may later discharge. Sometimes the meibomian glands suffer from a chronic infection, and a painless firm lump, called a chalazion, appears in the lid and slowly increases in size. The skin can be moved freely over the surface of the lump, showing that the latter is in the deeper tissue of the lid. The inner surface of the lid will show a discoloured area surrounded by inflammation. If the chalazion persists and does not respond to warm compresses, eyelid scrubs, and massage, it can be removed through an incision made on the inner surface of the lid.
Herpes zoster (shingles) may affect the skin of the eyelids and is of particular importance because the cornea (the transparent covering of the front of the eyeball) and inner eye may also be affected. The condition often starts with pain and redness of the forehead and the eyelids of the same side. Vesicles, or small blisters, form later in the affected area. The pain may be severe, and some constitutional disturbance is common.
