Fragile-X syndrome,  a chromosomal disorder associated with a fragile site on the end of the X chromosome. The major symptom of the syndrome is diminished mental ability, which may range from mild learning impairment to severe intellectual disability (or mental retardation).
The X chromosome is one of two sex chromosomes (the other being the Y chromosome). Males have one X and one Y chromosome; females have two X chromosomes. The male who receives the fragile-X chromosome will be affected by the syndrome, which is thought to be one of the major causes of intellectual disability in males. About one-third of the females who receive one fragile-X chromosome show mild cognitive impairment; the remaining two-thirds, though intellectually normal, have a 50-50 risk of passing the defective chromosome on to each of their children.
The symptoms of fragile-X syndrome result from the complete or partial loss of a protein known as FMRP (fragile-X mental retardation protein). FMRP plays an important role in the brain, facilitating the development and maturation of synapses (connections) between neurons. Synapses conduct electrical impulses and translate electrical signals to biochemical actions that are fundamental to cognition. It is believed that FMRP exerts these actions through its metabolism of neuron-produced transcripts of ribonucleic acid (RNA). In the absence of FMRP these transcripts are generated in abnormally large quantities, thereby disrupting synapse formation and function.
The genetic defect underlying the syndrome occurs in a gene known as FMR1 (fragile-X mental retardation 1), which is located in the fragile site of the X chromosome and encodes FMRP. FMR1 contains a repetitive sequence of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), made up of triplet repeats of the base pairs cytosine (C) and guanine (G), following the pattern CGG or CCG. In normal individuals this triplet is repeated about 30 times. However, in individuals with mutations in FMR1, the pattern is repeated from 50 to 200 times, with so-called premutations giving rise to fewer repeats and milder symptoms than full mutations, which give rise to high numbers of repeats and severe symptoms. In rare cases other types of mutations, such as deletions or point mutations, can occur in FMR1. In addition, mutations in FMR1 occur in about 2 to 6 percent of children diagnosed with autism or autism-spectrum disorder.
There is no cure for fragile-X syndrome. However, early intervention in the form of physical therapy, assistive technologies (e.g., specially designed devices and software), speech and language therapy, and sensory integration can benefit affected children. In some cases pharmacological treatment is necessary to control seizures and symptoms of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, aggression, or depression. Treatments under development for fragile-X syndrome include gene therapy and protein-replacement therapy.
