Galactosemia,   a hereditary defect in the metabolism of the sugar galactose, which is a constituent of lactose, the main carbohydrate of milk. Infants with this condition appear normal at birth, but, after a few days of milk feeding, they begin to vomit, become lethargic, fail to gain weight, and show an enlargement of the liver. Untreated infants who survive are usually malnourished and stunted in growth; cataracts in the eyes and mental retardation may also occur. When their urine is tested for sugars, galactose invariably is present. In all affected infants, the symptoms of galactosemia regress after milk and milk products are eliminated from their diet.
Normally, galactose is metabolized in the body to glucose, each step in the metabolic pathway being carried out by a specific organic catalyst, or enzyme. In galactosemia, the enzyme that catalyzes the second step, converting galactose-1-phosphate to glucose-1-phosphate, is not active. As a result of this metabolic block, there is an accumulation of galactose-1-phosphate in body tissues, and this compound is believed to be the cause of the cataracts and liver damage. Galactose is present in the blood and urine of persons suffering from galactosemia, and there is decreased formation of glucose in the body, which may result in a lowering of the blood glucose level. The mental retardation that is sometimes observed in galactosemic children may be caused by the high galactose level, the low glucose level, or both. It has been estimated that hereditary intolerance to galactose occurs in approximately one in 18,000 infants.
Galactosemia is transmitted by an autosomal recessive gene. Unaffected carriers of the trait who mate can expect, on the basis of chance, to have one galactosemic child, two children who are unaffected but are carriers, and one normal child for each four children born. Reliable and simple tests are available to detect carriers of galactosemia and galactosemic newborn infants. The condition can be detected before birth by collecting sample fluid from the amniotic sac. When a lactose–galactose-free diet is initiated early in infancy and maintained during the first three years of life, the development of liver disease, cataracts, and mental retardation may usually be prevented. In time, an increased tolerance to galactose may develop. 
