Gallbladder cancer,  disease characterized by the growth of malignant cells in the gallbladder. Gallbladder cancer is a rare disease and often is detected only after cancer cells have metastasized (spread) to other organs, resulting in poor survival rates. About 60 to 70 percent of gallbladder cancers are found incidentally following cholecystectomy (surgical removal of the gallbladder) for otherwise benign diseases, such as cholecystitis (inflammation of the gallbladder) or gallstones (cholelithiasis).
Gallbladder cancer affects women more often than men, and its incidence increases with age. The disease has unusually high rates of incidence among Native Americans in both North and South America. Some of the highest incidence rates are found in populations in the Andes Mountains of South America (particularly in Chile and Bolivia), in Mexican American populations, and in peoples living in northern India. Incidence is also high in South Korea.
A number of risk factors are associated with the development of gallbladder cancer. The presence of long-term inflammation, such as that associated with chronic gallstones, can increase the likelihood of tumours, possibly by creating an environment that promotes genetic mutations that then lead to tumour development. The larger the gallstones (e.g., larger than 3 cm [1.2 inches] in diameter), the higher the risk of gallbladder cancer. Although gallstones are present in about 85 percent of gallbladder cancer patients, however, only a small fraction of individuals with gallstones develop cancer.
Long-term infection with different types of bacteria, particularly Salmonella typhi, is also associated with an increased risk of gallbladder cancer. Risk is also increased in persons who have a family history of colorectal cancer, specifically conditions such as Gardner syndrome and hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC). Other possible risk factors include obesity and exposure to certain chemical substances (e.g., radon).
Symptoms of gallbladder cancer tend to be vague. They can include abdominal pain, loss of appetite, fever, nausea, and vomiting. Some patients develop jaundice (yellowing of the skin, whites of the eyes, and mucous membranes), abdominal distension, and itching. Early cancer, however, may be asymptomatic; when symptoms develop later, the cancer is likely to have progressed to an incurable state.
Various approaches are used to diagnose the presence of gallbladder cancer. Ultrasound is the usual diagnostic study when gallstone-related disease is suspected. Ultrasound can show thickened walls and masses; however, it may not give a conclusive diagnosis of gallbladder cancer. Computed tomography (CT) scanning can be used to assess the extent of tumour growth and spread. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) may be used to visualize the local anatomy of the gallbladder and to differentiate between benign and malignant lesions. Biopsy of the gallbladder prior to surgery usually is not undertaken owing to an increased risk of tumour cells’ spreading to surrounding tissues.
The treatment of gallbladder cancer depends on the stage at which the cancer is diagnosed. Staging determines the extent to which the cancer has grown or spread from the primary site (initial site of development). Treatment options include simple cholecystectomy (removal of the gallbladder only), radical cholecystectomy (removal of the gallbladder, excision of specific bile ducts, removal of regional lymph nodes, and removal of parts of the liver), radiation therapy, chemotherapy, palliative care, or some combination thereof.
