Gangrene,   localized death of animal soft tissue, caused by prolonged interruption of the blood supply that may result from injury or infection. Diseases in which gangrene is prone to occur include arteriosclerosis, diabetes, Raynaud’s disease, thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger’s disease), and typhus. It also may occur after severe burns, freezing, or prolonged bed rest (bed sores).
Gangrene is differentiated as being either dry or moist. Dry gangrene results from a gradual decrease in the blood supply (as from diabetes or arteriosclerosis) in the affected area, often an extremity. The diseased part may at first be discoloured and cold to the touch; later it becomes distinct from nearby healthy tissue, turning dark and dry. If the infection is confined to a small area, the diseased tissue may eventually dry up completely and fall off. Treatment involves improving the blood flow to the affected area.
Moist gangrene develops when the blood supply is suddenly cut off, as by a severe burn or an arterial blood clot. Tissue that has not been destroyed by the trauma begins to leak fluids, which then foster the growth of bacteria. The affected area becomes swollen and discoloured and later becomes foul-smelling. If not treated, the infection can spread beyond the wound and cause death. The administration of antibiotics is the principal treatment, which may be supplemented by the removal of diseased tissue to stop the spread of the infection.
A different and more virulent form, gas gangrene, is caused by infection with bacteria of the genus Clostridium, which grow only in the absence of oxygen. It typically develops in deep crushing or penetrating wounds, as in war wounds, that are improperly cleansed; it may also be a sequel to an improperly performed induced abortion. Within three or four days the wound begins to exude brownish, foul-smelling pus. Numerous gas bubbles, produced by a toxin released by the bacteria, form under the skin. The toxin is extremely lethal, and if the affected area is not treated, the infection spreads rapidly, causing death. Treatment involves removing all dead and diseased tissue and administering antibiotics. In some instances a polyvalent antitoxin derived from horses is also given, and occasionally a severely affected limb is placed in a high-pressure oxygen chamber to inhibit the growth of bacteria. See also infarction; necrosis.
