Glioma, plural gliomas or gliomata,  a cancerous growth or tumour composed of cells derived from neuroglial tissue, the material that supports and protects nerve cells. Gliomas typically form in the brain or spinal cord and are classified by cell type, location, or grade (based on microscopic features of tumour cells, usually relative to features of normal cells).
Examples of different types of gliomas include optic glioma, which affects the optic nerve in the brain; oligodendroglial tumours, which originate with oligodendrocytes, a type of neuroglia that produces myelin (the insulating sheath on the axons of nerves); and ependymomas, which originate with ependymal cells, a type of neuroglia that lines the ventricles of the brain and spinal cord. Glioblastoma (glioblastoma multiforme) is the most frequently occurring and the most aggressive primary brain tumour. Other gliomas are of variable malignancy.
Symptoms of glioma depend on the type of tumour that arises, its location, and its size. General symptoms include headache, confusion, change in personality, nausea, loss of balance or coordination, memory loss, blurred vision or other visual abnormalities, and slurred speech. Diagnosis is based primarily on imaging tests, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, and on biopsy to identify microscopic changes in cells. Depending on the type of glioma and its location, treatment may involve surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or targeted drug therapy.
Although therapy may work for some glioma patients, glioma in general is difficult to treat, since the tumour masses often spread diffusely throughout the brain. Glioma cells appear to take on neuronlike abilities that enable them to feed off existing neural networks. One example of this phenomenon is the observation that gliomas frequently have synapses—junctions normally found between neurons that enable neuron-to-neuron communication; glioma cells are able to form these connections with normal neurons and cells, which may enable them to escape the effects of drugs and other therapies.
