headache,  pain in various parts of the head. Headaches affect nearly everyone at some time in their life, recurrent headaches approximately 10 percent of persons. Headaches vary widely in their intensity and in the seriousness of the underlying conditions that cause them. Most headaches occur because specific pain-sensitive structures in or around the head are overstimulated or damaged. Some of these structures are inside the skull, or intracranial; the remainder are in the tissues surrounding or covering the skull, or extracranial.
An intracranial headache results from the dilation of arterial blood vessels at the base of the brain caused by a temporary increase in blood supply. An intracranial headache may result as a consequence of a fever, a “hangover,” or a severe and sudden attack of high blood pressure. An inflammation or hemorrhage affecting the arteries and their adjacent meningeal tissues (as during meningitis or a cerebral hemorrhage) can similarly cause an intracranial headache. One can also occur if a tumour displaces tissues inside the skull. Intracranial headaches often begin abruptly; they usually occur on awaking or at night, and pain usually changes with a change in posture. Intracranial causes of headache almost always produce associated abnormalities that a physician can detect by physical examination or laboratory tests.
Extracranial headaches may be caused by dilation and distension of the extracranial arteries that supply the surface tissues of the head or sustained contraction of the skeletal muscles of the face, scalp, and neck. Excess fatigue, neck problems, and eyestrain can all cause extracranial headaches.
Episodic tension headaches are by far the most common type of headache. They occur only irregularly and usually do not necessitate a visit to a physician. Pain is usually mild to moderate and is felt on both sides of the head. More than 90 percent of such headaches result from distension of the extracranial arteries or from sustained contraction of the face and neck muscles. Such headaches often arise from fatigue, stress, or feelings of frustration, anxiety, or depression. Mild analgesics such as aspirin and acetaminophen are usually effective in the treatment of tension headaches.
Chronic daily headaches have many of the same clinical features as episodic tension-type headaches but occur more often, sometimes on a daily basis. Their most common causes are depression, anxiety, anger, or frustration. Chronic daily headaches may also arise from excessive use of pain medications. Selective serotonin uptake inhibitors, such as fluoxetine (Prozac™), and such tricyclic antidepressants as amitriptyline (Elavil™) are effective in treating chronic headaches.
Migraine is a disorder marked by extremely painful recurring headaches, sometimes with nausea and vomiting. Migraine attacks may occur daily or as infrequently as once a year, but they most commonly occur once or twice a month. An attack is often triggered by an external stimulus, such as stress, hormonal changes that occur just before or during menstruation, or the ingestion of certain foods and drinks, such as alcoholic beverages. A minority of people with migraine experience initial warning symptoms, known as an aura, that precede the headache by as much as an hour; there may be illusions of flashing lights, loss of vision, dizziness, numbness, or temporary defects in speech or movement. Early symptoms subside in 10 to 30 minutes and are followed by a throbbing headache on one side of the head; less commonly the headache is bilateral. The headache is moderate to severe in intensity and can be intolerable in some sufferers. Movement, bright lights, and physical activity tend to aggravate the pain. In typical cases, the migraine attack lasts for 12 to 24 hours or more unless relieved by medication early in its course.
The underlying cause of migraine remains uncertain. The illness may be hereditary; about 75 to 90 percent of all migraine sufferers have a family history of the disorder. About two-thirds of all migraine sufferers are women. Migraines also occur with unusually high frequency in persons who are characteristically hardworking and who set high and demanding standards for themselves. Migraine may be caused by an abnormality in the regulation of serotonin, a chemical involved in transmitting impulses in the brain.
One basic therapeutic step in treating migraine is to determine which stimuli, if any, trigger the attacks, in order to avoid them in the future. Most of the remaining therapies involve the use of various medications. Drug therapies for migraine consist of abortive measures, which aim at stopping or alleviating an attack as it is starting or soon afterward, and preventive measures, which involve daily doses of medications to reduce the intensity or frequency of migraine attacks or eliminate them altogether. Aspirin, acetaminophen, and such nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as ibuprofen and naproxen are effective in aborting mild migraines. Migraine attacks of greater severity can sometimes be treated at the start with ergotamine, sumatriptan, dihydroergotamine mesylate (DHE-45), or caffeine; all of these drugs enhance the effect or supply of serotonin within the brain. Certain other medications are used on a daily, long-term basis if migraines have become extremely painful or have reached a frequency of one per week. These medications can mitigate the severity of such migraines and make them occur less frequently. Among these medications are ergotamine; beta-adrenergic blocking agents (beta blockers), notably propranolol (Inderal™) and timolol (Blocadren™); calcium channel blockers; and serotonin antagonists such as zolmitriptan (Zomig™), sumatriptan (Imitrex™), and methysergide (Sansert™).
Cluster headaches are characterized by sudden, severe periorbital (around the eye) pain on one side of the face. Men are afflicted more often than women with cluster headaches; they usually occur in persons between the ages of 20 and 60. Attacks are sudden, with intense throbbing pain, sometimes accompanied by watering of the eyes, stuffy nose, or facial sweating. The pain usually does not persist more than two hours for each episode, but attacks may be daily, weekly, or monthly. Cluster headaches may be triggered by alcohol consumption or stress. The affected person may not suffer any headaches for months or years before another patterned cluster of headaches arises.
