Digestive system disease,  any of the diseases that affect the human digestive tract. Such disorders may affect the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine (colon), pancreas, liver, or biliary tract. A prevalent disorder of the digestive system is gastroesophageal reflux disease (i.e., the passage of gastric contents into the esophagus), which causes heartburn on a regular basis in some individuals. Cirrhosis of the liver primarily results from excessive alcohol consumption, but it may also develop after infection with the hepatitis C virus. Other common diseases of the digestive system include peptic ulcers, colorectal cancer, and gallstones. Many disorders of the digestive system can be prevented by a diet low in fats and high in fruits and vegetables, limited alcohol consumption, and periodic medical examinations.
This article discusses the common infections, inflammations, ulcers, and cancers that affect each organ of the digestive tract. For a detailed discussion of the anatomy and physiology of the digestive system, see digestive system, human.
Besides local disease, features characteristic of systemic disorders are often present on the mouth and in the oral cavity. The lips may be fissured and eroded at the corners in riboflavin deficiency. Multiple brown freckles on the lips associated with polyps in the small intestine is characteristic of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Aggregates of small yellow spots on the buccal mucosa and the mucosa behind the lips due to the presence of enlarged sebaceous glands just below the mucosal surface indicate Fordyce disease.
The most common mouth ulcers are due to aphthous stomatitis. These ulcers affect one out of every five Caucasians. The manifestations of this condition range from one or two small painful vesicles rupturing to form round or oval ulcers, occurring once or twice a year and lasting seven to 10 days, to deep ulcers of one centimetre (about half an inch) or more in diameter. The ulcers are frequently multiple, occur anywhere in the mouth, and may persist for months at a time. Symptoms range from a mild local irritation to severe distressing pain that prevents talking and eating. Scarring can be seen at the sites of previous ulcers. Aphthous ulceration is sometimes associated with stress, but it may also be a reflection of an underlying malabsorptive disease such as celiac disease. Treatment is directed to the predisposing cause. Topical and systemic corticosteroids are the most effective treatment. Local anesthetic agents and analgesics may permit easier talking and eating. In a more serious condition, Behçet syndrome, similar ulcers occur in the mouth and on the genitalia, and the eyes may become inflamed.
Discoloration of the tongue, commonly white, is due to deposits of epithelial debris, effete (or worn-out) bacteria, and food. It also occurs in circumstances in which there is reduced saliva production. This may be acute, as in fever, when water loss through the skin is excessive. Discoloration of the tongue becomes chronic following atrophy of the salivary glands and in the absence of good oral hygiene. If the person is a heavy smoker, the deposit is coloured brown. Black discoloration of the tongue with the formation in the centre of a dense pellicle of furlike filiform papillae (black hairy tongue) may be due to a fungus with pigmented filaments. Occasionally it simply represents excessive elongation of the filiform papillae.
A bald tongue (atrophic glossitis), with a smooth surface due to complete atrophy of the papillae, is associated with malnutrition, severe iron deficiency anemia, pernicious anemia, and pellagra, a disorder of skin and mucous membranes due to niacin deficiency. The condition is endemic in underdeveloped countries in which there are periods of famine.
A deeply fissured tongue (scrotal tongue) may be due to a congenital variation in the supporting tissue of the tongue, but it can be caused by syphilis, scarlet fever, or typhoid fever. There is a mild degree of inflammation in the fissures, which causes a slight burning discomfort.
Geographic tongue, or migrating exfoliative glossitis, describes areas of denudation of the surface of the tongue of various shapes and sizes. These areas gradually become re-epithelialized with regrowth of the filiform papillae, only for the inflammatory process to begin elsewhere in the tongue. Thus, the bald zones move around the tongue. These changes usually give rise to no symptoms or, at the most, to a mild burning sensation. The cause is unknown, and the condition may persist for years. There is no treatment.
Vincent disease (trench mouth) is an ulcerating, necrotizing infection of the gingiva (gums) characterized by spontaneous bleeding from affected areas and foul odour of the breath arising from the gangrenous tissue. It is endemic in countries where there is severe malnutrition and poor oral hygiene. The infection probably involves several organisms, including spirochetes and fusiform bacilli. It is uncertain if it is transmitted by the exchange of saliva in kissing, but its epidemic increase in wartime and its frequency in the sexually promiscuous suggest this. Vincent disease is treated with antibiotics followed by trimming of the gum margins to eliminate subgingival pockets.
Oral cancer is sometimes caused by chronic thermal irritation in heavy smokers and is often preceded by leukoplakia (plaquelike patches arising on the mucous membranes of the cheeks, gum, or tongue). Similarly, oral cancer can be caused by the habit of keeping tobacco in the space between the cheek and the teeth. These cancers arise from the squamous cells that line the oral mucosa. Cancers of the salivary glands and of the mucous membranes of the cheeks cause pain, bleeding, or difficulty in swallowing. The lymphomas and other tumours of lymphoid origin may first appear in the tonsillar or pharyngeal lymph nodes. Cancer of the tongue and of the bony structures of the hard palate or sinuses may project into the mouth or may burrow deep into the surrounding tissues.
