Leukorrhea, also spelled leucorrhoea,  flow of a whitish, yellowish, or greenish discharge from the vagina of the female that may be normal or that may be a sign of infection. Such discharges may originate from the vagina, ovaries, fallopian tubes, or, most commonly, the cervix. Leukorrhea may occur during pregnancy and is considered normal when the discharge is thin, white, and relatively odourless. Physiologic leukorrhea is a normal condition occurring within several months to a year of the onset of menses in adolescent girls and is sometimes present in newborn girls, usually lasting one to two months. However, in many cases, leukorrhea is a sign of infection, especially when the discharge is yellow or green, has an offensive odour, and is accompanied by irritation, itching, pain, or tissue inflammation.
Abnormal leukorrhea may be caused by infections with bacteria, yeast, or other microorganisms. For example, many sexually transmitted diseases, which involve the transmission of viruses or bacteria and include diseases such as gonorrhea and chlamydia, are major causes of leukorrhea. These diseases lead to infection of the cervix, which is indeed one of the most common gynecological disorders. The infection has a tendency to irritate the mucus glands of the cervix, causing them to secrete an excess of mucous mixed with pus. Leukorrhea is also a sign of vaginitis (inflammation of the vagina), which is often caused by infection with the fungus Candida albicans or by infection with the protozoan parasite Trichomonas vaginalis. Infection with these organisms may give rise to an irritating discharge that is often quite resistant to treatment. A tampon, diaphragm, or other foreign object left too long in the vagina can also cause leukorrhea. Douching is not recommended, since this practice often disturbs the balance of normal vaginal flora, thereby exacerbating infection. A clinical examination to determine the cause of the discharge is necessary. Treatment is aimed at eliminating the underlying cause and typically involves administration of an antimicrobial agent. See also cervicitis; vulvitis.
