Malformation,  in biology, irregular or abnormal structural development. Malformations occur in both plants and animals and have a number of causes.
The processes of development are regulated in such a way that few malformed organisms are found. Those that do appear may, when properly studied, shed light on normal development. The science of teratology—a branch of morphology or embryology—is concerned with the study of these structural deviations from the normal, whether in animals or plants.
In general, abnormalities can be traced to deviations from the normal course of development, often in very early embryonic stages. Such deviations may be caused by abnormal (mutant) genes, by environmental conditions, by infection, by drugs, and, perhaps most frequently, by interactions between these sets of causes. A general interpretation has been that one factor in many cases is reduction of the rate of development, the kind and degree of deformity depending upon the stage at which the retardation occurs. This interpretation is supported by the results of descriptive studies of anomalies, and especially by evidence from experimental teratology.
Monstrosities, freaks, and other malformations have interested botanists for many years. There are numerous categories of such growth abnormalities in plants, and these are often related only loosely or not at all to one another.
Sometimes divergence from the normal represents merely a quantitative change, which is evidenced by a harmonious but exaggerated manifestation of the normal developmental processes. This is well illustrated in the so-called bakanae, or foolish seedling disease, of rice. The bakanae disease is caused by the fungus Gibberella fujikuroi. Diseased plants are often conspicuous in a field because of their extreme height and pale, spindly appearance. This exaggerated growth response was found to be due to specific substances, known as gibberellins, which were produced by the fungus. Evidence is now available to indicate that gibberellins, also produced by higher plant species, participate directly as an essential growth-regulating system in all higher plant species. The gibberellins of either fungal or higher plant origin stimulate the normal development of certain genetic dwarfs of maize and peas, which cannot themselves produce the gibberellins in amounts sufficient for their normal development.
A common deformity of tobacco, called frenching, occurs in most tobacco-growing regions of the world. The advanced state of this condition is characterized by a cessation of terminal bud and stem growth. When dominance of the stem tips is lost, the buds in the axils of the leaves develop, and unusually large numbers of leaves (as many as 300) appear on a plant. The leaves are characteristically sword- or string-shaped because of the failure of the leaf blades to develop. Such plants have the appearance of a rosette. Although the cause of frenching has not yet been unequivocally established, it is thought to be due to a toxic substance produced by the nonpathogenic soil bacterium Bacillus cereus.
Under the stimulus of pathogenic organisms of the most diverse kinds, the sepals, petals, stamens, or pistils of a flower may be transformed into structures that are very different in appearance from those found normally. Certain viruses can cause enlargement of the leaflike flower parts (sepals) surrounding the base of a blossom in plants of the nightshade family. The tomato big-bud virus appears to affect the sepals of the tomato flower rather specifically. These structures enlarge greatly under the influence of the virus and fuse to form huge bladderlike structures that may be 10 times or more the normal size. In the Madagascar periwinkle (Vinca rosea), however, viruses of this type bring about a green colouring in the petals, stamens, and styles; normally the petals are pink and the stamens and styles whitish. There is in this instance a retrograde development of floral parts into foliage leaves. (Findings such as these are of interest to the morphologist because they support the contention that the flower should be regarded as a modified leafy branch.)
Plant organs may arise in unusual places as a result of the infection by certain types of pathogenic agents. The carrot-yellows virus, for example, stimulates production of aerial tubers in the axils of the leaves of potato plants. Large numbers of adventitious roots (arising in abnormal places) appear on the stems of tomato plants infected with the bacteria Pseudomonas solanacearum and Agrobacterium tumefaciens as well as the Fusarium wilt fungus and the cranberry false blossom virus.
An extreme example of adventitious shoot formation is found in Begonia phyllomaniaca after shock. In this instance, small plantlets develop spontaneously in incredible numbers from the superficial cell layers of the leaf blades, petioles, and stems. The adventitious shoots do not arise from preformed buds but develop from cells at the base of hairs and especially from certain glands present in great numbers in young stems and leaves of this species. Although these plantlets develop a vascular system of their own, the vast majority never succeed in connecting that system with the vascular system of the host. They must therefore be regarded not as branches but rather as independent organisms.
