Malnutrition,  physical condition resulting either from a faulty or inadequate diet (i.e., a diet that does not supply normal quantities of all nutrients) or from a physical inability to absorb or metabolize nutrients.
Malnutrition may be the result of several conditions. First, sufficient and proper food may not be available, because of inadequate agricultural processes, imperfect distribution of food, or certain social problems such as poverty or alcoholism. In these instances, the cause of malnutrition is most often found to be a diet quantitatively inadequate in calories or protein.
Malnutrition may also result when certain foods containing one or more of the essential vitamins or minerals are not included in the diet. This commonly leads to specific nutritional deficiency diseases. Aging, sickness, and other factors that contribute to poor appetite can result in inadequate food consumption. Likewise, poor eating habits and food preferences may lead to malnutrition through the habitual consumption of certain foods to the exclusion of others or of large quantities of nonnutritious foods. In certain parts of Africa, for example, the practice of weaning breast-fed infants to a diet consisting chiefly of one kind of starchy food, such as cassava, may lead to protein deficiency (see kwashiorkor). In parts of East Asia, a restricted selection of foods and a preference for white polished rice as a dietary staple has led to the prevalence of a deficiency of thiamin (vitamin B1), which is found mainly in the germ and bran of grain (see beriberi). Multiple deficiencies are more likely to occur than single deficiencies, though the manifestations of one type usually predominate.
Malnutrition can also arise from acquired or inherited metabolic defects, notably those involving the digestive tract, liver, kidney, and red blood cells. These defects cause malnutrition by preventing the proper digestion, absorption, and metabolism of foodstuffs by organs and tissues.
Symptoms of malnutrition typically are self-apparent, with affected individuals commonly exhibiting weight loss, fatigue, and muscle weakness. Decreased immune function, dry skin, tooth decay, osteoporosis, dizziness, and mental disturbances (e.g., inability to concentrate) may also be present. Children who experience malnutrition over a prolonged period tend to be chronically underweight and may not develop normally, resulting in long-term consequences such as short stature.
Treatment for malnutrition depends on the cause. Food or meal delivery services may be used to ensure access to food, particularly in the case of elderly individuals. Persons who are severely affected may require hospitalization and use of a feeding tube. In many cases, however, simple dietary adjustments can readily reverse most harmful effects of malnutrition. Dietary supplements, such as vitamins and minerals, may be taken to aid recovery. Pastes or meals made from a specific combination of foods, with ingredients such as chickpeas, peanuts, bananas, and healthy oils, can greatly benefit the rehabilitation of normal gut microbial populations. Research in malnourished children has shown that such combinations of nutrients and accompanying improvements in the gut microbiome not only promote weight gain but also help restore overall metabolic function, which can impact bone growth, immunity, and other factors.
See also nutrition and nutritional disease.
