Mary Todd Lincoln, née Mary Ann Todd,  (born December 13, 1818, Lexington, Kentucky, U.S.—died July 16, 1882, Springfield, Illinois), American first lady (1861–65), the wife of Abraham Lincoln, 16th president of the United States. Happy and energetic in her youth, she suffered subsequent ill health and personal tragedies and behaved erratically in her later years.
Mary Todd was the daughter of Robert Smith Todd, a prosperous businessman, and Eliza Parker Todd, who came from a distinguished and well-connected family. Mary was given an excellent education for a young woman of her time, and she later boasted about how well she had learned French. After her mother died in 1825, her father remarried, and Mary, who despised her stepmother, spent more time with her grandmother. In 1832 she enrolled in boarding school.
In 1839 she moved to Springfield, Illinois, to live with her sister Elizabeth and Elizabeth’s husband, Ninian Edwards, whose family was active in local politics. As an attractive and accomplished member of a prominent household—her sister’s father-in-law was a former governor of Illinois—Mary received much attention, particularly from Abraham Lincoln, then a struggling country lawyer with no firm prospects. After a tempestuous courtship in which Abraham once broke off their engagement, the couple married on November 4, 1842, despite Elizabeth’s objections.
During the early years of their marriage Mary was fairly happy, despite the untimely death of her three-year-old son, Edward, in 1850 and her husband’s protracted absences while he campaigned or served in Congress.
Mary became first lady on the eve of the Civil War. Her position was a difficult one given her Southern birth and the fact that some of her relatives (including her half brothers) were fighting for the Confederacy. Her gracious performance as hostess drew initial praise, but she was later criticized for extravagant spending on her wardrobe and on White House furnishings, which caused her husband considerable distress. The death of her second son, Willie, in 1862 of typhoid fever added to her strain, and reports began to circulate about her irrational behaviour.
The assassination of President Lincoln in April 1865, which she witnessed, was nearly more than she could bear. At about this time she developed a powerful and lasting delusion that she was in dire poverty, though she continued to buy extravagantly. The wide public credence given the claim of William H. Herndon, her husband’s former law partner, that Ann Rutledge, a family friend who had died in 1835, was the only woman Abraham ever loved, bewildered and saddened her. In 1868 she traveled to Europe with her youngest son and lived for a time in Germany and England.
As the widow of an assassinated president—the first in the nation’s history—she received public sympathy, and in 1870 Congress responded by granting her an annual pension of $3,000, raising it to $5,000 in 1881. She considered the sum inadequate, however, and continued to believe that she was poor.
In 1871, shortly after her return to Chicago, her youngest son, Thomas (Tad), died. In 1875 her eldest and only surviving son, Robert Todd Lincoln, arranged for a hearing on her sanity, which resulted in her confinement for several months in a private sanatorium in Batavia, Illinois. A second hearing in 1876 reversed the earlier finding of insanity and ended her confinement but left her publicly humiliated. She spent the next four years in Europe, returning in late 1880 to Springfield, where she remained in declining health until her death in 1882. She was buried beside her husband at Oak Ridge Cemetery in Springfield.
