McArdle disease, also called glycogenosis type V or glycogen storage disease type V,  rare hereditary deficiency of the enzyme glycogen phosphorylase in muscle cells. In the absence of this enzyme, muscles cannot break down animal starch (glycogen) into simple sugars needed to meet the energy requirements of exercise. Muscle activity is thus solely dependent on the availability of glucose (blood sugar) and other nutrients in the circulating blood. McArdle disease is one of several distinct forms of glycogen storage disease.
McArdle disease is caused by mutations in the PYGM gene, which encodes an enzyme called myophosphorylase that specializes in the breakdown of glycogen specifically in muscle cells. Mutations in PYGM may be inherited from one or both parents, with full-blown disease arising from autosomal recessive inheritance (both parents passing mutations to offspring). When mutated, PYGM encodes a less functional form of myophosphorylase, resulting in decreased glycogen breakdown.
Owing to the lack of simple sugars directly available to muscle cells, individuals diagnosed with McArdle disease frequently experience muscle pain and cramping shortly after beginning exercise, particularly with activities such as running and weight lifting. Symptoms typically dissipate after a period of rest, and, in some instances, individuals can even resume their exercise routine with no subsequent issues. Extensive exercise, however, can damage muscle tissue, and some patients experience rhabdomyolysis (muscle breakdown), resulting in the release of a protein known as myoglobin into the urine. Myoglobin causes the urine to turn dark red or brown and potentially damages the kidneys, leading to kidney failure later in life.
Symptoms of McArdle disease can appear at any point between childhood and adulthood. Unlike most other types of glycogen storage diseases, McArdle disease is not fatal, and deficiencies in myophosphorylase function do not impair the functioning of other body systems. The condition can be managed through dietary modifications and a carefully planned exercise routine.
