Metabolic disease,  any of the diseases or disorders that disrupt normal metabolism, the process of converting food to energy on a cellular level. Thousands of enzymes participating in numerous interdependent metabolic pathways carry out this process. Metabolic diseases affect the ability of the cell to perform critical biochemical reactions that involve the processing or transport of proteins (amino acids), carbohydrates (sugars and starches), or lipids (fatty acids).
Metabolic diseases are typically hereditary, yet most persons affected by them may appear healthy for days, months, or even years. The onset of symptoms usually occurs when the body’s metabolism comes under stress—for example, after prolonged fasting or during a febrile illness. For some metabolic disorders, it is possible to obtain prenatal diagnostic screening. Such analysis usually is offered to families who have previously had a child with a metabolic disease or who are in a defined ethnic group. For example, testing for Tay-Sachs disease is relatively common in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. Countries that perform screening for metabolic diseases at birth typically test for up to 10 different conditions. Tandem mass-spectrometry is a new technology that allows for the detection of multiple abnormal metabolites almost simultaneously, making it possible to add approximately 30 disorders to the list of conditions for which newborns may be tested. If an infant is known to have a metabolic disorder soon after birth, appropriate therapy can be started early, which may result in a better prognosis. Some metabolic disorders respond very well if treatment is introduced at an early age. However, others have no effective therapy and cause severe problems, despite early diagnosis. In the future, gene therapy may prove successful in the treatment of some of these diseases.
Metabolic diseases are quite rare individually, but they are relatively common when considered as a group. Specific metabolic disorders have incidences ranging from approximately 1 in 500 (or even higher in isolated populations) to fewer than 1 in 1,000,000. As a group, it has been estimated that metabolic disorders affect approximately 1 in 1,000 individuals.
In 1908 British physician Sir Archibald Garrod postulated that four inherited conditions of lifelong duration—alkaptonuria, pentosuria, albinism, and cystinuria—were caused by defects in specific biochemical pathways due to the diminished activity or complete lack of a given enzyme. He called these disorders “inborn errors of metabolism.” Although Garrod was incorrect in his categorization of cystinuria, his insights provided the field of biochemical genetics with a solid foundation, and the list of inherited inborn errors of metabolism has rapidly grown. This article is primarily concerned with these inherited metabolic diseases, although other disorders, including endocrine diseases (e.g., diabetes mellitus and hypothyroidism) and malnutrition (e.g., marasmus and kwashiorkor), also affect cellular metabolism.
Food is broken down in a series of steps by cellular enzymes (proteins that catalyze the conversion of compounds called substrates) into products with a different biochemical structure. These products then become the substrate for the next enzyme in a metabolic pathway. If an enzyme is missing or has diminished activity, the pathway becomes blocked, and the formation of the final product is deficient, resulting in disease. Low activity of an enzyme may result in the subsequent accumulation of the enzyme’s substrate, which may be toxic at high levels. In addition, minor metabolic pathways that usually lie dormant may be activated when a substrate accumulates, possibly forming atypical, potentially toxic, products. Each cell in the body contains thousands of metabolic pathways, all of which are interlinked to some extent, so that a single blockage may affect numerous biochemical processes.
The consequences of metabolic imbalance may be severe; intellectual disability, seizures, decreased muscle tone, organ failure, blindness, and deafness may occur, depending on which enzyme is dysfunctional. In recent years, it has become apparent that even some conditions associated with multiple congenital anomalies (e.g., Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome) have an underlying metabolic cause.
