Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD),  rare inherited metabolic disease in which the lack of a key enzyme causes loss of the protective myelin sheath from the white matter of the brain, resulting in psychological disturbances, mental deterioration, and sensory and motor defects.
A number of genetic mutations have been associated with MLD. Nearly all of these mutations occur in a gene known as ARSA (arylsulfatase A) and result in outright or partial loss of activity of the gene product, an enzyme called arylsulfatase A (ASA), or cerebroside sulfatase. Arylsulfatase A deficiency allows certain harmful sulfur-containing lipids, known as sulfosphingolipids (also called sulfatides), to accumulate in nerve tissues of the central nervous system instead of being broken down. Sulfatides can also accumulate in nerve tissue in organs, such as the kidneys and gallbladder, where they can cause severe damage.
There are three types of MLD: infantile (onset occurs within the first four years of life), juvenile (onset occurs between ages 4 and 16), and adult (onset occurs after age 16). The most common form is infantile disease, characterized by a brief period of normal development during the first years of life and then a progressive onset of behavioral problems, mental deterioration, and blindness, ending after several years in death. The juvenile form is characterized by motor disturbances, cognitive deficits, and seizures. Juvenile MLD may be divided into early-juvenile, with onset between ages four and six, and late-juvenile, with onset after age six. The adult disease is characterized mainly by psychological disturbances, including dementia and schizophrenia.
Specific mutations in ARSA are linked to the timing of MLD onset and the phenotypic patterns (physical manifestations) of MLD, such as the degree of ASA deficiency and the severity of neuropsychiatric symptoms. Other genetic defects, such as those leading to the deficiency of an activator protein involved in the degradation of sulfatides but in which patients have normal ASA levels, can also cause MLD. In addition, there exist individuals who have very low levels of ASA but never develop the disease. This condition is known as pseudoarylsulfatase A deficiency (PASAD) and is the result of two specific polymorphisms that occur simultaneously in the ARSA gene.
Treatment options are limited for individuals with MLD. Bone marrow transplantation is the only effective treatment, used primarily for stabilizing neurocognitive function, although the disease will often progress despite transplantation. Scientists are investigating gene therapy and stem cell therapy as possible treatment options. Gene therapy was reported in 2013 to have successfully prevented the manifestation or progression of infantile MLD in a trial of three patients. The patients had a family history of MLD and displayed genetic evidence of infantile MLD but were presymptomatic at the time of therapy.
