Monkeypox,  viral disease of both animals and humans that causes symptoms similar to those of smallpox, though less severe. It is transmitted by the monkeypox virus, a member of the same virus family that causes smallpox and cowpox. Monkeypox was first identified in laboratory monkeys in 1958. The virus is usually found in primates and rodents in Central and West Africa. It can be transmitted to humans through an animal bite or through direct contact with infected bodily fluids. It can also be transmitted from person to person through prolonged close contact, usually among family members. The smallpox vaccine apparently protects against the monkeypox virus as well; as a result, during the period of intense smallpox vaccination in the 20th century, outbreaks of monkeypox were rare, isolated, and brief. Since the eradication of smallpox and the cessation of worldwide vaccination in 1980, monkeypox outbreaks in countries such as Congo (Kinshasa) have become larger and more prolonged, and the virus has shown an increased tendency to be spread directly by humans. In addition, the monkeypox virus has been brought out of Africa in infected “exotic pets” such as giant pouched rats, brush-tailed porcupines, and rope squirrels. In the United States, captive prairie dogs infected by imported African pets have passed monkeypox to humans.
In humans, the disease becomes apparent some two weeks after infection with the onset of fever, headache, general malaise and fatigue, and swollen lymph nodes. A few days later a rash of raised bumps appears on the face and body. These eventually crust and fall off, and the disease runs its course in two to four weeks. In Africa, monkeypox has proved to be most dangerous in children, who have had a mortality rate as high as 10 percent in some outbreaks. Treatment is limited to alleviating symptoms. Outbreaks are contained by isolating patients and by observing strict hygiene around them. Inoculation with smallpox vaccine may offer some protection to people likely to be exposed to the virus, including veterinarians and other animal handlers. Infected animals may display fever, rashes, swollen lymph nodes, eye discharge, and general listlessness.
