multiple sclerosis (MS), also called disseminated sclerosis,  progressive disease of the central nervous system characterized by destruction of the myelin sheath surrounding the nerve fibres of the brain, spinal cord, and optic nerves, as a result of which, the transmission of nerve impulses becomes impaired, particularly in pathways involving vision, sensation, and movement.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) has a worldwide distribution but is five times more common in temperate regions than in tropical regions. The disease primarily occurs in individuals between ages 20 and 40, and women are affected by the disease more often than men.
There are four major types of MS: relapsing-remitting (RRMS), secondary-progressive (SPMS), primary-progressive (PPMS), and progressive-relapsing (PRMS). About 80–85 percent of patients are diagnosed initially with RRMS. In this form of the disease, onset is usually gradual, and there are alternating intervals of symptom exacerbation and complete symptom remission. In many patients with RRMS, symptoms may worsen gradually during subsequent recurrences and eventually may no longer disappear during remissions. When this occurs, the patient’s diagnosis changes from RRMS to SPMS. About 10–15 percent of patients have PPMS, which is characterized by steady disease progression from the time of onset, without relapse-remission cycles. PRMS is a rare form of the disease, occurring in less than 5 percent of MS patients. This type is distinguished from other forms of MS by its steady worsening of symptoms from the time of onset, in which intermittent flare-ups become increasingly severe. There are no periods of complete symptom remission in PRMS.
In most forms of the disease, initial symptoms include numbness or tingling in the extremities or on the side of the face, muscle weakness, dizziness, unsteady gait, and visual disturbances such as blurred or double vision and partial blindness. The intensity of these early symptoms subsides in most individuals for months or even years. But in progressive forms of MS, remissions usually become shorter as the disease advances. New signs and symptoms may appear, including abnormal reflexes, difficulty in coordinating and controlling movement, bladder dysfunction, and neuropsychological problems such as depression, memory loss, and emotional instability. Eventually the impairment of motor control can develop into complete paralysis.
Genetic and environmental factors influence the development and progression of MS symptoms. For example, the presence in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid of lipids known as ceramides is associated with inflammation and with progression of the disease. Evidence indicates that ceramide levels are increased in MS in two ways, one of which involves the upregulation of genes that synthesize ceramides and the other of which involves increased intake of saturated fats in the diet. High body mass index and elevated blood lipid levels are associated with more severe symptoms and worsened disease progression in MS patients. Despite disease progression, most people with MS have a normal life expectancy.
The cause of MS remains unclear, but in many cases there is evidence of a genetic component. In fact, nearly five dozen different genetic variations have been associated with increased risk for the disease. Variations occurring in a cluster of genes that make up the major histocompatibility complex (MHC; also called human leukocyte antigen, or HLA, system), which regulates immune function, appear to have the most significant effect on risk. Some of these variations appear to be associated with environmental factors that precipitate the onset of disease. For example, the risk of MS in northern Europeans who carry a particular MHC variant is exacerbated by vitamin D deficiency, which weakens immune function.
Vitamin D deficiency as a factor in the development of MS has been further implicated by the identification of rare loss-of-function variations in a gene known as CYP27B1 that result in reduced vitamin D levels in the body. The inheritance of one copy (from one parent) of the mutated gene is sufficient to produce MS (inheritance of two copies, one from each parent, causes vitamin D-dependent rickets I, or pseudo-vitamin D-deficiency rickets). Thus, in those people who carry variations associated with or intensified by vitamin D deficiency, vitamin D supplementation may confer some degree of protection against MS.
There are also variations in other genes that have been identified and associated with MS, including several occurring in genes that encode proteins for signaling molecules known as interleukin receptors. These receptors are expressed on the cell membranes of B and T lymphocytes and play an important role in regulating lymphocyte development. Some variations in interleukin receptor genes are associated with autoimmune diseases, such as type 1 diabetes and Graves disease. There is much evidence suggesting that MS results from an autoimmune reaction in which a malfunctioning immune system produces T cells that react with and damage the body’s own cells, specifically the myelin sheath of nerve fibres. The trigger for this autoimmune reaction is not known, but it is suspected to be related to genetic factors, with the interaction of variations in multiple genes, rather than a single gene, being a likely cause. Some scientists believe these changes in immune function could also be the result of exposure to a virus.
There is no cure for MS, but a number of medications, such as corticosteroids, are used to alleviate symptoms. In addition, there are a handful of disease-modifying agents available for MS. These agents can reduce the frequency of relapses and generally slow the progress of the disease. Immunotherapy with different forms of interferon beta, a protein the body normally produces to modulate immune response, is used to reduce the severity and frequency of the exacerbation periods of the disease. Natalizumab (Tysabri), a monoclonal antibody (an antibody clone derived from a single immune cell), is also effective for controlling the severity and frequency of relapses. Natalizumab attaches to molecules on the cell membrane of lymphocytes, preventing them from entering the central nervous system and attacking nerve cells. Another monoclonal antibody, called Alemtuzumab (Lemtrada), which is used to treat chronic lymphocytic leukemia, also binds to the cell membrane of lymphocytes but works by stimulating antibody-mediated destruction of the cells. In clinical trials in patients with early-stage RRMS, this agent not only stopped progression of the disease but also facilitated the restoration of nerve function in some patients. Other agents used to treat MS include glatiramer acetate (Copaxone), the immunosuppressant drug mitoxantrone (Novantrone), and ocrelizumab (Ocrevus).
Another treatment for MS that has been explored in clinical trials is a form of stem cell therapy called autologous (self) hematopoietic stem cell transplant. This therapy has been tested only in patients who have not responded to conventional treatment regimens and therefore elect to undergo immunosuppressive therapy to destroy lymphocytes that have acquired autoimmune characteristics. Prior to the administration of immunosuppressive drugs, hematopoietic stem cells are harvested from the patient’s blood or bone marrow. These cells are then frozen and stored for later reinfusion into the patient following immunosuppressive therapy. Because hematopoietic stem cells have the potential to develop into normally functioning lymphocytes, transplant provides the patient’s immune system with an opportunity to recover normal activity. This treatment has proved successful in stopping or delaying disease progression in some patients, and, in rare cases, it has even led to the repair of neurological damage. However, significant risks are associated with stem cell therapy, including increased susceptibility to infection and possibility of transplant failure or relapse of disease.
