myotonia,  any of several muscular disorders characterized by difficulty in relaxing voluntary muscles after contraction. All the muscles or only a few may be affected. These disorders are often inherited.
Myotonia congenita and myotonic muscular dystrophy are usually caused by a mutation or other abnormality in a gene known as CLCN1 (chloride channel 1, skeletal muscle). That gene normally produces a protein that controls chloride channels in skeletal muscle fibre cells. However, defects in CLCN1 disrupt ion flow, causing muscles to contract for prolonged periods of time. Mutation of the human skeletal muscle sodium channel gene SCN4A (sodium channel, voltage-gated, type IV, alpha subunit) is associated with potassium-aggravated myotonia, acetazolamide-responsive myotonia, and paramyotonia congenita. Mutations in the SCN4A gene impede the passage of sodium ions through the cell membrane, inhibiting proper muscle function.
Myotonia congenita is a rare ion channel disorder. It occurs as an autosomal dominant form called Thomsen myotonia congenita or, more commonly, as an autosomal recessive form called Becker myotonia congenita (generalized myotonia congenita). (Autosomal dominant means that the inheritance of a single copy of the mutant gene from one parent is sufficient to cause disease; in autosomal recessive form, two mutant genes are required to produce the signs and symptoms of disease.)
Symptoms of inherited myotonia often are first noticed in early childhood, although some individuals do not manifest symptoms until early to late adulthood. Some mutations cause symptoms that present only during pregnancy. Myotonia congenita may cause lid lag (the inability to open the eyelids quickly). Difficulty in swallowing or in talking due to prolonged contraction of the tongue or throat muscles may also be present. Quick movements may precipitate myotonia, causing rigid paralysis in severe cases and stiffness in mild cases. Mild or transient weakness may be present in some individuals; others, however, may report average or greater-than-average strength. In fact, muscle fibres may be more developed than those of a person without the disorder. This overdevelopment, or hypertrophy, is commonly observed in the calf muscles of the leg. It may be caused by involuntary and repeated isometric exercise during attempts to make the muscle react normally, or there might be some replacement of the tissue with fat and fibrous scar tissue. A poorly understood but interesting feature of myotonia congenita is the “warm-up effect,” in which normal muscle function returns after repeated movement.
Some cases of muscular dystrophy, in which there is usually a gradual weakening of the muscles, also show stages of myotonia. Myotonia occurs in myotonic muscular dystrophy, of which there are three known types: congenital myotonia muscular dystrophy, which is present from birth and is the most severe form; myotonic muscular dystrophy type I; and myotonic muscular dystrophy type II, which may be very mild and not present until the third or fourth decade of life. Unlike myotonia congenita, in myotonic muscular dystrophy the muscles do not overdevelop but instead gradually degenerate. The stiffening effect of the myotonia may precede the degeneration by two to three years. Myotonic muscular dystrophy is a multisystem disorder; sufferers often develop cataracts at an early age, and heart problems and cognitive degeneration may also be present. Most instances of other forms of myotonia can be distinguished from muscular dystrophy because the myotonia fails to show the dystrophy symptoms of profound and constant weakness, cataracts, baldness, and gonadal atrophy.
Mexiletine is often the drug of choice for treatment of myotonia congenita; however, the drug must be used with caution because it can interfere with cardiac function. Quinine and phenytoin have also been used to alleviate symptoms of myotonia congenita. Acetazolamide may be used for potassium-aggravated myotonia and other myotonias caused by mutations in SCN4A. Individuals with such conditions may also benefit from mexiletine.
