Narcissism,  pathological self-absorption, first identified as a mental disorder by the British essayist and physician Havelock Ellis in 1898. Narcissism is characterized by an inflated self-image and addiction to fantasy, by an unusual coolness and composure shaken only when the narcissistic confidence is threatened, and by the tendency to take others for granted or to exploit them. The disorder is named for the mythological figure Narcissus, who fell in love with his own reflection. According to Sigmund Freud, narcissism is a normal stage in child development, but it is considered a disorder when it occurs after puberty.
Narcissistic personality disorder is usually diagnosed through clinical evaluation. It is defined by the fifth edition (2013) of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) in terms of the personality traits of grandiosity and attention-seeking and in terms of significant impairments in personality functioning—such as looking excessively to others for the regulation of self-esteem, viewing oneself as exceptional, having impaired empathy, and having mostly superficial relationships. Those qualities remain relatively stable over time and are not attributable primarily to a medical condition, the use of drugs, or the individual’s developmental stage. Researchers have also investigated a less-extreme form of narcissism that is termed the narcissistic personality type. Such individuals possess most or all of the characteristics of the narcissistic personality disorder but are considered within the normal range of personality.
Persons who display either narcissistic personality disorder or the narcissistic personality type are preoccupied with maintaining excessively positive self-concepts. They become overly concerned with obtaining positive, aggrandizing feedback from others and react with extreme positive or negative emotions when they succeed or fail to receive confirmation that others hold them in high regard. Narcissists want positive feedback about themsleves, and they actively manipulate others to solicit or coerce admiration from them. Accordingly, narcissism is thought to reflect a form of chronic interpersonal self-esteem regulation.
The narcissistic personality type is measured through self-report questionnaires such as the Narcissistic Personality Inventory (NPI), the most widely used such scale, which can also be used to assess narcissistic personality disorder. The NPI presents respondents with a set of forced-choice items in which they must decide which of two statements is most descriptive of them. For example, persons completing the NPI would be asked whether they are best described by “people always seem to recognize my authority” or by “being an authority doesn’t mean that much to me.” People who score high on the NPI have been shown to display a wide variety of narcissistic behaviours, such as arrogance, feigned superiority, and aggressiveness. In addition, people with a clinical diagnosis of narcissistic personality disorder score higher on the NPI than do people with other psychiatric diagnoses or those in control groups.
Clinical theories of narcissism, such as those of the Austrian psychoanalysts Heinz Kohut and Otto Kernberg, posit that adult narcissism has its roots in early childhood experiences. Both Kohut and Kernberg focus on disturbances in early social (parental) relationships as the genesis of adult narcissistic personality disorder. Also, both view narcissism at its core as a defect in the development of a healthy self. According to Kohut, the child’s self develops and gains maturity through interactions with others (primarily the mother) that provide the child with opportunities to gain approval and enhancement and to identify with perfect and omnipotent role models. Parents who are empathic contribute to the healthy development of the child’s self in two ways. First, they provide mirroring that fosters a more realistic sense of self. Second, parents reveal limitations in themselves that lead the child to internalize or assume an idealized image that is realistic and possible to attain. Problems are introduced when the parent is unempathetic and fails to provide approval and appropriate role models. According to Kohut, narcissism is in effect developmental arrest—a halt in the child’s development at what was a normal and necessary stage, with the result that the child’s self remains grandiose and unrealistic. At the same time, the child continues to idealize others to maintain self-esteem through association.
In contrast, Kernberg’s theory maintains that narcissism is a defense. It results from the child’s reaction to coldness and lack of empathy on the parents’ part, perhaps stemming from their own narcissism. According to Kernberg, the child becomes emotionally hungry and responds with rage to the parents’ neglect. In this view the narcissistic defense reflects the child’s attempt to take refuge in some aspect of the self that evokes admiration in others—a defense that ultimately results in a grandiose and inflated sense of self. Narcissists, in Kernberg’s view, are grandiose on the outside but vulnerable and questioning of their self-worth on the inside.
The theories of Kernberg and Kohut both characterize narcissists as individuals with a childhood history of unsatisfactory social relationships who as adults possess grandiose views of the self that foster a conflicted psychological dependence on others.
