Necrosis,  death of a circumscribed area of plant or animal tissue as a result of disease or injury. Necrosis is a form of premature tissue death, as opposed to the spontaneous natural death or wearing out of tissue, which is known as necrobiosis. Necrosis is further distinguished from apoptosis, or programmed cell death, which is internally regulated by cells, plays a critical role in embryonic development, and serves as a protective mechanism against disease and other factors.
Necrosis may follow a wide variety of injuries, both physical and biological in nature. Examples of physical injuries include cuts, burns, bruises, oxygen deprivation (anoxia), and hyperthermia. Biological injuries can include immunological attack and the effects of disease-causing agents. Notable conditions involving necrotic tissue death include avascular necrosis and gangrene, which result from a lack of blood supply to the affected area; necrotizing fasciitis, which is caused by a rapidly spreading bacterial infection; and loxoscelism, in which venom in a bite from a recluse spider (Loxosceles) produces a gangrenous wound. Such injuries and diseases inhibit crucial intracellular metabolic processes, in which intracellular enzymes become activated upon injury and destroy damaged cells. Lesions caused by necrosis often are of diagnostic value.
Early cellular signs of necrosis include swelling of the mitochondria, a process that impairs intracellular oxidative metabolism. Later, localized densities appear, with condensation of genetic material. Cytoplasmic organelles are disrupted, and affected cells separate from neighbouring cells. The dissolution of lysosomes, which normally house hydrolytic enzymes, leads to intracellular acidosis. The nucleus swells and darkens (pyknosis) and eventually ruptures (karyolysis). The outer membrane of the cell also ruptures, resulting in a loss of ion-pumping capacity and a rapid flow of sodium and calcium ions into the intracellular environment, resulting in osmotic shock (a sudden shift in intracellular and extracellular solute concentrations).
