Necrotizing fasciitis,  rapidly spreading infection of the underlying skin and fat layers caused by a variety of pathogenic bacteria, principally Streptococcus pyogenes, also known as the group A streptococcus. Popularly known as the flesh-eating disease, necrotizing fasciitis is an uncommon condition, but it can lead to life-threatening illness and death, with mortality rates approaching 50 percent.
The bacteria that cause necrotizing fasciitis usually enter the body through the mucous membranes or breaks in the skin. In many cases there is no obvious wound or memory of an injury. Infection begins with a mild rash, sensations of tenderness and warmth, and some swelling. Over the next 24 to 48 hours the rash darkens, and blisters begin to form. Gangrene sets in, and the subcutaneous tissues become necrotic.
Historically, group A streptococci have been responsible for deadly outbreaks of scarlet fever, rheumatic fever, and toxic shock syndrome. In the 1980s and ’90s, more-virulent strains of streptococci reemerged to cause a variety of life-threatening infections, including necrotizing fasciitis. The increase in numbers of serious cases of group A streptococcal infection may have been due to increased numbers of immunosuppressed people with organ transplants, AIDS, diabetes, cancer, and other illnesses. Genetic changes in the bacteria also may have contributed to the increased incidence.
The group A streptococci produce a variety of so-called virulence factors that permit them to evade the defense mechanisms of the host and thus cause disease. These factors include polysaccharide capsules and M proteins that impede phagocytosis, enzymes that degrade host tissues, and toxins that overstimulate the immune system, causing fever and shock.
Necrotizing fasciitis must be diagnosed and treated immediately. Surgery is often required to remove necrotic tissue, and amputation of gangrenous limbs is sometimes necessary. Antibiotics such as penicillin and clindamycin are also an important part of therapy.
