Occupational disease,  any illness associated with a particular occupation or industry. Such diseases result from a variety of biological, chemical, physical, and psychological factors that are present in the work environment or are otherwise encountered in the course of employment. Occupational medicine is concerned with the effect of all kinds of work on health and the effect of health on a worker’s ability and efficiency.
Occupational diseases are essentially preventable and can be ascribed to faulty working conditions. The control of occupational health hazards decreases the incidence of work-related diseases and accidents and improves the health and morale of the work force, leading to decreased absenteeism and increased worker efficiency. In most cases the moral and economic benefits far outweigh the costs of eliminating occupational hazards.
This article discusses general occupational health hazards and the disorders they cause, as well as the role of occupational health services. More detailed information about specific disorders can be found in the articles dealing with human diseases and the structures of the human body, such as cancer; infection; and respiratory disease.
The first recorded observation of an occupational disease may be a case of severe lead colic suffered by a worker who extracted metals. It is described in the third book of Epidemics, attributed to Hippocrates, the Greek physician of the 4th century bce. Other early writers also recognized the association between certain disorders and occupations. The Roman scholar Pliny, in the 1st century ce, described mercury poisoning as a disease of slaves because mines contaminated by mercury vapour were considered too unhealthy for Roman citizens and thus were worked only by slaves. In general, however, physicians of antiquity were not concerned with the health of workers.
During the Middle Ages the rise of metalliferous mining in central Europe inspired the German mineralogist Georgius Agricola to make a detailed study of gold-and silver-mining operations. In his De Re Metallica, published posthumously in 1556, Agricola described the primitive methods of ventilation and personal protection in use, common mining accidents and disasters, and such miners’ occupational diseases as the “difficulty in breathing and destruction of the lungs” caused by the harmful effects of dust inhalation.
A more comprehensive account of occupational disorders was written by Bernardino Ramazzini, a professor of medicine first at the University of Modena and later at the University of Padua. His De Morbis Artificum Diatriba (1700; Diseases of Workers) contains descriptions of the diseases associated with 54 different occupations, from the mercury poisoning of Venetian mirror makers to the diseases afflicting learned men. Ramazzini believed that a physician must determine the patient’s occupation in order to discover the cause of the patient’s disorder. He is generally regarded as the father of occupational medicine.
The Industrial Revolution of the 18th century had a profound impact on occupational diseases. Rapid technological progress and industrial growth had led to crowded, unsanitary working and living conditions, with a corresponding rise in the number of accidents and deaths caused by the new machinery and exposure to toxic materials. In 1775 Percivall Pott, a London surgeon, linked the frequent occurrence of scrotal cancer among chimney sweeps to the soot ingrained into their skin by prolonged exposure to flue dusts. Charles Turner Thackrah, a Leeds physician, further advanced the study of occupational medicine in Britain with his The Effects of the Principal Arts, Trades and Professions . . . on Health and Longevity . . . (1831), which described lung diseases caused by dust that commonly afflicted miners and metal grinders. In 1895 Britain introduced a statutory notification system that required medical personnel to report all occurrences of certain diseases to the chief inspector of factories. Other industrial nations followed Britain’s lead, and legal provisions for the health of the worker continued to be instituted throughout the 19th and 20th centuries.
Although such classic occupational diseases as lead poisoning and anthrax have declined in incidence in industrialized countries, none have been eradicated. Furthermore, new diseases continue to develop as a result of advances in technology. X rays were discovered in 1895, and 20 years later nearly 100 radiologists were estimated to have died as a result of occupational exposures. Asbestos-related disease was first reported in the first half of the 20th century, and in 1974 hemangiosarcoma, a rare malignant tumour of the liver, was discovered among workers involved in the polymerization of vinyl chloride monomer. Other occupational diseases related to the introduction of industrial processes and materials may well be recognized in the future.
Paralleling the development of new technology and occupational hazards has been the development of occupational health services. No longer concerned primarily with the prevention of industrial accidents and diseases among manual workers, industrial medicine now aims to protect and improve the health of all classes and kinds of workers. In 1950 a joint committee of the International Labour Organisation and the World Health Organization (ILO/WHO) defined the concerns of occupational health as:
In most countries in the West the responsibility for health and safety at work is placed on the employer, although the government may establish safety standards. Occupational health services are provided as benefits by employers and generally are separate from other community health services. In the former Soviet Union occupational health and hygiene were given high priority and were fully integrated in the general medical care system. In the developing and Third World countries, many of which are undergoing rapid industrialization, the importance of occupational health is increasingly realized. The problems of exposure to occupational hazards, however, are frequently compounded by preexisting malnutrition and a high incidence of infectious disease. Occupational health services in these countries are often most practical and cost-effective, therefore, when combined with primary health care delivery.
