Oligomenorrhea, also spelled oligomenorrhoea,  prolonged intervals between menstrual cycles. Menstruation is the normal cyclic bleeding from the female reproductive tract. Most women of reproductive age menstruate every 25 to 30 days if they are not pregnant, nursing a child, or experiencing other disorders such as tumours, anorexia nervosa, or Stein-Leventhal syndrome (polycystic ovary syndrome). However, in oligomenorrhea, menstruation occurs in intervals greater than 35 days, and affected women typically menstruate between 4 and 9 times per year. If a woman fails to menstruate at all, the condition is referred to as amenorrhea.
Oligomenorrhea can result in infertility and may be accompanied by symptoms of estrogen deficiency, such as loss of libido, breast atrophy, vaginal dryness, and hot flashes. The causes of oligomenorrhea include hypothalamic, pituitary, or ovarian dysfunction. Hypothalamic amenorrhea is a term used to describe the condition of women who have oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea as a result of decreased pulsatile secretion of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which stimulates the synthesis and secretion of the two primary gonadotropins—luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). Decreased GnRH secretion may be caused by psychological or emotional disorders (e.g., anorexia nervosa), chronic illnesses of nonendocrine organs (e.g., chronic liver, kidney, lung, or heart disease), starvation, or excessive exercise. Pituitary causes of oligomenorrhea include hyperprolactinemia (high serum prolactin concentrations), without or with galactorrhea (inappropriate lactation), and gonadotropin deficiency, such as that caused by a nonsecreting pituitary tumour or other disorder that results in decreased pituitary function.
Ovarian causes of oligomenorrhea include autoimmune premature ovarian failure, surgical removal of the ovaries, and radiation of the ovaries with X-rays. In addition, numerous drugs and hormones can inhibit the secretion of GnRH or gonadotropin or cause a decrease in ovarian function. For example, some psychoactive drugs cause hyperprolactinemia; glucocorticoids and androgens, whether taken for some therapeutic purpose or secreted in excess, inhibit gonadotropin secretion; and cyclophosphamide, an anticancer drug, causes ovarian deficiency.
The cause of oligomenorrhea can often be determined from the woman’s history and a physical examination. Information about the cause of oligomenorrhea may be revealed by measurements of serum concentrations of FSH, LH, prolactin, and testosterone. Images of the hypothalamus and pituitary gland or the ovaries may provide additional information about the underlying cause. High serum FSH and LH concentrations indicate the presence of ovarian dysfunction (primary hypogonadism), whereas low concentrations indicate the presence of hypothalamic or pituitary dysfunction (secondary or central hypogonadism).
Treatment depends on the cause. If a specific cause cannot be corrected or if no cause is identified, then treatment will depend on the woman’s desire for fertility. Treatment may consist of administration of a progestin for 7 to 10 days. If vaginal bleeding occurs after the progestin is stopped, repeated courses of progestin may be administered and spontaneous menstrual cycles and ovulatory cycles may resume. If fertility is not desired, a combination of estrogen and progestin or an oral contraceptive may be given. If fertility is desired, clomiphene, which stimulates a surge in LH secretion, may successfully induce ovulation. Fertility may also be restored by gonadotropin injections to stimulate follicle maturation and ovulation.
