Panic attack,  sudden onset of intense apprehension, fear, or terror that occurs without apparent cause. A panic attack is diagnosed based on the occurrence of at least four physical (somatic) or psychological symptoms. Physical symptoms may include shortness of breath, palpitations or accelerated heart rate, chest pain or discomfort, choking, dizziness or faintness, trembling or shaking, sweating, nausea, abdominal distress, numbness or tingling, and hot flashes or chills. Psychological symptoms may consist of a smothering sensation, a feeling of unreality, a fear of dying, and a fear of “going crazy” or losing control. The intensity of panic attacks is variable, ranging from severe to relatively mild, and most attacks last about 10–15 minutes. There are three different types of panic attacks, known as situationally bound (expected to occur in specific situations), situationally predisposed (may or may not occur in specific situations), and unexpected. Thus, a panic attack does not necessarily precede or follow a stressful situation. In some cases, symptoms of an attack are mistaken for other problems, such as a heart attack or a gastrointestinal condition.
Panic attacks are the most common psychological disorder occurring in people affected by breathing disorders, such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Some adults and children experiencing bereavement or separation anxiety are susceptible to panic attacks. Furthermore, many persons who experience panic attacks display irregular breathing patterns when resting quietly and when sleeping, and some are likely to engage in avoidance behaviour in an attempt to prevent placing themselves in situations that could precipitate an attack.
Panic attacks may form part of a more significant anxiety-related condition called panic disorder. There appear to be genetic factors that increase susceptibility in some individuals. Genetic defects in neurochemical messenger systems in the brain have been implicated in panic. For example, decreased levels of receptors for a neurotransmitter called serotonin, as well as decreased levels of an inhibitory neurotransmitter called gamma-aminobutyric acid, have been identified in the brains of people affected by panic attacks. Scientists also have proposed a suffocation false alarm theory, in which signals about potential suffocation arise from physiological and psychological centres involved in sensing factors associated with suffocation, such as increasing carbon dioxide and lactate levels in the brain. People affected by panic disorder appear to have an increased sensitivity to these alarm signals, which produce a heightened sense of anxiety. This increased sensitivity results in misinterpretation of nonthreatening situations as terrifying events.
Treatment for panic attacks typically includes cognitive therapy, in which patients learn skills that help them to cope with and to thwart an attack. Examples of skills that are effective in avoiding panic attacks when symptoms begin to appear include blocking thoughts associated with irrational fears, engaging in conversation with another person, and concentrating on a single repetitive task. Whereas many people can be treated through cognitive therapy alone, some patients require pharmacotherapy. For example, tricyclic antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and serotonin reuptake inhibitors can be effective treatments for patients who experience frequent panic attacks.
