Polymyalgia rheumatica,  joint disease that is fairly common in people over the age of 50, with an average age of onset of about 70. Out of 100,000 people over the age of 50, approximately 700 will exhibit signs of polymyalgia rheumatica. It tends to affect women twice as often as men. The syndrome is characterized by morning stiffness or aching in the neck, shoulders, torso, or hips.
Before the onset of polymyalgia rheumatica, patients tend to be healthy. Symptoms can manifest quickly or over weeks and months, including muscle and joint aches of the shoulder girdle, torso, neck, and pelvic girdle. Symptoms may also include anorexia, weight loss, fatigue, and low-grade fever. The exact cause of polymyalgia rheumatica is unclear, but it is believed to be an immune response that triggers the production of cytokines, which then cause inflammation. However, the production of cytokines cannot be directly linked to the vessel inflammation.
Diagnosis is complex due to the overlap of symptoms with other diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis. Along with morning stiffness and aching, the inflammatory process can be detected by analyzing the patient’s erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). This is the same test used to detect the inflammatory process in temporal arteritis, which is often associated with polymyalgia rheumatica. Fifteen percent of patients with polymyalgia rheumatica will develop temporal arteritis, and 50 percent of patients that have temporal arteritis will develop polymyalgia rheumatica. This association is noteworthy, as one of the primary concerns associated with temporal arteritis is the occurrence of irreversible visual loss.
When patients are thought to have polymyalgia rheumatica, a low dose of  corticosteroids is administered. If polymyalgia rheumatica is the correct diagnosis, symptoms will resolve almost immediately, and the ESR will gradually drop to normal values. If a patient does not respond to the initial course of corticosteroids, an immunosuppressant may be added to the regimen. Polymyalgia rheumatica is usually self-limited, lasting months to years, but has not been found to increase the chance of death.
