Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS),  a rare human genetic disorder characterized by weak muscle tone at birth, small stature, intellectual disabilities, overeating leading to childhood obesity, and high rates of morbidity and mortality. PWS arises from the deletion or disruption of genes in a particular region of chromosome 15. First described in 1956 by Andrea Prader, Heinrich Willi, and others, it occurs in approximately 1 of 15,000 live births.
Mothers with prior experience of normal pregnancies report distinctly delayed onset of labour and reduced fetal activity during the pregnancies involving Prader-Willi children. PWS is characterized at birth by the lack of spontaneous movements, excessive daytime sleepiness, and protective reflexes. Babies display little interest in feeding, and their ability to suck is weak or absent. They will take longer to attain the ability to walk, talk, sit, and stand. Children will go on to develop symptoms of muscular hypotonia (weak muscle tone). Distinctive facial features also identify a child with the syndrome; these include a narrow face, almond-shaped eyes, small-appearing mouth, a thin upper lip with down-turned corners of the mouth, and full cheeks. The child’s eyes may cross (strabismus). A frequent feature generally overlooked is thick saliva at the edges of the mouth. Patients also tend to be relatively insensitive to pain.
Between ages one and six, children with PWS suddenly develop a tremendous interest in food and begin overeating (hyperphagia). Dysfunction in the brain regions associated with satiety and hunger leads to severe disturbances of appetite regulation, including delayed meal termination and early return of hunger after a meal, resulting in abnormal body mass composition and obesity; this in turn leads to increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Some obese PWS patients eventually are diagnosed with type 2 diabetes, of which obesity is a common cause.
PWS children commonly exhibit behavioral problems. In some cases, for example, affected children display spontaneous outbursts of aggressive behaviour. PWS has also been associated with obsessive-compulsive disorder and sleep abnormalities. Patients may develop other behavioral difficulties as well as intellectual disabilities and other cognitive and learning problems.
Children with PWS also have endocrine problems including reduced or absent secretion of sex hormones (hypogonadism). During adolescence, males may have a smaller penis and undescended testis. Secondary sexual characteristics such as pubic hair and breast development in females may not develop as well. Growth spurt is also delayed, and thus patients tend to have a shorter stature.
PWS is incurable; however, several treatments are available to alleviate the symptoms. Growth-hormone therapy for short stature improves body composition, linear growth, physical strength, and agility. Treatment with octreotide, a somatostatic agent, can induce weight loss in children with obesity. Other therapies can stimulate testosterone production and virilization in patients with hypogonadism. Physical therapy and exercise help improve strength and coordination. Speech therapy is often beneficial for patients with language problems. As the child grows, eating and weight problems can be controlled through a balanced low-calorie diet, weight monitoring, external food restriction, and daily exercise.
