preeclampsia and eclampsia,  hypertensive conditions that are induced by pregnancy. Preeclampsia, also called gestational edema-proteinuria-hypertension (GEPH), is an acute toxic condition arising during the second half of the gestation period or in the first week after delivery and generally occurs in young women during a first pregnancy. Eclampsia, a more severe condition with convulsions, follows preeclampsia in about 5 percent of preeclamptic women and poses a serious threat to both mother and child.
Preeclampsia is marked by elevated blood pressure (hypertension), protein in the urine (proteinuria), and swelling (edema) that is strikingly noticeable in the hands and face. Common symptoms of preeclampsia include headaches, visual disturbances, and stomach pain; however, it may be detected before the onset of symptoms by monitoring blood pressure and weight gain.
The underlying causes of preeclampsia and eclampsia remain unclear. The primary clinical feature of elevated blood pressure may be attributed to malformed blood vessels feeding into the placenta from the uterus. Abnormal or damaged vessels can trigger the release of inflammatory substances and other molecules (e.g., angiotensin) that cause vessel inflammation or constriction. Other possible causes of preeclampsia and eclampsia include genetic defects, autoimmune disorders, and diet.
For example, women affected by the autoimmune condition systemic lupus erythematosus and women who carry autoimmune substances known as antiphospholipid antibodies appear to be at increased risk of preeclampsia. The association of those autoimmune conditions with preeclampsia has been attributed to loss-of-function defects in genes such as MCP (or CD46; CD46 molecule, complement regulatory protein) and CFI (complement factor I), which have been identified in women affected by both autoimmune disease and preeclampsia. Those genes produce complement regulatory proteins that normally mediate the activities of complement, a system of proteins responsible for the breakdown of immune complexes and defense against infection. Because the regulatory proteins also play a role in protecting the developing fetus from immune attack by maternal complement, it is suspected that their loss of function leaves the placenta and its blood vessels susceptible to immune damage contributing to preeclampsia.
Another gene believed to be susceptible to defects that predispose some women to preeclampsia is catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), which produces an enzyme. Scientists suspect that the enzyme and its major metabolite called 2-methoxyestradiol (2-ME) are required for normal formation and function of placental vasculature. Lack of the COMT enzyme and therefore 2-ME has been linked with persistent placental hypoxia—a decrease in oxygen in placental tissue that is considered a hallmark of preeclampsia. Hypoxia, which stimulates the formation of new blood vessels, is normal in the first trimester of pregnancy and ensures sufficient delivery of nutrients and oxygen to the rapidly growing fetus. By the third trimester the demand for new vessels drops, and new vessel formation is halted—a process controlled by 2-ME. Prolonged exposure to hypoxia endangers the health of the fetus and the mother and is the primary reason premature delivery may be necessary in preeclamptic pregnancies.
Preeclampsia can often be controlled by special diets, medication, and limitation of activity. For example, a diet high in fibre, which is associated with the generation of beneficial metabolic products, can promote immune health in pregnant women, potentially reducing the risk or severity of preeclampsia. If preeclampsia occurs late in pregnancy, there is the option of early delivery. Eclampsia can usually be avoided by similar measures. If convulsions occur, they are treated with infusions of magnesium sulfate.
