Rheumatic fever,  inflammatory disease of the heart, joints, central nervous system, and subcutaneous tissues that develops after a throat infection with group A beta-hemolytic Streptococcus bacteria, including untreated scarlet fever or strep throat. Prevention is possible with penicillin, but specific treatment is not available. Rheumatic fever is particularly important because of the heart disease, which includes vascular damage, that may ensue. The illness occurs chiefly in children and young adults, with a peak incidence between ages 5 and 15.
When a streptococcal throat infection goes untreated, most patients recover without complications. Approximately 1 percent, however, develop rheumatic fever. The onset of the disease is most often characterized by the sudden occurrence of fever and joint pain and inflammation several days to six weeks after the streptococcal infection. Signs of cardiac involvement include heart murmurs, increased heartbeat rate, and heart enlargement. Inflammation of the heart muscle and supporting structures may lead to a permanent scarring and contracture of the heart valves and a marked decrease in life expectancy. Other symptoms of rheumatic fever include nodules beneath the skin and skin rashes, the most typical of which is erythema marginatum; Sydenham chorea, a nervous system manifestation marked by emotional instability and purposeless, involuntary movements of the arms and legs; abdominal pain; nosebleeds; weakness; and loss of appetite and body weight. Generally the clinical symptoms, severity, and aftereffects of an attack of rheumatic fever are highly variable, ranging from a condition so mild as to go unnoticed to a severe acute attack associated with cardiac failure and death.
During the course of rheumatic fever, the streptococcal organism may no longer be demonstrable in cultures of the throat or other infected body areas, but blood titres of antibodies against the streptococcus, such as antistreptolysin O, are high. All the numerous types of group A beta-hemolytic Streptococcus appear capable of inducing rheumatic fever in susceptible individuals; infection with one type confers no immunity against the others, and individuals who have experienced one attack of rheumatic fever are especially prone to subsequent attacks. Both the initial and recurrent attacks can be effectively prevented with penicillin. Symptomatic treatment of the condition includes the use of salicylates such as aspirin or one of the steroid hormones. Surgery may be advocated to relieve the narrowing of the openings of the heart valves. Rheumatic fever patients must receive antibiotics on a regular basis for the remainder of their lives because their damaged heart valves predispose them to the development of bacterial endocarditis.
The exact cause of rheumatic fever is not clear, although most authorities favour the theory that the disease results from an autoimmune reaction, involving the production of antibodies that attack the body’s own tissues. The autoimmune reaction is believed to be triggered by components of the streptococci (antigens) whose structure resembles that of molecules found in human tissue (“self antigens”). Because of this resemblance, the antibodies that recognize streptococcal antigens may mistakenly react with similarly shaped antigens of certain cells of the body—such as those of the heart. By binding to these self antigens, the antibodies cause the tissue damage characteristic of rheumatic fever.
Since the mid-20th century the incidence and severity of rheumatic fever and other streptococcal infections, such as scarlet fever, have declined precipitously in the developed countries. This decline has occurred independently of the use of penicillin and other drugs and may simply signal the gradual dying out of the disease. However, in many other parts of the world rheumatic fever remains a serious and prevalent disease.
