Samuel Gridley Howe,  (born November 10, 1801, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.—died January 9, 1876, Boston), American physician, educator, and abolitionist as well as the founding director of the New-England Institution for the Education of the Blind (later known as the Perkins School for the Blind) and the Massachusetts School for Idiotic and Feeble-Minded Youth. Howe was known particularly for his success in teaching the alphabet to Laura Bridgman, a student who was blind and deaf. He also championed the improvement of publicly funded schools, prison reform, humane treatment for mentally ill people, oral communication and lipreading for the deaf, and antislavery efforts.
Howe graduated in 1821 from Brown University and then completed his medical education in 1824 at Harvard Medical College. Soon thereafter he left for Greece, where he participated in the Greek War of Independence against the Ottoman Empire. During that time Howe sent letters to his family and friends about the war; many of those letters appeared in American newspapers. He secured provisions from Americans that he then distributed to the citizens of war-torn Greece, and he published An Historical Sketch of the Greek Revolution (1828), which informed Americans about the causes, progress, and outcome of the war.
A few months after Howe’s return to the United States in 1831, the trustees of the New-England Institution for the Education of the Blind—a newly chartered Massachusetts blind school that was the first institution of its kind in the country—appointed Howe as their director. At the time, Howe knew little about either blindness or the education of the blind, so he sailed back to Europe to observe schools for the blind. He returned to the United States in 1832 to open the new school in Boston, and soon thereafter the school gained national fame through newspaper and magazine reports and through public exhibitions of the pupils’ skills in reading and music. In 1837, at age seven, Laura Bridgman joined the school; she had lost the ability to see, hear, taste, and smell five years earlier. Under Howe’s direction, Bridgman learned to use her sense of touch to recognize letters of the alphabet and English words and to receive and express communication. In 1842 English novelist Charles Dickens observed Bridgman and recounted his experience in his work American Notes (1842).
In 1843, while a member of the Massachusetts legislature, Howe introduced American educator, social reformer, and humanitarian Dorothea Lynde Dix’s “Memorial to the Legislature of Massachusetts” to lawmakers and the public. Through newspaper articles, Howe used Dix’s findings to call public attention to the inhumane conditions of mentally ill people in the state’s local almshouses and jails. Also in 1843, Howe married Julia Ward (later known for her 1862 poem “Battle Hymn of the Republic”). The couple honeymooned in Europe, where Howe toured charitable institutions, schools, and prisons and met with Florence Nightingale, who claimed that Howe was the first person to urge her to enter the nursing profession.
Upon his return to Boston in 1844, Howe found himself in the midst of controversies over public school reform. Along with friend and American educator Horace Mann, he championed an anti-Calvinist model of public education, which held that better student learning would be achieved with competent teachers who use patience and sympathetic guidance rather than punitive threats or corporal punishment. During the same period, he argued on behalf of the solitary-confinement model of prisoner incarceration as exemplified in Philadelphia’s Eastern State Penitentiary (see Pennsylvania system). In 1847 he became a member of the Boston Society for Aiding Discharged Convicts. The next year he received both public praise and ridicule after he convinced Massachusetts lawmakers to fund the first residential school for “idiots” (as intellectually disabled people were called at that time).
During the 1830s and ’40s, Howe developed the Perkins School for the Blind from a state to a regional institution. He traveled with his blind pupils beyond New England, venturing west to Ohio and Kentucky and as far south as Georgia and Louisiana. In state after state, Howe’s lectures—along with exhibitions of his students’ skills in reading, writing, oratory, and musical performance—encouraged state legislators to establish public facilities for the education of the blind. Twice during that period, his pupils showed their talents before the U.S. Congress. Howe urged Congress to appropriate funds for a national library for the blind, but his aspiration for such a library was never realized in his lifetime.
Howe had written against slavery as early as 1833. In 1846 he committed himself to its abolition, becoming a founder of the Boston Vigilance Committee. In doing so, Howe joined other opponents of slavery, including his close friend the future U.S senator Charles Sumner, in the effort to protect fugitive slaves from Southern slave catchers and their Northern allies. To distance themselves from so-called Cotton Whigs—those Whigs, such as U.S. Senator Daniel Webster, who were sympathetic to Southern slavery—opponents such as Howe described themselves as Conscience Whigs.
With the passage of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850, Howe’s antislavery activities increased. Between 1851 and 1853 he launched the Boston Commonwealth newspaper. Along with his wife, Howe used the newspaper to support the cause of Free Soil opposition to the extension of slavery into the western territories. Following the enactment of the 1854 Kansas-Nebraska Act, he joined the New England Emigrant Aid Company (also called the Massachusetts Emigrant Aid Company, or Kansas Emigrant Aid Company), an organization that provided assistance to Northerners who had migrated to Kansas in order to keep the territory free of slavery. His involvement with the company solidified what became Howe’s decadelong involvement in Kansas politics. Traveling to the state in 1856, Howe began his acquaintance with American abolitionist John Brown. The acquaintance developed into Howe’s membership in the Secret Six, a group of antislavery activists who provided Brown with funding and arms that he later used in his 1859 raid at Harpers Ferry, Virginia (later in West Virginia).
Howe spent the Civil War years as a member of both the U.S. Sanitary Commission and the American Freedmen’s Inquiry Committee. During those years he also reestablished the Boston Commonwealth, using its pages to champion the causes of the immediate emancipation of slaves and the arming of freed blacks for service in the Union army. In 1865 he became the chair of the Massachusetts Board of State Charities, taking advantage of his position to begin the practice of unannounced inspections of state-operated poorhouses and asylums.
