Thoracic squeeze, also called Lung Squeeze,  compression of the lungs and thoracic (chest) cavity that occurs during a breath-holding dive under water. During the descent, an increase in pressure causes air spaces and gas pockets within the body to compress.
The lungs are among the few bodily organs that are influenced by pressure differences.
Because the lung tissue is elastic and interspersed with tubules and sacs of air, it is capable of some enlargement when air is inhaled and some shrinkage when it is exhaled. Too much air causes rupture of lung tissue, while too little air causes compression and collapse of the lung walls.
As external pressure on the lungs is increased in a breath-holding dive (in which the diver’s only source of air is that held in his lungs), the air inside the lungs is compressed, and the size of the lungs decreases. If one descends to a depth of 100 feet (about 30 metres), the lung shrinks to about one-fourth its size at the surface. Excessive compression of the lungs in this manner causes tightness and pain in the thoracic cavity. If compression continues, the delicate lung tissue may rupture and allow tissue fluids to enter the lung spaces and tubules. The outer linings of the lungs (pleural sacs) may separate from the chest wall, and the lung may collapse.
The predominant symptom felt by the diver is pain when the pressure becomes too great; this can be relieved by ascending. If the thoracic squeeze has been sufficient to cause lung damage, the diver may have difficulty in breathing, may exhale frothy blood, and may even become unconscious. Artificial respiration may be necessary if the breathing has stopped. Any symptoms of thoracic squeeze call for prompt medical attention.
Animals such as seals and whales that descend to much greater depths than man on a single breath of air have special adaptations to help them. The sperm whale is reported to dive to 3,300 feet (about 1,000 metres), more than 10 times the depth that man can tolerate. These aquatic mammals have been found to have more elastic chest cavities than man; their lungs, even when reduced, do not separate from the chest wall; and their bodies are adapted to use the gases in the bloodstream more conservatively.
