tuberculosis (TB),  infectious disease that is caused by the tubercle bacillus, Mycobacterium tuberculosis. In most forms of the disease, the bacillus spreads slowly and widely in the lungs, causing the formation of hard nodules (tubercles) or large cheeselike masses that break down the respiratory tissues and form cavities in the lungs. Blood vessels also can be eroded by the advancing disease, causing the infected person to cough up bright red blood.
During the 18th and 19th centuries, tuberculosis reached near-epidemic proportions in the rapidly urbanizing and industrializing societies of Europe and North America. Indeed, “consumption,” as it was then known, was the leading cause of death for all age groups in the Western world from that period until the early 20th century, at which time improved health and hygiene brought about a steady decline in its mortality rates. Since the 1940s, antibiotic drugs have reduced the span of treatment to months instead of years, and drug therapy has done away with the old TB sanatoriums where patients at one time were nursed for years while the defensive properties of their bodies dealt with the disease.
Today, in less-developed countries where population is dense and hygienic standards poor, tuberculosis remains a major fatal disease. The prevalence of the disease has increased in association with the HIV/AIDS epidemic; an estimated one out of every four deaths from tuberculosis involves an individual coinfected with HIV. In addition, the successful elimination of tuberculosis as a major threat to public health in the world has been complicated by the rise of new strains of the tubercle bacillus that are resistant to conventional antibiotics. Infections with these strains are often difficult to treat and require the use of combination drug therapies, sometimes involving the use of five different agents.
The tubercle bacillus is a small, rod-shaped bacterium that is extremely hardy; it can survive for months in a state of dryness and can also resist the action of mild disinfectants. Infection spreads primarily by the respiratory route directly from an infected person who discharges live bacilli into the air. Minute droplets ejected by sneezing, coughing, and even talking can contain hundreds of tubercle bacilli that may be inhaled by a healthy person. There the bacilli become trapped in the tissues of the body, are surrounded by immune cells, and finally are sealed up in hard, nodular tubercles. A tubercle usually consists of a centre of dead cells and tissues, cheeselike (caseous) in appearance, in which can be found many bacilli. This centre is surrounded by radially arranged phagocytic (scavenger) cells and a periphery containing connective tissue cells. The tubercle thus forms as a result of the body’s defensive reaction to the bacilli. Individual tubercles are microscopic in size, but most of the visible manifestations of tuberculosis, from barely visible nodules to large tuberculous masses, are conglomerations of tubercles.
In otherwise healthy children and adults, the primary infection often heals without causing symptoms. The bacilli are quickly sequestered in the tissues, and the infected person acquires a lifelong immunity to the disease. A skin test taken at any later time may reveal the earlier infection and the immunity, and a small scar in the lung may be visible by X-ray. In this condition, sometimes called latent tuberculosis, the affected person is not contagious. In some cases, however, sometimes after periods of time that can reach 40 years or more, the original tubercles break down, releasing viable bacilli into the bloodstream. From the blood the bacilli create new tissue infections elsewhere in the body, most commonly in the upper portion of one or both lungs. This causes a condition known as pulmonary tuberculosis, a highly infectious stage of the disease. In some cases the infection may break into the pleural space between the lung and the chest wall, causing a pleural effusion, or collection of fluid outside the lung. Particularly among infants, the elderly, and immunocompromised adults (organ transplant recipients or AIDS patients, for example), the primary infection may spread through the body, causing miliary tuberculosis, a highly fatal form if not adequately treated. In fact, once the bacilli enter the bloodstream, they can travel to almost any organ of the body, including the lymph nodes, bones and joints, skin, intestines, genital organs, kidneys, and bladder. An infection of the meninges that cover the brain causes tuberculous meningitis; before the advent of specific drugs, this disease was always fatal, though most affected people now recover.
The onset of pulmonary tuberculosis is usually insidious, with lack of energy, weight loss, and persistent cough. These symptoms do not subside, and the general health of the patient deteriorates. Eventually, the cough increases, the patient may have chest pain from pleurisy, and there may be blood in the sputum, an alarming symptom. Fever develops, usually with drenching night sweats. In the lung, the lesion consists of a collection of dead cells in which tubercle bacilli may be seen. This lesion may erode a neighbouring bronchus or blood vessel, causing the patient to cough up blood (hemoptysis). Tubercular lesions may spread extensively in the lung, causing large areas of destruction, cavities, and scarring. The amount of lung tissue available for the exchange of gases in respiration decreases, and if untreated the patient will die from failure of ventilation and general toxemia and exhaustion.
