Visual field defect,  a blind spot (scotoma) or blind area within the normal field of one or both eyes. In most cases the blind spots or areas are persistent, but in some instances they may be temporary and shifting, as in the scotomata of migraine headache. The visual fields of the right and left eye overlap significantly, and visual field defects may not be evident without specific testing of each eye separately. Causes of visual field defects are numerous and include glaucoma, vascular disease, tumours, retinal disease, hereditary disease, optic neuritis and other inflammatory processes, nutritional deficiencies, toxins, and drugs.
Certain patterns of visual field loss help to establish a possible underlying cause. For instance, generalized constriction of the visual field can be due to glaucoma, retinitis pigmentosa, hysteria, or chronic high intracranial pressure. Increases in intracranial pressure can also cause enlargement of the natural blind spot due to abnormal swelling of the optic disks in both eyes, a condition called papilledema.
When defects occur in the visual field of only one eye, the cause can be localized to the eye or to anterior visual pathways (before the two optic nerves meet at the optic chiasm). In contrast, defects that involve the visual fields of both eyes often (but not always, as in the case of glaucoma) reflect disease processes at the optic chiasm or farther back in the brain. The specific condition where visual field defects are present in corresponding halves of the right and left eye fields is called homonymous hemianopia, whereas defects involving the outer or inner halves of both visual fields are called bitemporal or binasal hemianopia, respectively.
The extent and the location of the blind areas in the visual fields may provide further clues concerning the location of the lesion responsible. Bitemporal hemianopia suggests, for example, a lesion in the optic chiasm, the point at which the optic nerves from the two eyes meet and exchange some of the nerve fibres from each retina. A tumour of the pituitary may press upon the chiasm and have this effect. Precise demonstration of visual field defects can be accomplished via perimetry, in which the affected individual fixates his gaze straight ahead and indicates whether he can see special test lights projected onto an illuminated domed screen.
