Vulvitis,   inflammation and infection of the vulva—the external genitalia of the female. The external organs of the vulva include the labia majora and minora (folds of skin), the clitoris, and the vestibular glands. The basic symptoms of vulvitis are superficial red, swollen, and moisture-laden lesions on the skin of the vulva. Itching sensations are a particularly prominent and consistent symptom. The areas of affected vulvar skin may turn white, crack, or develop fluid-filled blisters that break open, ooze, and crust over.
The skin of the vulva is subject to all the irritations, infections, and other conditions that affect skin elsewhere on the body. Moreover, the skin of the vulva is unusually susceptible to irritation because it is moist and warm. Besides sometimes providing a breeding ground for bacteria, these conditions can render the vulva susceptible to allergic or inflammatory reactions from direct contact with underwear or commercial hygiene products. The vulva can become the site of infections by bacteria, fungi, or viruses, and vulvitis may also accompany similar infections of the vagina (vaginitis). Depletion of estrogen, as occurs in postmenopausal women, can lead to drying and thinning of the vulvar tissues, rendering them more susceptible to irritation and infection. The vulva can be contaminated by urine, feces, vaginal discharges, and menstrual flow.
Among the most common causes of vulvitis are inflammations arising from vulvar skin’s allergic reaction to soaps, vaginal sprays and deodorants, sanitary napkins, panty hose, synthetic underwear, or the detergents used to wash underwear. Allergic reactions usually take a few days to manifest themselves and produce such symptoms as itching, mild redness, and swelling. 
Vulvitis may also be caused by fungi, bacteria, or herpes or other viral infections. Fungal diseases of the vulva are common; usually the agent of infection is Candida albicans, a yeastlike fungus. Women with diabetes are especially susceptible to these infections, as are women who eat large amounts of carbohydrates (starches). Gardnerella vaginalis is the most common bacterial cause of vulvitis. Mycoplasma, Escherichia coli, and staphylococci and streptococci may also cause infections. Tight, nonporous, nonabsorbent underwear in combination with poor hygiene may foster the growth of bacterial or fungal infections on the vulvar skin.
A cortisone cream is sometimes used to relieve the itching of vulvitis until a specific therapy can be decided upon. The particular causative agent of the condition must be isolated if treatment is to be effective. Wearing loose, absorbent underwear that allows the circulation of air is often the only necessary treatment for contact vulvitis. The substitution of cotton for synthetic garments may also help to alleviate the problem. Vulvitis arising from fungal and bacterial infections is usually treated by the topical application of creams that kill the causative microorganisms. Candida vulvitis is treated with clotrimazole, nystatin, or miconazole creams; Gardnerella and other bacterial infections are treated with metronidazole; and Chlamydia infections are treated with the antibiotics doxycycline or erythromycin. 
