Wilson disease, also called hepatolenticular degeneration,  a rare hereditary disorder characterized by abnormal copper transport that results in the accumulation of copper in tissues, such as the brain and liver. The disorder is characterized by the progressive degeneration of the basal ganglia of the brain (large group of nuclei involved in the control of movement), the development of a brownish ring at the margin of the cornea, and the gradual replacement of liver cells with fibrous tissue. Wilson disease occurs in roughly 1 in 40,000 people, and symptoms usually first appear in the second or third decade of life.
The disorder is caused by autosomal recessive mutations (defects inherited from both parents) in a gene known as ATP7B, which produces a membrane protein that regulates the transport of copper out of cells. When the ATP7B gene is mutated, the membrane protein becomes dysfunctional, resulting in inefficient cellular export of copper. This in turn results in reduced binding of copper to a protein called ceruloplasmin, which is produced in the liver. Normally, ceruloplasmin binds to copper in the liver, circulates through the blood, and delivers the copper atoms to distant cells that use the atoms for basic processes. Mutation of ATP7B also disrupts normal biliary excretion of copper. The combination of decreased binding to ceruloplasmin and disrupted excretion results in the accumulation of copper in the liver, which damages liver cells. Excess free copper atoms that escape from the liver accumulate in other tissues, and the copper that is deposited in the affected structures gives rise to the characteristic symptoms of Wilson disease, which include tremors, incoordination, and personality changes.
Diagnosis of Wilson disease is often based on decreased serum levels of copper, decreased serum levels of ceruloplasmin, and increased urine levels of copper. In addition, biopsy to detect copper accumulation in the liver and genetic testing in patients with a family history of the disease can be used to confirm diagnosis. Initial treatment is aimed at reducing tissue levels of copper using chelating substances, such as penicillamine or trientine hydrochloride, that release copper into the bloodstream for excretion in the urine. Later treatment is aimed at maintaining low tissue levels of copper via a high-protein, low-copper diet and administration of a chelating substance and zinc, which blocks intestinal absorption of copper. Early diagnosis and treatment can potentially reverse the effects of the disorder and prevent permanent brain and liver damage.
