Aleut, self-names Unangax̂ and Sugpiaq,  a native of the Aleutian Islands and the western portion of the Alaska Peninsula of northwestern North America. The name Aleut derives from the Russian; the people refer to themselves as the Unangax̂ and the Sugpiaq. (The Sugpiaq pronounce the Russian-introduced name Aleut “Alutiiq.”) These two groups speak mutually intelligible dialects and are closely related to the Eskimo in language and culture.
The earliest people in this region, the Paleo-Aleuts, arrived in the Aleutian Islands from the Alaskan mainland about 2000 bce. Ancient Aleut villages were situated on the seashore near fresh water, with a good landing for boats and in a position safe from surprise attack. Village placement in such locations persisted over the long term, as did many other cultural characteristics.
Traditional Aleut villages were usually composed of related families that lived in extended family households in well-insulated, semisubterranean homes. Kinship was reckoned through the mother’s line. A chief, generally a seasoned and talented hunter, might govern several villages or an entire island. His rule, however, was based on his wisdom, experience, and ability to build consensus rather than on raw power.
Traditionally, Aleut men hunted seals, sea otters, whales, sea lions, sometimes walrus, and, in some areas, caribou and bears. One-man and two-man skin boats known as baidarkas, or kayaks, and large, open, skin boats (Eskimo umiaks) were used. Aleut women gathered fish, birds, mollusks, and wild plant foods such as berries and wove fine grass basketry. Stone, bone, and ivory were fashioned into containers, needles and awls, oil lamps, and other objects.
Aleut people first encountered Russian colonizers in 1741, when the expedition led by Vitus Bering reached the Aleutian Islands. Russian rule was quickly established, not least because of the depredations of a large party of Russian and Siberian hunters who overwintered in the Aleutian Islands in 1745; members of the party were later convicted of atrocities in the Russian courts. In subsequent decades, Russian trading companies treated Aleuts as they did their own rural population—as serfs, albeit serfs whose labour was tied to fur production rather than agriculture.
By the 1830s the Aleuts’ traditional ways of life had been heavily disrupted. Further disruptions occurred in the later 19th century, when discoveries of gold in Alaska drew prospectors to the region. The Aleut population declined drastically under foreign domination: at the time of first contact there were approximately 25,000 Aleuts, but by the end of the 19th century they numbered only about 2,000. By the late 20th century, however, Aleut people were revitalizing many forms of traditional culture, including language, crafts, and subsistence-oriented hunting and gathering practices. Aleuts and other northern tribes also became more politically active vis-à-vis the federal governments of the United States and Canada during this period.
Early 21st-century population estimates indicated more than 15,000 individuals of Aleut descent.
