Caddo,   one tribe within a confederacy of North American Indian tribes comprising the Caddoan linguistic family. Their name derives from a French truncation of kadohadacho, meaning “real chief” in Caddo. The Caddo proper originally occupied the lower Red River area in what are now Louisiana and Arkansas. In the late 17th century they numbered approximately 8,000 persons living in villages scattered along the Red River and its tributaries. This is also the region of the Caddoan archaeological complex, where many striking examples of workmanship have been found. Archaeological research shows the Caddoan tenancy of the area to be ancient.
When first encountered by French and Spanish explorers, the Caddo were a semisedentary agricultural people. They lived in conical dwellings constructed of poles covered with a thatch of grass; these were grouped around ceremonial centres of temple mounds. The Caddo were skillful potters and basket makers. They wove cloth of vegetable fibres and, on special occasions, wore mantles decorated with feathers. They also wore nose rings and, like many other southeastern tribes, adorned their bodies with tattoos.
Traditional Caddo descent was matrilineal, and a hereditary upper group, marked by head flattening and other status symbols, directed political and religious activities. There are scattered reports of ceremonial human sacrifice and cannibalism; these and other traits probably indicate trade or other links between the Caddo and the centres of Aztec or Mayan cultures in Mexico and Yucatán.
During the 18th century the French and Spanish disputed over Caddo territory; the tribe was initially friendly to the French. By the close of the 18th century, colonial pressures had broken up Caddo tribal life and turned many of them into wanderers in their own land. When the vast territory of French Louisiana was purchased by the United States, the number of colonial settlers increased, and the tribe was pushed farther south. Under the treaty of 1835 the Caddo ceded all their land to the United States. The Louisiana Caddo moved southwest to join others of the tribe in Texas. There they lived peaceably for a time, but in 1859 threats of a massacre by a vigilante anti-Indian group forced them to flee to east-central Oklahoma, where they settled on a reservation on the banks of the Washita River.
Early 21st-century population estimates indicated more than 4,000 individuals of Caddo ancestry.
