Hopi, formerly called Moki or (Spanish) Moqui,  the westernmost group of Pueblo Indians, situated in what is now northeastern Arizona, on the edge of the Painted Desert. They speak a Northern Uto-Aztecan language.
The precise origin of the Hopi is unknown, although it is thought that they and other Pueblo peoples descended from the Ancestral Pueblo (Anasazi), whom the Hopi call Hisatsinom, “Ancient People.” Archaeology has revealed that some abandoned pueblos, such as Sikyatki and Awatovi, were once occupied by Hopi people. Hopi origin traditions tell that their ancestors climbed upward through underground chambers called kivas and lived in many places before reaching their present settlements in this, the Fourth World.
Traditional Hopi culture emphasized monogamy and matrilineal descent. Hopi people also practiced matrilocal residence, in which a new husband becomes part of his mother-in-law’s household. A given pueblo, or town, might include two dozen or more matrilineal clans; these were grouped into several larger social units, or phratries.
The traditional Hopi economy centred on farming and, after Spanish colonization, on herding sheep. The chief crop was corn (maize), and the Hopi also grew beans, squash, melons, and a variety of other vegetables and fruits. Men farmed and herded, in addition to building houses, performing most of the ceremonies, making moccasins, and weaving garments and blankets. Women made baskets and pottery, gardened, raised children, cared for the elderly, and were responsible for the strenuous tasks of providing their families with hand-drawn water and hand-ground cornmeal.
Girls and boys began their ceremonial careers soon after reaching six years of age by being inducted into the kachina (Hopi: katsina) religious tradition. Hopi kachinas represented a wide variety of gods, spirits, departed ancestors, and clouds; during certain ceremonies they were impersonated by men in elaborate regalia. Women generally took the role of observers during the public aspects of ceremonies, except in events involving one or more of the three women’s societies. Men also had the option of joining a number of societies, including those that conducted a strenuous tribal initiation and staged an annual winter solstice celebration, or soyal. So important was the soyal that its leadership was always entrusted to a high official, usually the town’s chief.
The most widely publicized of Hopi rituals was the Snake Dance, held annually in late August, during which the performers danced with live snakes in their mouths. Although part of the Snake Dance was performed in public, visitors saw only a brief, though exciting, portion of a lengthy ceremony, most of which was conducted privately in kivas.
Some aspects of Hopi life have been considerably affected as a result of Spanish, and later American, colonization. Foremost among these are land disputes between the Hopi and the neighbouring Navajo. However, many aspects of traditional Hopi life persisted into the early 21st century. At that time, terraced pueblo structures of stone and adobe continued to dominate the architecture of a number of independent Hopi towns. Kachina religion remained vibrant, and a strong craft tradition persisted in Hopi communities.
Early 21st-century population estimates indicated more than 15,000 individuals of Hopi descent.
