Huichol and Cora,   neighbouring Middle American Indian peoples living in the states of Jalisco and Nayarit in western Mexico. Numbering together about 40,000 in the late 20th century, they inhabit a mountainous region that is cool and dry. The Huichol and Cora languages are about as closely related as Spanish and Italian and are next most closely related to Nahua, the language of the Nahua peoples of central Mexico and the language of the Aztecs. The Huichol and Cora, however, are perhaps culturally closer (as well as linguistically related) to the Uto-Aztecan Indians of northwestern Mexico.
The people are farmers, planting corn (maize), beans, squash, and cucumbers in steep hillside plots. Burning is used to clear undergrowth, plows and planting sticks being the chief cultivating implements. Most families keep a cow for milk and cheese, and sheep are sometimes kept for wool; however, very little meat is eaten. Other barnyard animals are also kept, and hunting, fishing, and gathering of wild foods augments farming. Neither the Huichol nor the Cora commonly live in villages but, rather, have households in the countryside clustered in loose groups of 1 to 12; these are called rancherias. Community centres consist of a church or Huichol temple, public buildings, sometimes schools or jails, and houses that are kept by some families to live in when they are at the centre. The rancherias may be quite isolated from such community centres.
Simple pottery is still made, particularly among the Cora. Weaving on the native backstrap loom is still done. The principal articles made are sashes, carrying bags, and wool blankets. Other crafts include cord making and embroidery. Dress is traditional or semitraditional: men wear muslin shirts and pants, sandals, and hats but may add embroidered sashes and shoulder bags and assorted jewelry; women wear long muslin skirts, long-sleeved blouses, sandals, and a cape (quechquemitl) over the head or the shoulders.
Ritual kinship is an important social institution among the Huichol and Cora. Resembling that practiced elsewhere in Middle America, it involves the choice of godparents at important points in the life of a child or in the lives of his parents. Both the Huichol and Cora are nominally Roman Catholic and practice some Catholic rituals. Patron saints are often identified with native gods, however, and native pagan religious ceremonies play a central role among both groups. Both also use peyote in certain rites.
