Kansa, also spelled Konza or Kanza, also called Kaw,  North American Indians of Siouan linguistic stock who lived along the Kansas and Saline rivers in what is now central Kansas. It is thought that the Kansa had migrated to this location from an earlier prehistoric territory on the Atlantic coast. They are related to the Omaha, Osage, Quapaw, and Ponca.
Like many other Plains Indians, the Kansa were traditionally a semisedentary people whose economy combined hunting and farming. Two or three Kansa families might live together in a large dome-shaped earth lodge; earth lodges were grouped in villages. Each village was presided over by one or more chiefs chosen for wisdom and bravery. Later, chieftainship became hereditary. Kansa men were notable for carefully plucking all their facial and head hair, except for a scalp lock running along the top and back of the head.
The Kansa religion involved animism and a pantheon of spirit beings, or wakan, of differing rank and power. The wakan were associated with natural phenomena such as the sun, light, darkness, woods, and grasslands. Adolescent boys went through a puberty rite known as the vision quest, a period of isolation and self-denial undertaken to invoke dreams of the future and to connect with supernatural phenomena. Kansa burial customs were well-developed and of considerable complexity. After the women of the tribe had painted the face of the deceased and covered the body with bark and a buffalo robe, it was given directions to the land of the dead. The deceased, accompanied by garments, weapons, pipe, and a supply of food, was placed in a shallow grave on a hill and covered with rock slabs.
In 1846 the Kansa were assigned a reservation at Council Grove (Kansas), their last home before removal to Indian Territory (present-day Oklahoma) in 1873. Before the reservation period their population had been much reduced by recurrent warfare with the Fox, Omaha, Osage, Pawnee, and Cheyenne. Pressure from these groups and from colonial sources—the Spanish, English, French, and finally U.S. settlers—undermined the Kansa subsistence economy. Their estimated population in the late 18th century was 3,000.
Population estimates in the early 21st century indicated approximately 2,000 individuals of Kansa descent.
