Kickapoo,  Algonquian-speaking Indians, related to the Sauk and Fox. When first reported by Europeans in the late 17th century, the Kickapoo lived at the portage between the Fox and Wisconsin rivers, probably in present-day Columbia county, Wisconsin. They were known as formidable warriors whose raids took them over a wide territory, ranging as far as Georgia and Alabama to the southeast, Texas and Mexico to the southwest, and New York and Pennsylvania to the east.
From the beginning of European contact, the Kickapoo resisted acculturation in economic, political, and religious matters, retaining as many of their old ways as possible. Traditionally, the Kickapoo lived in fixed villages, moving between summer and winter residences; they raised corn (maize), beans, and squash and hunted buffalo on the prairies. Their society was divided into several exogamous clans based on descent through the paternal line.
In the early 18th century part of the tribe settled near the Milwaukee River. After the destruction of the Illinois Indians about 1765, the Milwaukee River band moved south into the Illinois’ former territory near Peoria, Ill. By the 19th century, as a result of scattering in small villages to prevent attack, central tribal authority had broken down, and the chiefs of the various bands had become autonomous. One group moved as far as the Sangamon River and became known as the Prairie band; another pushed east to the Wabash and was called the Vermilion band. In 1809 and 1819, under the pressure of advancing American settlers, the Kickapoo ceded their lands in Illinois to the United States, moving to Missouri and then to Kansas. About 1852 a large group went to Texas and from there to Mexico, where they were joined by another party in 1863. Some returned to Indian Territory (present-day Oklahoma) in 1873 and later years. Those who stayed in Mexico were granted a reservation in eastern Chihuahua state.
In the early 21st century, Kickapoo descendants in the United States numbered more than 5,000, with about 300 in Mexico.
