Maroon community,  a group of formerly enslaved Africans and their descendants who gained their freedom by fleeing chattel enslavement and running to the safety and cover of the remote mountains or the dense overgrown tropical terrains near the plantations. Many of the groups are found in the Caribbean and, in general, throughout the Americas. In Brazil, Jamaica, Haiti, Suriname (the former Dutch Guiana), Cuba, Puerto Rico, St. Vincent, Guyana, Dominica, Panama, Colombia, and Mexico and from the Amazon River Basin to the southern United States, primarily Florida and the Carolinas, there are well-known domiciles of the maroons.
The word maroon, first recorded in English in 1666, is by varying accounts taken from the French word marron, which translates to “runaway black slave,” or the American/Spanish cimarrón, which means “wild runaway slave,” “the beast who cannot be tamed,” or “living on mountaintops.” The Spanish originally used the word in reference to their stray cattle. It is further believed that the word cimarrón is from cima or “summit.”
It is important to note that most Africans did not refer to themselves as “maroons.” They usually opted for liberatory, powerful names such as “Nyankipong Pickibu,” which means “Children of the Almighty” in Twi, a language widely spoken in Ghana, West Africa. The Jamaican maroons tend to prefer the monikers “Koromanti,” “Kromanti,” or “Yungkungkung” to denote their culture and history. This entry looks at the origins of maroon communities in Africa, their history of struggle and revolt in the New World, and their contemporary representation.
According to legend, the Koromanti name continues to ring in the maroon communities for one of two traditional reasons. The first is that it memorializes and pays tribute to one of their last visions of home, the West African coast of the same name that was traversed by the newly enslaved Africans en route to the ship that would transport them to the west. The alternative explanation is that the appellation represents the memory of the Koromanti clan, a subgroup of the Asante people of Ghana.
In 1717 the Koromanti are said to have famously rebelled against Asante paramountcy and killed their hallowed king, Osei Tutu I, whose body is said to have fallen into the river, never to be seen again. This inspired the Asante people to take a sacred oath that empowered them to rise up and put down the Koromanti uprising. Legend has it that the thwarted Kormantis were exiled and sold into slavery for their abomination. It is said that only their memory resides in Ghana. To this day, the Koromanti designation is commonly used by maroons to describe their rituals, languages, dances, and songs, which are sung to bury the dead and accompany healing rituals.
There are divergent accounts as to the earliest maroons, with some even indicating that the first maroon was a solitary African who escaped from the first slave ship to dock in the Americas in 1502, just 10 years after Columbus’s arrival. He is said to have escaped to the jungle-like interior of Hispaniola, or “Little Spain” in Spanish (present-day Haiti), blazing a trail that many of his African brethren and sisters would follow. Many reports, however, start the timeline at 1512, when a steady stream of enslaved Africans began escaping from Spanish and Portuguese slavers and “disappearing” into the hinterlands.
The maroons strategically teamed with indigenous peoples or survived from sheer will and have maintained a continuous presence in the Western Hemisphere. Faced with monumentally hostile conditions, they tactically established armed settlements because they were in constant danger of being recaptured or killed by European tyrants. Moreover, there was always the perpetual battle to physically sustain themselves because they were often left to forage for food, especially on the smaller islands of the Caribbean. To this, one must add the challenge of reproducing and multiplying their numbers.
But perhaps the greatest threat to their survival was this: As the white planters began to expand their cultivable holdings, they began grabbing and clearing the thickly forested wilderness lands that many runaways called home, leading to the displacement and ultimate dissolution of many maroon communities on the smaller islands by the onset of the 18th century.
On the larger islands, however, the maroons were able to hunt, grow crops, and, in a word, thrive. As increasing numbers of Africans escaped and joined their ranks, they took guerrilla warfare to new heights, burning and raiding plantations as well as poisoning slavers. Needless to say, they struck fear in the hearts of the white enslavers, causing the British and U.S. governments to pass dozens of acts against them and spend millions of pounds and dollars to conquer them. This was often for naught because the maroons were led by fearless warriors who would stop at nothing to throw off the insidious chains of chattel slavery.
Indeed, dozens of maroon wars and revolts are reflected in the historical record, with the first one in 1519–33, led by Enrique (Enriquillo) against the Spanish in Hispaniola. In Brazil the Africans set up settlements known as Quilombos. The most famous of such settlements was Quilombo dos Palmares, in the northeastern part of Brazil. It functioned successfully as an independent republic of the maroons in the 17th century, following an African pattern of social organization. At its apex, it was the home and refuge of some 20,000 African men, women, and children who had managed to escape the dreadful experience of plantation life. Its most famous and last leader was Zumbi dos Palmares, who was born in freedom in Quilombo dos Palmares.
