Pequot,  any member of a group of Algonquian-speaking North American Indians who lived in the Thames valley in what is now Connecticut, U.S. Their subsistence was based on the cultivation of corn (maize), hunting, and fishing. In the 1600s their population was estimated to be 2,200 individuals.
The Mohegan and the Pequot were jointly ruled by the Pequot chief Sassacus until a rebellion of the subchief Uncas resulted in Mohegan independence. For a period from 1620 onward the Pequot and British settlers lived side by side in mutual helpfulness and peaceful trade. Gradually, however, Pequot resentment swelled as increasing numbers of colonists encroached upon the tribe’s customary territory. The Pequot were concerned regarding these intrusions because their territory had already been reduced to the region between Narragansett Bay and the Connecticut River. The Pequot eventually promised all tribal trade to the Dutch, a course of action much resented by the British.
Several incidents had taken place between the Pequot and the British colonizers by the summer of 1636, when matters came to a breaking point. At that time a Boston trader was murdered, presumably by a Pequot, on Block Island. A punitive expedition that was sent by Massachusetts authorities to destroy native villages and crops succeeded only in arousing the tribe to make a more determined defense of its homeland. Puritan clergymen encouraged violence against the Pequot, whom they regarded as infidels, and the British colonists agreed to take up arms.
The turning point in the vicious 11-month Pequot War that followed was the Mistick Campaign of May 10–26, 1637, in which Capt. John Mason led English, Mohegan, and Narragansett warriors in an attack on the main fortified Pequot village on the site of modern-day Mystic, Connecticut. The Pequot were surprised but quickly mounted a spirited defense that almost led to an English defeat. Realizing that he could not defeat the Pequot in the close quarters of the palisade, Mason ordered their wigwams set afire; some 400 Pequot men, women, and children were burned alive or slaughtered when they tried to escape. After the Pequot were defeated in the subsequent Battle of the English Withdrawal and in the Swamp Fight, most Pequot communities elected to abandon their country rather than continue the war against the English. Many who fled were killed or captured by other tribes or the English, and others were sold into slavery in New England or the West Indies; the remainder were distributed among other tribes, where they received such harsh treatment that in 1655 they were placed under the direct control of the colonial government and resettled on the Mystic River. The English claimed all of Pequot territory by “right of conquest.”
Early 21st-century population estimates indicated approximately 3,000 Pequot descendants.
