South American Indian,  member of any of the aboriginal peoples inhabiting the continent of South America.
The customs and social systems of South American peoples are closely and naturally related to the environments in which they live. These environmental relationships are mediated by the systems of technology that the people use to exploit their resources.
Four basic types of social and cultural organization of South American peoples emerge from the archaeological and historical records: (1) central Andean irrigation civilizations, (2) chiefdoms of the northern Andes and the circum-Caribbean, (3) tropical-forest farming villages, and (4) nomadic hunters and gatherers. Each type developed in its own fashion during thousands of years, and since the 16th century each has made a distinctive adjustment to the impact of European civilization.
Early peoples, hunters and gatherers with no knowledge of agriculture, gradually worked their way across the Bering Strait in pursuit of food and meandered over North and South America in small, migratory bands for thousands of years. They reached Tierra del Fuego in approximately 6000 bc, after passing through the bottleneck of Central America, dispersing in the rugged terrain of the northern Andes, following the resource-laden Caribbean coastline eastward, and filtering southward through the tropical lowlands now making up part of Venezuela, the Guianas, and Brazil. They also hunted game through the highland basins of the central Andes and hunted and fished along the west coast of South America until they reached land’s end.
In South America, native language families encompassed large blocks of territory and numerous societies. They cut across different cultural and social types and are found represented in different geographical and environmental surroundings. Languages may be grouped in many ways, but the major language groupings or families of South America may be conveniently divided into the Macro-Chibchan, Andean-Equatorial (including Tupian), Ge-Pano-Carib, and Hokan. This is the most simplified classification of South American Indian languages (see also South American Indian languages).
In the 1500s, the central Andes, the area of greatest population density in South America (about 10 persons per square mile), was sparsely populated compared to centres of Old World civilization. Yet its population of approximately 3,500,000, crowded into narrow coastal valleys and small highland basins on approximately 1 percent of Peru’s total land area, constituted a much higher density than could be found in any other part of South America. The chiefdoms of the northern Andes, northern Venezuela, and the Antilles had an estimated total population of 1,900,000, with densities ranging from 6.6 to 1.1 persons per square mile (2.5 to 0.4 persons per square kilometre). The southern Andes was inhabited by the Atacama, Diaguita, and Araucanians, whose combined population was possibly 1,131,000, with a density range of 0.38 to seven persons per square mile. Tropical-forest peoples numbered about 2,200,000 and had a density of 0.6 per square mile. Hunting and gathering peoples of the Chilean archipelago, Patagonia, the Gran Chaco, and eastern Brazilian uplands had a combined population of less than 800,000 and a density range of 0.2 (Chilean archipelago) to 1.1 (western Chaco).
The population density of the central Andes was about 200 times greater than that of the hunters and gatherers, 20 times greater than that of the tropical-forest farmers, and 30 to 40 percent greater than that of the Araucanians and the chiefdoms of the northern Andes and the circum-Caribbean.
Human life-forms did not evolve in the New World, despite certain claims to the contrary which have never been taken seriously by most scholars. Migrants crossed from Siberia to Alaska, probably some 20,000 to 35,000 years ago (or perhaps earlier), when there was a land and ice bridge between the two continents. They seem to have remained locked in the northwestern sector of North America for eons, held back by impenetrable glacial formations. When the glacial cap retreated and valleys opened up, people (then existing as hunter-gatherers) began to follow the southward progression of game animals, fanning out across North America and down through Central America into South America, again a process occupying thousands of years. Archaeological discoveries have unearthed human skeletal remains in association with now-extinct species of animals and in geological deposits of the last phases of the Ice Age.
Archaeological evidence demonstrates that South America was occupied by early man at least 10,000 years ago, ample time for high civilizations to have evolved in the central Andes and for ecological adjustments to have been worked out elsewhere on the continent. Scientific dating techniques establish that agriculture was practiced along the Peruvian coast at least as early as 2300 bc. By 1000 bc agricultural societies flourished. This does not mean that all of South America had reached this stage of development nor that it was densely populated by farming communities. On the contrary, the continent was spottily inhabited by simply organized hunters and gatherers who then occupied the most favourable regions. As knowledge diffused from the central Andes to other parts of South America and as agriculture and other techniques were adopted by those peoples living in favourable environments, farming communities took form, and populations among them began to increase. Thus, on the foundation of early hunting and gathering societies, the more complex social and cultural systems gradually were built in those areas where agriculture developed; cultural growth and social complexity followed apace. Hunters and gatherers were pushed out of the farming regions to agriculturally marginal areas, where some of them are found today.
The original migrants to the New World had no knowledge of the domestication of plants or animals, with the exception of dogs, which were used in hunting. Recent discoveries in Mexico indicate that agriculture was independently discovered in the New World in roughly the same era that it was established in the Middle East (about 7000–8000 bc) and that New World civilizations were built on an indigenous agricultural base.
It is known archaeologically that cultural influences from Asia, as well as latter-day migrations of people such as the Eskimo, continued to impinge on parts of the New World over the millennia, but New World cultural developments that culminated in the formation of high civilizations in Mexico and Peru were overwhelmingly the product of native, independent invention in almost all spheres of cultural and social life. Sporadic influences probably reached Peru and the western parts of the tropical forests from across the Pacific Ocean, but their effect on the course of cultural development in this hemisphere was negligible. Native America constituted a separate cultural unit, comparable to that of the Old World.
The archaeological record for the central Andes shows a step-by-step development of cultural and social forms from a preagricultural, hunting and gathering baseline some 10,000 years ago to the Inca empire in the 15th century ad. The record does not show any significant cultural influence on this development from transpacific contacts.
The evidence on early hunting and gathering peoples in Peru is still sparse. It is not yet possible to reconstruct social patterns, since most of the remains consist only of shellfish middens and small, widely scattered campsites along the coast. It was a period of thousands of years’ duration, however, toward the end of which some knowledge of plant domestication reached the Peruvian coast.
The next major era is set off by incipient agriculture and also is characterized by the remains of small, hamlet-type communities along the Pacific Ocean near river mouths, where the alluvial soil was able to support crops. Technology remained simple, irrigation was not practiced, and population remained small.
After the passage of 1,000 years or so, marked developments appear in the archaeological record. These include many new crops, irrigation ditches that extended the arable area and controlled the supply of water, more and larger communities that attest to a growing population, and important temple mounds that formed the symbolic centres of theocratic government controlled by a priestly class. The formative era saw the development of the basic technologies and life-styles that were to become elaborated into even more complex cultural forms and state institutions. The emergence of city-states and empires in the central Andes is the result of local cultural-ecological adjustments of this sort, based on an irrigation agriculture that supported growing populations and necessitated controls in the hands of priests and nobles, with a warrior class subservient to the state.
About 500 bc strong regional styles began to appear in the manufacture of utilitarian and luxury goods and public buildings. An abundance of large temple mounds, more extensive and intricate irrigation networks, cities, roads, bridges, reservoirs, and other works calling for mass labour and tight controls characterize this cultural florescence. It was capped by the crystallization of class-organized societies, supported by masses of farm families and conscript labour, defended by well-organized and well-disciplined troops, catered to by a large number of master craftsmen, and ruled and regulated by a class of priests and nobles.
During the last phase of the prehistoric era in the central Andes, which began about ad 1000, regional states came to be absorbed into vast empires, the best known of which was the Inca empire. The Inca began their expansion in 1438 and completed it in 1532, by which time the Spaniards landed on the northern coast of Peru at what is now the seaport of Paita. The Inca spread their imperial bureaucracy from Ecuador to central Chile and implanted their religious beliefs and practices, as well as much of their culture and the Quechua language, in the process of empire building. Their achievement was cut short by the Spanish conquest under Pizarro, at a time when the Inca empire seemed on the verge of civil war.
