South American forest Indian,  indigenous inhabitants of the tropical forests of South America.
The tribal cultures of South America are so various that they cannot be adequately summarized in a brief space. The mosaic is baffling in its complexity: the cultures have interpenetrated one another as a result of constant migratory movements and through intertribal relations, leading to the obliteration of formerly significant differences, and to new cultural systems made up of elements of heterogeneous origin. Hundreds of languages, in very irregular geographic distribution, with innumerable dialects, are or have been spoken in the tropical area of South America. Thus, only the broadest generalizations can be made; one can mention certain cultural manifestations that are present in a great number of groups, even though varying in their actual expression, and illustrate them with specific examples—but always with the qualification that in a neighbouring tribe or group a distinctly contrasting idea or institution may exist.
The innumerable native peoples differ in their patterns of adaptation to their natural environment. Whether they live in the rainforest, in the gallery forests lining the rivers, in the arid savannas, or in the swamps, however, they share a common cultural background; they often combine hunting, fishing, and gathering wild plant foods with rudimentary farming. Most are relatively sedentary, but some are nomadic or seminomadic. Greater differences are sometimes found among neighbouring groups living in the same forest than between some forest and savanna peoples. And some tribes, when migrating to open areas, maintain to a great extent the forest characteristics of their culture.
On the banks of the great rivers and in zones between the forest and the savanna live tribes who gain their subsistence from farming and fishing. Hunters and gatherers, almost all of whom also practice some farming, have settled near the heads of rivers, in open land, or in gallery forests.
Tribes speaking related languages are scattered over a large part of the continent. The tribes of the Arawak and the Carib linguistic families are most numerous in the Guianas (French Guiana, Guyana, Suriname, and the adjacent regions of Venezuela and Brazil) as well as in other parts of the northern Amazon, but the former have representatives as far south as the Chaco and the latter as far south as the upper Xingu. The Tupí tribes extend to the south of the Amazon valley.
The Ge family includes groups most of which are located in the semi-arid lands of central Brazil. In the extreme northwest of Brazil and in the jungles of eastern Peru and Bolivia live the Pano tribes. The Jívaro of Ecuador are famous headhunters. They cut off the enemy’s head, separate the soft part from the skull, and, with the help of hot sand, reduce it to the size of a fist without altering the physiognomy. They attribute great magical power to these trophies, or tsantsa.
A characteristic feature of the tropical forest cultures is their combination of farming with hunting, fishing, and gathering. Before the arrival of Europeans, the Indians of the tropical forest had no domestic animals except the dog. As is typical of most farmer-foragers, these people did not write or erect stone buildings as did the Indians of Middle America, form states with centralized political organizations, or have castes of warriors or priests. Their utensils and instruments were almost all of vegetable or animal origin, since in large sections of the area stones for making axes, arrowheads, and other objects were quite scarce. One finds evidence of metalwork only in the regions near the Andean civilizations, although objects of copper and other metals occasionally found their way across the continent, through channels of trade.
In almost all of the tropical forest area the population density was low, probably averaging less than one person per square mile.
Populous centres existed only along the coast and the main rivers, particularly the Amazon; the latter, according to reports by early European explorers, was fringed with Indian villages. For the most part, however, the Indians were dispersed throughout the vast territory in innumerable tribes and tribelets. This is why a classification by languages and cultures gives only a vague idea of the complex picture of the forest populations. Peoples having the same dialect and culture might exist as separate groups, even as enemies. While some Indians considered themselves primarily members of their local group, others, like the Xerente (Sherenté), gave greater value to a common language and culture than to village divisions. But differences in dialect and culture often imposed obstacles to the recognition of tribal solidarity.
There were no permanent political associations or confederations encompassing tribes of different languages and cultures. From time to time tribes might form ephemeral confederations for warfare against a common enemy. Certain close relations sometimes existed between groups of diverse origin, especially through tribal intermarriage. The best known examples are along the Río Negro in northwest Brazil, where numerous populations, mostly Arawak and Tucano, are united in a vast network of interethnic relations. At the headwaters of the Xingu, a complex system of intertribal institutions also exists among formerly autonomous groups.
Few tropical forest tribes are strictly monogamous. Polygyny with two or more women is usually restricted, however, to chiefs and other men of prestige. It is perhaps most accentuated among the Jívaro, where headhunting once killed off many of the men; it frequently takes the form of marriage with two or more sisters. Examples of polyandry are rare.
The choice of a partner is sometimes limited by the division of the tribe into clans and segments to which an individual belongs by heredity and within which marriage is prohibited. In some cases, for example in the Guianas and in the Río Negro region, the individual must find a mate outside his village or even outside his tribe (exogamy). The Terena of the southern Mato Grosso divide themselves into endogamous groups: the man and wife must come from the same group, called by ethnologists a moiety. Marriage between cross cousins, that is, between children of siblings of different sex, is considered ideal in many tribes; that of parallel cousins, children of siblings of the same sex, is frequently prohibited.
Kinship groups and household communities are based predominantly on the principle of lineage, that is, on relation through either the male or female line. Communities of extended patrilineal families were typical of the Tupí-Guaraní. In many Amazon tribes and in others farther north, the lineages or groups of lineages are patrilineal exogamous clans. Tribes with matrilineal clans, although less numerous, can be found throughout South America. In some tribes the clans number 40 or more, as among the Mundurukú; they are generally organized into two groups so that the whole tribe comprises two exogamous moieties. The dual divisions of the Ge Indians, often not related to kinship and marriage, are mainly ceremonial.
In general, the tropical forest cultures do not exhibit much social stratification. When there is inequality, it is normally made up of ethnic outsiders who do not constitute a class as such. War captives may be reduced to slavery, as among the northern Carib and Arawak, the Huitoto, and the Mundurukú. Among the extinct Tupí of the Brazilian coast, slavery was the fate of those destined for ritual sacrifice. In many cases, chiefly among the northern Carib, slavery had primarily an economic function: the captives form a servile group known as peito—the same term applied to a fiancé during the period in which he is obliged to work for his future father-in-law. The Rucuyen, a Carib tribe of French Guiana, for some time maintained in servitude a great number of the Oyampī, their Tupí neighbours. In the northwest Amazon, Arawak and Tucano tribes hunt and enslave Makú men, who are forced to work in their gardens; the Makú women and children are used as domestic servants.
A tendency to form a class of nobility has been found in many Arawak groups, who not uncommonly impose themselves over other tribes by means of intermarriage, especially among families of chiefs. In some regions, relatives of chiefs constitute a kind of nobility. In tribes divided into clans, it is common to attribute superior status to a certain clan or even to scale them in hierarchic order. Nevertheless, the local or tribal community is essentially egalitarian.
The children learn through play and imitation. Boys acquire skill in the use of weapons by practicing with small bows or blowguns made by their fathers. Girls learn to cook in little clay pots and to weave on small looms; they help their mothers in the preparation of manioc flour. The young also participate in the general religious life. The transmission of moral standards is rarely of a formal nature, and there is little punishment or repression.
The institution of the couvade is found throughout the forest culture. The father of a newborn infant must observe a rigorous diet for a week or so after the infant’s birth. It is based on the idea of a mystical relation between the father and the child.
Puberty rites are often quite elaborate. In many tribes, such as the Guaraní, the symbol of masculine maturity is the labret, an ornament worn in a perforation of the lip; the ritual is preceded by an instruction period during which the boys, isolated from the community, learn the religious chants and dances, and it culminates with the perforation of their lower lips. Initiation rites may be limited to boys or to girls or may be for both sexes. The initiation of the boys is generally done collectively for those who have reached the eve of sexual maturity, while that of the girls is normally held individually on the occasion of the first menstruation.
In many of the Indian cultures these rites take a central position among other important ceremonies such as funerals and fertility rites. In the Guianas and the northwest Amazon region, the initiation of the boys is very complex. The Yurupary celebration inducts the boys into the secret society of mature men. Special rites are revealed to them; they are shown the sacred trumpets or the masks representing ancestral spirits. They are subjected to violent whippings, which they must tolerate without the least expression of pain. In the Guianas, the ritual torture consists of the stings of hornets or the bites of poisonous ants. The girls’ initiation, generally more developed in the Amazon area near the Andes, is also frequently accompanied by difficult tests. Among the Tikuna (Tucuna) and other Amazonian groups, all the hair of the girl is pulled out; its regrowth symbolizes the emergence of a new adult personality.
The initiation of the boys assumes great importance in the social structure of some Ge groups of central Brazil, whose complex of rites begins at ten years of age and continues in cycles until 20. In one such tribe, the Xerente, candidates spend three years isolated from community life preparing themselves for manhood. In these Ge groups, those who have been initiated together form a distinct set of persons who feel united the rest of their lives.
