Totonac,  Middle American Indian population of east-central Mexico. Totonac culture is in many ways similar to other Middle American cultures, but it possesses certain features not seen elsewhere in Middle America and more likely related to the circum-Caribbean cultures. The Totonac inhabit two types of environment—high mesa, cool and rainy, and coastal lowland, hot and usually humid—and there are corresponding differences in cultural patterns.
Both groups are agriculturists, growing corn (maize) and squash as staple crops. Lowland Totonac also keep bees, poultry, and hogs and raise a variety of cash crops. Highland Totonac keep poultry and raise some livestock; to augment their rather meagre farm production, they also engage in peddling and wage labour in the off-season.
Lowland Totonac live primarily in scattered farmhouses, while the highlanders live in central villages with their farmlands around them. The Totonac generally purchase their tools from commercial outlets, and only a little weaving and pottery making is still practiced by the women.
Highland Totonac wear basically traditional homemade clothing—white cotton shirts and pants for men, black wool skirts and cotton overblouses for women. Lowland men wear similar clothing or commercially produced garments, and women wear cotton skirts and blouses or cotton housedresses.
While each family generally farms its own land or follows a trade, highland men frequently go to the lowlands as seasonal wage labourers on the lowland farms. Communal labour on collectively owned village land is required in both the highlands and the lowlands.
A system of ritual kinship is practiced by the Totonac; this institution is related to the compadrazgo, or institution of godparenthood, commonly seen in Middle America, but among the Totonac the kinship ties are felt to be primarily between the adults involved, rather than between adult and child. The Totonac are nominally Roman Catholic but have adapted Christianity to their traditional beliefs, and many pagan ceremonies and rituals are still practiced.
