Joseph Yoakum, in full Joseph Elmer Yoakum,  (born February 20, 1890, Ash Grove?, Missouri, U.S.—died December 25, 1972, Chicago, Illinois), American self-taught artist and world traveler known for his colourful striated landscape drawings that blended imagination with his life experiences.
Yoakum was born one of 10 children and had little formal education. His mother was of African, French American, and Native American ancestry, born into slavery in the 1850s. His father was of Native American—Cherokee and Creek—heritage. Yoakum’s ancestry was of ongoing interest to him throughout his life. A storyteller by nature, he often described himself as Navajo, born “near the village of Window Rock, Arizona,” which was later a Navajo and Apache reservation. (His death certificate, however, listed Ash Grove as his place of birth, and there is no record of Navajo ancestry in his family.) At age nine he left home and joined the Great Wallace Circus, which began nearly a decade of travel across the United States and abroad with several railroad circuses such as Buffalo Bill Cody’s Wild West show and Ringling Brothers as well as with some lesser-known outfits. During his circus years he was employed variously as a horse tender and a bill poster. Yoakum returned to Missouri in 1908 and met Myrtle Julian, with whom he had a child and whom he married in 1910. The couple moved to Fort Scott, Kansas, where Yoakum worked in coal mining to support his burgeoning family, which soon grew to five children.
Yoakum was drafted into the army in 1918 and served in the all-black 805th Pioneer Infantry doing manual labour, repairing roads, railroads, and bridges. Following the war, Yoakum chose not to return to his family and instead reverted to the nomadic lifestyle that he had lived as a circus worker. He took odd jobs—railroad porter, seaman, apple picker, rock quarrier—and traveled widely through Australia, parts of Asia, and North America. By the end of the 1920s, Yoakum had settled in Chicago, where he remarried and worked another series of odd jobs. After Yoakum began showing signs of what was then diagnosed as “chronic brain syndrome” (now called dementia), Yoakum’s wife in 1946 had him admitted to a psychiatric ward, where he stayed for nearly a year.
Yoakum probably began drawing in earnest in the 1950s, after his time in the psychiatric institution, when he no longer could hold down a regular job. His work was not seen by the public until 1967, when John Hobgood—a professor of anthropology at Chicago State College (now Chicago State University)—noticed his drawings as he passed by Yoakum’s studio on the South Side of Chicago. Hobgood purchased a number of his drawings and helped arrange an exhibition for Yoakum’s work. That exhibition launched Yoakum’s career. His greatest champions were Whitney Halstead, a professor of art at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago (SAIC), and a group of artists schooled at SAIC known as the Imagists (Roger Brown, Art Green, Philip Hanson, Gladys Nilsson, Jim Nutt, Ed Paschke, Christina Ramberg, Suellen Rocca, Barbara Rossi, and Karl Wirsum), many of whom claimed Yoakum as an inspiration to their own work as well. In 1969 he was included with them in an exhibition at Chicago’s Museum of Contemporary Art.
Over the course of about 15 years, Yoakum created more than 2,000 drawings, mostly mountainous landscapes of places he had visited, or imagined he had visited, in his lifetime. In his personal library he had encyclopaedias and many books on geography and travel, which he likely used as source material for some of his drawings. He drew sinuous stylized lines to form mountains, trees, and rocks and used thoughtful muted palettes. Drawing freehand with a ballpoint pen, Yoakum outlined the forms in his composition and then filled the spaces in with watercolours, coloured pencils, chalk, pastels, or some combination of those. He used toilet paper to blend colours and achieve a uniform sheen. Except for some of his earliest works, Yoakum signed and inscribed each of his drawings with the location and the date on which he had visited it. Some include autobiographical information.
In 1971 a group of Yoakum’s drawings was exhibited at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, and, one month before Yoakum died, the Whitney Museum of American Art held a solo exhibition of his work. Though for much of the 20th century it was commonly held that Yoakum had invented the tales of his world travels, Derrel B. DePasse, Yoakum’s first biographer, determined that Yoakum had, in fact, traveled to many (though not all) of the places that he described and drew late in life.
