Lisette Model, original name in full Elise Amélie Felice Stern (family name changed to Seybert, 1903),  (born Nov. 10, 1901, Vienna, Austria-Hungary [now Austria]—died March 30, 1983, New York, N.Y., U.S.), photographer and teacher known for her unconventional street images and ruthlessly candid portraits.
Born to a Jewish Austrian-Italian father and French Catholic mother, Model was educated first in Vienna and then in Paris. Her music studies with the avant-garde composer Arnold Schoenberg introduced her to experimental ideas in the other arts. In Paris in 1926 she came into contact with other émigré artists, including the photographers Rogi André and Florence Henri and possibly Berenice Abbott. About 1933 she abandoned all efforts to pursue a career in music; after a brief interlude as an art student (with André Lhote), she turned to photography as a means of earning a living. Her sister, Olga, taught her the rudiments of film development and darkroom processes. In 1934 Model produced Promenade des Anglais, a series of startling, satiric portraits of the idle rich named for its setting, the road that runs along the seafront in Nice, France. These images, a selection of which appeared in the French journal Regards in 1935 and later in the New York newspaper PM, established Model as a master photographer and they remain among her most often reproduced images.
She married Russian-born painter Evsa Model in 1937, and a year later the couple immigrated to New York City. Stimulated by the city’s energy, Model embarked on a new phase of photography, making images of street activity and reflections in store windows, as well as portraits of celebrities, entertainers, and street people. Her work appeared in exhibitions at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City and in various publications, notably Harper’s Bazaar, for which she freelanced between 1941 and 1955.
Beginning in 1951, Model taught photography for some 30 years at the New School for Social Research and, for part of that period, in private classes held at her home. Her uncompromising and passionate approach to photography influenced a great many of her students, among them Diane Arbus and Rosalind Solomon.
