Malvina Hoffman,  (born June 15, 1887, New York, New York, U.S.—died July 10, 1966, New York City), American sculptor, remembered for her portraiture and for her unique sculptural contribution to Chicago’s Field Museum of Natural History.
Hoffman was the daughter of a noted English pianist. She leaned strongly toward an artistic career from an early age, and after studying painting for several years she took up sculpture, studying with Gutzon Borglum, who is perhaps best known for the Mount Rushmore National Memorial in South Dakota. She went to Paris in 1910 and studied in the studio of Auguste Rodin. Her Russian Dancers won first prize in an international art exposition in that year. She opened a studio of her own in New York City in 1912, but from 1913 to 1915 she was again in Paris. In the latter year her Pavlowa Gavotte and Bacchanale Russe won wide attention.
During World War I Hoffman was active in Red Cross work and was the American representative for Appui aux Artistes, an organization for the relief of needy artists that she had helped found in France. After the war she was deeply involved in relief work and conducted a tour of inspection of the Balkan countries for Herbert Hoover in 1919. Her first major postwar sculpture was The Sacrifice, a war memorial for Harvard University. A massive group, To the Friendship of the English Speaking People, was dedicated at Bush House in London in 1925. She became especially known for her portrait sculptures, and among her subjects were pianist Ignacy Paderewski (several times), ballerina Anna Pavlova (several times), conservationist John Muir, poet John Keats, and sculptor Ivan Meštrović.
Hoffman’s skilled, finely detailed portraits brought her in 1930 a remarkable commission from the Field Museum of Natural History to execute a series of 110 life-size figures (25 full-figure, 85 in bust) of human racial types. For five years she alternated periods in her Paris studio with journeys to every portion of the globe, often under considerable hardship, to observe and model the various types called for in the plan. (She had already spent 1926–27 in Africa for a similar purpose.) Leading anthropologists were consulted along the way. Of the 110 figures finally completed for the Hall of Man (which was dedicated in June 1933, before completion), 97 were cast by her in bronze, the remaining 13 being done in marble or stone.
Hoffman’s other notable sculptures include a series of 26 stone panels for the facade of the Joslin Clinic (now the Joslin Diabetes Center) in Boston, the American Battle Monument (World War II) at Épinal, France, and a bronze Mongolian Archer, which won a gold medal from the Allied Artists of America in 1962. In 1936 she published a memoir, Heads and Tales, that describes the experience of creating the sculptures for the Hall of Man, and in 1939 she published the instructional book Sculpture Inside and Out. In 1965 she published her autobiography, Yesterday Is Tomorrow.
