Rubbing,   one of the most universal and perhaps the oldest of the techniques used in printmaking. Rubbings are made by carefully pressing paper onto a carved or incised surface so that the paper conforms to the features to be copied. The paper is then blacked and the projecting areas of the surface become dark, while indented areas remain white. In East Asia, a special ink is used, and in the West, a mixture of wax and carbon black, called heelball, is rubbed onto the paper. A carefully made rubbing provides an accurate, full-scale facsimile of the surface reproduced.
Rubbings are generally used to reproduce surfaces carved or incised by someone other than the person who makes the rubbing. The end product, therefore, cannot be considered an original print but rather an accurate record of the work of others.
Rubbings probably originated in East Asia, where they served many utilitarian purposes. Japanese fishermen, for example, continue the centuries-old practice of using rubbings to record the size of the various fish that they catch. The earliest known rubbings are Buddhist texts rubbed from wooden blocks in Japan in the 8th century ad. Evidence suggests, however, that rubbing may have been practiced in China as early as the 2nd century ad. There, rubbing (t’a-pen) was used to disseminate Confucian texts carved on large stones. These inscriptions and the rubbings made from them were valued both for their information and for their calligraphy. Even after prints began to be made from woodcuts and stone engravings, rubbings remained the most common method of reproducing Confucian texts. In the Sung dynasty (960–1279), antiquarian research became fashionable, and rubbings were used to make copies of ancient relief carvings.
The technique of rubbing began to be practiced in the West at a relatively late date. In the United States, rubbing is most often used to reproduce reliefs carved on gravestones, especially of the colonial period and the early 19th century. In Europe it is almost exclusively applied to monumental brasses, engraved memorial brass sheets mounted into large stone slabs. See also frottage.
