Bustle,  item of feminine apparel for pushing out the back portion of a skirt. The bustle, or tournure, was notably fashionable in Europe and the United States for most of the 1870s and again in the 1880s.
Padded cushions for accentuating the back of the hips represent one of several methods women throughout history have used to shape their skirts. Known variously as “bum rolls,” “bearers,” and “cork rumps,” such pads enjoyed sporadic popularity in the West from the 16th century, especially in France in the late 1700s. The bustle followed the decline of the crinoline, another skirt-shaping device, in the latter half of the 19th century, as the crinoline changed to become flatter in the front and more-emphasized in the back and designs focused on a bunching up of material behind the waist. A modified crinoline, known as a crinolette, was developed to support this extra material. The crinolette employed hoops only at the back, whereas a full crinoline was more bell-shaped.
By the early 1870s the bustle had become a separate garment, which was situated over the posterior and generally tied around the waist. Bustles were constructed in various ways, often with a rigid support (for example, metal or mesh) as well as some form of padding (horsehair, down, wool, or even straw). Over the course of the decade, bustles became smaller until they all but vanished about 1878. They reappeared in France about the beginning of the 1880s, and a new, more-exaggerated style became popular again in the United Kingdom by 1883. Bustles eventually developed into a wire cage that was attached to the petticoat and extended backward like a shelf, over which the dress material was draped. By the mid-1880s wire bustles had developed such that some could collapse when the wearer sat down and spring back into shape when she stood.
Despite such innovations, the bustle went out of fashion by the beginning of the following decade, replaced again by a simple pad. It has not enjoyed widespread popularity since, with the exception of bridal fashion, and the term has come to refer to fabric draped in a bustle style as well as to the clothing item itself.
