Paolo’s legacy became the basis upon which a young designer named Tom Ford decided to build his vision when he became creative director in 1994. The now infamous Tom Ford look—what he later called “sexy, sensual, fuck-me clothes”—oozed power and prestige and reminded customers viscerally of the company’s glory days. In short order, Gucci was a global player once again.

The fashion crowd has made their way from Milan to Paris for the final leg of the spring 2022 season (in Europe, at least—there are more collections to come in Seoul, Shanghai, and other cities). The Paris schedule is filled with a mix of runway shows, intimate presentations, parties, and virtual events, and we’re anticipating a bustling street style scene. Acielle of Style du Monde is on the ground to capture the best looks outside Balenciaga, Dior, Chanel, and more of the top shows in Paris; scroll through her latest photos here and come back for her daily updates.

By now, it’s almost redundant to say Stella McCartney was ahead of her time. While the rest of the fashion industry is scrambling to address its carbon footprint and connect to a Gen Z customer, her commitment to sustainability dates back to 2001. Her collaboration with Adidas, now in its 17th year, was prescient too. The linkup predates the “athleisure” movement by about a decade, and it feels newly relevant in our time of social distancing and remote work. It’s easy to find comfy, stretchy activewear that stands up to a day at your desk (read: couch) or a grocery run, but it’s significantly harder to find leggings and hoodies that are stylish and sustainable too.

With every collection, the label’s sustainability goals become more ambitious: Fall 2020 includes a long puffer in 100% recycled polyester.. Design-wise, this collection—shot pre-pandemic, and available in stores this week—was inspired by the idea of bringing nature into urban cities. The black-and-white leopard print is the most pointed reference, seen on puffer vests and neon-piped leggings. Sleeker items, like a metallic chrome parka and a sharp-shouldered pullover, were photographed by the water or in fields just outside of New York. In the past, McCartney typically shot her collections on models running on a track, stretching in a yoga studio, or leaping through the air. Here, the results were a bit gentler, with the suggestion that these clothes are ready for anything.

Party season is fast approaching, and platforms are high on our festive wish lists. In need of styling inspiration? Chunky heels stormed the spring/summer 2022 runways. Saint Laurent’s Paris Fashion Week showcase, set against the backdrop of the Eiffel Tower, delivered on vertiginous footwear (the sky-high lacquered peep-toe platforms are among our favourites), while almost every look at Lanvin was paired with rebellious pierced heels. Versace’s towering satin black styles boasted similar party appeal. 

Expect to see show attendees bring out their best looks for a jam-packed schedule that includes the likes of Dior, Chanel, Valentino and Louis Vuitton, with effortless tailoring and statement handbags likely to be the name of the game.

Below, see the best street style looks at Paris Fashion Week’s spring/summer 2022 edition, captured on the ground for Vogue by Style Du Monde’s Acielle.

To complement the two pants shapes, Gainsbourg has also created a micro wardrobe that matches exactly how she dresses now: A black bralette, two pairs of black knickers, a long-sleeve tee, short-sleeve tee, tank, sweater, denim shirt, and denim jacket. C’est tout! “This is really how I dress every day,” she says.

The Paris collections are fashion’s main event, and there has been plenty of style on display at the spring/summer 2022 shows currently underway. As celebrities from across the globe fly in to experience the latest from Dior, Saint Laurent, Chanel, and Givenchy, they’re bringing their A-game and suitcases filled with designer goodies. After several seasons of virtual events and live-streamed runways, PFW’s calendar of in-person events has led to a front-row renaissance and plenty of high drama ensembles.

And for us shopaholics, there is no greater joy than walking into our favorite stores and feeling the rush of a new collection on the shelves.

The vibrancy of fall’s best pieces, like Prada’s patterned bodysuit, Alexander McQueen’s blooming biker jacket, and Versace’s itty-bitty minis, have a worldwide appeal, too, as evidenced by Vogue’s first global spread. That means your new Wales Bonner knit dress and Celine shearling jacket will look as good from Paris to Shanghai to New York.

The brighter the color, the better the sweater.

Loewe intarsia crewneck sweater

Bottega Veneta cutout cotton-blend minidress

Victor Glemaud color-blocked polo

Tory Burch shrunken double-face cardigan

Christopher John Rogers color-blocked ribbed-knit sweater

Stella McCartney knitted sweater

Try this Dolce & Gabbana bralettes with groovy Adam Lippes pants.

Alexander McQueen anemone-print biker jacket

Dries Van Noten Chiala rose-print velvet top

Dolce & Gabbana floral cotton-blend bustier

Marni tulip-print crepe midi skirt

Preen by Thornton Bregazzi Dorchen recycled patchwork floral-print crepe de chine dress

Adam Lippes flare pant in printed cotton twill

Alessandra Rich button-embellished check tweed jacket

Alessandra Rich checked tweed mini skirt

Self-Portrait cropped wool-blend cardigan with crystal buttons

Self-Portrait mélange flared skirt

Charles Jeffrey Loverboy single-breasted tartan cotton-twill jacket

Charles Jeffrey Loverboy tartan pleated cotton-twill miniskirt

sweatpants are definitely out. Instead, opt for a matching stretchy set from Rodarte, Prada, or Burberry, and let your curves—and these optic prints—do the talking.

Prada flower jacquard turtleneck

Prada patterned jacquard high-waist leggings

Rodarte floral turtleneck bodysuit

Rodarte floral stretch leggings

Burberry Emery check long-sleeve turtleneck

Burberry W Madden stretch leggings

No item is more crucial to a closet than a great leather jacket. This season’s most memorable styles have a little extra verve than your average moto jacket, though: There’s Bottega Veneta’s elongated bomber, Simone Rocha’s mega pouf, and a sleek style from Supriya Lele.

Bottega Veneta cropped layered leather jacket

Simone Rocha cropped ruffled leather biker jacket

Supriya Lele rubberized drawstring jacket

R13 ring-detail refurbished leather moto jacket

Alexander McQueen peplum leather moto jacket

Burberry fringed plongé lambskin cropped trench coat

Versace stretch Cady crop top

The Attico front-slit crepe mini suit skirt

Stella McCartney Milly sequined minidress

Victoria Victoria Beckham leather minidress

Emilia Wickstead Talia cloque minidress

Saint Laurent bouclé tweed miniskirt with faux fur

Rugby stripes get a sensual new look at Chloé, Balmain, and Wales Bonner. Purists can try Monse’s skirt with a classic white button-up, while those looking for some va-va-voom might consider mixing it up with a Kenzo knit. The more directions, the better.

Victoria Beckham striped wool sweater

Monse striped asymmetric merino wool–blend sweater skirt

Wales Bonner Brixton striped stretch-cotton chenille midi dress

Kenzo striped tiger crest tunic

Chloé striped wool sweaterdress

Balmain striped button-detail sweater

Extra-large jackets from Celine and Loewe have made it all the easier to be ready—and cozy—for any climate. Even better? Their oversize shapes mean your sweater will actually fit inside the sleeves.

Balenciaga logo-embroidered long-line panel-shell jacket

Marni oversized leather bomber jacket with genuine shearling collar

Loewe leather-trimmed quilted-cotton bomber jacket

Miu Miu quilted down jacket

Prada pouch-detail bomber jacket

Celine monogrammed shearling bomber jacket

Total look dressing is a thing of the past. Collage prints, upcycled patchworks, and retro graphics are all making a major comeback—best worn all together. So pair that Louis Vuitton with that Chopova Lowena! Weird times call for eccentric style.

Rave Review Sally patchwork wool coat

Etro Santa Barbara striped jacquard wool-blend sweater

Louis Vuitton zebra bust gladiator dress

Preen by Thornton Bregazzi Evelyn patchwork jacquard, printed canvas, and twill skirt

AZ Factory leggings

Chopova Lowena Kiel flocked-cotton midi skirt

The Quintessential Coat

The prime example of an investment that will never go out of style is the classic beige Burberry trench.

Burberry Camden car coat

Nili Lotan x Target khaki women’s pleated-back trench coat

APC Balt trench coat

Cos organic cotton oversized trench coat

The Chunky Oversized Knit

An oversized pullover is key to any minimalist’s winter wardrobe. They’re utterly simple yet powerfully sophisticated. Bonus points for a thick ribbed texture and chin-grazing necklines.

Totême sweater

Everlane Cloud turtleneck

Filippa K Alexandra sweater

Proenza Schouler oversized asymmetric ribbed wool-blend sweater

The Dainty Knit

When the occasion calls for something lighter, fine knits will do just the trick. For a fitted take on minimal tops, try a ribbed collared sweater, a pale-colored turtleneck, or a bell-sleeved pullover.

Vince ribbed-cotton cardigan

Tory Burch ribbed-knit turtleneck

& Other Stories Mulberry fitted silk-blend sweater

Caes organic cotton ribbed-knit sweater

The Everyday Shirtdress

Elevate your standard shirtdress with feminine details, like a bow tied belt, tiered hemlines, or one with a wrapped effect top.

Frankie Shop Cala oversized organic cotton-poplin midi shirtdress

Lemaire gathered cotton shirtdress

Co tiered cotton shirtdress

Sir Pierre shirtdress

The Cozy-Chic Knit Dress

These sweater dresses aren’t your typical ill-fitting silhouette. Daniel Lee’s Bottega Veneta gives the knit dress a completely contemporary twist, while Club Monaco’s fit-and-flared style is as flattering as it is chic and comfortable LVIR’s turtleneck version looks like a turtleneck sweater and skirt set while Khaite’s mock neck dress has a desirable yet unexpected cut out.

LVIR yellow wool turtleneck and dress set

Bottega Veneta cutout ribbed-knit midi dress

Club Monaco Melissah knit dress

Khaite Mischa dress

The Wear-Forever Foundations

Finding basics that last (and, more importantly, that you love) is often a never-ending search. The search stops here with minimalist wardrobe heroes, including investment layerables from Wolford, structured ribbed knit tanks from Agolde, and affordable yet luxurious shirting from The Frankie Shop.

Frame standard shirt

Wolford ribbed pullover

Agolde Bea high-neck tank top

Frankie Shop Melody oversized cotton shirt

The Mighty Midi Skirt

Appropriate for work, weekends, and even formal occasions, the below-the-knee-length skirt is the minimalist’s solution for everywhere style. Tuck a structured tank into a leather version for transitional style, or add sculptural jewels and a heeled sandal to Tibi’s belt-wrapped style and head off to cocktails in the best minimalist style.

Tibi Norris belted layered woven midi skirt

LVIR faux leather pleated wrap skirt

Aeron Daria belted ribbed-knit skirt

The Row Luun virgin wool and alpaca midi skirt

The Wearable Art

The finishing touches come in the form of hammered metal rings, pendants, and sculptural liquid-like earrings. Nothing completes a neutral color palette better than strikingly chic gold.

Marni trapeze enamel earrings

Agmes Gertrude pendant

Completed Works The Best Place to Be a Puffin gold ring

Mounser stone hoop earrings

The Sleek and Smooth Loafer

A toast to penny loafers in soft suedes and supple neutral-palette leathers.

JW Anderson women’s leather loafer mules

Tod’s leather loafers

Scarosso Valeria penny loafers

Sam Edelman Birch penny loafers

The Thong Sandal

A flip-flop is an iconic style that can be surprisingly chic. Look for elevated details like square-toe soles, thin straps, or buttery leathers.

The Row Ginza flip flops

Neous 55mm leather thong sandals

Aeyde Renee leather flip flops

Porte & Paire suede platform flip flops