Frida Giannini,  (born 1972, Rome, Italy), Italian fashion designer who was creative director of the world-renowned Gucci fashion house from 2006 to 2015.
After studying at Rome’s Academy of Costume and Fashion (Accademia di Costume e di Moda) and holding an apprenticeship at a small fashion house, Giannini went to work in 1997 at the larger Fendi, where she quickly rose to become a designer of leather goods. She was responsible for Fendi’s Baguette, an opulent handbag that helped to ignite a profitable accessories craze. In 2002 she was hired as Gucci’s director of handbag design. At Gucci Giannini took on more responsibilities, serving as creative director of accessories from 2004 and of women’s ready-to-wear and accessories from 2005 until she was named creative director of the entire firm in 2006.
Although critics had doubted that Giannini had the experience and vision to reinvigorate Gucci, the company’s management reasoned that she, as a young female European, understood Gucci’s customers. In addition, she had performed brilliantly as creative director of accessories, overseeing the merchandise that generated some 80 percent of the company’s revenue. In 2004, for example, she introduced the Flora collection—handbags, ribbon-embellished sandals, scarves, and limited-edition watches—which incorporated a perky floral print that Gucci had created in 1966 for Princess Grace of Monaco (Grace Kelly); the Flora line was a triumph for the firm. Indeed, Giannini regularly mined Gucci’s archives for inspiration, and customers consistently embraced her approach. Sales increased dramatically, and by 2008 Gucci had reasserted its position as one of the world’s most-coveted luxury brands, largely because of Giannini’s creative leadership.
However, Gucci’s sales subsequently stagnated, and Giannini drew criticism for failing to create a distinctive style. In addition, the brand lost its status as a trendsetter, which some blamed on her tendency to rework older designs. In December 2014 Gucci announced that Giannini was being dismissed as creative director, and she left in January 2015.
