Stella McCartney,  (born September 13, 1971, London, England), British fashion designer known primarily for her fur-free and leather-free apparel as well as for her celebrity-studded clientele.
Stella McCartney was the daughter of Sir Paul McCartney (a former Beatle) and Linda McCartney, a noted photographer and animal-rights activist. She worked for a time at the French couture house Christian Lacroix and as an intern at British Vogue before enrolling in Central Saint Martin’s College of Art and Design, London. For her graduation in 1995, she produced a blockbuster show that featured supermodel Naomi Campbell. McCartney subsequently rose quickly to the forefront of the international fashion world, and in 1997 she was hired by the Vendôme Luxury Group to revitalize its 45-year-old design label, Chloé.
McCartney succeeded in reestablishing Chloé as a desirable brand; its sales increased markedly. Her first collection, featuring lacy petticoat skirts and dainty camisoles, silenced critics, and her 2001 Paris romantic offerings—silk pants set off by midriff-baring tops, body-hugging jeans paired with tunic tops or jackets, and faux-fur coats and jeweled vests—cemented her professional reputation. McCartney also brought to the brand a celebrity cult following. This in part was due to her high-profile customers and friends, notably Madonna (for whom she designed a wedding dress), actresses Kate Hudson (whom she outfitted for the 2001 Academy Award ceremonies), Liv Tyler, and Gwyneth Paltrow, and model Kate Moss.
In 2001, after protracted negotiations with McCartney, the Italian luxury goods conglomerate Gucci (owned by PPR [later renamed Kering]) announced that it would participate in a joint venture to launch a new design label produced under McCartney’s name. In accordance with demands made by McCartney, a lifelong vegetarian, no leather or fur—both central design elements for Gucci—were to be used in the products. McCartney released her first perfume, Stella, in 2003. She launched a line of organic skin-care products in 2007 and her first collection of children’s wear (for retailer Gap Inc.) in 2009. McCartney later designed the uniforms worn by athletes representing Great Britain at the 2012 London Olympic and Paralympic Games. In 2018 she created the reception dress Meghan Markle wore after her wedding to Prince Harry.
Also in 2018 McCartney become the sole owner of her line after acquiring Kering’s 50 percent stake in the business. However, in 2019 she entered a partnership with LVMH Moët Hennessy–Louis Vuitton, the largest luxury products company in the world. As part of the deal, she retained a majority stake in her brand.
McCartney was included in the New Year Honours List for 2013 as an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE).
