Tyra Banks, in full Tyra Lynne Banks,  (born December 4, 1973, Inglewood, California, U.S.), American fashion model and television personality best known as a face of the cosmetics company CoverGirl and the American lingerie, clothing, and cosmetics retailer Victoria’s Secret, as well as for her daily television talk show, The Tyra Banks Show (2005–10), and for hosting the modeling competition series America’s Next Top Model (2003–15, 2017–18).
Banks was raised in Inglewood, a suburb of Los Angeles, where she attended a local all-girls Catholic school. Her father was employed as a computer consultant, and her mother worked as a photographer. Banks started modeling at age 15 and, with the help of her mother, assembled a modeling portfolio. At age 17 she began seeking professional representation from local modeling agencies. Despite initial rejection—allegedly because of her “ethnic” look—Banks signed in 1990 for professional representation with Elite Model Management, one of the world’s top modeling agencies. Soon afterward she was featured in the leading teen magazine, Seventeen. After graduating from high school in 1991, Banks enrolled in Loyola Marymount University, but her plans changed when a French modeling scout offered her the opportunity to model high-fashion collections on the runways of Paris. Banks walked a record 25 shows in her first season and subsequently appeared on the cover of the Spanish edition of the leading fashion magazine Vogue, and she was soon christened the “new Naomi Campbell.”
Banks started her own company to manage her career and thereafter patterned her career trajectory after that of her idol, supermodel Cindy Crawford, venturing into multiple industries. Banks was subsequently featured in a string of pop music videos including Michael Jackson’s “Black or White” (1991), Tina Turner’s “Love Thing” (1992), and George Michael’s “Too Funky” (1992). In 1992 she returned from Paris, and in 1993 she was featured in a recurring role on several episodes of the television comedy series The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air (1990–96), a Will Smith vehicle. In the same year, she became a new face of CoverGirl, which catapulted her to the status of supermodel—a top fashion model who appears simultaneously on the covers of the world’s leading fashion magazines and is globally recognized by first name only. In 1994 and again in 1996 she was named one of People magazine’s “50 Most Beautiful People.” She made her movie debut in the dramatic film Higher Learning (1995).
In the mid-1990s, because of her increasingly curvaceous figure, Banks began to lose runway assignments. Refusing to cave to industry pressure to lose weight, she instead shifted her focus toward modeling lingerie and swimwear, which typically favours models with more shapely physiques. She became the first African American woman to be featured on the cover of GQ magazine (February 1996), the Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue (with fellow top model Valeria Mazza), and the Victoria’s Secret catalog. In 1997 she became one of the original Victoria’s Secret Angels—the brand’s most visible spokesmodels. She subsequently launched her own film and television production company, Bankable Productions, and cofounded with her mother the Tyra Banks TZONE Foundation, dedicated to the advancement of opportunities for low-income and disadvantaged girls through the operation of various programs and services including self-esteem workshops. With Vanessa Thomas Bush she wrote Tyra’s Beauty Inside & Out (1998), a collection of beauty, health, and fashion tips.
In the early 21st century Banks continued to expand her career, appearing in Coyote Ugly (2000), a rowdy coming-of-age feature film, and releasing a music single, “Shake Ya Body” (2004), which garnered little attention.
In 2003 Banks signed on as the host and executive producer of America’s Next Top Model, a weekly prime-time reality talent show that chronicled the search for a promising fashion model from a lineup of neophytes. It swiftly became one of the highest-rated shows in the history of the UPN (United Paramount Network). The show later aired on the CW, a network created when UPN merged with Warner Brothers’ The WB. It became a cultural touchstone, with many of Banks’s memorable neologisms working their way into the lexicon. Although America’s Next Top Model was canceled in 2015, it returned the following year, airing on the cable channel VH1. Banks hosted the show in 2017–18.
Banks premiered her own daily talk show, The Tyra Banks Show, in 2005. It focused on fashion, lifestyle, makeovers, and topical issues and featured Banks at the centre of a reality-show-like twist: in taped confessional segments she divulged her own struggles with a variety of issues, including low self-esteem and her inability to find and keep a suitable mate. She retired from modeling that same year. In both 2008 and 2009 The Tyra Banks Show won an Emmy Award for outstanding talk show in the newly created “informative” category. The program ended in 2010.
During this time, Banks continued to occasionally act, and she appeared on such TV shows as Gossip Girl, Glee, and Black-ish. In 2017–18 she hosted the reality TV series America’s Got Talent.
Banks participated in a number of unsuccessful ventures, including the reality television series True Beauty (2009–10), the Web site Type F (2011), which offered beauty and fashion advice, and the talk show FabLife (2015). She began offering her own line of cosmetics in 2014 and in 2015 launched a Web site that sold her makeup and dispensed tips on cosmetic application.
