Helen Maria Williams,  (born 1762, London—died  Dec. 15, 1827, Paris), English poet, novelist, and social critic best known for her support of such radical causes as abolitionism and the French Revolution.
The daughter of an army officer, she was privately educated at Berwick-on-Tweed. After she went to London in 1781 to publish her poem Edwin and Eltruda, she made a wide literary acquaintance, which included Dr. Samuel Johnson and Robert Burns as well as such prominent radicals as Joseph Priestley and William Godwin. In the 1780s she achieved some success with her poetry; her collected poems (1786) had a subscription of some 1,500 names.
The first important expression of Williams’s interests in social reform came with her Poem on the Slave Bill (1788), and her opposition to slavery was clear in her novel Julia (1790), which also indicated her support for the French Revolution. She spent the summer of 1790 in Revolutionary France, returned again in late 1791, and settled there in late 1792. Her sympathy for the Revolution is recorded in volumes of Letters published from 1790 to 1796. She was particularly attracted to the moderate Girondins and allowed her Paris salon to serve as a meeting place for them as well as for British radicals; among the attendees were the English-American political pamphleteer Thomas Paine and the English feminist Mary Wollstonecraft. Arrested with other British citizens in October 1793, Williams was soon released but had to leave Paris the following year, eventually going to Switzerland in June to escape Jacobin persecution.
On her travels Williams was accompanied by another English expatriate, John Hurford Stone. She wrote about her time in Switzerland in Tour in Switzerland (1798), which also includes some of her verse. Her hatred for Robespierre did not destroy her faith in the original principles of the Revolution, and after his fall (July 1794) she returned to Paris.
Williams’s enthusiasm for political change in France lost her most of her literary friends in England. Because of her disenchantment with the Directory, she initially admired Napoleon Bonaparte, but she later condemned him as a tyrant and finally welcomed his fall in her Narrative of the Events (1815). In the meantime she satirized rank and privilege in Perourou (1801) and reiterated her republican principles in an edition of the forged correspondence of Louis XVI (1803). In 1817 she took out letters of naturalization in France but spent most of the remaining decade of her life in Amsterdam. Her Poems on Various Subjects appeared in 1823.
