Abdülmecid I,   (born April 25, 1823, Constantinople, Ottoman Empire [now Istanbul, Tur.]—died  June 25, 1861, Constantinople), Ottoman sultan from 1839 to 1861 who issued two major social and political reform edicts known as the Hatt-ı Şerif of Gülhane (Noble Edict of the Rose Chamber) in 1839 and the Hatt-ı Hümayun (Imperial Edict) in 1856, heralding the new era of Tanzimat (“Reorganization”).
Well educated, liberal minded, and the first sultan to speak French, Abdülmecid continued the reform program of his father, Mahmud II, and was strongly assisted by his ministers Mustafa Reşid Paşa, Mehmed Emin Âli Paşa, and Fuad Paşa. The reform edicts were in part directed toward winning the support of European powers. The edicts proclaimed the equality of all citizens under the law and granted civil and political rights to the Christian subjects. The main purpose of the reforms, however, remained the preservation of the Ottoman state. The army was reorganized (1842) and conscription introduced; new penal, commercial, and maritime codes were promulgated; and mixed civil and criminal courts with European and Ottoman judges were established. In 1858 a new land law confirming the rights of ownership was introduced, and an attempt was made to establish a new system of centralized provincial administration. The sultan’s educational reforms included the formation of a Ministry of Education and the establishment of military preparatory schools and secondary schools; he also established an Ottoman school in Paris (1855).
Abdülmecid’s foreign policy was directed toward maintaining friendly relations with the European powers to preserve the territorial integrity of the Ottoman state. He ascended the throne as a mere boy a few days after the Ottoman defeat by the Viceroy of Egypt at the Battle of Nizip (June 1839). Only an alliance of European powers (excluding France) saved the Ottomans from accepting disastrous terms from Egypt (Treaty of London, July 1840). In 1849 Abdülmecid’s refusal to surrender Lajos Kossuth and other Hungarian revolutionary refugees to Austria won him the respect of European liberals. Finally, in 1853 the Ottomans were assisted by France, Great Britain, and Sardinia in the Crimean War against Russia and were admitted as participants in the Treaty of Paris (1856).
The European powers, however, while insisting on reforms regarding the Christians and minorities in the Ottoman Empire, obstructed the sultan’s efforts at centralization and at recovering power in Bosnia and Montenegro in the Balkans. They also forced the Ottomans to grant autonomy in Lebanon (1861), while the effect of the Treaty of Paris was to unify the Danubian principalities, paving the way for the independence of Romania (1878).
Abdülmecid restored Hagia Sophia, built the Dolmabahçe Palace, and founded the first French theatre in Constantinople. See also Âli Paşa, Mehmed Emin; Reşid Paşa, Mustafa. 
