al-Maʾmūn, in full Abū Al-ʿabbās ʿabd Allāh Al-maʾmūn Ibn Ar-rashīd,  (born 786, Baghdad—died  August 833, Tarsus, Cilicia), seventh ʿAbbāsid caliph (813–833), known for his attempts to end sectarian rivalry in Islām and to impose upon his subjects a rationalist Muslim creed.
The son of the celebrated caliph Hārūn ar-Rashīd and an Iranian concubine, al-Maʾmūn was born in 786, six months before his half-brother al-Amīn, the son of a legitimate wife of Arab blood. When it became necessary for ar-Rashīd to choose an heir, he is said to have hesitated before deciding finally in favour of al-Amīn. In 802, on the occasion of a pilgrimage to Mecca, the caliph formally announced the respective rights of the two brothers: al-Maʾmūn recognized al-Amīn as successor to the caliphate in Baghdad, but al-Amīn acknowledged his brother’s almost absolute sovereignty over the eastern provinces of the empire, with his seat at Merv in Khorāsān (now in Turkmenistan).
Hārūn ar-Rashīd’s death in March 809 nevertheless created discord that soon developed into armed conflict between the two brothers. Al-Maʾmūn, in effect stripped by al-Amīn of his rights to the succession, was supported by an Iranian, al-Faḍl ibn Sahl, whom he was to make his vizier, as well as by an Iranian general, Ṭāhir. Ṭāhir’s victory over al-Amīn’s army on the outskirts of the present Tehrān allowed al-Maʾmūn’s troops to occupy western Iran. Al-Amīn appealed in vain to new troops recruited in part from among the Arabs of Syria. He was finally besieged in Baghdad in April 812. There was desperate resistance, and the city was taken only in September 813. Al-Amīn, who had in the meantime been declared deposed as caliph in Iraq and Arabia, wished to surrender but was killed, contrary, it seems, to al-Maʾmūn’s orders. Thus ended one of the most merciless civil wars known to the Islāmic East.
The war had originated in Hārūn ar-Rashīd’s ill-advised decision over the succession, but it also revealed internal divisions within the ʿAbbāsid empire. It was not merely a question of a personal rivalry between the two brothers—one of whom, al-Maʾmūn, was unquestionably of far-superior intelligence—it was also a question of a conflict between different politico-religious trends that had become apparent during the preceding reign; al-Amīn had emphasized traditionalism and Arab culture, while al-Maʾmūn, who was open to new movements of thought and outside influences, courted the support of Iranian figures and of the eastern provinces.
Al-Maʾmūn, having become caliph of the entire ʿAbbāsid empire, decided to continue to reside at Merv, assisted by his faithful Iranian vizier al-Faḍl. It was then that al-Maʾmūn, determined to put an end to the division of the Islāmic world between Sunnite and Shīʿite—between the adherents of the ʿAbbāsid caliphs, descendants of Muḥammad’s uncle al-ʿAbbās, and the defenders of ʿAlī, the prophet’s cousin and son-in-law, and his descendants—made a decision that was startling to his contemporaries and injurious to his own position. He designated as his heir not a member of his own family but instead ʿAlī ar-Riḍā, who was a descendant of ʿAlī. In an attempt visibly to reconcile the two rival families, al-Maʾmūn gave ʿAlī ar-Riḍā his own daughter as a wife. As a further symbol of reconciliation, he adopted the green flag in place of the traditional black flag of the ʿAbbāsid family.
But this spectacular measure did not achieve the anticipated result. It was not sufficient to pacify the Shīʿite extremists, while on the other hand it embittered the partisans of ʿAbbāsid legitimism and of Sunnism, particularly in Iraq. In Baghdad, declaring al-Maʾmūn deposed, they proclaimed as the new caliph the ʿAbbāsid prince Ibrāhīm, son of the third caliph, al-Mahdī. When news of this insurrection finally reached al-Maʾmūn, he abruptly decided to leave Merv for Baghdad. During the long journey, two dramatic events took place: the vizier al-Faḍl was assassinated in February 818, and ʿAlī ar-Riḍā died in August of the same year after a brief illness that chroniclers ascribed to poisoning. Thus, the man whose elevation to the position of heir presumptive had bedeviled the caliph’s rule, as well as the vizier closely associated with that policy, were eliminated. Notwithstanding his denials, historians have generally attributed the deaths to al-Maʾmūn.
During the following 15 years, al-Maʾmūn showed himself to be a judicious sovereign. He closely controlled his ministers and did not again appoint an all-powerful vizier. He also tried to maintain strict control over the provincial governors but was forced to allow a relative degree of autonomy to his former general, Ṭāhir, who had been named governor of Khorāsān.
Although al-Maʾmūn, upon his arrival in Baghdad, abandoned his policy of reconciliation with the descendants of ʿAlī, which he symbolized by reinstating the traditional black ʿAbbāsid flag, he did not give up hope of attaining the same goal by means of a more circuitous path. He had already, at Merv, evidenced his sympathy for the representatives of the Muʿtazilī movement, those supporters of Islām who adopted rationalist methods and borrowed from the works of ancient Greek or Hellenistic philosophers the modes of reasoning that seemed to them best-suited for combating the influence of such doctrines as Manichaeism (a dualistic religion founded in Iran). Al-Maʾmūn encouraged the translation of Greek philosophical and scientific works and founded an academy called the House of Wisdom (Bayt al-Ḥikmah) to which the translators, most often Christians, were attached. He also imported manuscripts of particularly important works that did not exist in the Islāmic countries from Byzantium. Developing an interest in the sciences as well, al-Maʾmūn established observatories at which Muslim scholars could verify the astronomic knowledge handed down from antiquity.
Not content with extending his patronage to the translators and scientific research, al-Maʾmūn imposed on all his subjects the Muʿtazilī doctrine, characterized by a purified concept of divinity, belief in free will, and full human responsibility. One of the most innovative aspects of this theodicy was the affirmation of the created and not eternal character of the Qurʾān, the word of God. Such a doctrine was likely to diminish the influence of the learned doctors, the interpreters of the sacred text, who found themselves defending ʿAbbāsid legitimism; in addition, the doctrine demanded exceptional moral and religious qualities of the caliph, for it went so far as to authorize rebellion against a wicked sovereign. This tenet of the Muʿtazilī doctrine diverged from the traditional concept upon which the ʿAbbāsid caliphs had based their authority, and many adherents of the doctrine manifested an avowed sympathy for Shīʿah. Al-Maʾmūn, attracted by the intellectual rigour of Muʿtazilah, also saw in it the means of encouraging public opinion to accept a new, more flexible conception of the caliphate. In fact, when he announced his adherence to the thesis of the “created Qurʾān” in 827, al-Maʾmūn also asserted the superiority of ʿAlī over the other Companions of the Prophet. This position of al-Maʾmūn’s manifested clear political implications.
At the beginning of 833 al-Maʾmūn decided to require adherence to Muʿtazilah from all his subjects. As the caliph was then on an expedition against the Byzantines in the region of Tarsus, he entrusted this task to his representative in Baghdad, the prefect of police Isḥāq ibn Ibrāhīm. The latter first called together the qāḍīs (judges) to urge them to recognize the Muʿtazilī doctrine; then it was the turn of the specialists in Ḥadīth Muslim tradition; but among this group protestations were raised that the caliph hoped to silence through the use of threats. Some resisted obstinately, refusing to pronounce the Qurʾān a “created” work. This was notably true of Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal, the founder of the Ḥanbalī school of Islāmic law, who was to have been sent, under a heavy guard, before the caliph but was temporarily spared by the sudden death of al-Maʾmūn at Tarsus in 833. This episode, called the trial (miḥnah) by the traditionalists, showed that one portion of the public opinion resisted the beliefs that al-Maʾmūn had wished to impose. The strength of this opposition serves to explain why the caliphs, a few decades later, abandoning their attempt at reorienting religious beliefs, returned to traditional dogma.
Possessed of a distinguished and sagacious mind, al-Maʾmūn set forth in the political domain very personal ideas that, in effect, ended in failure. He was never able to put an end to the divisions that were tearing the Muslim community apart; and the violence that he did not hesitate to employ at the end of his reign—to impose a doctrine he considered salutary for the Islāmic community—tarnished the image of an otherwise exceptionally open-minded ruler.
