Frederick III,  (born Sept. 21, 1415, Innsbruck, Austria—died  Aug. 19, 1493, Linz), Holy Roman emperor from 1452 and German king from 1440 who laid the foundations for the greatness of the House of Habsburg in European affairs.
Frederick, the son of Duke Ernest of Austria, inherited the Habsburg possessions of Inner Austria (Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, and Gorizia) on his father’s death in 1424. By 1439 he had become the senior member of the dynasty and the following year was elected German king; yet he was to be plagued by conflicts with his relatives and a powerful, rebellious nobility throughout his reign. As guardian of Ladislas Posthumus, son of his cousin the German king Albert II, Frederick attempted to exploit his ward’s claims to the Bohemian and Hungarian thrones to his own advantage; but rebellious nobles forced him to release Ladislas prematurely (1452). On the boy’s death in 1457, the House of Habsburg temporarily lost possession of both domains; Bohemia elected George of Poděbrady and Hungary elected Matthias I Corvinus as kings.
Revolts of the Austrian nobility, disputes with the German princes, and inability to carry out governmental reforms caused Frederick to withdraw almost completely from German affairs. This heightened German dissatisfaction and resulted in the rise of a number of claimants to the throne, including Frederick’s own brother Albert VI. With Albert’s death in 1463, however, and the cession of Tirol by Frederick’s cousin Sigismund to Frederick’s son Maximilian, the Austrian heritage, partitioned between two rival branches of the House of Habsburg in 1379, was once again united.
Frederick maintained somewhat better relations with the church. Travelling to Italy, he received the Lombard crown (1452) and, on March 19, 1452, became the last emperor to be crowned in Rome by a pope.
Frederick was never able to pacify the eastern borders of his realm. The Ottomans took Constantinople in 1453 and advanced into Styria and Carinthia, unopposed by the financially and militarily weak emperor. It was from his reign onward, however, that the Habsburgs saw themselves as Christian Europe’s first line of defense against Islām, a role they were to play for more than three centuries. Frederick had to suffer the humiliation of seeing Matthias I Corvinus of Hungary conquer much of Austria and enter Vienna in 1485, but Matthias’ death in 1490 allowed Frederick’s son Maximilian to recapture Austria (1490–91).
Frederick’s greatest achievement was marrying his son in 1477 to Mary, daughter of Charles the Bold, duke of Burgundy, a union that gave the House of Habsburg a large part of the Burgundian domains and made the Austrians a European power.
After 1486, when, on the insistence of the German princes, Maximilian became king of the Romans and co-regent, the Emperor assumed a less active role in affairs of state.
Like many men in the late Middle Ages, he occupied his time with astrology, magic, and the attempted manufacture of gold from base metals; but he also travelled as far as the Holy Land (1437), associated with Humanists, and collected books and precious stones. 
