Hārūn al-Rashīd, in full Hārūn al-Rashīd ibn Muḥammad al-Mahdī ibn al-Manṣūr al-ʿAbbāsī,  (born February 766/March 763, Rayy, Iran—died March 24, 809, Ṭūs), fifth caliph of the ʿAbbāsid dynasty (786–809), who ruled Islam at the zenith of its empire with a luxury in Baghdad memorialized in The Thousand and One Nights (The Arabian Nights Entertainment).
Hārūn al-Rashīd was the son of al-Mahdī, the third ʿAbbāsid caliph (ruled 775–785), and al-Khayzurān, a former slave girl from Yemen and a woman of strong personality who greatly influenced affairs of state in the reigns of her husband and sons. The elder prince, al-Hādī, was four when Hārūn was born. The princes were brought up in the court at Baghdad and educated in the Qurʾān (the holy book of Islam), poetry, music, anecdotes about the Prophet Muhammad, early Islamic history, and current legal practice. Hārūn had as tutor Yaḥyā the Barmakid, a loyal supporter of his mother. In 780 and 782 Hārūn was nominal leader of expeditions against the Byzantine Empire, though the military decisions were doubtless made by the experienced generals accompanying him. The expedition of 782 reached the Bosporus, opposite Constantinople, and peace was concluded on terms favourable to the Muslims. For this success Hārūn received the honorific title of al-Rashīd, “the one following the right path,” and was named second in succession to the throne and appointed governor of Tunisia, Egypt, Syria, Armenia, and Azerbaijan, with his tutor Yaḥyā acting as actual administrator. These moves were presumably engineered by al-Khayzurān and Yaḥyā. The two are even said to have induced al-Mahdī to make Hārūn his immediate successor, but al-Mahdī died in August 785 without officially changing the succession. Al-Hādī became caliph and Hārūn acquiesced. When al-Hādī died mysteriously in September 786, rumour suggested that al-Khayzurān was behind the death, because he had resisted her domination.
Hārūn al-Rashīd thus became caliph on Sept. 14, 786, succeeding to the rule of an empire reaching from the western Mediterranean to India. He made Yaḥyā the Barmakid his vizier, or chief minister. With Yaḥyā were associated his sons al-Faḍl and Jaʿfar, for the vizier at this period was not only an initiator of policy but also had attached to himself a corps of administrators to carry out his decisions. Al-Khayzurān had a considerable influence over the government until her death in 789. Thereafter until 803 the Barmakids largely controlled the empire, but the caliph was not wholly dependent on them, since certain offices of state were held by other men.
The reign was one of much internal trouble. At various times there were revolts for local reasons in Egypt, Syria, Yemen, and several eastern provinces, but the central government was strong enough to quell these and restore order. Ifrīqīyah (or Tunisia), after having had a series of incompetent governors, was given in 800 to Ibrāhīm ibn al-Aghlab, who agreed to make a substantial yearly payment to Baghdad in return for semi-independent status. This was immediately advantageous to Hārūn financially but was the beginning of the loss of power by the caliphs, for the Aghlabid family continued to rule the province for over a century without interference from Baghdad, and similar status was granted to other regional dynasties. Though the revolts fill the pages of the historians, much of the empire was peaceful most of the time. This led to a great development of industry (textiles, metal goods, paper, and so forth) and to an expansion of trade. The resulting prosperity made possible the concentration of vast wealth in the hands of the caliph and leading men and women of the empire.
The fabulous descriptions of Hārūn and his court in The Thousand and One Nights are idealized and romanticized, yet they had a considerable basis in fact. Untold wealth had flowed into the new capital of Baghdad since its foundation in 762. The leading men, and still more their wives, vied in conspicuous consumption, and in Hārūn’s reign this reached levels unknown before. His wife Zubaydah, herself a member of the ʿAbbāsid family, would have at her table only vessels of gold and silver studded with gems. Hārūn’s palace was an enormous institution, with numerous eunuchs, concubines, singing girls, and male and female servants. He himself was a connoisseur of music and poetry and gave lavish gifts to outstanding musicians and poets. The brilliant culture of the court had certain limits, however, since, apart from philology, the intellectual disciplines were in their infancy in the Arabic world. There was also a rougher and more sombre side. Instead of listening to music, Hārūn might watch cocks and dogs fighting. As caliph he had power of life and death and could order immediate execution. In the stories of his nocturnal wanderings through Baghdad in disguise, he is usually accompanied by Masrūr the executioner as well as friends like Jaʿfar the Barmakid and Abū Nuwās, the brilliant poet.
