Isaac II Angelus,  (born c. 1135 ce—died February 1204), Byzantine emperor, who, although incapable of stemming administrative abuses, partly succeeded, by his defeat of the Serbians in 1190, in retrieving imperial fortunes in the Balkans.
In September 1185 Isaac was unexpectedly proclaimed emperor by the Constantinople mob that had murdered his cousin, the emperor Andronicus I Comnenus. Isaac’s reign was inaugurated by the decisive victory of his general Alexius Branas over the Normans who, after invading the empire and sacking Thessalonica (1185), were then driven off Greek soil (except for the islands of Cephalonia and Zacynthus [modern Zante]). Isaac was unsuccessful, however, in recovering Cyprus from the rebel Isaac Comnenus, who set himself up as an independent ruler of that island in 1185. Isaac II failed to crush the revolt of the Bulgarians and Walachians that broke out toward the end of that year, even though he led expeditions against them in 1186–87. In 1187 he was forced to recognize the second Bulgarian empire.
In 1189 the Byzantine ruler was confronted with the Third Crusade, which, led by the Holy Roman emperor Frederick I Barbarossa, was passing through Byzantine territory. Isaac tried to protect himself by concluding a treaty with Saladin, the sultan of Egypt, but he was soon forced to assist Frederick. Isaac concluded the Treaty of Adrianople with Frederick in February 1190, and in the following month Frederick’s forces were transported across the Hellespont to Asia Minor.
Free to turn his attention to the Balkans, Isaac restored Byzantine prestige by defeating Stefan Nemanja of Serbia (1190). With Hungarian help, he planned an expedition against the Bulgarians, assembling a Byzantine army for this purpose near the city of Cypsela in the spring of 1195. On April 8, however, he was suddenly overthrown by his brother, who imprisoned and blinded him and assumed the throne as Emperor Alexius III.
In 1201 Isaac’s son Alexius made his way to Germany, where he succeeded in bringing about the diversion of the Fourth Crusade to Constantinople in order to restore his father to power. In July 1203 the Crusaders entered the city, and on August 1 Isaac, after eight years’ imprisonment, was crowned co-emperor with Alexius, who assumed the title Alexius IV. Friction between the Crusaders and the townspeople of Constantinople, however, led to a revolution in January 1204. The co-emperors were dethroned, Alexius IV was assassinated on February 8, 1204, and Isaac died several days later.
