Otto IV, also called Otto of Brunswick, German Otto von Braunschweig,  (born c. 1175/82—died May 19, 1218, Harzburg Castle, Lower Saxony [Germany]), German king and Holy Roman emperor, candidate of the German anti-Hohenstaufen faction, who, after struggling against two Hohenstaufen kings, was finally deposed.
A member of the Welf dynasty, Otto was a son of Henry the Lion of Brunswick and Matilda, daughter of Henry II of England. Brought up at the court of his uncle Richard I of England, Otto was made earl of York in 1190 and count of Poitou and duke of Aquitaine in 1196. Under both kings Richard and John, English diplomatic and financial help were to be of great assistance to Otto in his struggles with the Hohenstaufens.
When the Hohenstaufen emperor Henry VI died in September 1197, his heir, Frederick II, was an infant. Therefore the German princes favouring the Hohenstaufens elected Frederick’s uncle, Philip of Swabia, as German king in March 1198. The opposing party, led by Archbishop Adolf of Cologne, however, elected Otto in June 1198.
War ensued between the two factions. In 1201 Otto obtained the support of Pope Innocent III after agreeing to the papacy’s territorial claims in central Italy. In 1204, however, some of Otto’s chief supporters in Germany, including Archbishop Adolf, went over to Philip’s side. When, in early 1208, Otto held only the Welf allodial lands (hereditary possessions independent of any higher lord) in Brunswick, even Pope Innocent recognized Philip as king.
When in June 1208 Philip was murdered by a German count to whom he had refused to give one of his daughters in marriage, many of Philip’s former supporters made overtures to Otto, who agreed to a new election. Chosen king at Frankfurt in November 1208, he strengthened his position by his betrothal to Philip’s 10-year-old daughter Beatrix the Elder. The pope recognized Otto again after the king reaffirmed the papacy’s claims in central Italy.
When in August 1209 Innocent received him at Viterbo, Italy, Otto refused to concede to the church all the lands that the papacy had been claiming from the empire. He agreed, however, not to claim suzerainty over Sicily, of which the young Frederick of Hohenstaufen had in 1198 been crowned king as a vassal of the papacy, because the pope’s policy aimed at preventing a reunion of the German and Sicilian crowns. Otto was crowned emperor in Rome on October 4, 1209.
Soon, however, it became evident that Otto did not intend to keep his word. After occupying Tuscany, he invaded the mainland part of Frederick’s kingdom of Sicily. Disregarding his excommunication by Innocent, Otto in November 1210 conquered southern Italy. By the time Apulia had fallen, an assembly of princes at Nürnberg declared him deposed and invited Frederick to take his place.
When Otto returned to Germany in March 1212, in order to retain the support of at least part of the Hohenstaufen faction, he married Philip’s daughter Beatrix, but he lost that support when she died within three weeks of their marriage. Frederick, who arrived in Germany in September 1212, soon prevailed in the southern duchies, but Otto and his supporters held out against him in the lower Rhine district and northeastern Germany. In alliance with his uncle, King John of England, Otto then invaded France, which supported Frederick. Disastrously defeated at the Battle of Bouvines (July 27, 1214), Otto was deserted by nearly all his supporters. He was formally deposed as king in 1215. By the time of his death, three years later, his power was confined again to his Brunswick dominions.
