Dorothy Day,  (born November 8, 1897, New York, New York, U.S.—died November 29, 1980, New York City),    American journalist and Roman Catholic reformer, cofounder of the Catholic Worker newspaper, and an important lay leader in its associated activist movement.
While a student at the University of Illinois on a scholarship (1914–16), Day read widely among socialist authors and soon joined the Socialist Party. In 1916 she returned to New York City and joined the staff of the Call, a socialist newspaper; she also became a member of the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW). In 1917 she moved to the staff of the Masses, where she remained until the magazine was suppressed by the government a few months later. After a brief period on the successor journal, the Liberator, Day worked as a nurse in Brooklyn (1918–19). For several years thereafter she continued in journalism in Chicago and in New Orleans, Louisiana. In 1927, following years of doubt and indecision, she joined the Roman Catholic Church, an act that for some time estranged her from her earlier radical associates.
In 1932 Day met Peter Maurin, a French-born Catholic who had developed a program of social reconstruction, which he initially called “the green revolution,” based on communal farming and the establishment of houses of hospitality for the urban poor. The program, now called the Catholic Worker Movement, aimed to unite workers and intellectuals in joint activities ranging from farming to educational discussions. In 1933 Day and Maurin founded the Catholic Worker, a monthly newspaper, to carry the idea to a wider audience. Within three years the paper’s circulation had grown to 150,000, and the original St. Joseph’s House of Hospitality in New York City had served as the pattern for similar houses in a number of other cities.
The Catholic Worker Movement that Day inspired took radical positions on many issues as it grew, and Day, a professed anarchist, became widely regarded as one of the great Catholic lay leaders of the 20th century. A staunch adherent to the church’s “preferential option for the poor,” Day advocated and practiced a Catholic socioeconomic teaching known as distributism, which she saw as a third option between socialism and capitalism. During World War II the Catholic Worker was an organ for pacifism and supported Catholic conscientious objectors. Day protested the Vietnam War and was arrested in 1973 while demonstrating in California in support of Cesar Chavez and the United Farm Workers. Day died of heart failure at the House of Hospitality on the Lower East Side of New York City.
Her autobiography, The Long Loneliness, was published in 1952. In the late 1990s steps were taken with the Vatican to begin the canonization process for Day; the Vatican granted the Archdiocese of New York permission to open her cause in March 2000. The Duty of Delight: The Diaries of Dorothy Day (ed. by Robert Ellsberg) and All the Way to Heaven: The Selected Letters of Dorothy Day (ed. by Robert Ellsberg) were released in 2008 and 2010 respectively, her diaries and correspondences having been sealed until 25 years after her death.
