All-volunteer force (AVF),  military force composed solely of volunteers, without resorting to a military draft. The United Kingdom was one of the first nations to abolish conscription and has relied on an AVF since 1960, followed by New Zealand and Australia in 1972. The United States adopted an AVF during the Vietnam War in 1973 in response to protests by members of the antiwar movement. More than 100 countries rely on volunteer enlistment for their armed forces, though many still reserve the ability to enact a draft.
The draft has been a contentious issue among Americans since the very founding of the nation. During the American Revolution, Gen. George Washington requested that the central government be given the power to conscript soldiers, a power that had previously been reserved for the individual colonies. Despite the clear need for troops, the Continental Congress turned down Washington’s request. During the Civil War in 1863, Pres. Abraham Lincoln imposed a draft, a move that provoked riots in New York and other cities.
The country’s first peacetime draft took place in September 1940. The draft supplied two-thirds of the American service members who fought in World War II and remained in effect until 1947. The draft was allowed to lapse for a period of 15 months before it was reinstated as a result of mounting Cold War tensions and the military’s inability to meet its recruitment goals.
The draft became a casualty of its own unpopularity during the Vietnam War. Although draftees made up only 25 percent of the U.S. military, they accounted for more than half of the army’s battle deaths. Meanwhile, more than half of the men who reached draft age between 1964 and 1973 never served, and the number of conscientious objectors was unprecedented. Colleges and graduate schools were widely employed as acceptable methods of avoiding the draft, and an estimated half million evaded the draft illegally. Of the latter group, only about 4,000 ever served prison time for their failure to register.
In 1968 Pres. Richard Nixon ran for election, promising to end the draft. Ending the draft was part of Nixon’s goal that he called “a full generation of peace,” a response to the antiwar movement and its focus on the draft. In March 1969 Nixon established the Commission on an All-Volunteer Force (also known as the Gates Commission), which released a report in February 1970 recommending an end to the draft. On July 1, 1973, the draft law expired in the United States when Congress refused to extend it.
The first extended mission conducted by the post-Vietnam AVF was the Persian Gulf War of 1990–91. The success of U.S. forces in that conflict was widely interpreted as proof that a draft was unnecessary. Military leaders cited factors such as morale, motivation, and longer-term service as proof of the superiority of a military in which those serving have volunteered as opposed to having been conscripted. Other factors also made volunteer forces seem more desirable than a draft force. For example, draftees were required to serve only two years, whereas those who volunteer stay in uniform much longer on average. According to military officials, that enables the armed forces to focus on improving training and quality of life for service personnel. In addition, military service is frequently considered to be an asset in the job market once a soldier has returned to civilian life.
However, the AVF is not without drawbacks. The Iraq War required the extension of active-duty troops as well as members of the National Guard and Army Reserves. As a result, some troops have been prohibited from leaving the military or have been called back into service after having completed their tours of duty. In addition, some observers claim that there is an “economic draft”; that is, those serving tend to come from lower socioeconomic backgrounds. Those concerns raise the issue of whether the United States does actually have an AVF or whether the draft has simply become more complex. Critics claim that the burden of war should be distributed more equally among all socioeconomic classes and worry that the current inequalities are contributing to a “warrior class.”
In response, advocates of the AVF point out that the draft does not necessarily make the military more representative or spread the burden of sacrifice. They point to the fact that most draft-eligible young men never served in Vietnam and that the percentage of women in the military is higher in an AVF. In addition, the percentage of college-educated African Americans is higher in the military than among those who do not serve. That raises the question of whether it is actually desirable, much less possible, for military personnel to reflect the demographics of the civilian population.
