Bonus Army,  gathering of probably 10,000 to 25,000 World War I veterans (estimates vary widely) who, with their wives and children, converged on Washington, D.C., in 1932, demanding immediate bonus payment for wartime services to alleviate the economic hardship of the Great Depression.
Adjusted Compensation certificates, or bonuses, had been approved by Congress in 1924 but were not scheduled for full payment until 1945. In an effort to force early lump-sum payment of these urgently needed benefits, the Bonus Army, sometimes called the “Bonus Expeditionary Force,” converged on the nation’s capital in the spring of 1932; they moved into abandoned shacks below the Capitol and set up shanties and tents along the Anacostia River. Despite inadequate housing, sanitation, and food, the movement’s leader, Walter W. Waters, managed to maintain order and to oust agitators.
In mid-June the U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill that authorized an immediate payout of the bonuses to the veterans, but the Senate rejected the bill (62–18), and most of the veterans left for home discouraged. The rest, variously estimated at 2,000 to 10,000, over the next few weeks engaged in protests and near-riots, producing an atmosphere of restlessness and threats of turbulence. Local authorities requested that U.S. Pres. Herbert Hoover intervene. Troops led by Brig. Gen. Perry L. Miles and accompanied by Gen. Douglas MacArthur, the U.S. Army chief of staff, drove out the demonstrators and destroyed their encampments, using tanks and tear gas. One veteran was shot to death, and several veterans and policemen were wounded. Congress then appropriated $100,000 to send the protestors home, and they dispersed.
Politically, the event was a blow to Hoover. A second Bonus Army came in May 1933 and this time was greeted by the new president’s wife, Eleanor Roosevelt, and presidential assistant Louis Howe. Although again no bonus legislation was passed, Congress did create the Civilian Conservation Corps, in which many of the veterans were able to find work. In 1936, however, Congress finally passed, over a presidential veto, a bill to disburse about $2 billion in veterans’ benefits. The Bonus Army laid the foundation for the G.I. Bill of Rights (1944).
