Drill,  preparation of soldiers for performance of their duties in peace and war through the practice and rehearsal of prescribed movements. In a practical sense, drill consolidates soldiers into battle formations and familiarizes them with their weapons. Psychologically, it develops a sense of teamwork, discipline, and self-control; it promotes automatic performance of duties under disturbing circumstances and instinctive response to the control and stimulus of leaders.
Modern drill is essentially of two types: close-order and extended-order, or combat drill. Close-order drill comprises the formal movements and formations used in marching, parades, and ceremonies. Combat drill trains a small unit in the looser, extended formations and movements of battle.
Rudimentary drill appeared in ancient Sumer and Egypt with the dawn of formal warfare because of the need to assemble and move large numbers of men for battle. Drill in the modern sense was introduced by the Greeks, who periodically practiced the maneuvers of the phalanx; the Spartans carried disciplined drill to an extreme unequalled by their contemporaries. Philip II of Macedonia and Alexander III the Great further improved the phalanx and its drill. The careful training of the legions contributed largely to Roman domination of the Mediterranean world for almost a thousand years. After Rome’s decline, military drill almost disappeared as warfare degenerated into undisciplined melees and individual dueling. Two notable exceptions were the well-trained professional armies of Byzantium and the disciplined cavalry formations of Genghis Khan and his successors.
Gustavus II Adolphus of Sweden accelerated a gradual revival of skill in European warfare early in the 17th century. His introduction of simplified drill techniques for the use of improved weapons was copied by all Europe. By the end of the 17th century, France led in the development of modern standing armies, largely because of a drill system devised by Louis XIV’s inspector general of infantry, Jean Martinet, whose name became a synonym for drillmaster. To make effective use of inaccurate muskets, concentrated volleys had to be delivered at short range. Troops advanced in rigidly maintained battle lines, all firing simultaneously on command. Through ceaseless drill, the Prussian Army of Frederick II the Great achieved a mechanical perfection in these tactics. At Valley Forge during the American Revolution, Baron von Steuben, a German officer who helped train American troops, adapted Prussian techniques into a less rigid drill system fitted to the American character and to conditions of warfare in the New World.
Exact parade ground maneuvers on the battlefield disappeared in the 19th century because of improvements in the range and accuracy of weapons. This trend began during the American Civil War, when soldiers had to be trained to spread out, take cover, and dig entrenchments. It was hastened later by the introduction of the machine gun and quick-firing artillery. Close-order drill, however, was retained not only because it had value for ceremonies and for moving large bodies of men on foot but also because it provided a psychological foundation of teamwork and discipline without which combat drill is impossible.
