Harlem Hellfighters, byname of 369th Infantry Regiment, originally 15th New York (Colored) Infantry Regiment,  nickname given to the 369th Infantry Regiment of the United States Army during World War I. The French government decorated the entire unit with the Croix de Guerre, its highest award for bravery, as well as 170 additional individual medals for valour. The 369th’s battlefield prowess was almost overshadowed by its contribution to music, however, as the Hellfighters’ regimental band was credited with bringing jazz to Europe.
The Hellfighters originated as the 15th New York (Colored) Infantry Regiment, a National Guard unit. Members of the African American community in New York City’s Harlem district had long advocated for the creation of a homegrown military unit, but white politicians blocked several attempts at establishing such a body. On June 2, 1913, a bill authorizing an African American National Guard regiment finally passed the New York state legislature, and Gov. William Sulzer signed it into law. However, the 15th New York existed in name only until June 1916, when Gov. Charles Whitman appointed William Hayward, his former campaign manager, to serve as its commanding officer. Hayward had been a colonel in the Nebraska National Guard, and he, like most of the field-grade officers in the unit, was white.
Hayward proved to be an adept organizer, and he recognized the importance of incorporating African American soldiers into the unit’s officer corps. An early addition was Charles Fillmore, a Spanish-American War veteran who had been instrumental in the campaign to establish an African American regiment. Fillmore was commissioned a captain and made a company commander. However, despite an endorsement from the New York Age, arguably the most influential African American newspaper of its era, the 15th New York had trouble meeting its recruiting targets. At full strength, the regiment would field several thousand men, but by the end of the summer of 1916, only a fraction of that number had enlisted.
The regiment’s fortunes turned around with the enlistment of James Reese Europe in September 1916. Europe was a giant in the music scene of the early 20th century. He was a gifted multi-instrumentalist and composer as well as a tireless champion of African American music and musicians. Europe was also the bandleader for Vernon and Irene Castle, one of the most famous dance teams of the age.
Like many in New York City’s African American community, Europe initially had been lukewarm to the notion of military service. The segregated armed forces offered limited opportunities for African American troops, and Europe was the toast of American high society. He had more than a dozen orchestras performing under his banner in 1916, and his creative energies were fueling the transformation of ragtime into jazz. When Europe told his friend and collaborator Noble Sissle that he had joined the 15th New York, Sissle countered that running Europe’s musical empire had left neither of them with any time to devote to the army. Europe responded by telling Sissle that he would be joining the unit as well.
Europe was painfully aware of the prejudice that he and his musicians faced. They routinely played at the estates of the wealthiest families in the United States but never entered through the front door. Lynchings were commonplace, but U.S. Pres. Woodrow Wilson had not yet publicly denounced them. In the 15th, Europe saw an opportunity to create “a strong, powerful institution for the development of the Negro manhood of Harlem.” Europe told Sissle that “our race will never amount to anything, politically or economically, in New York or anywhere else unless there are strong organizations of men who stand for something in the community.” Sissle was receptive to this argument, and he enlisted the same day. Recruitment, however, continued to be hampered by the 15th’s limited resources.
In an effort to boost his unit’s profile, Hayward looked to the 8th Illinois, the only other African American regiment in the National Guard, for inspiration. The 8th Illinois had a concert band of national renown, and Hayward had Lieut. Jim Europe at the head of one of his machine gun companies. The solution seemed obvious, but Europe had a reputation to uphold. If he was going to establish a regimental band, he told Hayward that he would need the freedom to make it the finest in the army. Hayward secured $10,000 to fund the band, Europe was made bandleader, and Sissle was promoted to sergeant and made drum major. Europe spent months recruiting the country’s finest musicians to his cause, and he personally led a trip to Puerto Rico to fill his reed section. While Europe was building his band, the United States entered World War I.
