Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), Albanian Ushtria Çlirimtare e Kosovës,  ethnic Albanian Kosovar militant group active during the 1990s that sought Kosovo’s independence from Serbia, a republic in the federation of Yugoslavia.
Kosovo, which borders Albania, was a province of Serbia, which itself was a part of Yugoslavia (1929–2003). Kosovo was once the centre of Serbian culture and society, but over the course of several hundred years, its population changed, shifting toward a majority of people being of Albanian ethnicity, most of them Muslim. Despite the shift in population, Serbs still considered Kosovo an integral part of their country.
Yugoslavia was a federation of six nominally equal republics: Croatia, Montenegro, Serbia, Slovenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Macedonia. Although Kosovo was a province of Serbia, it had autonomous status. In 1989 Slobodan Milošević was elected president of Serbia on a nationalist platform. One of his first actions was to strip Kosovo of its autonomy, replacing Albanian officials with Serbian ones and closing Albanian-language schools. The reaction of Kosovar Albanians was to boycott all Serbian institutions in a form of peaceful protest and to set up their own shadow government. These tactics did not gain the hoped-for attention and support of the international community, however. Meanwhile, Yugoslavia became embroiled in civil war after some of the republics declared their secession in the early 1990s. The 1995 Dayton Accords, which resolved this conflict, failed to address the issue of Kosovo’s status, and many Kosovar Albanians began to look for other solutions.
It was in this atmosphere that the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) emerged. The group, which had been founded in the early 1990s, began to actively engage in coordinated attacks in 1996, targeting several Serbian police stations and wounding many officers during that year and the next. The KLA made its first public statement in late 1997 during a funeral service for an Albanian teacher killed by Serbian police. The speech was a call to arms outlining the KLA’s position and objectives, which included the secession of Kosovo from Serbia and the eventual creation of a “Greater Albania,” encompassing Kosovo, Albania, and the ethnic Albanian minority of neighbouring Macedonia (now North Macedonia). The KLA found great moral and financial support among the Albanian diaspora, and it used the money it received to purchase weapons, which were then smuggled over the porous Albania-Kosovo border. As the KLA became better armed, its attacks became more effective.
By 1998 the KLA’s operations had evolved into a significant armed insurrection. (See also Kosovo conflict.) In response, the Serbian government began a crackdown on the Kosovar Albanian population, raiding villages and expelling people from their homes. Massacres by the Serbian police were reported, and suspects taken into police custody were often beaten and tortured to extort confessions. The crackdown on the Kosovar Albanian population only increased support for the KLA, which attracted thousands of new recruits and was removed from the United States’ list of terrorist groups in 1998. Throughout that year, the KLA escalated its attacks, and Serbia followed suit with reprisals.
As the conflict continued between the KLA and forces from Serbia (and later Yugoslavia as well), an international consortium supported by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) brought delegations from the Serbian government and from Kosovo into truce negotiations in Rambouillet, France, in February 1999. The Kosovar delegation, lead by a KLA leader, was eventually persuaded to sign the treaty, but the Serbian delegation refused. In response, in March 1999 NATO commenced air strikes on Serbian targets. The air campaign lasted for 11 weeks. During the campaign, the KLA forces on the ground played an important role by engaging Serbian and Yugoslav troops and relaying their positions to NATO, allowing NATO air strikes to be more effective. In June Yugoslavia (which at this point included only the republics of Serbia and Montenegro) agreed to terms of peace, bringing an end to the bombing campaign.
Following the war, the United Nations (UN) sent a multinational peacekeeping force into the region, and all Serbian and Yugoslav forces were removed. The KLA eventually submitted to demilitarization and disbanded. Several of its leaders went on to form political parties and became active in Kosovo’s administration. Kosovo declared itself an independent country in February 2008, but many countries did not recognize it as such, considering it to still be a province of Serbia.
Following demilitarization, many of the members of what had been the combat wing of the KLA joined the newly formed Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), an emergency-response organization under the authority of the UN. In 2009 the KPC was dissolved and replaced by the Kosovo Security Force (KSF), which handled light security duties in addition to emergency-response services. Many KPC members became part of the KSF.
The Serbian government argued that the KLA was a terrorist group and that its former leaders should be tried for crimes committed during and after the war against Serbia. Individual KLA members were tried and convicted of war crimes, both by Kosovo courts and by the United Nations International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), located in The Hague. But whereas the ICTY, which began indicting former KLA members in 2003, consistently found that some KLA members did commit atrocities, prosecutors were not able to prove that the KLA itself had a policy of targeting civilians or engaging in war crimes. As a result, higher-ranking KLA leaders tried by the ICTY were largely acquitted. These include Fatmir Limaj, a KLA commander who served as minister of transportation and telecommunications in Kosovo (2008–10), and Ramush Haradinaj, a KLA commander who became Kosovo’s prime minister in 2004 but stepped down the next year to stand trial. Others, such as Agim Çeku, a former KLA military head and a former prime minister (2006–08), as well Hashim Thaçi, a former KLA leader who became prime minister in 2008, were not indicted by the ICTY, although they are considered war criminals by Serbia.
