Midshipman,  title used in the Royal Navy from about 1660 for “young gentlemen” in training at sea to qualify for service as commissioned officers. Continental and U.S. navies adopted the title and system. The equivalent French title is aspirant, and the Spanish is guardia marina. In the early 21st century all British midshipmen were students at the Britannia Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, Devon, England, while midshipmen of the U.S. Navy attended the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Maryland.
As lord high admiral of England, James, duke of York, believed it was necessary to train “sea officers” and to start early. Before his time there was no corps of professional naval officers. With the approval of his brother, Charles II, James inaugurated the first step in a development which took about 200 years. Until about 1720, midshipmen were in theory volunteers, accepted aboard ship with a letter of service, which led them to be called “king’s letter boys.” Rudyard Kipling and other writers affectionately used the term "snotty" for midshipmen.
The system underwent many changes. The entering age varied, and the title “naval cadet” was introduced to denote a rank below midshipman. A naval academy, established at Portsmouth in 1729, was reorganized in 1773 and renamed the Naval College in 1806. In 1837 the boys went to sea directly and had schoolmasters to aid the ships’ officers in their instruction. In 1857 the training ship Britannia was established. The Royal Naval College at Osborne was used until 1921.
The entering age and scholastic attainments for entrance to the Britannia Royal Naval College at Dartmouth have been raised since 1945. To enter as a cadet on September 1, one must be at least 18 years of age and not over 25 years, although exceptions can be made for candidates up to the age of 34, provided that they meet medical and fitness requirements. All cadets receive the same basic naval education for the first year, including a six-week cruise on a Royal Navy warship.
In the early days of the U.S. Navy, during the American Revolution, Barbary Wars, War of 1812, and Mexican War, many young men distinguished themselves while in the rank of midshipman. Until 1845 all service as midshipmen was in seagoing ships. David G. Farragut became a midshipman at the age of 9 and was promoted to lieutenant at 24. Usually, however, the age at entrance was 14 to 20.
The United States Naval Academy was established at Annapolis, Maryland, by George Bancroft, the historian, then secretary of the navy, in 1845. Congress provided that midshipmen should be appointed to the academy by senators and representatives. This policy, which already applied to the United States Military Academy, had the advantage of bringing in young men from all sections of the country, in proportion to population, thus making the navy a national rather than a sectional institution. In the beginning a midshipman spent one year at Annapolis, three years at sea, and another year at Annapolis for study and final examinations. Upon passing these examinations he was promoted to “passed midshipman.” In 1862 the grade of ensign was established as the equivalent of the rank of second lieutenant in the army, and passed midshipmen were given the rank of ensign.
The students at the naval academy have been called in turn acting midshipmen, midshipmen, cadet midshipmen and cadet engineers, naval cadets, and, again, since 1899, midshipmen. In the 21st century the navy undertook a review of its position titles to reflect the increasing number of women serving throughout the military. The term midshipman was retained for both men and women; officials noted that midshipman is a naval rank codified in U.S. law and not simply a form of address.
