National World War II Memorial,  monument in Washington, D.C., dedicated both to the Americans who served in World War II in the armed services—including the more than 400,000 dead—and to those who supported the war effort at home. It is located on a 7.4-acre (3-hectare) site on the east end of the Reflecting Pool on the Mall, opposite the Lincoln Memorial and west of the Washington Monument. Its creation was authorized by Pres. Bill Clinton in May 1993. Its designer, architect Friedrich St. Florian, won a national open competition. The memorial was constructed between 2001 and 2004 and opened to the public on April 29, 2004; its official dedication took place a month later, on May 29.
The main part of the memorial is an elliptical plaza, in the centre of which is a pool with fountains and water jets. The pool predated the building of the monument around it, which was a source of controversy before and during construction because the World War II memorial would occupy space that had previously been available for public demonstrations and other gatherings. A rectangular ceremonial entranceway leads into the plaza. Balustrades along its sides bear 24 bronze bas-reliefs illustrating, on the north side, the war in Europe and, on the south side, the war in the Pacific. Many of the images are based on historical photographs, and both sets of panels incorporate imagery of the war effort on the home front as well. Beyond the entrance, two pavilions 43 feet (13 metres) in height mark the midpoints on the north and south sides of the plaza. They incorporate bronze baldachins, bronze columns bearing American eagles, World War II victory medals, and inscriptions noting the victories in the European and Pacific theatres of operations.
Around the perimeter of the ellipse stand 56 granite pillars, 17 feet (5.2 metres) high, that represent the U.S. states and territories of the period as well as the District of Columbia. Each is adorned with a bronze oak-and-wheat wreath and inscribed with the state or territory’s name. The pillars are linked with a bronze sculpted rope, symbolizing the country’s unified effort during the war.
Used liberally throughout the memorial are quotations from prominent military and political figures, including Gen. (later Pres.) Dwight D. Eisenhower, U.S. Presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman, Col. Oveta Culp Hobby, Adm. Chester W. Nimitz, Gen. George C. Marshall, and Gen. Douglas MacArthur. At the western end of the memorial is a curved Freedom Wall bearing a field of 4,000 golden stars, each of which stands for 100 American military deaths in the war. Before it lies a granite curb inscribed “Here we mark the price of freedom.”
