Navy SEAL, SEAL in full Sea, Air, and Land,  in the U.S. Navy, a member of a special operations force trained to engage in direct raids or assaults on enemy targets, conduct reconnaissance missions to report on enemy activity (especially prior to beach landings), and take part in action against terrorist groups.
The SEALs trace their heritage to various elite units in World War II, particularly to naval combat demolition units (NCDUs) and underwater demolition teams (UDTs) whose “frogmen” were trained to destroy obstacles on enemy-held beaches prior to amphibious landings in Europe and the Pacific. Other special units of that war were scouts and raiders, who were assigned to reconnoitre coastal areas and guide landing craft to the shore, and “operational swimmers” of the secretive Office of Strategic Services, who are said to have pioneered modern underwater combat. During the Korean War, UDTs undertook their usual reconnaissance and mine-clearing work, but they also extended their missions beyond the beach by disrupting enemy transportation lines inland.
In 1961 Pres. John F. Kennedy called for an increase in special forces of all kinds to be specifically trained for the conduct of unconventional warfare. In response, the following year the navy created the first two SEAL teams with personnel taken from existing UDTs. During the Vietnam War, SEAL units trained South Vietnamese naval commandos, and SEAL teams and UDTs also conducted numerous counterguerrilla operations along riverbanks, on beaches, and in the hinterland.
Following the disastrous attempt in 1980 to resolve the Iran hostage crisis by military action, the United States reorganized its special operations forces. In 1983 all remaining UDTs were redesignated as either SEAL teams or units that eventually became known as SEAL delivery vehicle (SDV) teams. In 1987 all SEAL and SDV teams were placed under the new Naval Special Warfare Command, located at Naval Base Coronado, at the entrance to San Diego Bay, California.
SEAL units took part in several U.S. military engagements abroad, including the protection of merchant shipping in the Persian Gulf in 1987–88 during the Iran-Iraq War, the intervention in Panama in 1989, and the liberation of Kuwait during the Persian Gulf War (1990–91). During the global war on terrorism following the September 11 attacks of 2001, SEAL teams were in almost constant rotation, particularly in the Afghanistan War (from 2001) and the Iraq War (from 2003). In those conflicts they conducted numerous counterguerrilla and counterterrorist operations, often far from the coastal or riverine environments with which they are usually associated—the most prominent operation being the killing in 2011 of al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden in northern Pakistan.
Members of the U.S. Navy can apply for SEAL training between the ages of 17 and 28, though special waivers are available through age 33. (In 2015 the navy announced that it would open the SEAL program to women, though no time frame was given.) Candidates who pass two months of preparatory training, including a battery of demanding physical and mental screening tests, enter an extremely rigorous six-month Basic Underwater Demolition/SEAL (BUD/S) training program, often said to be the toughest in the U.S. military. There they undergo constant physical and mental conditioning and are trained in a host of skills, including basic water competency and swimming, underwater combat, weapons and demolitions, and navigating on dry land. BUD/S training includes the notorious “Hell Week,” more than five days in which the candidate is put through intense physical exertion almost around the clock, being allowed only about four hours of sleep in the entire period. Normally only about one-quarter of any candidate class completes BUD/S training.
Following BUD/S, candidates are put through weeks of intermediate SEAL qualification training that includes small-unit tactics, parachuting, and cold-weather operations. They are then awarded the Trident (the official Navy SEAL symbol) and assigned to a SEAL platoon or SDV team, where they report for several more months of advanced training for specialty and unit-level skills. There are some 2,500 SEALs on active duty.
The basic operational SEAL unit is the platoon, numbering approximately 16 men, which may be divided into smaller squads and fire teams as needed. Several platoons plus headquarters and other elements make up a SEAL team; each team is assigned to a specific area of the world and may have a specialized skill set. Active-duty SEAL teams are components of either Naval Special Warfare Group One, based at Coronado on the West Coast, or Naval Special Warfare Group Two, based at Little Creek, near Virginia Beach, Virginia, on the East Coast. Each of the groups is also assigned an SDV team, which operates submersible craft designed to insert and extract SEALs operating in marine areas. Many other boat and logistical units support SEAL operations around the world. Some SEAL and SEAL-support units operate in total secrecy; for example, the SEAL team that killed bin Laden, variously known as SEAL Team 6 or the Naval Special Warfare Development Group (DEVGRU), is not officially acknowledged by the U.S. Navy to exist.
