Quds Force, also spelled Qods Force, also called Jerusalem Force,  elite clandestine wing of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), responsible primarily for its foreign operations. Organized shortly after the Iranian Revolution (1978–79), its activities have centred on organizing, supporting, and at times leading local forces abroad in ways favourable to the interests of the IRGC and Iran’s clerical establishment.
The contingent’s first activity as a distinct unit came in 1982, when it became involved in the Lebanese Civil War after Israel’s invasion of Lebanon. It aided in the organization of Hezbollah, a predominantly Shiʿi militia founded that same year to repel the Israeli invasion, and remained a close ally and sponsor of the militant group even after the civil war ended in 1990. In the 1990s it turned its attention to Iran’s eastern frontier and provided support to the Northern Alliance in Afghanistan against an emergent Taliban.
The unit became increasingly visible on the world stage in the 21st century, after the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2003 and the regional instability that followed the Arab Spring. In Iraq it played an important role in organizing and aiding efforts among Shiʿi militias against U.S. forces, coordinating most notably with the Badr Organization. As the 2011 uprising in Syria devolved into civil war, the Quds Force came to the aid of Syria’s president, Bashar al-Assad, whose regime was an invaluable ally in Iran’s “Axis of Resistance” (a centre-periphery enterprise stretching geographically from Iran to Lebanon). In Yemen it supported the Houthis, whose rebellion against the central government was bolstered in the aftermath of Yemen’s 2011–12 uprising. It also took a leading role in organizing ground forces against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL; also known as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria [ISIS]). Its continued influence in Iraq’s internal affairs became a target of popular protests, however, after the Quds Force’s commander, Qassem Soleimani, intervened in October 2019 to prevent the ouster of Iraq’s Prime Minister Adel Abdul Mahdi.
