Ranger,   in U.S. military usage, a soldier specially trained to act in small groups that make rapid surprise raids on enemy territory. Ranger has also been the designation for the Texas state constabulary and for national-park supervisors and forest wardens.
Ranger units originated during the French and Indian War (1756–63), when the British formed special units of expert woodsmen and marksmen to range the forests on scouting, screening, and harassing missions. During the American Revolution, both British and American forces employed rangers, who formed entire regiments of light infantry. In 1832 the force authorized for the Black Hawk War included 600 mounted rangers. This was the first suggestion of combining the functions of rangers and cavalry.
During the Mexican War (1846–48), companies of Texas Rangers were formed into regiments and mustered into federal service. They operated both as conventional cavalry and as rangers on scouting, patrolling, and raiding duty. After the Mexican War they served as a state constabulary organized along military lines, maintaining law and order against the Indians and against bandits and other lawless elements. In 1901 they were organized into a permanent law-enforcement agency. The Texas Rangers were merged in 1935 with the State Highway Patrol under the Department of Public Safety.
Rangers operated on both sides during the American Civil War but were a more significant factor in Confederate operations. The United States had six ranger battalions during World War II. They made sudden hard-hitting raids behind enemy lines, carrying out demolition and intelligence missions. The success of these ranger missions led to formation in 1950 of airborne ranger infantry as an integral part of each U.S. infantry division.
In the National Park Service, the U.S. Department of the Interior established in 1916 a force of national-park rangers whose functions were protection and conservation of forests and wildlife, enforcement of park regulations (for which they have police power), and assistance to visitors. Similar functions with respect to the national forests were assigned to the rangers of the Forest Service, established in 1905 as an agency of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Forest rangers are particularly noted for their activities in the prevention and fighting of forest fires.
