Swiss Guards, Italian Guardia Svizzera,  corps of Swiss soldiers responsible for the safety of the pope. Often called “the world’s smallest army,” they serve as personal escorts to the pontiff and as watchmen for Vatican City and the pontifical villa of Castel Gandolfo.
The guards, who are independent of the Swiss armed forces, are employed by the Roman Catholic Church under the leadership of the pope, to whom they swear fealty in a ceremony at Belvedere Court. As is common with any elite military corps, competition is intense for inclusion in the Swiss Guards. New recruits must be unmarried Roman Catholic males with Swiss citizenship, between 19 and 30 years of age, and at least 5 feet 8 inches (1.74 metres) tall; they must have a professional diploma or high school degree and must complete basic training with the Swiss military. (Historically, new recruits also had to prove they were free of physical deformities, and commanding officers were traditionally of noble lineage.)
The guards normally wear blue doublets and blue berets, but on ceremonial occasions they don the colourful Renaissance-era uniforms for which they are famous. They are among the oldest uniforms in continuous use, though Michelangelo, contrary to legend, probably did not design them. The tunics are striped in the colours of the Medici family: red, dark blue, and yellow. White ruffs and high plumed helmets (with ostrich feathers coloured to reflect different ranks) are also worn, as, on occasion, is armour. While in traditional dress, the guards carry pikes and swords, but they are also trained in the use of modern weaponry and counterterrorism techniques.
The living quarters of the Swiss Guards are at the eastern edge of the city, north of St. Peter’s Square and beside the Vatican palace. Their chapel is that of Saints Martino and Sebastiano, and the Campo Santo Teutonico, near St. Peter’s Basilica, is designated their cemetery.
Swiss mercenaries were long renowned as the best soldiers in the world—the ancient Roman scholar Tacitus stated, “The Helvetians are a people of warriors, famous for the valour of their soldiers”—and they served the ruling powers of many European countries; they were in particularly high demand in France and Spain. The guardsmen began serving the Papal States in the late 14th and 15th centuries. In 1505 the Swiss bishop (later cardinal) Matthäus Schiner, acting on behalf of Pope Julius II, proposed the creation of a permanent Swiss contingent that would operate under the direct control of the pope, and on January 22, 1506, the first contingent of 150 Swiss guardsmen, led by Captain Kaspar von Silenen, arrived at the Vatican. They soon earned a reputation for self-sacrifice and bravery, as demonstrated during the sack of Rome in 1527, when all but 42 of the 189 guardsmen died defending Pope Clement VII. The Swiss Guards prepared for similar self-sacrifice during World War II, when the vastly outnumbered guardsmen took up defensive positions as German forces rolled into Rome; Adolf Hitler, however, chose not to attack the Vatican.
The unit was reorganized in 1914 to consist of a commandant (with the rank of colonel), 5 other ranking officers, 15 lesser officers, a chaplain, and 110 pikemen. Further reorganizations were made in 1959 and 1976, and in 1979 their number was fixed at 100 (a commandant, 3 other high officers, a chaplain, 23 lesser officers, 2 drummers, and 70 pikemen).
In 1981 Swiss Guards helped protect John Paul II during an assassination attempt in St. Peter’s Square. In fact, the plainclothes guardsman who rushed to the pope’s aid became a hero and was named commandant of the Swiss Guards in 1998. Within hours of his promotion, however, he and his wife were shot and killed by a disgruntled lower-ranking guard, who then committed suicide; these were the first murders known to have taken place in Vatican City since the mid-19th century.
The Swiss Guards are sometimes referred to as the Vatican City police, but a separately administered police force is charged with the overall security of the nation-state (except St. Peter’s Square, which is under the jurisdiction of the Italian police). See also Pontifical Gendarmerie.
