Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW), in full Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States,  American organization created on August 1, 1914, in the merger of three national war-veteran societies that were founded in 1899, shortly after the Spanish-American War. The American Veterans of Foreign Service, based in Columbus, Ohio, the Colorado Society of the Army of the Philippines, based in Denver, Colorado, and another society also known as the American Veterans of Foreign Service but based in Altoona, Pennsylvania, merged in a convention in Pittsburgh to become the single nationwide association known since then as the Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States.
Membership in the VFW is open to any individual who meets all three of the following requirements. The individual must (1) be a U.S. citizen or U.S. national, (2) be currently serving in the armed forces of the United States or have received an honourable discharge or a general discharge under honourable conditions, and (3) be currently serving in or have completed service in a war, campaign, or expedition on foreign soil or in hostile waters. The VFW recognizes as proof of such service the issuance of a qualifying campaign medal, the receipt of hostile fire pay or imminent danger pay (as verified by a military pay statement), or service in Korea for 30 consecutive or 60 nonconsecutive days.
The mission of the VFW, in its own words, is to “foster camaraderie among United States veterans of overseas conflicts”; to “serve our veterans, the military and our communities”; and to “advocate on behalf of all veterans.” The organization also works to “[e]nsure that veterans are respected for their service, always receive their earned entitlements, and are recognized for the sacrifices they and their loved ones have made” on behalf of their country.
The VFW maintains both its legislative service and the central office of its National Veterans Service in Washington, D.C. The latter nationwide program serves all disabled veterans of all wars, members and nonmembers alike, in matters relating to government compensation and pension claims, hospitalization, and civil-service employment preferences, among others. The VFW has more than 6,000 local units, which are known as “Posts.” The VFW maintains its national headquarters in Kansas City, Missouri.
