Xi’an Incident, also called Sian Incident,  (Dec. 12–25, 1936), in Chinese history, seizure of the Nationalist generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek (Jiang Jieshi) by two of his own generals, Zhang Xueliang (Chang Hsüeh-liang) and Yang Hucheng (Yang Hu-ch’eng). Zhang, commander of the forces in Northeast China (Manchuria), and Yang, commander of the forces stationed around Xi’an (conventional Sian; Wade-Giles romanization Hsi-an), in northwestern China, opposed Chiang’s policy of continuing to fight the Chinese communists rather than devoting the Nationalists’ full effort to fighting the Japanese, who had invaded northern China. The incident ended with Chiang’s release and the formation of the second communist-Nationalist United Front against the Japanese. The Xi’an Incident relieved Nationalist military pressure on the communists, who were able to rebuild their forces during the ensuing alliance with the Nationalists.
When, on Dec. 12, 1936, Chiang visited the headquarters of Zhang and Yang at Xi’an to promote a new anticommunist campaign, he was arrested by Zhang’s troops; the high officials accompanying Chiang were arrested by Yang’s troops. Motivated by their concern for their homelands, then occupied or threatened by the Japanese, they demanded the cessation of the civil war between Nationalists and communists, the establishment of a national united front to oppose the Japanese, and the reorganization of the Nationalist government. In full agreement with the rebels’ requests, the Chinese communists, represented by Zhou Enlai, joined the negotiations.
After giving his oral acceptance of the proposals, Chiang Kai-shek was released on December 25. Although Chiang did establish a second United Front with the communists to fight the Japanese, he later arrested Zhang Xueliang (who had accompanied Chiang back to the capital of Nanjing) and kept him imprisoned throughout the war. Brought to Taiwan in 1949, Zhang remained under house arrest for years. Yang Hucheng was dismissed from his post and sent abroad. However, when he returned in late 1937, he was arrested and imprisoned, and in 1949 Chiang secretly ordered his execution.
