Anheuser-Busch Companies, Inc.,  American company that is one of the largest producers of beer in the world. It became a subsidiary of Anheuser-Busch InBev in 2008. The headquarters are in St. Louis, Missouri.
The company had its origins in a small brewery opened in St. Louis by George Schneider in 1852. This faltering enterprise was bought by the soap manufacturer Eberhard Anheuser in 1860, and the following year Anheuser’s daughter married Adolphus Busch, a brewery supplier who became the driving force behind the brewery’s future success. Busch pioneered the use of refrigerated railcars and of pasteurization in the brewing industry as part of his efforts to create the first nationally selling beer in the United States. In 1876 the company introduced a new, light-coloured beer called Budweiser. In 1879 the company was incorporated, and the name E. Anheuser & Company was changed to Anheuser-Busch Brewing Association. Busch became president of the company in 1880 after Anheuser’s death. The Michelob brand was introduced in 1896.
The company greatly expanded its brewing operations during the presidency (1946–75) of August Anheuser Busch, Jr., and his son August A. Busch III headed the firm into the 21st century. By then Anheuser-Busch Companies had become the world’s largest brewer, but it was surpassed in 2004 by InBev, a corporation formed by the merger of AmBev and Interbrew. Anheuser-Busch remained the largest in terms of income, however. The firm diversified into such industries as aluminum recycling, real estate development, turf farming, label printing, and the processing of raw materials such as rice and malt. In July 2008 Anheuser-Busch agreed to be purchased by InBev for approximately $52 billion. After the takeover was finalized in November, the newly formed Anheuser-Busch InBev became the world’s largest brewer. In 2016 the company acquired SABMiller, a beverage company based in London, for more than $100 billion.
Anheuser-Busch is also a major owner of family-entertainment attractions. Among these are three SeaWorld amusement parks; water parks in Florida and Virginia; Sesame Place, a water and amusement park with a Sesame Street television show theme, in Pennsylvania; Busch Gardens, a zoo and amusement park with African themes, in Tampa, Florida; and Busch Gardens, an amusement park with historical European themes, near Williamsburg, Virginia. Anheuser-Busch also owned the St. Louis Cardinals professional baseball team from 1953 to 1996.
