Beekeeping,  care and management of colonies of honeybees. They are kept for their honey and other products or their services as pollinators of fruit and vegetable blossoms or as a hobby. The practice is widespread: honeybees are kept in large cities and villages, on farms and rangelands, in forests and deserts, from the Arctic and Antarctic to the Equator. Honeybees are not domesticated. Those living in a man-made domicile called a beehive or hive are no different from those living in a colony in a tree.
In antiquity people knew that bees produce delicious honey, that they sting, and that they increase their numbers by swarming. By the 17th century they had learned the value of smoke in controlling them and had developed the screen veil as protection against stings. From the 17th to the 19th century, the key discoveries upon which modern beekeeping is founded were made. These included the mystery of the queen bee as the mother of nearly all the occupants of the hive, her curious mating technique, parthenogenetic development, the movable frame hives, and the fact that bees rear a new queen if the old one disappears.
Given this knowledge, people were able to divide a colony instead of relying on natural swarming. Then the development of the wax-comb foundation, the starter comb on which bees build straight, easily handled combs, and the discovery that honey can be centrifuged or extracted from them and the combs reused, paved the way for large-scale honey production and modern commercial beekeeping. The identification of bee diseases and their control with drugs, the value of pollen and pollen substitutes in producing strong colonies, and the artificial insemination of queens have increased the honey-production efficiency of colonies.
Honeybees belong to the order Hymenoptera and to one of the Apis species. (For a complete discussion of honeybees, see the article hymenopteran.) Honeybees are social insects noted for providing their nests with large amounts of honey. A colony of honeybees is a highly complex cluster of individuals that functions virtually as a single organism. It usually consists of the queen bee, a fertilized female capable of laying a thousand or more eggs per day; from a few to 60,000 sexually undeveloped females, the worker bees; and from none to 1,000 male bees, or drones. The female of most species of bees is equipped with a venomous sting.
Honeybees collect nectar, a sugary solution, from nectaries in blossoms and sometimes from nectaries on the leaves or stems of plants. Nectar may consist of 50 to 80 percent water, but when the bees convert it into honey it will contain only about 16 to 18 percent water. Sometimes they collect honeydew, an exudate from certain plant-sucking insects, and store it as honey. The primary carbohydrate diet of bees is honey. They also collect pollen, the dustlike male element, from the anthers of flowers. Pollen provides the essential proteins necessary for the rearing of young bees. In the act of collecting nectar and pollen to provision the nest, the bees pollinate the flowers they visit. Honeybees also collect propolis, a resinous material from buds of trees, for sealing cracks in the hive or for covering foreign objects in the hive that they cannot remove. They collect water to air-condition the hive and to dilute the honey when they consume it. A populous colony in a desirable location may, in a year’s time, collect and carry into the hive as much as 1,000 pounds (450 kilograms) of nectar, water, and pollen.
Bees secrete beeswax in tiny flakes on the underside of the abdomen and mold it into honeycomb, thin-walled, back-to-back, six-sided cells. The use of the cell varies depending on the needs of the colony. Honey or pollen may be stored in some cells, while the queen lays eggs, normally one per cell, in others. The area where the bees develop from the eggs is called the broodnest. Generally, honey is stored toward the top of the combs and pollen in cells around the broodnest below the honey.
The bees maintain a uniform temperature of about 93 °F (34 °C) in the broodnest regardless of outside temperature. The colony can survive daily maximum temperatures of 120 °F (49 °C) if water is available with which they can air-condition the cluster. When the temperature falls below about 57 °F (14 °C), the bees cease flying, form a tight cluster to conserve heat, and await the return of warm weather. They can survive for several weeks in temperatures of −50 °F (−46 °C).
When summer flowers bloom in profusion, the queen’s egg-laying is stimulated, the cluster expands, and honey accumulates in the combs. When the large number of young bees emerge, the domicile becomes crowded.
When the colony becomes crowded with adult bees and there are insufficient cells in which the queen can lay large numbers of eggs, the worker bees select a dozen or so tiny larvae that would otherwise develop into worker bees. These larvae are fed copiously with royal jelly, a whitish food with the consistency of mayonnaise, produced by certain brood-food glands in the heads of the worker bees. The cell in which the larva is developing is drawn out downward and enlarged to permit development of the queen. Shortly before these virgin queens emerge as adults from their queen cells, the mother queen departs from the beehive with the swarm. Swarming usually occurs during the middle of a warm day, when the queen and a portion of the worker bees (usually from 5,000 to 25,000) suddenly swirl out of the hive and into the air. After a few minutes’ flight, the queen alights, preferably on a branch of a tree but sometimes on a roof, a parked automobile, or even a fire hydrant. All the bees settle into a tight cluster around her while a handful of scouts reconnoitre a new homesite.
When the scout bees have located a new domicile, the cluster breaks. The swarm takes to the air and in a swirling mass proceeds to the new home. Swarming is the bees’ natural method of propagation or increase.
Back in the parent colony, the first queen to emerge after the mother queen departs with the swarm immediately attempts to destroy the others. If two or more emerge at the same time, they fight to the death. When the surviving virgin is about a week old, she soars off on her mating flight. To maintain genetic diversity within a colony, a queen frequently mates with more than one drone (called polyandry) while in the air. She may repeat the mating flights for two or three successive days, after which she begins egg laying. She rarely ever leaves the hive again except with a swarm. Normally, sufficient sperm are stored in her sperm pouch, or spermatheca, to fertilize all the eggs she will lay for the rest of her life. The drones die in the act of mating.
The queen can live up to five years, although many beekeepers replace the queen every year or two. If she is accidentally killed or begins to falter in her egg-laying efficiency, the worker bees will rear a “supersedure” queen that will mate and begin egg laying without a swarm emerging. She ignores the mother queen, who soon disappears from the colony.
Worker bees live about six weeks during the active season but may live for several months if they emerge as adults in the fall and spend the winter in the cluster. As the name implies, worker bees do all the work of the hive, except the egg laying.
Drones are reared only when the colony is populous and there are plentiful sources of nectar and pollen. They usually live a few weeks, but they are driven from the hive to perish when fall or an extended period of adversity comes upon the colony. The only duty of the drone is to mate with the queen.
The queen can lay drone (unfertilized) eggs in the drone cells. If she is not allowed to mate or if her supply of sperm is exhausted, she will lay unfertilized eggs in worker cells. The development of unfertilized eggs into adult drones is known as parthenogenesis. Occasionally a colony may become queenless and unable to develop another queen. Then some of the worker bees begin to lay eggs, often several to a cell, and these develop into drones. A colony that has developed laying workers is difficult to requeen with a laying queen.
