Sir Cornelius Vermuyden,  (born 1595, Tholen, Netherlands—died April 1683?, London), Dutch-born British engineer who introduced Dutch land-reclamation methods in England and drained the Fens, the low marshy lands in the east of England.
An experienced embankment engineer, Vermuyden was employed in 1626 by King Charles I of England to drain Hatfield Chase on the Isle of Axholme, Yorkshire. Jointly financed by Dutch and English capitalists, this project was a controversial undertaking, not only for the engineering techniques used but also because it employed Dutch instead of English workmen. The fenmen, local inhabitants who hunted and fished in the fens, attacked the Dutch workers; to complete the project, the engineer had to employ English workers and compensate the fenmen for their loss of hunting and fishing rights.
In 1630 Vermuyden contracted to drain the Great Fens, or Bedford Level, Cambridgeshire; this project, completed in 1637, drew objections from other engineers, who claimed the drainage system was inadequate. During the English Civil Wars, Parliament ordered the dikes broken and the land flooded (1642) to stop a Royalist army advance. In 1649 Vermuyden was commissioned to reclaim the Bedford Level; 40,000 acres were drained by 1652.
In 1653 Vermuyden, who had been knighted in the 1620s and had become a British subject (1633), headed an unsuccessful English mission to the United Provinces of the Netherlands to arrange a political union between the two nations.
Despite the initial success of his land-reclamation efforts, Vermuyden’s techniques were undermined by the unique peatland ecology of the Fens. Draining the marshes caused the peat to shrink dramatically, lowering the land surface by as much as 3.7 metres (12 feet) below the height of the drainage canals and making the area extremely susceptible to flooding. Indeed, much of the reclaimed land was regularly flooded by the end of the 17th century, and the issue remained largely unsolved until steam-powered pumps were employed in the early 19th century.
