Dehydration,  in food processing, means by which many types of food can be preserved for indefinite periods by extracting the moisture, thereby inhibiting the growth of microorganisms. Dehydration is one of the oldest methods of food preservation and was used by prehistoric peoples in sun-drying seeds. The North American Indians preserved meat by sun-drying slices, the Chinese dried eggs, and the Japanese dried fish and rice.
Hot-air dehydration was developed in France in 1795, enabling the commercial production of dehydrated food products, particularly spaghetti and other starch products. Modern dehydration techniques have been largely stimulated by the advantages dehydration gives in compactness; on the average, dehydrated food has about 1/15 the bulk of the original or reconstituted product. The need to transport large shipments of food over great distances during World War II provided much of the stimulus to perfect dehydration processes. The advantages of reduced bulk later came to be appreciated by campers and backpackers and also by relief agencies that provide food in times of emergency and disaster.
Dehydration equipment varies in form with different food products and includes tunnel driers, kiln driers, cabinet driers, vacuum driers, and other forms. Compact equipment suitable for home use is also available. A basic aim of design is to shorten the drying time, which helps retain the basic character of the food product. Drying under vacuum is especially beneficial to fruits and vegetables. Freeze-drying benefits heat-sensitive products by dehydrating in the frozen state without intermediate thaw. Freeze-drying of meat yields a product of excellent stability, which on rehydration closely resembles fresh meat.
The dairy industry is one of the largest processors of dehydrated food, producing quantities of whole milk, skim milk, buttermilk, and eggs. Many dairy products are spray dried—that is, atomized into a fine mist that is brought into contact with hot air, causing an almost instant removal of moisture content. See also food preservation.
