Gaucho,  the nomadic and colourful horseman and cowhand of the Argentine and Uruguayan Pampas (grasslands), who flourished from the mid-18th to the mid-19th century and has remained a folk hero similar to the cowboy in western North America. The term also has been used to refer to cowhands and other people of Rio Grande do Sul state in Brazil.
Gauchos were usually mestizos (persons of mixed European and Indian ancestry) but sometimes were white, black, or mulatto (of mixed black and white ancestry). From their own ballads and legends a literature of the gaucho—la literatura gauchesca—grew and became an important part of the Argentine cultural tradition. Beginning late in the 19th century, after the heyday of the gauchos, Argentine writers celebrated them. Examples include José Hernández’s epic poem El gaucho Martín Fierro (1872) and Ricardo Güiraldes’ novel Don Segundo Sombra (1926).
In the mid-18th century, when British, Dutch, French, and Portuguese traders provided a profitable contraband business in hides and tallow in the frontier regions around Buenos Aires, gauchos arose to hunt the large herds of escaped horses and cattle that had roamed freely, bred prodigiously, and remained safe from predators on the extensive Pampas. Gaucho weapons were the lasso, knife, and boleadoras (or bolas), a device made of leather cords and three iron balls or stones that was thrown at the legs of an animal to entwine and immobilize it. Gauchos subsisted largely on meat. Their costume, still worn by modern Argentine cowhands, included a chiripa girding the waist, a woolen poncho, and long, accordion-pleated trousers, called bombachas, gathered at the ankles and covering the tops of high leather boots. The gauchos lived in small mud huts roofed with grass mats and slept on piles of hides. Their marriages were seldom solemnized, and their religious beliefs consisted mainly of age-old superstitions varnished with Roman Catholicism. Their pastimes included gambling, drinking, playing the guitar, and singing doggerel verses about their prowess in hunting, fighting, and lovemaking.
By the end of the 18th century, private owners had acquired the half-wild livestock on the Pampas and hired the gauchos as skilled animal handlers. By the later 19th century the Pampas had been fenced into huge estancias (estates), and the old pastoral economy had given way to more intensive use of the land. Purebred animals replaced the scrub herds and alfalfa was grown to feed them. The once free-spirited gaucho thus became a farmhand or peon.
In the early 19th century the gauchos had been the mainstay of the armies of the Río de la Plata region, which first had thrown off the Spanish colonial regime and had then engaged in decades-long internal struggles between rival caudillos (provincial military leaders). An unruly group of horsemen called the montonera fought in these wars, usually under the federalist caudillos of the provinces outside of Buenos Aires.
