Caracas,  city, capital of Venezuela, and one of the principal cities of South America. It is Venezuela’s largest urban agglomeration and the country’s primary centre of industry, commerce, education, and culture. Founded in 1567 as Santiago de León de Caracas, the city grew slowly until the 1940s, after which it expanded by monumental proportions, and its influence came to extend to even the remotest parts of the country. In addition to its role as the national capital, Caracas serves as the seat of government for the Capital District, comprising an area of 167 square miles (433 square km). The city itself, however, spreads across the Capital District boundary, a considerable part of its area lying in the state of Miranda, which borders the district on the east and south. Pop. (2001) 1,836,032; (2011) 1,942,652.
The physical setting of Caracas is impressive. Steep mountains of the Venezuelan coastal range rise abruptly from the Caribbean Sea, affording little level land for urban development. About 7 miles (11 km) southward, beyond this mountainous wall, the city spreads out in a valley. Its elevation at the centre of Caracas is 3,025 feet (922 metres), and the valley extends about 15 miles (25 km) in an east–west direction. Almost all of its inhabitable area is occupied by the city, and this once green and peaceful valley is now crisscrossed by streets and highways. The valley is subject to earthquakes, including notable ones in 1755, 1812, and 1967.
The Andes Mountains extend eastward from Colombia across all of northern Venezuela to the island of Trinidad. The site of Caracas is a high rift valley within this system; hence, mountains enclose the city at all cardinal points. The Cordillera del Litoral, which rises above 8,600 feet (2,600 metres) at the Pico Oriental and above 7,000 feet (2,100 metres) at El Avila, towers high above the city and limits its expansion northward. The Serranía del Interior, to the south, is lower but nevertheless rugged. The principal river draining the valley is the Guaire, once relatively large but now reduced in volume and highly polluted. Its principal affluent in the metropolitan area is the Río El Valle, and others include the Quebrada Baruta and Quebrada Anauco.
Climatic conditions and natural vegetation in the coastal range form an extremely complex pattern. Temperatures generally decrease with increasing elevation, and rainfall and humidity are high on slopes that face eastward toward the prevailing winds. The decisive climatic factor in the valley is elevation. Temperatures range from the mid-40s  to the low 90s °F (about 7 to 33 °C), the annual mean being about 70 °F (21 °C). In contrast, the average temperature at La Guaira, at sea level just 10 miles (16 km) away, is in the low 80s °F (about 27 °C). The seasonal range of temperature in Caracas between the average of the coldest month (January) and that of the warmest month (May) is only 5 °F, considerably less than the normal diurnal range. Annual precipitation totals about 32 inches (800 mm). There is a distinct rainy season from May through November, which accounts for more than four-fifths of the total annual precipitation and features warm, humid weather. In contrast is the dry season, from December through April, characterized by clear skies and pleasantly cool temperatures.
The higher mountain slopes, especially to the north, often have a thick cloud cover. There a fairly abundant vegetation, including forest remnants, remains green throughout the year. Other patches of luxuriant vegetation are preserved in the major parks of the city and in its various gardens, including the Botanical Garden. Where barren slopes prevail, erosion is a serious problem. Bird life, once exceeding 100 species in the valley, has been reduced dramatically.
The nucleus of Caracas is near the western margin of the valley adjacent to the hill of El Calvario Park, which offers a panoramic view of the city. There, centred around the Plaza Bolívar, are many historic buildings reflecting the colonial past, including the Caracas Cathedral, the National Capitol, the Municipal Council building, the birthplace of Simón Bolívar, and Miraflores Palace, which serves as the official residence of the president of the republic. Only a short distance away is the National Pantheon, with the tomb of Bolívar and those of other national heroes. The twin towers of the  Simón Bolívar Centre are also located nearby. Once the tallest buildings in the country, these 30-story structures house various ministries of the national government.
Increasingly, the civic centre of Caracas is moving eastward toward the Parque Central and Plaza Venezuela. This district focuses around a monument to Christopher Columbus, but more conspicuous is a cluster of skyscrapers, including another set of twin towers that are among the tallest buildings in all of Latin America. Begun in 1971, these structures soar to a height of 725 feet (221 metres) above street level. Planned to house the main offices of the national government, each tower is equipped for helicopter landings on its roof and affords a spectacular view of the entire valley. After a devastating fire in 2004, the east tower required extensive reconstruction. Nearby are a number of other important city landmarks, including the Botanical Garden, several museums, Parque Los Caobos, and the Central University of Venezuela.
Still farther eastward the principal landmarks of the city are the Caracas Country Club, the Parque Nacional del Este, and the Francisco de Miranda Airport. The city has also expanded southward over the hillsides and along valleys tributary to the Guaire River.
