Jakarta, formerly (until 1949) Batavia or (1949–72) Djakarta,  largest city and capital of Indonesia. Jakarta lies on the northwest coast of Java at the mouth of the Ciliwung (Liwung River), on Jakarta Bay (an embayment of the Java Sea). It is coextensive with the metropolitan district of Greater Jakarta (Jakarta Raya) and nearly coextensive with the daerah khusus ibukota (special capital district) of Jakarta—the latter also including a number of small offshore islands in the Java Sea.
In 1966, when the city was declared a special capital district, it gained a status approximately equivalent to that of a state or province. The city has long been a major trade and financial centre. It has also become an important industrial city and a centre for education. Area special capital district, 255 square miles (661 square km). Pop. (2000) Greater Jakarta, 8,342,435; special capital district, 8,361,079; (2010) Greater Jakarta, 9,586,705; special capital district, 9,607,787.
Jakarta lies on a low, flat alluvial plain with historically extensive swampy areas; the parts of the city farther inland are slightly higher. It is easily flooded during the rainy season. The draining of swamps for building purposes and the continuous decrease of upland forest vegetation have increased the danger of floods. With such an excess of water in the soil, Jakarta has a shortage of clean drinking water, for which there is increasing demand. The area is quite fertile for fruit and other horticulture, as most of the soil is of old volcanic origin.
Jakarta is a tropical, humid city, with annual temperatures ranging between the extremes of 75 and 93 °F (24 and 34 °C) and a relative humidity between 75 and 85 percent. The average mean temperatures are 79 °F (26 °C) in January and 82 °F (28 °C) in October. The annual rainfall is more than 67 inches (1,700 mm). Temperatures are often modified by sea winds. Jakarta, like any other large city, also has its share of air and noise pollution.
Although the Dutch were the first to attempt to plan the city, the city layout is probably more British than Dutch in character, as can be seen from such large squares as Medan Merdeka (“Freedom Field”) and Lapangan Banteng (meaning “place of the gaur [large wild ox]”). The Oriental style, or “indische” style, as the Dutch call it, is apparent not only in the city’s way of life but also in the types of houses, the wide, tree-lined streets, and the original spacious gardens and house lots. In Kebayoran, a satellite town built since World War II on the southwestern side of the city, and in other modern developments, the houses and garden lots are much smaller than in the older colonial districts.
Jakarta has long been a city of new settlers who assimilated local ways and became Jakartans themselves. Some traditional neighbourhoods can, however, be identified. The Kota (“City”; also called Kota Tua [“Old City”] or Old Batavia) area, sometimes called the downtown section, is the historical city centre, and it houses a significant part of the Chinese population. The contemporary city’s business and financial hub lies somewhat to the south of Kota, primarily along Jenderal Sudirman and Mohammad Husni Thamrin roads, in central Jakarta. The area of Kemayoran (“Progress”) and Senen, originally on the eastern fringe of the city, is now almost central in its location and increasingly has become the city’s major retail area. The Jatinegara (“Real Country”) section, originally a Sundanese settlement but later incorporated as a separate town, then a Dutch army camp (Meester Cornelis), is now merged with the rest of Jakarta and includes many new settlers. The Menteng and Gondangdia sections were formerly fashionable residential areas near the central Medan Merdeka (then called Weltevreden). To the west, Tanah Abang (“Red Earth”) and Jati Petamburan are, like Kemayoran, densely developed. Tanjung Priok is the harbour, with its own community attached to it.
The most common type of house in the city is the kampong, or village, house; most such houses are built of materials such as wood or bamboo mats, but this does not necessarily mean that they are substandard. Another common type of housing, often used to house government workers, is the colonial urban house, or rumah gedongan; such houses are mostly single-family detached or semidetached, each standing on a separate lot. Apartment buildings constitute a more modern category; although they are more economical in the use of land than single-family types, their architectural and construction costs often make them fairly expensive. Housing is generally overcrowded.
Some of Jakarta’s buildings, such as the Portuguese Church (1695) in Kota, are of architectural or historical interest. Some of the buildings around the city square in Kota also date from colonial times, including the old city hall (1710), which has been restored and now serves as the municipal museum. The National Archives building was originally the palace of a Dutch governor-general, Abraham van Riebeeck. The Ministry of Finance building, facing Lapangan Banteng, also was designed as a governor’s palace (Herman Willem Daendels, one of Napoleon’s marshals). The Presidential Palace, north of Medan Merdeka, faces Monas, or Monumen Nasional (National Monument). The Istiqlal Mosque, in the northeast corner of Medan Merdeka opposite Lapangan Banteng, is one of the largest mosques in Southeast Asia. The National Museum (formerly the Central Museum), on the west side of Medan Merdeka, houses a collection of historical, cultural, and artistic artifacts.
After World War II Jakarta underwent a building boom. The Hotel Indonesia (the city’s first high-rise building) and the Senayan Sports Complex were built for the Asian Games in 1962. Most high-rise buildings are located in the city’s financial centre.
The population of Jakarta has increased dramatically since 1940. Much of that increase is attributed to immigration, which has transformed Jakarta into one of the world’s largest urban agglomerations. Although government regulations close the city to unemployed new settlers, better economic conditions inevitably attract new people. In addition, much of the population is young, resulting in a high natural increase potential. Analysis of the immigrant stream shows that, after the West Javanese, the largest groups represented are the Central and East Javanese; a sizable number also are from Sumatra. Other population groups—Arabs, Indians, Europeans, and Americans—are present in small numbers.
