Nanjing, Wade-Giles romanization Nan-ching, conventional Nanking,  city, capital of Jiangsu sheng (province), east-central China. It is a port on the Yangtze River (Chang Jiang) and a major industrial and communications centre. Rich in history, it served seven times as the capital of regional empires, twice as the seat of revolutionary government, once (during the Sino-Japanese War of 1937–45) as the site of a puppet regime, and twice as the capital of a united China (the second time ending with the Japanese conquest of the city in 1937). The name Nanjing (“Southern Capital”) was introduced in 1403, during the Ming dynasty. Area mun., 2,547 square miles (6,598 square km). Pop. (2005 est.) urban districts, 2,363,844; urban and suburban districts, 5,133,771; mun., 5,957,992.
The central districts of Nanjing are situated on the southeastern bank of the Yangtze, some 160 miles (260 km) west of  Shanghai. The city proper comprises the area encircled by a gigantic wall constructed during the Ming dynasty (1368–1644) and adjacent districts and outskirt suburbs. The city wall—of which about two-thirds is still standing—is 21 miles (34 km) long, has an average height of 40 feet (12 metres), and originally included 13 gates (a few of which are still extant). The municipality (shi) of Nanjing includes territory extending to the border of Anhui province on the north, west, and south and to the borders of Yangzhou, Zhenjiang, and Changzhou municipalities on the east. Included in the municipality of Nanjing are two counties (xian) in the extreme south and both urban and rural districts on either side of the Yangtze.
Nanjing’s four seasons are clearly distinguishable. The hot summer months are from July to September. Winter lasts from December until March. Spring and autumn are both mild and pleasant. January and July mean temperatures are about 37 °F (3 °C) and 82 °F (28 °C), respectively. The average annual rainfall is about 40 inches (1,000 mm), the bulk of it falling between June and August.
The central city of Nanjing, encircled by hills and rivers, resembles a gourd with its tip pointing northwest, toward Xiaguan district, on the south bank of the Yangtze. Xiaguan and Pukou district, which is opposite it on the north bank, house some of the harbour facilities of the huge Nanjing River Port. On the west and south, central Nanjing is bordered by the Qinhuai River, which runs along the outside of the city wall and is a tributary of the Yangtze. On the east are the foothills of the Zijin (“Purple-Gold”) Mountains, and at the city’s west side is Qingliang (“Clear-Cool”) Hill. Outside of the city wall to the northeast is the extensive Xuanwu (“Mystic Martial”) Lake, containing five islets linked by embankments, and on the other side of the Qinhuai River, to the southwest, is Mochou (“No Sorrow”) Lake; both lake areas are city parks. The skyline suggests spaciousness and grandeur. Blue-glazed tiles adorning the old city gates, parklike scenery along the boulevards, lotus blossoms and tea pavilions on the lakes, and temples half-hidden in the green hills are all characteristic sights in Nanjing.
The old central city southeast of the Yangtze consisted of four districts (qu): north, central, east, and west. These were subsumed into larger districts that encompassed central-city and suburban areas when the city was administratively reorganized in 1995. Of the six city districts, the largest is Xuanwu, named for Xuanwu Lake. It includes the old eastern district within the city wall and extends northeastward into an area formerly within the suburban Qixia district. Xuanwu district contains such landmarks as Beijige (“North Pole Pavilion”) and Jimingsi (“Cockcrow Temple”), as well as city government offices and modern residential quarters. It is also a centre of the city’s ancient culture; it includes the ruins of the former Ming dynasty palace as well as Nanjing Museum and scientific institutions. The northeastern portion of the district encompasses part of the magnificent forested Zijin range, and its cultural and historic sites include the Xiaoling tomb group of the Ming dynasty, notably the tomb of the Hongwu emperor (designated as part of a previously named UNESCO World Heritage site in 2003); the blue-tile-roofed mausoleum of the Chinese Nationalist Party leader Sun Yat-sen (Sun Zhongshan), the first provisional president of the Republic of China; the Linggu (“Valley of Spirits”) Temple (first built in 514) and its nearby 200-foot- (60-metre-) high pagoda; and the Zijinshan Astronomical Observatory.
West of Xuanwu district is Gulou district, named for the Gulou (“Drum Tower”), a city landmark built in 1382. Gulou encompasses the former northern and western districts of the old city. In addition to the provincial government offices, some major hotels and guest houses are located there. North of these two districts is the former suburban area of Xiaguan, now also one of the city districts. Alongside the Yangtze and known as the northern gate of Nanjing, Xiaguan is traditionally a collecting and distribution point for the city. South of Xuanwu district is the Baixia district. Surrounding the flourishing and crowded Xinjiekou (“New Crossroads”), it is both a shopping centre and the business hub of the city. Farther to the south is the district of Qinhuai. Named for the Qinhuai River, the district was historically famous for its entertainment venues. It is now once again a popular tourist destination, with its renowned Confucius Temple (Fuzi Miao; first built in 1034 and subsequently reconstructed) and the river cruise on the Qinhuai.
South of Gulou and west of Qinhuai is Jianye, the sixth city district. Situated west of the Qinhuai River and completely outside of the city wall (and thus with more vacant space available), it has been designated as a new city centre and includes a science and technology park. Scenic Mochou Lake is on its northeastern corner, and it also houses a memorial for victims of the Nanjing Massacre during the Sino-Japanese War of 1937–45.
Forming an integral part of the life of the city are its immediate outskirts. To the south is Yuhuatai (“Terrace of the Rain of Flowers”) district, noted for its five-colour pebbles and a communist martyrs’ memorial. To the northwest is Pukou, long a river port on the northern bank of the Yangtze and now also a rapidly developing industrial centre. Some other scenic spots located in the suburban districts include Yanziji (“Swallow’s Bluff”) in the north and Qixiashan (“Abode of Clouds Mountain”) farther to the northeast.
