Phoenix,  city, seat (1871) of Maricopa county and capital of Arizona, U.S. It lies along the Salt River in the south-central part of the state, about 120 miles (190 km) north of the Mexico border and midway between El Paso, Texas, and Los Angeles, California. The Salt River valley, popularly called the Valley of the Sun, includes not only Phoenix but also nearby cities such as Mesa, Scottsdale, and Tempe. Phoenix plays a prominent role in the economy of the Mountain West region of the country, serving as a financial, communications, and transportation hub. Area 450 square miles (1,165 square km). Pop. (2000)  1,321,045; Phoenix-Mesa-Glendale Metro Area, 3,251,876; (2010) 1,445,632; Phoenix-Mesa-Glendale Metro Area, 4,192,887.
With its broad, tree-lined avenues, Spanish-style architecture, and surrounding mountains, Phoenix bears much resemblance to Los Angeles. Like its California counterpart, Phoenix is a metropolis with not one but many centres, all at considerable distances from one another. From its historic heart to the west of Sky Harbor International Airport, the greater metropolitan area—of which Phoenix is only a small part—has grown to take in a vast expanse of land that stretches nearly from the Gila River far to the south to the tall plateaus and volcanic mountains of the north and east and out into the broad desert valley to the west. Growth is a constant in Phoenix life as thousands of new residents and millions of visitors find their way there each year.
Phoenix lies near the confluence of the Gila and Salt rivers and is situated at the extreme northern part of the Sonoran Desert, an arid ecological zone whose characteristic plant is the nationally protected saguaro cactus. To the east of Phoenix are the rugged Superstition Mountains, a large complex of volcanic calderas that formed about 305 million years ago; the mountains reach to about 3,000 feet (900 metres) at their highest point. The Mazatzal Mountains rise to the northeast; the Verde River flows to the west of the mountains, entering the Salt River east of Phoenix.
The broad valley in which the city lies extends west to the Colorado River and south to the mountain chains north of Tucson, although the geographic borders of Phoenix end far short of those natural barriers. The Phoenix metropolitan area—the Valley of the Sun—stands at an elevation of 1,100 feet (335 metres) above sea level. The northern and eastern ends of this valley rise into the surrounding volcanic peaks; the remainder is level terrain, dotted with small volcanic mountains of granite and schist. Camelback Mountain, Squaw Peak, and South Mountain are the most prominent of these urban peaks, reaching elevations of about 2,600 to 2,700 feet (790 to 820 metres).
The desert soil is alkaline, and the water in the river and in local wells is saline and contains other minerals. Many irrigated areas in the Phoenix area are encrusted with dried mineral deposits, which accumulate and reduce the productivity of the soil. Water is strangely abundant, given the fact that the city lies in one of the most arid regions on the continent; the valley overlies a subterranean sedimentary bowl that can hold vast quantities of groundwater. However, these stores have been substantially depleted, and Phoenix increasingly has come to depend on water from the Colorado River via the Central Arizona Project (CAP), an artificial waterway 336 miles (541 km) long extending from Lake Havasu on the California border to Tucson. In addition, water from subterranean stores is piped into the valley from outlying areas. In the past, virtually all of the region’s water was used for agricultural purposes, although an increasing share is now apportioned for municipal use.
Phoenix has a dry, warm climate that in the winter months attracts tens of thousands of visitors. The average daily high temperature in the winter approaches 70 °F (21 °C), but summer highs typically rise to more than 100 °F (38 °C). It is almost always sunny throughout the year.
Precipitation averages less than 8 inches (200 mm) annually, divided almost evenly between the winter and summer months. In summertime, the so-called monsoon season, much of this precipitation returns to the atmosphere almost immediately through evaporation or transpiration.
None of the mountains ringing Phoenix to the north and east reaches an elevation high enough to attract much moisture. The city depends almost wholly on groundwater that flows from the Salt and Gila rivers, as well as supplemental water brought in by aqueducts via the CAP.
Until relatively recently, some three-fifths of the land within the Phoenix city limits was undeveloped. In the mid-1970s a plan was proposed to develop these vacant lands through a program of “infill” construction, taking advantage of the infrastructure that was already in place. Instead, however, the city pursued a policy of annexing surrounding communities, expanding outward to accommodate its growing population.
Phoenix has grown to absorb many satellite communities, and it is surrounded by other independent municipalities that have boomed on their own. These include Scottsdale, an affluent area known for its shopping and art districts, to the northeast; Fountain Hills, an exclusive community in the hills east of Scottsdale; Tempe, a middle-class suburb that is home to Arizona State University, to the east and Mesa, the “Mormon capital of Arizona,” farther east; Chandler, where a high-technology centre has emerged, to the southeast; the once-small agricultural communities of Gilbert and Queen Creek east of Chandler; Glendale, Goodyear, and Avondale to the west; and Sun City, one of the first retirement communities in the country, to the northwest.
