Bruttii,  an ancient Italic people of what is now southwestern Italy, occupying an area coextensive with modern Calabria (an area sometimes referred to as the “toe of the boot”). This area was separated from Lucania (corresponding to modern Basilicata) on the north, and it was to part or the whole of this peninsula that the name Italia was first applied.
In alliance with the Lucanians, the Bruttii made war on the Greek colonies of the coast and seized on Vibo in 356 bc. Though for a time overcome by the Greeks who were aided by Alexander of Epirus and Agathocles, tyrant of Syracuse, they reasserted their mastery of the town from about the beginning of the 3rd century bc and held it until it became a Latin colony at the end of the same century.
At this time they were speaking Oscan as well as Greek, and two of three Oscan inscriptions in Greek alphabet still testify to the language spoken in Vibo in the 3rd century bc. Despite their use of the Oscan language, the Bruttii were not actually akin to the Samnite tribe of the Lucani, who also spoke Oscan. The name Bruttii was used by the Lucanians to mean “runaway slaves,” but it is considerably more likely that this signification was attached to the tribal name of the Bruttii from the historical fact that they had been conquered and expelled by the Samnite invaders.
The Bruttii were at the height of their power during the 3rd century bc. Their chief towns were Consentia (modern Cosenza), Petelia (near Strongoli), and Clampetia (Amantea). To this period (about the time of the Pyrrhic War) is assigned the series of coins they struck, and they appear to have retained the right of coinage even after their final subjugation by the Romans. The influence of Hellenism over the Bruttii can be seen in finds in tombs and their use of the Greek language in addition to their own. The mountainous country, ill suited for agricultural purposes, was well adapted for these hardy warriors, whose training was Spartan in its simplicity and severity.
The Bruttii first confronted the Romans during the war with Pyrrhus, to whom they sent auxiliaries. After his defeat, they submitted and were deprived of half their territory in the Sila forest, which was declared state property. In the war with Hannibal, they were among the first to declare in his favour after the battle of Cannae, and it was in their country that Hannibal held his ground during the last stage of the war (at Castrum Hannibalis on the Gulf of Scylacium). The Bruttii entirely lost their freedom at the end of the Hannibalic war; in 194 bc colonies of Roman citizens were founded at Tempsa and Croton, and a colony with Latin rights at Hipponium called thereafter Vibo Valentia. In 132 bc the great inland road from Capua through Vibo and Consentia to Rhegium (Reggio di Calabria) was built, but neither in the Social War nor in the rising of Spartacus, who held out a long time in the Sila (71 bc), do the Bruttii play a further part as a people.
