Ionian,  any member of an important eastern division of the ancient Greek people, who gave their name to a district on the western coast of Anatolia (now Turkey). The Ionian dialect of Greek was closely related to Attic and was spoken in Ionia and on many of the Aegean islands.
The Ionians are said to have migrated to western Anatolia from Attica and other central Greek territories following the Dorian immigration (c. 1000 bce) that upset the Achaean kingdoms on the mainland. This is confirmed by the fact that the same four “tribes” (phylai) found among the Athenians reappear in the inhabitants of Miletus and other Ionian cities. Homer in his epics gives the Ionians but a passing mention, but in the Homeric Hymn to Apollo, roughly corresponding in time to the first certain written reference to the Ionians by the Assyrian king Sennacherib (reigned 704–681 bce), they are noted as the great and wealthy people who frequent the festival of Apollo at Delos.
By the time of Herodotus (c. 450 bce), Greek thinkers had worked out a detailed ethnological theory, identifying the Ionians with the aboriginal element in Greece (Pelasgoi) and the Dorians with the immigrant northern Hellenes proper. This hypothesis introduced an element of racialism into Greek interstate polemics. The Ionians of Asia, because of their exposed position, had been subjected by Persia and came to be despised as “soft” in comparison to the military, disciplined cadres of the Peloponnesian Dorians.
From about 700 bce, expansion and accompanying colonization brought the Ionians of Euboea to eastern Sicily and Cumae near Naples, and Samians to Nagidus and Celenderis in Pamphylia. Among the Ionian cities, Miletus, which was said to have founded 90 colonies, was instrumental in opening up the Black Sea, while Phocaea was active in the Mediterranean, establishing a colony at Massilia (Marseille). “Ionians” (Homeric: Iawones; Persian: Yauna; Hebrew: Yewanim; Turkish and Arabic: Yunani) became and remained the Oriental term for all Greeks.
The contribution of Ionians to Greek culture was of major importance, including the Homeric epics and the earliest elegiac and iambic poetry. In the 6th century, Ionic rational thought dominated intellectual life, fostering the study of geography and nature and research into matter and the universe. Ionians at home and overseas also laid the foundation of Greek philosophy and historiography. In the age after Alexander the Great, Attic Ionic, the literary language, became the basis of Koine, or “common speech,” the language of practically all later Greek writing, including the New Testament, down to the present day. Ionians were also substantial artists in the areas of architecture, sculpture, and cast-bronze statuary. (See also Ionia.)
