Absinthe,  flavoured distilled liquor, yellowish green in colour, turning to cloudy opalescent white when mixed with water. Highly aromatic, this liqueur is dry and somewhat bitter in taste. Absinthe is made from a spirit high in alcohol, such as brandy, and typically is marketed with alcoholic content of 68 percent by volume. The flowers and leaves of wormwood (Artemisia absinthium) are the chief flavouring ingredients; other aromatic ingredients include licorice (which usually predominates in the aroma), hyssop, fennel, angelica root, aniseed, and star aniseed. The beverage was first produced commercially in 1797 by Henry-Louis Pernod, who used a recipe purchased by his father-in-law, Major Dubied.
Absinthe came to be considered dangerous to health because it appeared to cause convulsions, hallucinations, mental deterioration, and psychoses. Absinthe manufacture was prohibited in Switzerland in 1908, in France in 1915, and eventually in many other countries. In 1918 Pernod Fils established a factory in Tarragona, Spain, to manufacture both absinthe and a similar beverage, without wormwood, for export to those countries prohibiting true absinthe.
Whether absinthe has hallucinogenic effects remains unclear. The psychological symptoms attributed to the liquor were later thought to be caused by thujone, a toxic chemical present in wormwood; that conjecture was disproved in the late 1990s. The production and sale of absinthe subsequently became legal in many countries, fueling a modern revival in absinthe consumption.
Absinthe is usually served diluted with water and ice and may be used to flavour mixed drinks. The classic absinthe drink, the absinthe drip, is served in a special drip glass, allowing water to slowly drip through a sugar cube into the liquor. Beverages developed as substitutes, similar in taste but lower in alcohol content and without wormwood, are known by such names as Pernod, anis (or anisette), pastis, ouzo, or raki. Pastis also turns cloudy white when mixed with water, and anis turns to a cloudy greenish-tinged white.
