Acai,  (Euterpe oleracea), also spelled assai or assaí,  species of palm (family Arecaceae) cultivated for both its fruit and edible hearts of palm. Native to tropical South and Central America, acai palms are common along the Amazon River estuary and are cultivated on floodplains, especially in the state of Pará in Brazil. The plant has long been valued commercially for its high-quality hearts of palm, and its fruits, touted as a superfood, grew in popularity worldwide in the early 21st century.
Acai palms consist of 4–8 slender gray-brown stems, each of which is about 25 metres (82 feet) tall and generally no greater than 20 cm (about 8 inches) in diameter. The stems bear ringlike leaf scars and are topped with a crown of 9–15 compound leaves; the leaves measure about 1.2–4 metres (4–13 feet) long. The small brown-purple flowers are either staminate (male) or pistillate (female) and are borne on large branching inflorescences that hang from the tops of the stems. The flowers are pollinated by small bees and flies and produce round drupes known as acai berries. The fruits are about 1.5 cm (0.6 inch) in diameter and feature a single large seed. They usually ripen from green to a deep purple, though the fruit of some populations remains green at maturity. Each acai stem can produce up to eight bunches of fruit a year, with each bunch weighing up to 6 kg (13 pounds).
Acai fruits have a high fat content and thus are highly perishable, usually lasting only about a day after being picked. Local peoples use the pulp of the fresh fruit in a variety of sweets and beverages, including wine, and the juice is commonly mixed with tapioca. For export, the fruit pulp is usually dried and powdered as a dietary supplement, or it is flash frozen for smoothies and juices. Acai is high in antioxidants and a number of phytochemicals, though most of the health claims about the fruit—including its value as a weight loss aid—have not been substantiated.
Acai and other members of the genus Euterpe are important commercial sources of palm hearts, also known as hearts of palm, which are eaten as a vegetable. Palm hearts are harvested by removing the growing top of the palm crown; each heart consists of a whitish cylinder of tender immature leaves. Given that acai palms are multistemmed, the harvest can be done without killing the entire plant and thus is considered more sustainable than collection from single-stemmed species.
In addition to its commercial importance, acai is also used as a medicinal plant by indigenous and local peoples, and the leaves and stems are useful for thatch and building materials.
