Black cumin,  (Nigella sativa), also called black seed, black caraway, Roman coriander, kalonji, or fennel flower,  annual plant of the ranunculus family (Ranunculaceae), grown for its pungent seeds, which are used as a spice and in herbal medicine. The black cumin plant is found in southwestern Asia and parts of the Mediterranean and Africa, where it has a long history of use in diverse culinary and medicinal traditions. The seeds have an aroma similar to fennel and have a pungent flavour somewhat similar to nutmeg, though the plant is not related to either. The seeds are commonly roasted and ground as a spice and are widely used in India, the Middle East, and parts of north Africa to season curries, rice, breads, and sweet confections. Black cumin is also important in traditional medicine in many places and is an esteemed herbal remedy for a wide variety of ailments. The plant is sometimes grown as an ornamental for its attractive flowers and is closely related to love-in-a-mist (Nigella damascena), a more common ornamental.
Black cumin plants are hardy annuals that grow from 20 to 60 cm (8 to 24 inches) in height. The branched stems bear fine, deeply divided leaves, and the plant has a developed taproot. The pale blue or white flowers have five petals, numerous stamens, and five or six elongated fused carpels . The black triangular or pyramidal seeds are borne in a capsule with five or six segments, each of which terminates in an elongated projection. The plants can grow in a variety of soils and readily reseed, becoming weedy in some areas.
Sometimes hailed as a panacea, black cumin seeds and their oil are widely used in traditional Islamic medicine and Ayurveda to treat a variety of ailments. The seeds are believed to stimulate lactation and have been used for menstrual and postpartum problems. They are commonly used to treat intestinal worms and are said to relieve digestive troubles. The seeds and oil are also used for inflammation and are employed to reduce asthma and bronchitis symptoms and to treat rheumatoid arthritis. A substantial number of studies have been conducted that suggest the seeds may indeed have pharmacological potential. The seeds contain a variety of chemicals, but most of the pharmacological properties of black cumin are attributed to the presence of quinine compounds, of which thymoquinone is the most abundant. There is clinical evidence that the seeds have antimicrobial, antiparasitic, and antifungal properties, and some animal studies have demonstrated tumour suppression. In addition, there is evidence that black cumin may be effective against diabetes and hypertension and may be useful as an anti-inflammatory.
