Bobby Flay, byname of Robert William Flay,  (born December 10, 1964, New York City, New York, U.S.), American chef, restaurateur, and television personality who was best known for his frequent appearances on the cable station Food Network, where he first garnered attention as one of the original competitors on Iron Chef America.
Flay, who grew up on New York City’s Upper East Side, seemed destined for a culinary career from childhood when he requested an Easy-Bake Oven for Christmas. After dropping out of school at age 17, he took a job at Joe Allen, a popular New York restaurant in which his father owned a share. Flay quickly proved his raw talent, and his boss sent him to New York City’s French Culinary Institute (now the International Culinary Center), from which he emerged (1993) with an Outstanding Graduate Award.
He held several more jobs in New York City, including one under restaurateur Jonathan Waxman, who introduced Flay to the spicy Southwestern flavours that would become his trademark. In 1991 Flay opened his first restaurant, Mesa Grill. Two years later he won the James Beard Foundation’s Rising Star Chef of the Year award and launched Bolo, a fine-dining Spanish restaurant. He expanded his restaurant empire with Mesa Grill spin-offs in Las Vegas (2004) and in the Paradise Island area of Nassau, Bahamas (2007), as well as branches of his bistro-style Bar Americain and a more down-market franchise, Bobby’s Burger Palace. Both Mesa Grill and Bolo were forced to close when the restaurants lost their leases in 2013 and 2007, respectively. In 2014 Flay opened Gato, a Spanish- and Mediterranean-inflected restaurant to replace Bolo.
With his success as a restaurateur, Flay branched out into television in 1994, appearing on the Food Network’s Iron Chef America, and his frequent appearances on the competitive cooking show earned him the nickname “Iron Chef Flay.” Two years later he starred in Grillin’ & Chillin’. By the time he launched Boy Meets Grill with Bobby Flay (2003–07) and BBQ with Bobby Flay (2004–06), he had gained a reputation as TV’s hottest grill master, an image that continued with Grill It! with Bobby Flay (2008–10) and Bobby Flay’s Barbecue Addiction (2011–12).
His versatility came to the fore on such shows as Throwdown! with Bobby Flay (2006–11), in which he sought to best expert cooks at their own specialties; The Next Food Network Star (NFNS; 2006– ), Worst Cooks in America (2012– ), and Bobby’s Dinner Battle (2013), three shows in which he mentored or judged aspiring cooks; and Brunch @ Bobby’s (2010–17), which aired on the Food Network’s sister station, Cooking Channel. He also appeared with his daughter, Sophie, on The Flay List (2019– ), in which the duo revealed some of their favorite food places. His own Irish American background inspired him to film Bobby’s Ireland (2011), a modern culinary tour of that country. Flay was also the author of numerous cookbooks.
