Bordeaux wine, also called claret,  any of numerous wines of the region surrounding the city of Bordeaux, France. Bordeaux has a long history in wine culture; like Burgundy and the Rhine region, it was known in Roman times. During the English occupation of Bordeaux, a charter was granted, first by Richard I and second by John in 1199, to the still-functioning jurade, a controlling body dating originally from the 12th century, which in its ceremonies still observes its medieval ritual and uses its traditional robes of the St. Emilion district for the supervision of wine making. Claret meant in those days a pale wine made by mixing reds and whites; the word claret is not used in modern French.
The modern Bordeaux region is one of the world’s most important regions making fine wines. It is divided by the Bordeaux wine classification into 36 districts, which in turn are divided into communes. Within these communes, again, are certain individual vineyards, called châteaux in this region, that produce the finest wines. The châteaux bottle their own wine and label it under their names, thus guaranteeing that it is not a blend. The château-bottled wines rated best are classified as crus classés, which in turn have five categories called growths. These five growths are not altogether based on excellence, which in fine wines remains always a matter of taste to some degree; other criteria, such as market price, exportation, and fame also formed these ratings. Rated in 1855, this classification is also outdated; nevertheless it has held up well over the years apart from excluding the possibility of improvement after 1855. After these crus classés are crus exceptionnels, comprising a half dozen wines, and several hundred wines named crus bourgeois and crus artisans, or paysans. The last two categories are largely obsolete owing to the growth of cooperative wineries, which have enabled small proprietors to use up-to-date wineries managed by expert vintners, thus raising the quality of less-expensive wine in Bordeaux and elsewhere. Although strict labeling is in force in Bordeaux château-bottled wines, inferior wines are still sold as Bordeaux. Further, because a poor year produces wine of inferior quality, such wines must be known by vintage as well.
Wines of the Bordeaux region are labeled Bordeaux. Wines from specific districts of Bordeaux are usually of specific type and have more interest; they are labeled with the district name, as Médoc or St. Emilion. Within the districts are communes, of specific wine type and of superior character; these are labeled with the name of the commune, St. Julien or St. Estèphe. Of the 17 districts in Bordeaux, Médoc, Graves, St. Emilion, and Pomerol are best known. Médoc, Sauternes, and Barsac were classified in 1855, Graves in 1953, and St. Emilion in 1955.
These wines are red, generally of light body and strong flavour. Médoc, 50 miles (80.5 km) long and 3–7 miles (5–11 km) wide, has a dozen communes, each possessing soil that produces wine of particular quality; Pauillac, Margaux, St. Julien, Cantenac, and St. Estèphe are of these. Of the 61 red wines classified crus classés in 1855, all but one were from Médoc. First growth châteaux are Lafite-Rothschild, Margaux, and Latour; other crus classés number among them Mouton-Rothschild and Kirwan.
The general reputation of Graves is for white wine, rich in taste and not too sweet. Actually Graves produces as much red as white. These balanced, fine-coloured, and rather fruity reds are sometimes rated finer than the whites. Château Haut-Brion was classified first growth in 1855; it is one of eight classified red wines of Graves in the 1959 official classification of Graves. Five châteaux were selected as classified white wines of Graves in 1959.
The natural sweet wines, fruity with enduring rich flavour, of this district are usually considered among the world’s finest. To achieve their quality the grapes are left until overripe on the vines before harvesting, thus producing the ripeness known as pourriture noble, which leaves an abundance of sugar in the grape, sweetening the wine and producing a high alcoholic content. A label of Haut-Sauternes is also allowed for wines of this district, although no such area exists. Wines from the village area of Barsac, similar to Sauternes, are allowed the label of Sauternes or Barsac. Château d’Yquem is classified first superior growth, and 24 other châteaux are classed in the first and second growths.
Sometimes called masculine wines, St. Emilions are full-bodied and of darker colour than Médocs. The 1955 classification listed 12 called first great growths of St. Emilion, among which are Château Cheval Blanc and Château Ausone, of long-standing reputation. There were 63 châteaux rated as great growths. These classes, like those of Graves, are peculiar to these districts, not part of the 1855 Médoc classification.
White wines come from Sainte Foy, Entre-Deux-Mers, Langoiran. At their best the whites of Ste. Croix-du-Mont, Loupiac, and Cérons have characteristics of Sauternes. Good red and white wines are produced in Bourg, Blaye, Cadillac, and Camblanes-et-Meynac.
Some wines prosper in generally bad years or fail in good years. Thus vintage charts are not a certain guide. Bordeaux reds are at their peak 8 to 23 years after vintage. They are long-lived, however, and full-bodied reds will last 50 years or more. Dry whites may be ready to drink in 1 to 2 years but age faster than reds or sweet whites, fading sometimes after 7 years. Sweet whites may be drunk about 3 years after vintage, will be at their peak at 10 years, and may last 30 years.
