Bread,  baked food product made of flour or meal that is moistened, kneaded, and sometimes fermented. A major food since prehistoric times, it has been made in various forms using a variety of ingredients and methods throughout the world. The first bread was made in Neolithic times, nearly 12,000 years ago, probably of coarsely crushed grain mixed with water, with the resulting dough probably laid on heated stones and baked by covering with hot ashes. The Egyptians apparently discovered that allowing wheat doughs to ferment, thus forming gases, produced a light, expanded loaf, and they also developed baking ovens.
Flat breads, the earliest form of bread, are still eaten, especially in much of the Middle East, Asia, and Africa. The principal grains used in such breads are corn (maize), barley, millet, and buckwheat—all lacking sufficient gluten (elastic protein) to make raised breads—and wheat and rye. Millet cakes and chapaties (crisp, whole-meal cakes) are popular types in India. Corn is used to make the small, flat cakes known as tortillas, important throughout much of Latin America; and in Brazil small cakes are made from cassava.
Although Far Eastern peoples have traditionally preferred rice, consumed as a grain, consumption of Western breads was increasing there in the latter half of the 20th century; and in Japan the bread-baking industry, using U.S. processes, expanded rapidly after World War II. Raised black bread, common in Germany, Russia, and Scandinavia, is made chiefly from rye. Lighter rye loaves, with wheat flour added, are popular in the United States. Raised wheat breads include white bread, made from finely sifted wheat flour; whole wheat bread, made from unsifted flour containing much of the outer and inner portions of the wheat kernel normally removed for white flour; gluten bread, lower in sugars because much of the starch is removed from the flour; and Vienna and French bread, long, narrow, crusty loaves. Other forms of raised breads include rolls and buns, chemically leavened quick breads, and yeast-leavened sweet goods that are rich in sugar and shortening.
Although raised bread originally relied upon spontaneous fermentation, bakers learned to produce fermentation with yeast. Specific strains have been developed with useful bread-making qualities, including stability, rapid fermentation capacity, and the ability to withstand high temperatures, all permitting production of a uniform product. Only wheat and rye flours produce the necessary gluten to make raised loaves, and wheat gluten is more satisfactory for this purpose. Other ingredients include liquids, such as milk or water, shortenings of animal or vegetable origin, salt, and sugar.
Improvements in the commercial production of bread include better temperature control, handling methods, fuels, and refrigeration. Modern commercial bread making is highly mechanized. Mixing is performed by the straight-dough or sponge-dough methods or the newer continuous-mixing process. In the straight-dough method, frequently used in small bakeries, all ingredients are mixed at one time. In the sponge-dough method, only some of the ingredients are mixed, forming a sponge that is allowed to ferment and is then mixed with the remaining ingredients to form the dough. The mixed dough is divided into appropriately sized pieces, deposited in bakery pans, and allowed to rise. The pans then pass through a travelling tray oven, baking the bread. The continuous-mixing process eliminates many individual operations.
