breakfast cereal,  grain food, usually precooked or ready-to-eat, that is customarily eaten with milk or cream for breakfast in the United States and elsewhere, often sweetened with sugar, syrup, or fruit. The modern commercial concept of cereal food originated in the vegetarian beliefs of the American Seventh-day Adventists, who in the 1860s formed the Western Health Reform Institute, later renamed the Battle Creek Sanitarium, in Battle Creek, Michigan. The entrepreneurial possibilities of the ground, thin-baked cereal dough served to the sanitarium’s patients inspired two men, C.W. Post and W.K. Kellogg, to each found his own business.
Ready-to-eat breakfast cereals are of four basic types: flaked, made from corn, wheat, or rice that has been broken down into grits, cooked with flavours and syrups, and then pressed into flakes between cooled rollers; puffed, made by exploding cooked wheat or rice from a pressure chamber, thus expanding the grain to several times its original size; shredded, made from pressure-cooked wheat that is squeezed into strands by heavy rollers, then cut into biscuits and dried; and granular, made by a process in which a stiff dough made from wheat and malted barley flour, salt, yeast, and water is fermented, is baked thoroughly, and then, after being crumbled and rebaked, is ground into rough grains. As a final step in each process, the cereal is treated to restore vitamins lost through cooking and is often coated with sweet flavouring.
Until the mid- to late 1950s, the market for ready-to-eat breakfast cereal was relatively small, making its subsequent rapid growth one of the most dramatic success stories in modern advertising. By skillful product diversification and promotion, ready-to-eat products took over the breakfast food market—children found a prize in every package or associated a cereal with their favourite cartoon characters, while their parents, ever reminded of the convenience and the nutritional value of fortified cereals, could enter manufacturer-sponsored contests for prizes of their own.
Late in the 20th century, the majority of breakfast cereals continued to be directed toward the children’s market, with entertainment-oriented packaging and a wide variety of “treat” flavours. Alongside these, the so-called health food movement fostered, or revived, cereals composed of “natural” whole grain and fruit in the old-fashioned granola style. These cereals became increasingly popular in the early 21st century.
In the 1990s the ready-to-eat breakfast cereal industry sold the equivalent of several billion bowls of cereal to Americans yearly, having far surpassed the market for the traditional “hot” cereals made from rolled oats or enriched wheat farina. Breakfast cereals remained popular in the early 2000s. In the first decade of the 21st century, Americans bought about 2.7 billion boxes of cereal each year.
