Cereal processing,  treatment of cereals and other plants to prepare their starch for human food, animal feed, or industrial use.
Cereals, or grains, are members of the grass family cultivated primarily for their starchy seeds (technically, dry fruits). Wheat, rice, corn (maize), rye, oats, barley, sorghum, and some of the millets are common cereals; their composition is shown in the table.
Starch, a carbohydrate stored in most plants, is a major constituent of the average human diet, providing a low-cost energy source with good keeping qualities. Cereals are high in starch, which may be used in pure or flour form. Starches are also obtained from such root sources as potatoes and from the pith of tropical palm trees. Various starches are used commercially in food processing and in the manufacture of laundering preparations, paper, textiles, adhesives, explosives, and cosmetics.
This article treats the processing and utilization of the major cereals—wheat, rice, barley, rye, oats, corn, sorghum, millet, and buckwheat; of important starchy foods consumed in certain countries instead of cereals, including potatoes and cassava; and of soybeans, legumes widely used in the bakery industry. Wheat species are treated in detail, other cereals in a more general way.
Cereal processing is complex. The principal procedure is milling—that is, the grinding of the grain so that it can be easily cooked and rendered into an attractive foodstuff. Cereals usually are not eaten raw, but different kinds of milling (dry and wet) are employed, depending on the cereal itself and on the eating customs of the consumer. Wheat may be crushed with grinding stones or similar devices or by modern automated systems employing steel cylinders, followed by air purification and numerous sievings to separate the endosperm from the outer coverings and the germ.
Corn is often milled by wet processes, but dry milling is also practiced, especially in the developing countries. Corn, with its high germ content, is inclined to respire more during storage and, unless precautions are taken, may increase in temperature during incorrect storage. Most other cereals are ground in the dry state. Some cereal grains are polished, removing most of the bran and germ and leaving the endosperm.
Cereals are used for both human and animal food and as an industrial raw material. Although milled white flour is largely used for bread production, especially in industrialized countries, the grain may be converted to food in other ways. In India the major part of the grain is not ground into flour in roller mills but is roughly ground in small crushing mills into a meal called atta. This meal is cooked into flat cakes known as chapatis.
The principal cereals used as components of animal feeds are wheat and such wheat by-products as the outer coverings separated in the preparation of white flour (bran and the more floury middlings), corn, barley, sorghum, rye, and oats. These are supplemented by protein foods and green fodders.
Animal foods require proper balance between the cereals (carbohydrates) and the more proteinous foods, and they must also contain suitable amounts of necessary minerals, vitamins, and other nutrients. The compounded ration for a milking cow generally contains about 50–80 percent cereals, consisting of wheat by-products, flaked or ground corn, barley, sorghum, wheat, and oats. Requirements for most balanced rations for pigs and poultry are similar. Corn is especially useful in high-energy feeds either as meal or as the flaked and partly gelatinized product; barley is desirable for fattening, and oats help provide a better balanced cereal for livestock. Without cereals for use in farm animal foods, the available supply of the animal protein required in the human diet would be greatly reduced.
The relatively minor use of cereals in nonfood products includes the cellulose in the straw of cereals by the paper industry, flour for manufacturing sticking pastes and industrial alcohol, and wheat gluten for core binders in the casting of metal. Rice chaff is often used as fuel in Asia.
