Cranberry,  any of several small creeping or trailing plants of the genus Vaccinium (family Ericaceae) and their tart edible red fruits. In regions where they are grown, cranberries are a popular pie filling, their juice is widely marketed as a beverage, and in sauce and relish form cranberries are traditionally associated with U.S. and Canadian Thanksgiving and Christmas meals.
The stems of cranberry plants are wiry and creeping. The leaves are evergreen, oval or elliptical, and less than 1.2 cm (0.5 inch) long. Small, bell-shaped flowers appear in June and have a four-lobed rose-tinted corolla. The round crimson berries, which ripen in September, are about the size of currants and are often spotted; they have an acid taste. False-blossom virus and various types of fruit rot are the main diseases affecting cranberry plants. Commercial vines are protected from frost by flooding.
Cranberries are cultivated on acid soils of peat or vegetable mold with a surface layer of sand. Additional sand is applied every few years. The American cranberry is grown extensively in Massachusetts, New Jersey, and Wisconsin and near the Pacific coast in Washington and Oregon. Berry harvesting begins in early September and continues until late October. Commercial fields are commonly flooded, and the ripe, floating fruits are scooped from the water surface. Most cranberry products are consumed in the United States and Canada.
The American cranberry (V. macrocarpon) is the most commercially important species and is found wild in the greater part of the northeastern United States. It is robust with round, oblong, or pear-shaped berries that vary in colour from pink to very dark red or mottled red and white. The small-fruited, or northern, cranberry (V. oxycoccos) is found in marshy land in northern North America and Asia and in northern and central Europe and is of local importance.
Other fruits of species in the genus Vaccinium are also known as cranberries. The lingonberry, or cowberry (V. vitis-idaea), also known as mountain or rock cranberry, is not cultivated but is used in northern Europe and by Scandinavians in the United States. The southern cranberry, or red huckleberry (V. erythrocarpum), is found in mountainous areas from West Virginia to Georgia; its large berries are dark red in colour and of exceptionally fine flavour. The fruit of the cranberry tree (see Viburnum) is sometimes substituted for true cranberries in Canada and the northern United States.
