Emeril Lagasse,  (born October 15, 1959, Fall River, Massachusetts, U.S.), American celebrity chef, author, and television personality who by the early 21st century was one of the most recognizable chefs in the United States, known as much for his cooking as for his energetic personality and catchphrases.
As a child, Lagasse was fascinated with food. By age seven he was begging his mother to teach him how to make vegetable soup. He made several attempts before he got the soup right, and he declared that even in those first lessons, his mother taught him to cook with passion and patience. During his childhood he also excelled at music, playing percussion in a youth orchestra. He later turned down a full scholarship at the New England Conservatory of Music so that he could study cooking. In 1978 he graduated from Johnson & Wales University, Providence, Rhode Island, with a degree in culinary arts.
Following further studies in France and a series of cooking jobs in New York City, Boston, and Philadelphia, Lagasse moved to New Orleans. There he succeeded Paul Prudhomme as executive chef at Commander’s Palace in 1981. Nine years later Lagasse opened his first establishment, Emeril’s Restaurant, in New Orleans, and in 1992 he launched NOLA Restaurant in the city’s French Quarter. Lagasse’s restaurants received a number of awards, and in 1991 he was named best southeast regional chef by the James Beard Foundation.
In 1993 Lagasse attracted an even wider following. That year he published his first cookbook, the best-selling Emeril’s New New Orleans Cooking, and Lagasse became a cable television personality, joining the Food Network. He hosted two programs, Emeril Live (2001–10) and The Essence of Emeril (1996–2008), both of which proved extremely popular. Lagasse’s skills in the kitchen as well as his engaging, boisterous personality—highlighted by his catchphrases “Bam!” and “Kick it up a notch!”—were instrumental to the shows’ success. He later hosted the shows Emeril Green (2008–12) and Emeril’s Florida (2013–17) and served as a judge for two seasons of the cooking competition Top Chef (2006– ). His other shows included Fresh Food Fast with Emeril (2010–11) and Eat the World with Emeril Lagasse (2016). In addition to the Food Network, he made regular appearances on ABC’s Good Morning America and starred in a short-lived 2001 NBC sitcom, Emeril. Lagasse subsequently opened restaurants in several U.S. cities, including Las Vegas, Orlando, and Atlanta. His books have sold several million copies. He also developed his own line of food and cooking merchandise.
