Energy drink,  any beverage that contains high levels of a stimulant ingredient, usually caffeine, as well as sugar and often supplements, such as vitamins or carnitine, and that is promoted as a product capable of enhancing mental alertness and physical performance.
Energy drinks are distinguished from sports drinks, which are used to replace water and electrolytes during or after physical activity, and from coffee and tea, which are brewed, contain fewer ingredients, and may be decaffeinated. Energy drinks also differ from soft drinks, which either do not contain caffeine or contain relatively small amounts of caffeine. Although some energy drinks are considered beverages, others, namely those containing food additives (e.g., taurine or other amino acids), may be marketed as dietary supplements. Examples of energy drinks include Red Bull, Monster, Rockstar, NOS, and Amp.
The manufacturers of energy drinks claim that their products boost energy levels. Those claims generally have been based on proprietary formulas, in which the stimulant effects of a drink were said to be derived from the specific concoction of ingredients. Research has indicated, however, that the stimulant effects of energy drinks are due primarily to caffeine. Other ingredients, such as taurine and vitamins B6 and B12, could potentially exert biological effects but have not been known to increase energy levels; the effects of some ingredients (e.g., glucuronolactone) are unknown. Levels of vitamins and certain other additives in energy drinks often far exceed recommended daily intakes.
In the early 21st century, the safety of energy drinks was an emerging public health issue. In particular, the combined use of energy drinks and alcohol, which became popular particularly among college students, was linked to an increased likelihood of high-risk drinking behaviour (e.g., binge drinking) and increased risk of alcohol-related injury and other consequences. Studies in human subjects who consumed energy drinks revealed potentially dangerous effects on heart function and blood pressure.
