Espresso, (Italian: “fast, express”)  a strong brew of coffee produced by forcing boiled water under pressure through finely ground coffee. The finely ground coffee beans means an increased amount of surface contact with the water, resulting in a highly flavoured and aromatic brew. The nuances of brewing and enjoying the drink have spurred international barista championships and detailed discussions of the drink by aficionados worldwide. Espresso is especially associated with Italy, where it is woven into the fabric of daily life.
A culture of refinement has long surrounded this dark, rich, and exotic beverage, an aura doubtless tied to the beginning of coffeehouses in the Middle East in the 15th and 16th centuries, when such establishments attracted the leading thinkers and writers of the day. But the surprising truth is that espresso is an innovation of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. In fact, espresso is arguably the first example of “fast food,” its very name meaning speed.
Drinking coffee was very popular in Europe in the 19th century, but the boiled-water process of brewing it was laborious and time-consuming, especially for workers on a “coffee break.” To accelerate its production, Italian inventor Angelo Moriondo patented in 1884 a “new steam machinery for the economic and instantaneous confection of coffee beverage.” In short, he invented the prototype of the espresso machine, albeit one that produced the beverage only in bulk. To orient the process toward quick individualized servings, Italian inventor and businessman Luigi Bezzera created the first known machine to force, by pressure, steam and hot water through ground coffee into an individual cup so that each customer could have the freshest possible brew in the fastest possible way, reducing the brewing time from a few minutes to 30 seconds. Bezzera’s 1902 patents were then purchased the following year by Desiderio Pavoni, who made improvements to Bezzara’s brewing machine by devising the pressure-release valve and the steam wand for frothing beverages by tapping into the system’s built-up steam. Working together, Pavoni and Bezzera introduced their new coffee machine, called the Ideale (because they had mastered the “ideal” temperature and pressure for brewing coffee), and their fast new product, caffè espresso, at the 1906 World’s Fair in Milan. By mid-century there were espresso systems in use that resemble many of the machines still in use today.
Many subtle factors are at work in the production of each shot of espresso: the gauge pressure, the water temperature, the amount and fineness of the ground coffee, the duration (in seconds) of extraction, and the volume of liquid produced; even tiny variations in the size of the coffee particles in the grind can make an enormous difference in the quality of the espresso. The quality of the espresso machine is also key. The goal is to keep the pressure and temperature absolutely consistent from shot to shot. That uniformity is not easy to maintain, and the high price of top-ranked espresso machines is typically because of their ability to deliver that much-desired consistency.
On a well-pulled shot, the much-celebrated golden to reddish-brown foam known as crema lingers on the surface for a minute or two rather than dissipating immediately. Because it blankets the surface, the crema helps trap the aromatics in the liquid below. Although the crema is traditionally considered an important characteristic of a well-prepared espresso shot, many leading baristas have been experimenting with skimming the crema off the shot before serving. The result is a sweeter-tasting shot. But in all cases a shot of espresso should be drunk immediately, before the highly volatile aromas dissipate.
Because the espresso procedure tends to amplify the distinct character of the beans both for good and for bad, roasters generally use a blend of beans from different sources. Further, the beans might also be roasted to different degrees, bringing out various levels of fruity, floral, spicy, earthy, or other flavours. In the manner that vintners blend wine grapes, baristas blend coffees to balance the best qualities of individual beans—aroma, taste, richness, and body.
There is, however, a growing following for single-origin coffees. Although roasters certainly define their style and personality with signature blends that become standards for their regular customers, they will also offer special selections of coffees from one specific farm or region. That venture comes with some risk. As with a single varietal wine, it can be trickier to create an outstanding beverage out of a single product instead of from a blend. That is especially true in brewing espresso, which is less forgiving than other brewing methods.
