Fannie Farmer, in full Fannie Merritt Farmer,  (born March 23, 1857, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.—died January 15, 1915, Boston), American cookery expert, originator of what is today the renowned Fannie Farmer Cookbook.
Farmer grew up in Boston and in Medford, Massachusetts. She suffered a paralytic stroke during her high-school years that forced her to end her formal education. She recovered sufficiently to find employment as a mother’s helper, and she soon showed both an aptitude and a great fondness for cooking. With the encouragement of her parents, she entered the Boston Cooking School. Graduating in 1889, Farmer was asked to remain as assistant director, and in 1894 she became head of the school. Although reticent, she nevertheless became much sought after as a lecturer. She left the school in 1902 to open her own Miss Farmer’s School of Cookery, which was designed to train housewives rather than teachers, institutional cooks, or servants. For a year at Harvard University she conducted a course in dietetic and invalid cooking, and with her sister, Cora Farmer Perkins, she wrote a regular column for the Woman’s Home Companion from 1905 to 1915.
Farmer’s lasting contribution was twofold: the introduction of standardized level measurements in recipes and the Boston Cooking School Cookbook, first published in 1896 and still a best-seller in a modernized version, frequently revised, entitled The Fannie Farmer Cookbook. Its 12 editions in the first 70 years had sales totaling nearly four million copies. Recipes for everyday and classic dishes were accompanied by sections on formal entertaining, proper management of the home and service staff, use of kitchen equipment, and etiquette. Her largely intuitive knowledge of diet planning predated the modern field of nutrition. She stressed in her cookbook the “knowledge of the principles of diet [as an] essential part of one’s education. Mankind will eat to live, will be able to do better mental and physical work, and disease will be less frequent.” Her recipes were all personally tested and, thanks to accurate measurements, easy to follow successfully.
Farmer’s other books included Chafing Dish Possibilities (1898), Food and Cookery for the Sick and Convalescent (1904), What to Have for Dinner (1905), Catering for Special Occasions, with Menus and Recipes (1911), and A New Book of Cookery (1912). Her cooking school continued until 1944.
