Fat,  any substance of plant or animal origin that is nonvolatile, insoluble in water, and oily or greasy to the touch. Fats are usually solid at ordinary temperatures, such as 25 °C (77 °F), but they begin to liquefy at somewhat higher temperatures. Chemically, fats are identical to animal and vegetable oils, consisting primarily of glycerides, which are esters formed by the reaction of three molecules of fatty acids with one molecule of glycerol (see oil).
Together with oils, fats comprise one of the three principal classes of foodstuffs, the others being proteins and carbohydrates. Nearly all cells contain these basic substances. Fat is sometimes called nature’s storehouse of energy because on a weight basis it contains more than twice as much energy as does carbohydrate or protein. It is probably as storehouses or depots of concentrated energy that fats appear in plant reproductive organs, such as pollen grains and seeds. It is this fat that humans recover from plants for use as food or in industry. The fat content of the nonreproductive tissue of plants is usually so low that recovery is impracticable. Yet much dietary fat comes from natural foodstuffs without being separated from the other plant materials with which it occurs. The proportion of fat in these foodstuffs varies from 0.1 percent in white potatoes to 70 percent in some nut kernels.
More than 90 percent of the fat recovered in the world is obtained from about 20 species of plants and animals. Most of this separated fat is used eventually as human food. Consequently, fat technology deals largely with the separation and processing of fats into forms acceptable to the various dietary customs in the countries in which they are to be used. (For further information on the subject, see food processing.)
Humans have used many natural fats for both food and nonfood purposes since prehistoric times. The Egyptians, for example, used olive oil as a lubricant in moving heavy building materials. They also made axle greases from fat and lime, mixed with other materials, as early as 1400 bce. Homer mentions oil as an aid to weaving, and Pliny talks about hard and soft soaps. Candles and lamps using oil or tallow have been used for thousands of years.
The commercial uses of fats have increased in number as the understanding of the chemical nature of fats has expanded. C.W. Scheele, a Swedish chemist, discovered in 1779 that glycerol could be obtained from olive oil by heating it with litharge (lead monoxide), but it was not until about 1815 that the French chemist Michel-Eugène Chevreul (1786–1889) demonstrated the chemical nature of fats and oils. A few years later the separation of liquid acids from solid acids was accomplished. Margarine was invented by the French chemist Hippolyte Mège-Mouriès, who in 1869 won a prize offered by Napoleon III for a satisfactory butter substitute. The modern hydrogenation process had its origin in research in the late 19th century that led to the establishment of the vegetable-oil-shortening industry and a variety of industrial applications.
After World War I, organic chemists gained extensive knowledge first of fatty-acid compositions and then of glyceride compositions. Growth of the chemical industry stimulated a simultaneous expansion of the use of fats as raw materials and as intermediates for scores of new chemicals. The modern application of many organic chemical reactions to fats and fatty acids formed the foundation of a new and rapidly growing fatty-chemicals industry.
The universal distribution of fats in plant and animal tissues suggests physiological roles that go beyond their function as a fuel supply for the cells. In animals the most evident function of fats is that of a food reserve to supply energy (through subsequent enzymatic oxidation—that is, combination with oxygen catalyzed by enzymes). The storage of fat in vegetable seeds can be explained similarly on the basis that it is a food reserve for the embryo. It is not so easy, however, to account for the presence of large quantities of fat in such fruits as olives, avocados, and palms; much of this fat is probably lost or destroyed before the seed germinates. Fats fulfill other valuable functions in plants and animals. Subcutaneous deposits of fat insulate animals against cold because of the low rate of heat transfer in fat, a property especially important for animals living in cold waters or climates—e.g., whales, walruses, and bears.
Fats that have been separated from tissues always contain small quantities of closely associated nonglyceride lipids such as phospholipids, sterols, vitamins A, D, and E, and various carotenoid pigments. Many of these substances are vital emulsifying agents or growth factors. Others function as agents that prevent deterioration of fats in plant tissues and seeds caused by destructive combination with oxygen. These minor constituents probably are present in the fats as a result of their physical solubility, and thus fats serve as carriers for these substances in animal diets.
Many animals require some fat containing one or more of the essential fatty acids (linoleic, arachidonic, and to a limited extent linolenic) to prevent the physical symptoms of essential-fatty-acid deficiency manifested by skin lesions, scaliness, poor hair growth, and low growth rates. These essential fatty acids must be supplied in the diet since they cannot be synthesized in the body.
The prostaglandins, discovered by the Nobel laureate U.S. von Euler of Sweden, are hormonelike compounds derived from arachidonic acid. These biologically active fatty acids, which are present in very minute quantities in animal tissues, apparently are involved in contraction of smooth muscles, enzyme activity in lipid metabolism, function of the central nervous system, regulation of pulse rate and blood pressure, function of steroid hormones, fat mobilization in adipose tissue, and a number of other vital functions.
