Grant Achatz,  (born April 25, 1974, St. Clair, Michigan, U.S.), American chef whose culinary innovations made him a leader in the cuisine inspired by molecular gastronomy.
Achatz grew up in a small town in eastern Michigan, where he worked at his parents’ family restaurant. After graduating in 1994 from the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, New York, he served a brief—and unsuccessful—stint at Charlie Trotter’s eponymous Chicago restaurant. In 1996 Achatz persuaded California chef Thomas Keller to hire him at the French Laundry, then one of the country’s most-acclaimed restaurants. After four years under Keller’s mentorship—along with a short spell at a nearby winery and a trip to Spain to dine at Ferran Adrià’s groundbreaking El Bulli—Achatz in 2001 took charge of the kitchen at Trio restaurant near Chicago. He was named Best New Chef (2002) by Food and Wine magazine and Rising Star Chef (2003) by the James Beard Foundation (JBF).
In 2005 in Chicago he and Nick Kokonas (an enthusiastic Trio customer) launched Alinea, where Achatz had free rein for his increasingly inventive style. Within two years Gourmet magazine pronounced Alinea the country’s best restaurant. In 2008 the JBF named Achatz the best chef in the United States, and in 2010 Alinea was awarded a coveted three stars from the Michelin Guide.
Meanwhile, Achatz was diagnosed in mid-2007 with stage 4 nonmetastatic tongue cancer. Although most of the doctors he consulted recommended the removal of about 75 percent of his tongue, Achatz selected a team of oncologists who were running clinical trials on a protocol that relied on chemotherapy and radiation rather than surgery. By early 2008, tests had determined that he was cancer-free, and Achatz began to regain his sense of taste.
Achatz remained busy, and in 2011 he opened The Aviary cocktail lounge; Next, a prix-fixe restaurant that sold tickets (rather than taking reservations) for a themed menu that was replaced several times a year; and The Office, a 14-seat speakeasy-style lounge underneath The Aviary. In 2017 Achatz expanded outside Chicago, opening versions of The Aviary and The Office in New York City.  His memoir, Life, on the Line (cowritten with Kokonas), was published in 2011.
