Jamie Oliver,  (born May 27, 1975, Clavering, Essex, England), British chef who achieved worldwide fame with his television shows The Naked Chef (1999) and Jamie Oliver’s Food Revolution (2010–11) and as author of a number of cookbooks with a variety of culinary themes.
Oliver’s parents were owners of a pub-restaurant in Clavering, Essex. After persistently begging the chefs to let him assist, he was allowed to work in the kitchen. At age 16 Oliver entered the Westminster Catering College before traveling to France for additional training and experience. He landed his first job in London at the Neal Street Restaurant as head pastry chef and soon began working as sous-chef at the River Café, where his talent in front of the camera was discovered during the filming of a documentary on the restaurant. He was quickly contracted by Optomen Television to host his first series, The Naked Chef, in which he demonstrated how to simplify food preparation by using basic ingredients and cooking techniques.
In addition to starring in numerous television programs—including Oliver’s Twist (2002) and several other Naked Chef series—Oliver authored a number of best-selling cookbooks and launched his own line of cookware. In 2002 he established the Fifteen Foundation, a London-based program that gave underprivileged youths the opportunity to experience careers in the culinary industry at Oliver’s Fifteen restaurant. The success of the project, chronicled in the television series Jamie’s Kitchen, spurred Oliver’s plans to expand the program throughout the United Kingdom and overseas.
The five-week television series Jamie’s School Dinners, which aired in 2005, documented the challenges Oliver faced while training a group of school cafeteria workers to prepare new, healthier items, as well as his ability to encourage students to try the new menu. The show helped Oliver launch his overwhelmingly successful “Feed Me Better” campaign to improve the quality of meals served in Britain’s schools. Largely through his efforts, the British government agreed to increase the amount spent on each school meal. In 2007 Oliver began hosting Jamie at Home, a show that focused on urban gardening and the preparation of homegrown produce. Three years later Jamie Oliver’s Food Revolution aired in the United States. The six-episode program, which chronicled his efforts to improve the eating habits of people in Huntington, West Virginia, won an Emmy Award for outstanding reality program. The show returned for a second season in 2011, set in Los Angeles. Both seasons gave special attention to providing healthy food in schools.
Oliver’s later shows included Jamie’s 15-Minute Meals (2012), Jamie’s Comfort Food (2014), and Jamie & Jimmy’s Friday Night Feast (2014– ), all of which inspired books. Oliver published Jamie Magazine, which launched in the United Kingdom in 2009; a U.S. edition premiered in 2012. In 2017, however, the magazine folded. In addition, his restaurant business in the United Kingdom struggled and in 2019 became insolvent, resulting in the closure of more than 20 eateries.
