Kurihara Harumi,  (born March 5, 1947, Shimoda, Shizuoka prefecture, Japan), Japanese chef, lifestyle expert, and television personality who in 1994 founded the media and home furnishing corporation Yutori no Kūkan (“A Place to Relax”).
Kurihara was taught by her mother how to cook. After marrying a well-known newscaster in Japan, her exceptional cooking skills were noticed by reporters who went to her home to interview her husband. She was soon invited to submit recipes and short articles to various magazines. This led to a television career in 1983, when she served as a production assistant on a cooking program. She moved on to host her own series of shows, but it was not until 1992, when she published her first cookbook, Gochisōsama ga, kikitakute (“I Want to Hear You Say Delicious”), that Kurihara emerged as a national icon. In addition to writing numerous cookbooks, she established a magazine, Suteki reshipi (“Great Recipes”), in 1996; it was renamed haru_mi in 2006. She also opened a chain of stores that sold her own brand of houseware items—including aprons, gardening tools, kitchen equipment, linens, and cookware—and oversaw several restaurants that used her recipes to create authentic Japanese dishes. All of Kurihara’s various endeavours were overseen by her company, Yutori no Kūkan.
With a keen interest in sharing her techniques for preparing traditional Japanese dishes with Western audiences, Kurihara wrote the English-language cookbook Harumi’s Japanese Cooking: More than 75 Authentic and Contemporary Recipes from Japan’s Most Popular Cooking Expert (2004). Winner of the 2004 Gourmand World Media Award for best book of the year (the first such prize ever bestowed on a book by an Asian author), it was lauded for presenting simple recipes for traditional Japanese cuisine that could be prepared quickly and easily with relatively familiar, inexpensive ingredients in lieu of the difficult and laborious techniques that the style of cooking often required. Kurihara’s later English-language cookbooks include Harumi’s Japanese Home Cooking (2006) and Everyday Harumi (2009).
