Lime,  any of several species and hybrids of trees and shrubs in the rue family (Rutaceae), widely grown in tropical and subtropical areas for their edible acidic fruits. The Persian lime (Citrus ×latifolia) is one of the most common commercial varieties, though the smaller key lime, or Mexican lime (C. ×aurantifolia), is also economically important in many places. The lime fruit is a key ingredient in certain pickles and chutneys, and lime juice is used to flavour drinks, food, and confections. Limeade and other lime-flavoured drinks have a flavour and bouquet quite distinct from those made from lemons. The juice may be concentrated, dried, frozen, or canned. Lime oil, from the peel of the fruit, is processed mainly in the West Indies. Citrate of lime and citric acid are also prepared from the fruit.
The tree seldom grows more than 5 metres (16 feet) high and if not pruned becomes shrublike. Its branches spread and are irregular, with short stiff twigs, small leaves, and many small sharp thorns. The evergreen leaves are pale green, and the small white flowers are usually borne in clusters. The fruit is usually about 3 to 4 cm (1 to 1.5 inches) in diameter, oval to nearly globular in shape, often with a small apical nipple, and the peel is thin and greenish yellow when the fruit is ripe. The pulp is tender, juicy, yellowish green in colour, and decidedly acid. Limes exceed lemons in both acid and sugar content. There are, however, some varieties so lacking in citric acid that they are known as sweet limes. These are grown to some extent in Egypt and certain tropical countries.
Wild limes probably originated in the Indonesian archipelago or the nearby mainland of Asia. Arabian traders may have taken limes, as well as lemons, from India to the eastern Mediterranean countries and Africa about 1000 ce. Limes were introduced to the western Mediterranean countries by returning Crusaders in the 12th and 13th centuries. Christopher Columbus took citrus seeds, probably including limes, to the West Indies on his second voyage in 1493, and the trees soon became widely distributed in the West Indies, Mexico, and Florida. Limes are grown to a limited extent in practically all citrus-growing areas. Limes contain vitamin C (ascorbic acid) and were formerly used in the British navy to prevent scurvy—hence the nickname “limey.”
A number of other related plants are commonly referred to as limes and are used similarly. The fruit and leaves of the Kaffir lime, or makrut lime (C. hystrix), add distinctive flavour to the cuisines of Southeast Asia and are sometimes used in perfumery. Sweet lime (C. limetta), less tart than the Persian lime, is commonly cultivated in the Mediterranean region. The mandarin lime, also known as the Rangpur lime (C. ×limonia), is thought to be a lemon–mandarin orange hybrid and is commonly used to make marmalade. Finger limes (C. australasica), native to Australia, are a developing crop noted for their discrete juice vesicles, sometimes called “lime caviar.”
