Lychee,  (Litchi chinensis), also spelled litchi  or lichi,  evergreen tree of the soapberry family (Sapindaceae), grown for its edible fruit. Lychee is native to Southeast Asia and has been a favourite fruit of the Cantonese since ancient times. The fruit is usually eaten fresh but can also be canned or dried. The flavour of the fresh pulp is aromatic and musky, and the dried pulp is acidic and very sweet.
Lychee is of local importance throughout much of Southeast Asia and is grown commercially in China and India. Its introduction into the Western world came when it reached Jamaica in 1775. The first lychee fruits in Florida—where the tree has attained commercial importance—are said to have ripened in 1916. To a lesser extent the tree has been cultivated around the Mediterranean, in South Africa, and in Hawaii.
The lychee tree develops a compact crown of foliage that is bright green the year round. The leaves are compound, composed of two to four pairs of elliptic to lanceolate leaflets that are 50–75 mm (2–3 inches) long. The flowers, small and inconspicuous, are borne in loose diverse terminal clusters, or panicles, sometimes 30 cm (12 inches) in length. The fruits are oval to round, strawberry red in colour, and about 25 mm (1 inch) in diameter. The brittle outer covering encloses a translucent white fleshy aril and one large seed.
The tree is propagated by seed and by air layering, in which a branch is made to produce roots while still attached to the parent plant. When moved to a permanent orchard, lychee plants are set 7.5–10.5 metres (24.5–34.5 feet) apart. They require very little pruning and no unusual attention, though they should have abundant moisture around the roots most of the time. The trees come into production at three to five years of age.
The consumption of lychee fruits has been linked to hypoglycemic encephalopathy and death in a number of children in India, Bangladesh, and Vietnam. The fruits and seeds contain the toxins hypoglycin A and methylene cyclopropyl-glycin, which inhibit the synthesis of glucose and can cause acute hypoglycemia. These toxins are more concentrated in unripe fruits, and their effects seem to be compounded in undernourished children or when consumed after a period of fasting.
