macadamia,  (genus Macadamia),  genus of four species of evergreen trees belonging to the family Proteaceae known for their richly flavoured edible seeds. The trees originated in the coastal rainforests and scrubs of what is now Queensland in northeastern Australia and are grown commercially in a number of subtropical areas. Commonly known as macadamia nuts, the seeds are often roasted and salted or are used by bakers and chocolatiers in confections and chocolates. They are a good source of calcium, phosphorus, iron, and vitamin B, and they contain 73 percent fat.
Macadamia trees commonly grow to 18 metres (60 feet) high and 15 metres (49 feet) wide. They have shiny leathery leaves that are 20–30 cm (8–12 inches) long. Fragrant pink or white flowers are borne in clusters and are succeeded by bunches of up to 20 fruits. Not a true nut, the shiny round 25-mm (1-inch) seed is enclosed in a thick leathery husk that splits along one side during the ripening process.
The macadamias grown commercially are principally of two species, the smooth-shelled Macadamia integrifolia and the rough-shelled M. tetraphylla; the two tend to hybridize beyond distinction. A third species, M. ternifolia, is sometimes cultivated, while the final member of the genus, the bulberin nut (M. jansenii), is an endangered species.
Because macadamias are difficult to propagate, slow to bear, and limited in range of cultivability, production has not kept pace with increased demand, thus rendering the product costly. Most commercial production takes place in their native Australia and in Hawaii. However, given the successes of the Hawaiian macadamia industry, other subtropical regions have planted orchards, and there are large acreages of macadamias in South Africa, Zimbabwe, and Malawi and in parts of South and Central America.
As an orchard crop, the macadamia needs rich well-drained soil and 130 cm (50 inches) of rain annually. It is difficult to tell precisely when the nuts are ripe, so the macadamias are not usually harvested until they drop to the ground. The mature fruits are then gathered by hand, machine-hulled, dried, and stored for processing.
