malt,  grain product that is used in beverages and foods as a basis for fermentation and to add flavour and nutrients. Malt is prepared from cereal grain by allowing partial germination to modify the grain’s natural food substances. Although any cereal grain may be converted to malt, barley is chiefly used; rye, wheat, rice, and corn are used much less frequently.
The largest quantities of malt are used in the brewing of beer, and the flavour of beer is predominantly the result of the malt from which it was made. From 11 to 22 kg (25 to 50 pounds) of malt are used to make a barrel (31 U.S. gallons) of beer. The next most important use of malt is to make distilled alcohol for whiskey and other beverages. Malt extracts are also used for flavour, enzyme activity, and starch content in such food products as flour, malt vinegar, breakfast cereals, baby foods, confections, and baked goods.
The controlled germination of cereal grains that results in malt is initiated by adding moisture and is arrested by removing the moisture before the young plant grows out of its seed covering. The malting process itself consists of three stages: steeping, germination, and kilning. In steeping, the grain is placed in a tank with water and absorbs moisture, awakening the embryo within the kernel. The dampened grain is then allowed to germinate, or sprout, and tiny rootlets grow out from the bottom of the kernel. During germination, enzymes are activated that the embryo plant uses to break down the starch in its kernel and build it into root and stem structures. These starch-splitting enzymes also permeate the seed’s hard, brittle outer wall, converting it into a softer and more soluble form and giving it a characteristic malty flavour. The germination process requires that cooled and moistened air move through the mass of sprouting grain, which must be gently moved to prevent matting of the rootlets. In modern malting procedures, germination usually takes place in revolving drums or in tanks equipped with agitators. This process has largely replaced floor malting, in which the moistened grain was spread on concrete floors and turned by shoveling.
When the desired biological modification in the grain has been attained, the germination process is stopped by kilning. In this stage, the germinated grain, called green malt, is dried by currents of heated air entering through perforations in the floor of the kiln. The timing and heat intensity applied in kilning affect the malt’s flavour and colour development. The malt intended for Scotch whisky is dried over a fire to which peat is added, its smoke being absorbed by the malt.
The enzymes produced within the barleycorn during germination break down the starch stored in the seed kernel to simpler carbohydrates, chiefly malt sugar (maltose). Other enzymes are also produced in the grain that can break down proteins to simpler nitrogenous compounds. In brewing, malt is added to a cereal mash in order for the former’s enzymes to convert the latter’s starches into maltose. The maltose is subsequently fermented by yeast, resulting in the alcohol and carbon dioxide that give beer its distinctive qualities.
Malt extract is produced by mashing malt, removing the solids, and then using an evaporator to concentrate the aqueous fraction. The resulting product is a thick syrup containing sugars, vitamins, and minerals. Early British beers were made from successive extracts of a single batch of brown malt in a top-fermentation process. The first and strongest extract gave the best-quality beer, called strong beer, and a third extract yielded the poorest-quality beer, called small beer. London brewers departed from this process in the 18th century.
Specialized malts for enhancing the colour and flavour of beers are produced by controlled heating of wetted or dry malt (e.g., crystal malt and “chocolate,” or black, malt).
