Maple syrup,   sweet-water sap of certain North American maple trees, chiefly the sugar maple, Acer saccharum, but also the black maple, Acer nigrum. It was utilized by the Indians of the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence River regions prior to the arrival of European settlers and is still produced solely in North America.
The sweet-water sap from which maple syrup is made is different from the circulatory sap of the growing tree. When the tree is dormant, the sap will flow from any wound in the sapwood, such as a taphole, each time a period of freezing is followed by a period of thawing. The sap contains 1 1/2 to 3 percent solids, mostly sucrose, but does not contain the colour or flavour of maple syrup, which are imparted to the sap as it is concentrated by evaporation in open pans. About 30 to 50 gallons (115 to 190 litres) of sap yield one gallon of syrup.
The syrup season begins in mid-January in the more southerly areas and ends in mid-April in the northern regions, lasting four to six weeks in each place. For more than 300 years the making of maple syrup remained virtually unchanged, except for the introduction of the flue evaporator. Then, in the late 1940s, modernization began: taphole-drilling equipment was mechanized; sanitary methods were adopted for handling sap; precision instruments were developed for making syrup; provision was made for sap to be transported from the tapholes of entire areas of sugar bush (sugar maple stands) to storage tanks via plastic tubing; and central evaporator plants were established to serve whole communities of sap producers.
Commercial quantities of maple syrup are produced, in order of amounts, in Quebec, Vermont, New York, Ontario, Wisconsin, Ohio, Michigan, New Hampshire, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, and Maine. Maple products are similar in quality over the different areas. The major products are pure and blended brown table syrups, confections, toppings for ice cream, flavourings, and casing for tobacco. The best-known use of maple syrup is as a sweet topping for pancakes and waffles.
