Mate, also spelled maté, also called yerba mate, Paraguay tea, or Brazilian tea,  tealike beverage, popular in many South American countries, brewed from the dried leaves of an evergreen shrub or tree (Ilex paraguariensis) related to holly. It is a stimulating drink, greenish in colour, containing caffeine and tannin, and is less astringent than tea. Mate is especially common in Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay, and southern Brazil as well as in Syria and parts of Lebanon, where it was introduced from Argentina. While the name of the drink can be spelled mate or maté in English, the latter represents a hypercorrection to distinguish its pronunciation from that of the common English word mate. It is never spelled with an acute accent in either Spanish or Portuguese, and maté in Spanish means “I killed.”
Although mate is an ancient Guaraní beverage, the plant was first cultivated by Jesuit missionaries. In the wild state, the plant becomes a round-headed tree; under cultivation, which improves the quality of the brew, it remains a small multistemmed shrub, requiring a minimum of two years between harvests for regrowth. The plant requires specific soil and climatic conditions and is grown commercially only in small regions of Argentina, Paraguay, and Brazil.
Drying methods vary. In Brazil the leafy branches are placed on a six-foot square of beaten earth, called a tatacua, and a fire is kindled around the area, providing preliminary roasting; the branches are next heated on an arch of poles over a fire; and the dried leaves, placed in pits in the earth, are ground into coarse powder, producing a mate called caa gazu or yerva do polos. In Paraguay and parts of Argentina the leaves, with midribs removed before roasting, are made into a mate called caaminí. In a newer method, similar to the Chinese procedure for drying tea leaves, the leaves are heated in large cast-iron pans.
In brewing mate, the dried leaves (yerba) are placed in a dried hollow gourd or other vessel, covered with hot (not boiling) water, and briefly steeped. The drink is sucked from the gourd with a metal straw, known as a bombilla or bomba in Spanish, that is fitted with a strainer at one end to keep leaf particles from the mouth. Each gourd holds only a small amount of liquid and is repeatedly refilled with hot water, usually about 10 times. Mate is often shared communally, with the server continually refilling the gourd and passing it to each person in succession. The gourds, called mates or culhas, are often decorated and are sometimes silver mounted or covered with leather. Mate can also be prepared in similar vessels made out of wood or metal. The drink is often served plain and is sometimes flavoured with milk, sugar, herbs, coffee grounds, or lemon juice.
