Millet,  any of several species of cereal grasses in the family Poaceae, cultivated for their small edible seeds. Millets were probably first cultivated in Asia more than 4,000 years ago, and they were major grains in Europe during the Middle Ages. Today, though they are used chiefly for pasture or to produce hay in the United States and western Europe, they remain important food staples in less-developed countries worldwide. Millet grains are high in carbohydrates, with protein content varying from 6 to 11 percent and fat varying from 1.5 to 5 percent. They are somewhat strong in taste and are mainly consumed in flatbreads and porridges or prepared and eaten much like rice.
Millets are typically annuals and range in height from 30 to 130 cm (1 to 4 feet), with the exception of pearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum), which has stalks 1.5 to 3 metres (5 to 10 feet) tall and about 2.5 cm (1 inch) thick. The inflorescences may be spikes or racemes, in which the flowers are borne on stalks of about equal length along an elongated axis, or panicles with dense clusters of small florets. With the exception of pearl millet, seeds remain enclosed in hulls after threshing. Hulled seeds are usually creamy white.
Pearl millet, called bajra in India, is suited to soils of low fertility and limited moisture and is a popular food crop in India and Africa. Proso millet—also called common, or broomcorn, millet (Panicum miliaceum)—ripens within 60–80 days after sowing and is commonly used in birdseed mixtures. It is also eaten as a cereal food in Asia and eastern Europe and is used as a livestock feed elsewhere. Foxtail millet (Setaria italica) has small pointed seeds. It is grown for hay in North America and western Europe, and it is an important food crop in China and other Asian countries. Finger millet (Eleusine coracana) is an important food grain in southern Asia and parts of Africa. Japanese millet (Echinochloa frumentacea) is grown chiefly in Japan and the United States as a hay crop. Little millet (Panicum sumatrense) is chiefly a food crop of India.
