Molecular gastronomy,  the scientific discipline concerned with the physical and chemical transformations that occur during cooking. The name is sometimes mistakenly given to the application of scientific knowledge to the creation of new dishes and culinary techniques.
The scientific discipline—which was introduced under the name molecular and physical gastronomy and later shortened to molecular gastronomy—was established in 1988 by Hervé This, a physical chemist, and Nicholas Kurti, a former professor of physics at the University of Oxford, who were interested in the science behind the phenomena that occur during culinary processes. Although food science had existed for some centuries, its focus had historically been on the chemical composition of ingredients and on the industrial production and nutritional properties of food. Molecular gastronomy, on the other hand, focuses on the mechanisms of transformation that occur during culinary processes at the level of domestic and restaurant cooking, an area that had historically tended to rely heavily on tradition and anecdotal information. Molecular gastronomy seeks to generate new knowledge on the basis of the chemistry and physics behind culinary processes—for example, why mayonnaise becomes firm or why a soufflé swells. One side goal is to develop new ways of cooking that are rooted in science. These techniques are called molecular cooking, whereas the new culinary style based on such techniques is called molecular cuisine.
A program was proposed for molecular gastronomy that took into account the fundamentally important artistic and social components of cooking as well as the technical element. A distinction was also made between the parts of recipes: “culinary definitions”—descriptions of the objective of recipes—and “culinary precisions”—the technical details of a recipe. Thus, a program for molecular gastronomy emerged: first, to model recipes, or culinary definitions; second, to collect and test culinary precisions; third, to scientifically explore the artistic component of cooking; and, finally, to scientifically explore the social aspects of cooking.
In giving a name to the new study, Kurti and This looked to the definition of gastronomy given by Anthelme Brillat-Savarin, author of Physiologie du goût (1825; The Physiology of Taste): “the intelligent knowledge of whatever concerns man’s nourishment.” The adjective molecular was added to further define that branch of science, which includes elements of physics, chemistry, and biology.
Beginning in 1988, research teams were established in the field of molecular gastronomy at universities in several countries—including France, the Netherlands, Ireland, Denmark, Italy, Spain, and the United States—and the number of such nations continued to increase, reaching more than 30 in the early 21st century. New research laboratories were being created often for scientific research or for university education. Educational initiatives were also introduced within the main framework of physical chemistry education, such as the Experimental Cuisine Collective, launched in 2007 at New York University. Molecular gastronomy was shown to be an excellent educational tool, allowing students in chemistry, physics, and biology to observe and understand the practical use of the theories that they learned. In fall 2010 Harvard University debuted a new course on science and cooking taught in part by Catalan chef Ferran Adrià.
Among many other results, in 2002 a formalism now called “disperse systems formalism” (DSF) was introduced in order to describe the organization and material of food in particular but also of all formulated products (including drugs, cosmetics, and paintings), and new analytic methods were introduced for the study of the transformation of foods either in isolation or in aqueous solutions such as broths and stocks.
Molecular gastronomy has famous ancestors. These include 18th-century chemist Claude-Joseph Geoffroy, who studied essential oils in plants; 18th-century French chemist Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier, who studied meat stock and is celebrated as one of the founders of modern chemistry; American-born British physicist Sir Benjamin Thompson, count von Rumford, who developed modern theories regarding heat and was also interested in meat cooking; German chemist Friedrich Christian (Fredrick) Accum, whose A Treatise on Adulterations of Food and Culinary Poisons (1820) raised awareness of food safety; and 19th-century French chemist Michel-Eugène Chevreul, who analyzed the chemical composition of animal fats. In the 20th century, French microbiologist Édouard de Pomiane published best-selling books on cooking, notably the influential La Cuisine en dix minutes; ou, l’adaptation au rhythme moderne (1930; French Cooking in Ten Minutes; or, Adapting to the Rhythm of Modern Life), though some criticized the work for confusing science, technology, and technique.
Molecular gastronomy developed very quickly after its creation in 1988, but about 1999 it was determined that different names had to be applied to distinguish the scientific activity on the one hand from the culinary enterprise on the other. The name molecular cooking (and its variations molecular cookery) was introduced to refer to the kind of technologically oriented way of cooking that was developed by some of the world’s top chefs. Proposed just before 2000, this new terminology gained momentum, and by 2010 it was established that the term molecular gastronomy should only be used to designate the scientific discipline that investigates the mechanisms of phenomena that occur during culinary transformation, whereas the term molecular cooking and its variations should be used to describe the culinary trend in which chefs use “new” tools, ingredients, and methods developed through research in molecular gastronomy. Molecular cuisine is used for designating a culinary style using the new techniques.
Yet the use of the word new in itself was problematic. Tools such as laboratory filters (for clarification), decanting bulbs (used in skimming stocks), vacuum evaporators (for making extracts), siphons (for producing foams), and ultrasonic probes (for emulsions) were not new in chemistry laboratories. Gelling agents such as carrageenan, sodium alginate, and agar were certainly not entirely new in the food industry. Liquid nitrogen (used to make sherbets and to flash freeze almost anything) had been proposed for use in the kitchen as early as 1907. None of those tools or ingredients, however, was present in cookbooks as recently as the 1980s. Indeed, it was an objective of Kurti and This to rationalize culinary activity as well as to modernize it (for example, to improve the efficiency of some traditional heating systems, in which the energy loss regularly reached 80 percent).
Molecular cooking was perfected by such noted chefs as Adrià and Andoni Luis Aduriz in Spain, Denis Martin in Switzerland, Ettore Bocchia in Italy, Alex Atala in Brazil, René Redzepi in Denmark, Sang-Hoon Degeimbre in Belgium, Heston Blumenthal in the United Kingdom, and, much later, Thierry Marx in France.
In the United States, Fritz Blank, a former clinical microbiologist, opened the Philadelphia restaurant Deux Cheminées (closed 2007). At his restaurant wd~50 (closed 2014) in New York City, Wylie Dufresne invented such singular creations as deep-fried mayonnaise and noodles made with protein (such as shrimp) instead of flour. In Chicago chefs Homaru Cantu at Moto and Grant Achatz at Alinea devised such innovations as edible ink and paper and dishes nestled on aromatic pillows, respectively. Even chefs who did not specialize in molecular cooking introduced into their menus spherification (liquids that create their own spherical “skin” through gelling agents), culinary foams (popularized by Adrià), and flash-frozen popcorn balls, among other concoctions.
The spread of molecular gastronomy inspired various trends, notably “note-by-note cooking,” which was introduced by Hervé This in the mid-1990s and gained popularity in the ensuing decades. This style uses only pure compounds—such as water, ethanol, and glucose—rather than traditional food ingredients (plants and animals). It is for food the equivalent of synthetic music.
