Offal, also called variety meats,  any of various nonmuscular parts of the carcasses of beef and veal, mutton and lamb, and pork, which are either consumed directly as food or used in the production of other foods. Variety meats have been a part of the human diet since the invention of cooking, which rendered the otherwise indigestible animal parts edible. In nutritional terms, several variety meats are richer in certain vitamins, minerals, and forms of protein than muscle tissue; calf’s liver, for example, is a major dietary source of iron, and sweetbread (thymus) is considerably higher in the water-soluble protein albumin than is beef.
Beef offal includes the stomachs, tripe, or large stomach, brains, heart, liver, tongue, and kidneys. For young beef, or veal, a number of additional parts, such as spinal marrow, trotters (feet), mesentery, and the sweetbread, are counted among the variety meats. Mutton and lamb offal includes the kidneys, tongue, brains, feet, stomach, heart, liver, and lights, or lungs. In pork, the designation includes the liver, kidneys, brains, trotters, and head. Pigs’ intestines are used as containers in the manufacture of sausages, and pigs’ blood is an ingredient in black pudding.
The variety meats figure prominently across the full spectrum of Western cuisine. Some offal, notably the brains, liver, tripe, lights, and trotters, have long been associated in the United States with rural cookery, with pork intestines, or chitterlings, being considered perhaps an archetypal fare of the rural poor. In this context, the parts are typically prepared by boiling or frying and served highly seasoned. Several of the same foods, such as calf’s liver for frying and jellied tripe and pickled beef tongue for use as cold cuts, are routinely stocked in the average urban food store; other variety meats are generally available by special order. In the haute cuisine of Europe, variety meats form the basis of numerous classic dishes, such as tripe à la mode de Caen and grilled sweetbreads.
