Olive oil,  oil extracted from the fleshy part of the ripened fruit of the olive tree, Olea europaea. Olive oil varies in colour from clear yellow to golden; some varieties obtained from unripe fruit have a greenish tinge. Oils of varying characteristics and qualities are produced by almost every country that grows olives, the variations depending on the district and the ripeness of the fruit.
Pure olive oil is used largely for culinary purposes and in the preservation of foods, particularly canned fish. It is also used in the textile industry for wool combing, in the manufacture of toilet preparations and cosmetics, in the pharmaceutical industry for medicinal purposes, in the manufacture of high-quality castile soap, and as a lubricant.
Most of the world supply of olive oil is produced in the countries of the Mediterranean Basin, but some is produced in California, South America, and Australia. Leading producers include Spain, Italy, Greece, and Tunisia. While some of the oil produced in the Mediterranean Basin is consumed there, a significant portion of it is exported.
The ripe olive fruit with the pit removed contains 20 to 30 percent oil, depending on the climate and care in cultivation. Olive oils obtained from the first mechanical pressing without further treatment are called virgin, and their quality depends on the state of the fruit. Only oils from the best fruit are fit for consumption without further treatment. They are rarely exported without treatment, but they may be used as the basis for export oil or may be consumed locally. The crushing apparatus used to express the oil varies from simple Roman presses, consisting of conical stones operated by mule or by hand, to modern hydraulic presses. To prevent the formation of free fatty acids, the best quality edible oil must be removed from the pulp as soon as possible. After an initial pressing, the residual pulp is pressed again with hot water, and from this second pressing, oil is obtained that has a higher acid content. This oil, together with inferior virgin oils, constitutes the oil called lampante, because of its use as fuel in lamps. Lampante is further refined to remove acid, colour, and odour and is sold as refined olive oil, which is used largely for mixing with first-extraction oils to produce edible products. Edible olive oil contains little free fatty acid; most export oils do not exceed 1 percent.
Olive oil is broadly classified into four grades: (1) extra virgin, oil derived from first pressings that possesses excellent taste and odour and has a free fatty acid content, expressed as oleic acid, of not more than 0.8 grams per 100 grams; (2) virgin, oil derived from first pressings that possesses good taste and odour and has a free fatty acid content of not more than 2.0 grams per 100 grams; (3) pure, or edible, a mixture of refined and virgin; (4) refined, or commercial, refined lampante. Olive oil is sometimes mixed with other vegetable oils, but this is not legal in all countries; in some countries, it constitutes fraud. Adulteration can be detected by chemical analysis.
Olive oil is a central component of the so-called Mediterranean diet, which is considered to be especially beneficial for cardiovascular health. Olive oil is rich in antioxidants, including polyphenols, and in healthy monounsaturated fatty acids. Studies of olive oil have shown that its consumption in the diet, particularly in the form of extra-virgin olive oil, is associated with lowered risk of cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus and with reductions in brain inflammation and amyloid-beta plaque formation, which are characteristic of Alzheimer disease. Studies in animals have shown that a diet rich in olive oil can in fact help protect against memory loss and learning impairment associated with dementia.
