Preservative,  in foods, any of numerous chemical additives used to prevent or retard spoilage caused by chemical changes, such as oxidation or the growth of mold. Along with emulsifying and stabilizing agents, preservatives also help to maintain freshness of appearance and consistency. See also emulsifier.
Preservatives are of various types that are suited to certain products and are effective against specific chemical changes. Antimycotics inhibit the growth of molds in products such as fruit juice, cheese, bread, and dried fruit; examples are sodium and calcium propionate and sorbic acid. Antioxidants (e.g., butylated hydroxytoluene, or BHT) retard the development of rancidity produced by oxidation in margarine, shortening, and a variety of foods containing fats and oils. Antibiotics such as the tetracyclines are used to prevent the growth of harmful bacteria in poultry, fish, and canned foods. Humectants, substances that absorb moisture, help to retain the moisture content in such products as shredded coconut.
In addition to retarding spoilage, some preservatives have an aesthetic role—that is, they improve the appearance of the product. An example of one such preservative is sodium nitrate (or its nitrite form), controversial because of its association with the formation of an alleged carcinogen. Nitrate and nitrite are used in the curing of meats to prevent the development of botulism-causing bacteria; they also impart the reddish colour characteristic of ham, bacon, and luncheon meats. Opponents of these additives argue that modern sanitation and refrigeration eliminate the need for chemical preservatives. Industry representatives defend their use for cosmetic reasons, pointing out that the natural brownish colour of these meats would be unappetizing.
Preservatives used to maintain moisture and softness in baked goods are known as antistaling agents (e.g., glyceryl monostearate). These substances are thought to act by preventing water loss from starches.
For a discussion of food-preserving methods, see food preservation.
