Raspberry,  bramble fruit of the genus Rubus (family Rosaceae). Raspberries are an economically significant crop throughout much of northern Europe, as well as in the United States and Canada, and are thought to have evolved in eastern Asia. Raspberry fruits contain iron, vitamin C, and antioxidants and are usually eaten fresh, often with cream or ice cream, as a dessert fruit. Jams and jellies are also popular, and the fruit is commonly used as a pastry filling and as a flavouring for certain liqueurs.
Raspberries are perennial plants with canes that live two years each. The canes are either armed with prickles or smooth, and many only produce fruit in their second year. Often reaching more than 1.8 metres (6 feet), the canes bear compound leaves with three or more toothed leaflets, depending on the species or cultivar. The leaf undersides are characteristically white to gray in colour and often hairy. The white to pink flowers have five petals and produce juicy red, purple, or black (rarely orange, amber, or pale yellow) fruit. The core of the delicate fruit remains on the plant when picked, unlike that of the blackberry. Though they are commonly called “berries,” the fruit is technically an aggregate of drupelets (small drupes), each of which contains a single seed.
Most commercial red raspberries are cultivars or hybrids of Rubus idaeus and R. strigosus. Two North American species of black raspberry (R. occidentalis and R. leucodermis) are also grown commercially in some areas, though production is limited. Raspberry plants are fairly resistant to disease and pests but must be staked or trellised to control their wild growth. Red varieties are usually propagated by suckers (adventitious shoots) from the roots of the parent plant, though leaf or root cuttings are also used for rapid increase of new varieties. Black and purple varieties have arched canes and are propagated by tip layers, the tips of the shoots being buried about 50 mm (2 inches) deep in late summer and the rooted tips being dug in early spring.
