Rye,  (Secale cereale), also called cereal rye or winter rye,  cereal grass (family Poaceae) and its edible grain that is chiefly used to make rye bread and rye whiskey. It is high in carbohydrates and dietary fibre and provides small quantities of protein, potassium, and B vitamins. Rye is also used as livestock feed, as a pasture plant, and as a green manure crop that is plowed under to improve the soil. Its tough fibrous straw can be used for thatching, mattresses, hats, and paper.
Rye is a fast-growing annual with long linear leaves. It can reach heights of 1 to 2 metres (3.3 to 6.6 feet), depending on the variety. Its small florets (reduced flowers) are wind-pollinated and are borne in dense spikes; they develop into one-seeded fruits, or grains, with long awns (bristles). The plant is highly susceptible to the ergot fungus, which if ingested by humans and other animals can result in serious acute or chronic illness known as ergotism.
Rye cultivation probably originated in southwestern Asia about 6500 bce, migrating westward across the Balkan Peninsula and over Europe. Modern rye is grown extensively in Europe, Asia, and North America. It is mainly cultivated where climate and soil are relatively unfavourable for other cereals and as a winter crop where temperatures are too cool for winter wheat. The plant, which thrives in high altitudes, has the greatest winter hardiness of all small grains, growing as far north as the Arctic Circle.
Rye contains gluten and is the only cereal other than wheat that has the necessary qualities to make a loaf of bread, though it is inferior to wheat for that purpose and lacks elasticity. Because of its dark colour, a loaf made entirely from rye flour is often called black bread. The lighter-coloured rye breads popular in Europe and the United States contain admixtures of wheat or other flours in addition to rye. Pumpernickel, a dark brown bread made wholly from unsifted rye flour, was a staple food in central and eastern Europe for centuries.
