sake, also spelled saké,  Japanese alcoholic beverage made from fermented rice. Sake is light in colour, is noncarbonated, has a sweet flavour, and contains about 14 to 16 percent alcohol.
Sake is often mistakenly called a wine because of its appearance and alcoholic content; however, it is made in a process known as multiple parallel fermentation, in which a grain (rice) is converted from starch to sugar followed by conversion to alcohol. Special strains of rice are precisely milled to remove the outer layers, a process that reduces the grain to 50 to 70 percent of its original size.
Production begins with kome-koji, a preparation of steamed rice and koji (Aspergillus oryzae), a fungus that converts the rice starch to fermentable sugars. The koji is mixed with water and fresh steamed rice, traditionally by hand, and is wrapped in a blanket and incubated to form a sweet crumbly dry material. This is then placed in a vat with more rice and water. This mixture, allowed to ferment for about four weeks with sake yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), becomes moto, with an alcoholic content of about 11 percent. More koji, steamed rice, and water are added to the vat, and a second fermentation begins, lasting about seven days. Throughout this process, the grain remains in a single vat, which distinguishes sake fermentation from fermentation processes for other types of alcohol, including beer. After resting for another week, the sake is filtered, pasteurized, and bottled. Alcohol may be added to the desired level.
In Japan, where it is the national beverage, sake is served with special ceremony. Before being served, it is warmed in a small earthenware or porcelain bottle called a tokkuri; it is usually sipped from a small porcelain cup called a sakazuki. Premium sake, of a delicate flavour, is served cold or on ice. Sake is best when consumed less than a year after bottling.
The manufacture of sake began sometime after the introduction of wet rice cultivation in Japan in the 3rd century bce. The first written record referring to sake dates from the 3rd century ce, and the first reference to its manufacture dates from the 8th century. In ancient Japan sake was produced primarily by the imperial court and by large temples and shrines, but from the early 12th century the general population began to manufacture it. By the early 16th century the modern process for making sake had been nearly perfected. The scarcity of rice during World War II, however, led manufacturers to add distilled alcohol to the rice mash, which had the unintended effect of significantly increasing sake production, enabling manufacturers to more easily meet demands. Sake made with the addition of alcohol became common thereafter.
Sake is the drink of the kami (gods) of Shintō, the indigenous Japanese religion. It is drunk at festivals and is included in offerings to the kami. At a Shintō wedding the bridal couple perform a ceremony of drinking sake from lacquer cups.
