seafood,  edible aquatic animals, excluding mammals, but including both freshwater and ocean creatures. Most nontoxic aquatic species are exploited for food by humans. Even those with toxic properties, such as certain blowfish, can be prepared so as to circumvent harm to the consumer.
Fish and other seafood may be humanity’s most important food, after cereals, furnishing about 15 percent of the world population’s protein intake. Lean fish muscle provides 18–25 percent protein by weight, the equivalent of beef or poultry, but is much lower in calories. In fish one gram of protein is present for 4 to 10 calories, as contrasted with 10–20 calories per protein gram for lean meats and up to 30 for fatty meats.
Seafood comprises all bony fishes and the more primitive sharks, skates, rays, sawfish, sturgeons, and lampreys; crustaceans such as lobsters, crabs, shrimps, prawns, and crayfish; mollusks, including clams, oysters, cockles, mussels, periwinkles, whelks, snails, abalones, scallops, and limpets; the cephalopod mollusks—squids, octopuses, and cuttlefish; edible jellyfish; sea turtles; frogs; and two echinoderms—sea urchins and sea cucumbers.
The most commercially important ocean fish are species of salmon, herring, codfish, flatfish (flounder, sole, halibut, turbot), redfish (ocean perch), jack mackerel, tuna, mackerel, and sardine. Major species of freshwater fish are carp, eel, trout, whitefish, pike, pike perch, and catfish. The catch ranges in size from whitebait and baby eels, both about 5 cm (2 inches) long, to bluefin tuna, up to 4.3 metres (14 feet) in length.
Because fish spoils quickly and is thus highly perishable, for most of history the majority of the catch has been dried, smoked, salted, pickled, or fermented when not eaten fresh. Even when these practices are no longer strictly necessary for preservation, the distinctive alterations in taste that they produce have cultivated a continuing demand for fish preserved in these ways.
Fish are cooked whole or cut into steaks, fillets, or chunks. Crustaceans are usually cooked whole, alive, as are most mollusks. Larger, tougher mollusks are ground or sliced and pounded to tenderize the tough flesh. Much seafood is eaten uncooked, either completely raw or somewhat modified by marination.
In addition to flesh, the roe of fishes and some shellfish and the eggs of turtles are eaten. Caviar, the roe of sturgeon, is now synonymous with luxury but was relatively cheap and common until the latter part of the 19th century, when worldwide sturgeon stocks began to decline rapidly.
A major consideration in cooking fish or shellfish is to avoid overcooking. The rule of thumb is that fish should be cooked 10 minutes per inch, measured through the thickest part of the fish, with an additional 5 minutes required if the fish is cooked in a sauce. The time should be doubled for frozen fish.
The repertory of fish cookery worldwide is immense. Fish may be poached, sautéed, broiled, baked, deep-fried, steamed, or eaten raw. Seafood, often in combination, forms the basis of many savoury stews, soups, chowders, gumbos, and bisques. In general, the more delicate and lean seafoods are prepared with milder seasonings and sauces, while those that are more robust in flavour, with coarser or fattier flesh, receive more pronounced seasoning.
