Texas barbecue, also called Texas BBQ,  seasoned smoked meats—specifically beef brisket, pork ribs, and sausage—associated with Texas. Texas barbecue has a number of influences, including the meat-smoking techniques of 19th-century immigrants from Germany and Czechoslovakia who settled in the central part of the state.
Barbecued beef brisket starts as a tough cut of meat from the breast or chest of a cow. It is then rubbed with salt and coarse pepper (occasionally with cayenne and garlic as well) and slowly smoked, traditionally over oak in central Texas but sometimes over charcoal. The brisket is cooked over indirect heat for 6 to 24 hours, until the exterior “bark” is well blackened atop a telltale pink “smoke ring” (a prized feature in barbecued meats) and the interior’s connective tissue and collagen are tenderized, resulting in a marbled meat both fatty and flavourful. It is a simple process that nonetheless requires skill on the part of the person preparing the meat, who is known as the pit master or grill master. Brisket is also used in another Texas dish, the BBQ beef sandwich, in which the “burnt ends” of the meat are chopped, slathered with a sweet or spicy sauce, topped with onions, and served on a bun.
Pork ribs and sausage are the two other smoked meats that comprise the trinity of Texas barbecue. Pork ribs—generally spare ribs—are smoked just enough so that the meat is moist but not “fall off the bone” tender, with a blackened skin and rich smoky flavour. Texas smoked sausages, generally beef or a beef-pork mix and frequently homemade, are often served whole with the string still tied to their ends, from which they are dangled above the pit. Sometimes flavours are added to the sausage, such as cheese and jalapeño.
In Texas, sauce is generally served only on the side (if at all) so as not to distract from the meats. To that end, sliced brisket, pork ribs, and smoked sausage are traditionally served on butcher paper, with sides and condiments offered separately.
