Trans fat, also called trans fatty acid or partially hydrogenated fat,  fat produced from the industrial process of hydrogenation, in which molecular hydrogen (H2) is added to vegetable oil, thereby converting liquid fat to semisolid fat.
The synthesis of hydrogenated compounds originated in the 1890s, when French chemist Paul Sabatier discovered that metal catalysts could be used to precipitate hydrogenation reactions. (Sabatier, for his discoveries concerning catalysts, shared the 1912 Nobel Prize for Chemistry with French chemist Victor Grignard.) In 1901 German chemist Wilhelm Normann experimented with hydrogenation catalysts and successfully induced the hydrogenation of liquid fat, producing semisolid fat, which came to be known as trans fat. This process, for which Normann received a patent in 1903, was eagerly adopted by food manufacturers. Products containing unsaturated fats were susceptible to rancidity upon exposure to air, resulting in a short shelf life. Therefore, a stable form of unsaturated fat had the potential to significantly extend the shelf life and value of a variety of foods. The first food product developed that contained trans fat was Crisco vegetable shortening, introduced in 1911 by Procter & Gamble Company.
Hydrogenation was important particularly in the production of margarine, which was used in place of butter when the latter was rationed during World War II. In the following decades, the use of hydrogenation to stabilize the shelf life of food products grew rapidly. By the 1980s, many food manufacturers and restaurants had stopped using tallow and lard, replacing these fats with trans-fat based products, which had similar smoke points and were thought to be healthier.
Liquid fat, such as vegetable oil, is made up of molecules of unsaturated fatty acids. Unsaturated fats contain chains of hydrocarbons connected by one or more double bonds. The hydrocarbon chains lie in the same plane of the molecule, which forms a cis configuration (in this case, two chains form a “v” shape, with the double bond at the point of the “v”). Following hydrogenation, an unsaturated fat is modified into a different configuration that is characterized by a single twist in the centre of the molecule (forcing one side of the “v” to twist down). This twist places the chains of hydrocarbons connected by the double bond in opposite planes, and thus the molecule is described as having a trans configuration. The trans fat molecule is linear, and, with the exception of the twist in the centre, this structure resembles the linear form of a saturated fat. Thus, through hydrogenation, the liquid consistency of the unsaturated fat is transformed into a soft-solid form that is generally more pliable than the typical hard-solid consistency of a saturated fat.
Trans fats occur in a number of manufactured foods, including margarine, potato chips, pizza dough, and crackers. Because shortening often contains trans fats, baked foods—such as pie crusts, cookies, and doughnuts—usually contain trans fats. These fats are also found in deep-fried foods, such as french fries and fried chicken. In some countries, nutrition labels on packaged food products indicate the amount of trans fat contained in a single serving. In addition, packaged foods typically contain a list of ingredients; if “partially hydrogenated oil” is included in this list, then the food contains trans fat.
Although trans fats are not synthesized by animals, some microorganisms occurring in the guts of ruminants can synthesize trans fats through the process of biohydrogenation. These microorganism-produced trans fats are found in dairy products, such as cheese and butterfat, and in certain types of meat, including lamb and beef.
Concern over the health impacts of trans fats first emerged in the 1940s, and by the late 1950s scientists had demonstrated a clear link between the intake of saturated fat and heart disease. However, this link was contested by subsequent studies, which found that the consumption of fats was healthy. Confusion over which types of fat were healthy and which types were unhealthy resulted in numerous lengthy studies designed to identify the physiological effects of each type of fat. In the late 1980s, an association between high intake of saturated fat and increased risk of heart disease was firmly established. As a result, the consumption of trans fats soared, since they were used in favour of all products containing saturated fats, including lard and tallow. However, in the 1990s, evidence emerged indicating that trans fats carried a higher risk for heart disease than saturated fats.
The consumption of trans fats causes an increase in levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol. Increased LDL levels result in the accumulation of fat in blood vessels, which can lead to atherosclerosis, heart disease, and stroke. Trans fats also lower levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, which plays an important role in transporting cholesterol from cells and blood vessels to the liver, where cholesterol is metabolized for excretion. Levels of HDL are inversely correlated with the risk of heart disease, and therefore the depletion of HDL by trans fats increases the risk of cardiovascular disease. In addition, trans fats are associated with an increased risk of type II (adult-onset) diabetes mellitus.
In the early 2000s, health agencies in various countries worldwide recognized the need to introduce regulations controlling the amount of trans fats used in manufactured foods. Countries such as Denmark (2003) and Switzerland (2008), as well as cities (e.g., New York in 2006 and Calgary in 2008) and regional governments (e.g., California in 2008) have imposed trans-fat bans that permit only very small amounts of trans fats in certain foods and prohibit the use of nearly all trans-fat containing products in restaurants. Many restaurants have voluntarily stopped cooking with trans-fat products. For example, a number of fast-food restaurants, including Kentucky Fried Chicken, Taco Bell, Wendy’s, and McDonald’s, no longer cook with products containing trans fats.
Manufacturers of food products sold in countries such as the United States and Canada are required to list trans fats in the nutrition facts panel on prepackaged foods. In addition, trans fats contained in dietary supplements, such as energy bars, that are manufactured and sold in the United States must be listed on the product package when these fats are present in amounts exceeding 0.5 grams per serving. A food product in the United States is declared “trans-fat free” only when the trans fat content is below 0.5 grams per serving; in Canada the trans fat content must be below 0.2 grams per serving to earn this labeling.
The American Heart Association nutrition guidelines indicate that, based on a 2,000 calorie-a-day diet, only 20 calories from trans fats should be consumed per day. This translates to 2 grams of trans fat per day for the average adult. Because it is suspected that many people consume this amount of trans fat in naturally occurring forms in meat and dairy products, physicians have recommended that people not consume any manufactured product containing trans fats. Trans fats found naturally in meat and dairy products have not been associated with heart disease.
