abbreviation,  in communications (especially written), the process or result of representing a word or group of words by a shorter form of the word or phrase. Abbreviations take many forms and can be found in ancient Greek inscriptions, in medieval manuscripts (e.g., “DN” for “Dominus Noster”), and in the Qurʾān. But it was the so-called information explosion of the 20th century that made abbreviation a common practice in communication.
A major factor in the trend toward abbreviation is that of economy. Scientific studies indicate that a significant amount of all information in relatively long communications is redundant, and this knowledge makes abbreviation not only possible but convenient. Another factor in the development of abbreviations is the proliferation of new products and organizations that need to be named. Long descriptive terms can be shortened into mnemonic units. This is especially noticeable in Internet communication, particularly with e-mails, where a huge number of abbreviated forms came into use beginning in the 1990s. The need for speed in shorthand and the desire to avoid redundancy in codes makes abbreviation an important element in stenography and cryptography as well.
There are several important forms of abbreviation. One form entails representing a single word either by its first letter or first few letters (as “n” for “noun,” or “Co.” for “Company”), by its most important letters (as “Ltd.” for “Limited”), or by its first and last letters (as “Rd.” for “Road”). These abbreviations are usually spoken as the whole word they represent.
Truncation is especially common in popular speech, as, for example, “the Met” for “the Metropolitan Museum of Art” or “the Metropolitan Opera Association.” At the end of the 1990s, as people began sending text messages with increasing frequency, the restricted space of mobile phone screens and the awkwardness of typing on a numerical keypad resulted in a new and highly truncated variety of language. A new set of abbreviations, often using first letters of the words in a colloquial phrase (as BTW for “by the way”) or using numbers to stand for sounds (as L8R for “later”), were combined with this truncation (as “sup” for “What’s up?”).
The combination of the first syllables or letters of component words within phrases or within names having more than one word is common and often produces acronyms, which are pronounced as words and which often cease to be considered abbreviations. An example of this type of abbreviation is the word flak (from German Fliegerabwehrkanone, “antiaircraft cannon”). Such combinations are especially common in the U.S. military, which has provided NORAD for “North American Aerospace Defense Command.” An example from the Soviet era is Narkomvneshtorg for “Narodny Komissariat Vneshney Torgovli” (Russian: “People’s Commissariate of Foreign Trade”). Other popular acronyms are the well-known radar (“radio detecting and ranging”) and snafu (“situation normal, all fouled up”).
Acronyms are to be distinguished from initialisms such as U.S.A. and NCAA, which are spoken by reciting their letters.
The symbolic notations used in mathematics and other sciences may also be regarded as forms of abbreviation.
