Adamántios Koraïs,  (born April 27, 1748, Smyrna, Anatolia [now İzmir, Turkey]—died  April 6, 1833, Paris, France), Greek humanist scholar whose advocacy of a revived classicism laid the intellectual foundations for the Greek struggle for independence. His influence on modern Greek language and culture was enormous.
Koraïs, the son of a merchant, studied medicine at the University of Montpellier, France, and in 1788 moved to Paris to pursue a literary career. His first works were editions of ancient medical writers, particularly Hippocrates, and the Characters of the philosopher Theophrastus. His main literary works were a 17-volume Library of Greek Literature, published between 1805 and 1826, and the 9-volume Parerga, published between 1809 and 1827. The Library included historical, political, philosophical, and scientific works by classical writers, for which he wrote prefaces in Modern Greek. He also edited the first four books of Homer’s Iliad.
Convinced that contemporary Greeks could find strength and unity only through a revival of their classical heritage, Koraïs made his writings an instrument for awakening his countrymen to the significance of that heritage for their national aspirations. His influence on the modern Greek language, and on Greek culture more broadly, has been compared to that of Dante on Italian and Martin Luther on German. Koraïs’s most enduring contribution was the creation of a new Greek literary language: purifying the vernacular (Demotic) of foreign elements, he combined its best elements with Classical Greek. His Atakta, composed between 1828 and 1835, was the first Modern Greek dictionary, and later Greek writers are indebted to him for his linguistic innovations.
A witness of the French Revolution, Koraïs took his primary intellectual inspiration from the Enlightenment, and he borrowed ideas copiously from the philosophers Thomas Hobbes, John Locke, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, as well as from the historian Edward Gibbon, whose thesis that a new classicism must arise after the passing of the Dark Ages particularly attracted him. As an advocate of secular liberalism, Koraïs thus rejected both the Orthodox Christian heritage of the Byzantine Empire and the liturgical language of the church as a basis for a new Greek language. Although his influence in the Greek world was strong, his religious skepticism alienated him from Greek patriots who saw the war of independence as a struggle to restore the primacy of the church over the Ottomans and to recapture Constantinople.
Koraïs remained in France throughout most of his life, and during the War of Greek Independence he wrote pamphlets, raised funds, and was one of the founders of the Paris Philhellenic Society. During the July revolution of 1830 in France, he suggested that the marquis de Lafayette, a hero of the American Revolution, be asked to assume the presidency of Greece.
