Berber languages, also called Amazigh languages,  family of languages in the Afro-Asiatic language phylum. As they are the most homogeneous division within Afro-Asiatic, the Berber languages have often been referred to as a single language in the past (especially in the tradition of French scholarship). Berber languages are spoken today by some 14 million people, mostly in scattered enclaves found in the Maghrib, a large region of northern Africa between Egypt’s Siwa Oasis and Mauretania. The heaviest concentration of Berber speakers is found in Morocco.
Major Berber languages include Tashelhit (Tashelhiyt, Tashelhait, Shilha), Tarifit, Kabyle, Tamazight, and Tamahaq. The family may also include extinct languages such as the Guanche languages of the Canary Islands, Old Libyan (Numidian), and Old Mauretanian, which are known from inscriptions but have not yet been studied thoroughly enough to make any affirmative generalizations about their linguistic characteristics. Another possible member is the language called Iberian, after whose speakers the Iberian Peninsula is named. An old consonantal alphabet (tifinagh) has survived among the Tuareg. It relates to the early Libyan inscriptions and the Phoenician quasi-alphabet.
Unlike some members of the Afro-Asiatic phylum, Berber languages are not tone languages. They do, however, include emphatic consonants (those formed deeply in the vocal tract), which occur in inherited words (such as ḍ and ẓ) and in the many loanwords from Arabic (such as ṣ). Pharyngeal consonants (those articulated at the back of the vocal tract with the pharynx), such as ḥ and ʿ (“ayn”), are found only in Arabic loanwords. Long consonants are quite common and are due to both gemination (doubling) and assimilation (i.e., when two adjacent but different consonants become identical in pronunciation, as with /b/ + /p/ in the English word “cupboard”).
The sound system is further complicated by the fact that different consonants and vowels may share some of their pronunciations, at times in relation to length. For example, w may be pronounced /w/ or /u/ when it is short but /ggW/, /kk/, or /bbW/ when it is long. There are three full vowels (a, i, and u). Groups of consonants are made pronounceable by prothesis or epenthesis (the insertion of a vowel at the beginning or in the middle of a word, respectively). Berber languages usually insert the vowel ə (“schwa”), which, however, is described as a full vowel for some varieties such as Southern Berber, Figuig, and, most recently, Siwi (in Egypt). These languages also have a system in which some consonants, called “weak radicals,” can be used as vowels depending on where they occur within the word; the weak radicals y and w, for instance, can become the vowels i and u.
Like many other Afro-Asiatic languages, Berber languages are characterized by a root and pattern system of morphology. In a root and pattern system, the basic lexical meaning of the word is manifested in the consonants alone; this consonantal skeleton is the “root.” The sequence of vowels interspersed among the consonants (the “pattern”) adds grammatical information and may modify the basic lexical meaning of the root. Patterns are sometimes combined with prefixes or suffixes. While the root and pattern system is operative in the Berber family, it is less regularized there than in the Semitic languages.
Berber nouns are distinguished by masculine and feminine gender and by two syntactic states, status absolutus and status annexus. Internal plurals are common, a practice demonstrated by the change from the pattern a-u- to i-a- in the root -ghy-l: aghyul ‘donkey’ and ighyal ‘donkeys.’ The suffix -(ə)n is also commonly used to make plurals, and both types of pluralization may combine, as in argaz ‘male’ and irgazən ‘males.’
Verbs and nouns derive from common roots; thus, *-k-r-s- (the asterisk * denotes a hypothetical construction from a proto-language), which connotes the general idea ‘tie/tying,’ can be made into the verb tə-kras ‘she ties’ as well as the noun t-akərris-t ‘knot.’ Alternations of vowels also govern the verb stems used in mood and aspect formations, which are often described as tenses. Thus, the verb ‘to find’ has the shape af in the aorist paradigm but has the two forms ufi and ufa (depending on the person and number of the subject) in the perfective aspect paradigm. Preverbal particles such as ad ‘future’ allow further differentiation of tenses, as in the Kabyle verb aď-y-af ‘he will find.’
In Berber languages the “habitual” stem uses derivative strategies known from other Afro-Asiatic languages, such as t(t)- to indicate iterative or repeated action. Habitual stems appear to have been widely integrated into the aspectual system as well, yielding forms such as the Kabyle aď yə-tt-af ‘he will keep finding.’ Infixes are used to denote position relative to the speaker, with the marker -d- indicating nearness or motion toward the speaker, while -n(n)- shows distance or motion away from the speaker. Derivational morphology, in which words are created from other words, is comparatively rare.
Basic word order is, quite likely, verb–subject–object, even though subject–verb–object is also frequently found in main clauses. Note, however, that it is generally possible to emphasize particular parts of the clause by moving them to clause-initial position.
