Australian Aboriginal languages,  family of some 200 to 300 Indigenous languages spoken in Australia and a few small offshore islands by approximately 50,000 people. Many of the languages are already extinct, and some are spoken by only dwindling numbers of elderly people, but a few are still vigorous. There is currently a resurgence of ethnic pride among Aboriginal peoples, and government programs that assist them in maintaining their languages and becoming literate in them have sprung up. Evidence of this ethnic and linguistic pride can be seen in the preference of many Indigenous Australians for the use of such self-designations as Koori (also spelled Koorie, meaning “person”) rather than the terms “Aborigine” and “Aboriginal,” which were imposed upon them (see Researcher’s Note: Britannica usage standards: Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait Islander peoples of Australia). Another linguistic trend is the use of a distinctive Aboriginal English (which might arguably be classified as a creole and is called Kriol) in some areas.
Australian Aboriginal languages are a unique language group, having no generally accepted genetic connections with non-Australian languages. (Despite its name, the Austronesian language family does not include Australian Aboriginal languages.) This uniqueness is probably the result of geographic isolation: archaeological evidence indicates that Australia has been inhabited for at least 40,000 years, and there is little sign of influxes of new inhabitants or even of extensive cultural contact with other Pacific peoples (except locally in the Torres Strait Islands, which are between northern Queensland and Papua New Guinea). Although Australian languages have a fairly clear grammatical and phonological profile, the great length of time over which they developed makes reconstructing Proto-Australian challenging.
Aboriginal peoples traditionally lived by hunting and gathering and were seasonally mobile, but, because each local clan was deeply attached to certain local sites of ritual importance, permanent population movements seem to have been gradual. The linguistic map of Australia reflects stepwise migrations rather than rapid military conquests and imperial expansions like those that established the linguistic landscapes of other continents. Language boundaries were marginal or irrelevant to political organization and were crosscut by kinship and marriage networks. In thinly populated areas, such as the Great Sandy Desert (Western Desert), chains of closely related dialects were spread over a wide area; in the more densely populated coastal and subcoastal areas, language boundaries were generally sharp, but multilingualism was common.
Estimates of the number of distinct Aboriginal languages at the time of European contact range from 200 to 300. A precise count is difficult, not only because of the problem of distinguishing dialects from languages but because many speech varieties became extinct before they could be systematically recorded, and they are known—if at all—from fragmentary and badly transcribed missionary word lists. A major collective effort to record the surviving languages began in the early 1970s, and fairly complete grammars or grammatical sketches of perhaps 100 languages are now available.
Most specialists agree that the languages of continental Australia are a genetic group. In the Torres Strait Islands one of the two languages is genetically Australian while the other is Papuan. Other languages, such as Tiwi and Anindilyakwa, spoken on small offshore islands, clearly belong to the Australian family. The language or languages of Tasmania were not extensively studied before their extinction; the meagre surviving lists of Tasmanian words show the characteristic Australian sound system, but the words themselves do not form demonstrable cognate sets with continental languages.
The major issue in the internal subgrouping of Australian languages is the relationship between the Pama-Nyungan group, which covers 90 percent of the continent, and the residual non-Pama-Nyungan cluster, which stretches across northernmost Australia (except Queensland). The Yuulngu group is a separate Pama-Nyungan enclave, isolated from the main block by intervening non-Pama-Nyungan languages, as indicated on the map. In classifications published between 1950 and 1975, Pama-Nyungan was identified as a genetic subfamily; but the remaining languages were divided into some 25 to 30 subfamilies, some with just a single language, each descending separately from Proto-Australian. As new data have become available, it has become clear that many (and possibly all) of these northern subfamilies are more closely related to each other than to Pama-Nyungan, and scholars now seriously entertain the possibility that non-Pama-Nyungan is a genuine genetic entity. Personal pronouns in particular seem to differentiate the two divisions, a feature that has been used to revise the eastern boundary of non-Pama-Nyungan.
Among the most convincing cognates linking Pama-Nyungan and non-Pama-Nyungan are a small set of monosyllabic verb stems that appear to be derived from a common element in an older language. In languages of both groups, these verbs have characteristic affixes: either single consonants, which are known as consonantal augments (as when *bu- ‘hit, kill’ becomes *bu-m); case suffixes, such as the dative case marker *-ku and the accusative case marker *-n(a); and personal pronouns, such as first person singular *ŋay. (In the examples given, the asterisk marks a form that is reconstructed as having existed in Proto-Australian.)
