Euthymius Of Tŭrnovo,   (born c. 1317—died c. 1402), Orthodox patriarch of Tŭrnovo, near modern Sofia, monastic scholar and linguist whose extensive literary activity spearheaded the late medieval renaissance in Bulgaria and erected the theological and legal bases for the Orthodox churches of Eastern Europe.
Bulgarian by birth, Euthymius joined the monastery of Kilifarevo, near modern Burgas, Bulg., where he became the leading disciple of Theodosius, whom he succeeded as spokesman for Hesychasm, the Byzantine movement of contemplative prayer. Characteristic of this school, Euthymius travelled to various monastic communities at Constantinople and Mt. Athos (northeastern Greece), practicing the ascetic discipline and working in a Greco-Slavic environment as a copyist of manuscripts and a writer. He returned to Bulgaria by 1371 and in 1375 was elected patriarch of Tŭrnovo and primate of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church but was forced into exile after the fall of Tŭrnovo to the Turks in 1393.
During his patriarchate Euthymius wrote much, including the translation and revision of the liturgical and legal codes of the Orthodox church into the formal Old Slavonic language, thus instituting a consistent and structured linguistic program based on specific cultural and theological principles. The Slavonic heritage bequeathed by the 9th-century Greek apostles to the Slavs, Cyril and Methodius, had grown obsolete. The original, single Slavonic tongue had splintered into distinct languages and dialects. Church Slavonic, however, had retained the grammatical and syntactical structure of the old 9th-century form and, by increasing divergence from the various Slavonic idioms, in effect had become a dead language. The biblical and liturgical texts, moreover, had grown ambiguous through a series of coarse revisions and had occasioned the spread of heretical sects, principally the dualistic Bogomils, who held that the visible, material world was created by the devil.
Euthymius’ reform followed his conviction that public morality and theological orthodoxy were essentially related to the accuracy and literary qualities of the sacred Scriptures. Thus he revived an international Old Slavonic with its Cyrillic grammar and written form but more intricately interwoven with the Greek rhetorical and emphatic style. Such a linguistic tool furthered his belief in a Slavic destiny as successor to the Byzantine church, culture, and political heritage.
Applying his Hesychast background, Euthymius made this monastic culture the energy source of his theological and literary reform. He emphasized its Byzantine conservatism in ritual and doctrine and prominently portrayed the role of the Holy Spirit in religious experience. Moreover, in Hesychast fashion he used the method of dramatic biographies of the leading Orthodox saints and early fathers as the vehicle for propagating correct doctrine and asceticism by interweaving theological reflections with the narrative. Thus, the Bulgarian monastic centres of Paroria and Kilifarevo and the monk missioners, both native Slav and Greek refugee scholars, carried the Euthymian reform throughout Eastern Europe.
