George Of Trebizond,   (born 1396, Candia, Crete [now Iráklion, Greece]—died  1486, Rome [Italy]), Byzantine humanist, Greek scholar, and Aristotelian polemist. His academic influence in Italy and within the papacy, his theories on grammar and literary criticism, and his Latin translations of ancient Greek works, although at times strongly criticized, contributed substantially to Italian humanism and the Renaissance.
Named for his family’s origin in Trebizond (now Trabzon in Turkey), on the Black Sea, George went to Italy as a youth and soon distinguished himself as a scholar, becoming professor of Greek at Vicenza in 1420 and at Venice in 1433. He eventually succeeded to the literary primacy of the humanist scholar Francesco Filelfo (1398–1481). Hearing of his reputation, Pope Eugenius IV invited him to Rome as his private secretary and to join the faculty of philosophy at the Sapienza academy. In the course of his criticism of the classical Latin rhetorician Quintilian (1st century ad), George incurred the wrath of the Roman humanist Lorenzo Valla. Harsh contention intensified over his hurried translations of Aristotle’s Rhetoric and The History of Animals, Plato’s Laws, Ptolemy’s Almagest, and various tracts from the Greek Church Fathers, resulting in errors and linguistic deformities. Such lapses in scholarship cost him the patronage of Pope Nicholas V (1447–55) and forced him to leave Rome in 1453. On his final return in 1466, the ferocity of criticism mounted as the Platonists Gemistus Plethon and Cardinal Bessarion attacked George’s assertions of the superiority of Aristotle’s realism over Plato’s idealist theory of knowledge. Significant success, however, came when George published, in 1471, a radically revised Latin grammar in which he abandoned the medieval method for the purer form of the 6th-century Latinist Priscian. An earlier work on rhetoric based largely on Aristotelian and later Greek principles attained lasting recognition, even from his critics, who admitted to the erudition and brilliance of his vast oeuvre.
