Gothic language,  extinct East Germanic language spoken by the Goths, who originally lived in southern Scandinavia but migrated to eastern Europe and then to southern and southwestern Europe. The language is especially important for the study of the history of the Germanic language family because its records, except for a few scattered runic inscriptions, antedate those of the other Germanic languages by about four centuries. Gothic occurred in two dialects: Ostrogothic (in eastern Europe and later in Italy) and Visigothic (in east central Europe and later in Gaul and Spain), grouped according to tribes. Most of the modern knowledge of Gothic is derived from the remains of the translation of the Bible into Gothic that was made by Ulfilas in the 4th century ce for the Visigothic tribes living along the lower Danube. The surviving manuscripts are copies probably made in northern Italy during the period of Ostrogothic rule (493–554). The language died out among the Ostrogoths after the fall of their kingdom in Italy in the 6th century; in Spain it is doubtful whether or not Gothic survived among the Visigoths until the Arab conquest in 711.
Gothic has many archaic features, among which are dual number (a plural form expressing two persons or things as distinct from three or more), reduplication (repetition of part of a word) in one class of verbs, special vocative case forms in two classes of nouns, and passive voice forms in the verbs. These occur seldom, if at all, in the other Germanic languages that began to appear in writing several centuries later. Gothic also shows no trace of the umlaut found in the later Germanic languages.
Gothic persisted longer in Crimea than in Spain and Italy. In 1560–62 a Flemish diplomat, Augier Ghislain de Busbecq, then serving in Constantinople as the ambassador from Ferdinand I of Austria, collected a number of words and phrases from the Crimean Goths showing that their language was still essentially a form of Gothic.
As for the other East Germanic languages, little is known of Gepidic, Rugian, and Burgundian, but some knowledge of Vandalic and Ostrogothic, as well as Visigothic, is provided by the names recorded in Greek and Latin writings. See also Gothic alphabet.
