Gur languages, formerly Voltaic languages,  a branch of the Niger-Congo language family comprising some 85 languages that are spoken by approximately 20 million people in the savanna lands north of the forest belt that runs from southeastern Mali across northern Côte d’Ivoire, through much of Burkina Faso, to all of northern Ghana, Togo, and Benin. Moore, which is spoken by some five million people, is the most widely used language of the branch.
Most Gur languages fall into one of two groups: Central Gur and Senufo. Central Gur itself breaks down into two major subgroups, termed Oti-Volta (with some 25 languages in Ghana, Togo, Benin, and Burkina Faso) and Grusi (with a further 20 languages, some to the west and others to the east of the Oti-Volta group). The largest languages in the Oti-Volta group include Moore, the principal language of eastern Burkina Faso; Gurma (600,000); Gurenne (550,000); Dagbani, the principal language of northern Ghana (500,000); and Dagaari (450,000), spoken in northwestern Ghana. Among the Grusi languages, Kabiye (550,000) is widely spoken as a second language in northern Togo so that approximately 1,200,000 people use it.
The Senufo group, with some 20 languages, is situated to the west of the Central Gur group in northern Côte d’Ivoire, southwestern Burkina Faso, and southeastern Mali. Within this group are Senari (700,000), Mamara (500,000), and Supyire (400,000).
One characteristic of Gur languages is the widespread occurrence of syllabic nasals, which contrast in distribution with both consonantal nasals and nasalized vowels and occur only initially in the word, carrying their own tone and syllabic timing, as can be seen, for example, in the Dagbani words nzugu ‘my head’ and mbia ‘my child.’ Another characteristic of Gur languages is the presence of noun class systems—that is, systems in which every noun is marked by one of a set of affixes and other elements of the clause are also marked by an affix determined by the respective noun class. Also notable is the contrast between imperfective and perfective (expressing completed action) forms of the verb. There are tonal systems as well, which usually carry grammatical rather than lexical functions.
