Horatio Hale, in full Horatio Emmons Hale,  (born May 3, 1817, Newport, N.H., U.S.—died  Dec. 28, 1896, Clinton, Ont., Can.), American anthropologist, who made valuable linguistic and ethnographic studies of North American Indians. His major contribution is the influence he exerted on the development of Franz Boas, whose ideas came to dominate U.S. anthropology for about 50 years.
While a student at Harvard University (1833–37), Hale studied the language of some Algonquian-speaking Indians who camped on college land. His published results placed his linguistic research in an ethnological setting, thus establishing the pattern of his later work. Following graduation he joined Charles Wilkes’s surveying and charting expedition that went around the world (1838–42). Reaching Oregon Territory near the end of the voyage, he studied the languages of Indians of the Northwest. He also gathered a substantial amount of linguistic data in Polynesia, which appears in his Ethnology and Philology: United States Exploring Expeditions (1846).
In 1856 Hale entered legal practice at Clinton, Ont., and for the next 20 years was engaged primarily with his practice. In the late 1860s, however, he began collecting traditional Iroquois literature from the Six Nations Reserve, Brantford, Ont. Those collections are the basis of his major contribution to the literature of anthropology. Hale considered linguistic evidence to be superior to racial data for establishing ethnological relations among existing groups. Among his linguistic achievements was a demonstration that the Wyandot Huron language is the oldest form of Iroquoian. His most important work, The Iroquois Book of Rites (1883), summarizes much of his research and reconstructs the later prehistory of the tribes of the Six Nations.
In the early 1890s Hale chose Franz Boas to conduct fieldwork among the Northwest Coast Indians for the British Association for the Advancement of Science. He not only provided Boas with material support but also corresponded with him regularly, offering guidelines and advice that Boas incorporated into his field approach to general anthropology.
