Kana,  in the Japanese writing system, two parallel modern syllabaries (katakana and hiragana), each of which independently represents all the sounds of the Japanese language. Although each syllabary is based on elements from the ideograms (or characters) of the Chinese writing system (called kanji in Japanese), the two serve different purposes and differ stylistically.
Katakana symbols consist of components of kanji and tend to be angular in shape. They are most commonly used to transliterate foreign words and in telegrams and some children’s books. In addition, they often are employed for advertising headlines in print media and television and billboards and for use in electronic media, such as e-mail and text messages.
Hiragana, a cursive, graceful writing system, is composed of symbols derived by modifying portions of kanji. It flourished as a literary script beginning in about 1000 ce, particularly among the ladies of the imperial court in Heian (now Kyōto), when it came to be called onna-de (“woman’s hand”). The syllabary is used in modern Japanese primarily to perform grammatical functions. That need arises because the kanji used extensively in written Japanese as nouns and verb stems cannot of themselves express the inflected forms of the Japanese language; hiragana symbols indicate inflection and possession, identify direct objects of sentences and phrases, and perform other grammatical functions. Prepositions and many adjectives and common phrases are nearly always written in hiragana, as are numerous frequently used single words. A typical passage of Japanese writing, therefore, contains kanji, hiragana, and perhaps also katakana.
Each kana syllabary consists of 46 basic symbols, the first five of which represent the vowels a, i, u, e, o. The next 40 symbols represent syllables composed of an initial consonant (or consonants) followed by a vowel, e.g., ka, shi, fu, te, yo. The final symbol represents a final n (sometimes m). Additional sounds are represented by slightly modifying 20 of the basic katakana or hiragana symbols; that is done by placing nigori, a tiny circle or two small strokes resembling quotation marks, at the upper right-hand corner of the kana symbol. In that way 25 new sound symbols are produced; e.g., ka becomes ga, shi becomes ji, fu becomes bu or pu, te becomes de, and so becomes zo.
Further sounds are represented by combining syllables. The long vowel sound (rendered in romanized script with a macron over the vowel) is written by adding one of the vowel symbols to a consonant-vowel kana. Examples include ku combined with u and pronounced kū, or ne combined with e and pronounced nē. Other modifications involve adding the ya, yu, and yo symbols as a subscript to a consonant-vowel kana. Some examples are ki and ya, pronounced kya, and shi and yu, pronounced shu. The vowel sounds on those three subscript kana can be lengthened by adding as a second subscript the corresponding vowel symbol (e.g., shi and yu plus u  produce shū).
