Karl Brugmann, in full Friedrich Christian Karl Brugmann,  (born March 16, 1849, Wiesbaden, Nassau [Germany]—died  June 29, 1919, Leipzig, Ger.), German linguist who gained a position of preeminence in comparative Indo-European linguistics during the late 19th and early 20th centuries as a result of his comprehensive and still-authoritative research in this field.
Brugmann was the central figure of the Junggrammatiker, or Neogrammarians, who in the 1870s rejected a doctrinaire approach to language science, asserted the inviolability of phonetic laws, and adhered to strict research methodology. His own contribution to establishing the ascendancy of the Neogrammarian position was the publication of a highly original study of nasal sounds (1876). The first volume of Morphologische Untersuchungen (1878; “Morphological Investigations”), edited by Brugmann and Hermann Osthoff (1847–1919), contained his statement of the Neogrammarian views. In 1891 he founded, with Wilhelm Streitberg, the journal Indogermanische Forschungen (“Indo-European Researches”).
During most of his professional life (1887–1919), Brugmann was professor of Sanskrit and comparative linguistics at the University of Leipzig. An enormously productive researcher, a keenly perceptive original investigator, and a vigorous defender of theoretical principles, he came to be the greatest synthesist among the Indo-European grammarians of his time. Of his 400 publications, the work on which his fame most securely rests is the two volumes on sounds and forms he prepared for the Grundriss der vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen Sprachen, 5 vol. (1886–93; Outline of the Comparative Grammar of the Indo-Germanic Languages). The three volumes on syntax were prepared by Berthold Delbrück. A second, greatly enlarged edition was issued between 1897 and 1916. Not only has the Grundriss remained probably the most authoritative grammar ever written, but it also stands as one of the great schemes of knowledge concerning the Indo-European languages.
