Korean language,  language spoken by more than 75 million people, of whom 48 million live in South Korea and 24 million in North Korea. There are more than 2 million speakers in China, approximately 1 million in the United States, and about 500,000 in Japan. Korean is the official language of both South Korea (Republic of Korea) and North Korea (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea). The two Koreas differ in minor matters of spelling, alphabetization, and vocabulary choice (including the names of the letters), but both essentially endorse the unified standards proposed by the Korean Language Society in 1933.
While much is known about Middle Korean, the language spoken in the 15th century (when the script was invented), information about the language before that time is limited. Several hundred words of early Middle Korean were written with phonograms in the vocabularies compiled by the Chinese as far back as 1103. A still earlier form of the language, sometimes called Old Korean, has been inferred from place-names and from the 25 poems (called hyangga) that were composed as early as the 10th century and reflect the language of the Silla kingdom. Written with Chinese characters used in various ways to stand for Korean meanings and sounds, the poems are difficult to decipher, and there is no consensus on the interpretation of the content.
Nor is there general agreement on the relationship of Korean to other languages. The most likely relationships proposed are to Japanese and to the languages of the Altaic group: Turkic, Mongolian, and especially Tungus (-Manchu-Jurchen).
When Korean words are cited in English and other languages they are transcribed in a variety of ways, as can be seen from the spellings seen for a popular Korean surname: I, Yi, Lee, Li, Ree, Ri, Rhee, Rie, Ni, and so on. For English speakers the most popular transcription is that of the McCune-Reischauer system, which writes words more or less as they sound to the American ear. Despite its clumsiness, McCune-Reischauer is the system used in this description, and following that system the common surname is written Yi; it sounds like the English name of the letter e. In citing sentences, many linguists prefer the Yale romanization, which more accurately reflects the Korean orthography and avoids the need for diacritics to mark vowel distinctions. For a comparison of the two systems, see the Table.
The writing system dates from 1443, and for many years it was known as Ŏnmun ‘vernacular script,’ though in South Korea it is now called Hangul (han’gŭl; or Hankul in the Yale romanization) and in North Korea Chosŏn kŭl(tcha), Chosŏn mun(tcha), or just Chosŏn mal ‘Korean.’ Very simple symbols are provided for each of the phonemes. Words can be spelled by putting these symbols one after another, as most writing systems do, but Koreans have preferred to group the symbols into square blocks like Chinese characters. The first element in the block is the initial consonant; if the syllable begins with a vowel, a small circle serves as a zero initial. What follows, either to the left or below (or both) is the vowel nucleus, which may be simple or complex (originally a diphthong or triphthong). An optional final element at the bottom (called patch’im) writes a final consonant or a cluster of two consonants. The 15th-century script had a few additional consonant letters that became obsolete in the following centuries and an additional vowel distinction that survived in the spellings until 1933; that vowel is usually transcribed as ă. On Cheju Island, where the distinction is maintained, the phoneme is pronounced [ɔ], very close to the modern Seoul version of the vowel transcribed ŏ, which in many parts of the country is still pronounced [ə]. That accounts for the first vowel of the usual spelling Seoul (= Sŏul), based on a French system of romanization, and for the use of the letter e to write ŏ in the Yale system.
The earlier language had a distinctive musical accent. In the far south and the northeast, the accent is still maintained as distinctions of pitch, vowel length, or a combination of the two. In the 15th century, low-pitched syllables were left unmarked but a dot was placed to the left of the high-pitched syllables and a double dot (like a colon) was put beside syllables that rose from low to high. The rising accent was maintained as vowel length in central Korea after the other distinctions eroded, but it, too, is vanishing in modern Seoul, even in initial syllables, where it has persisted longest. Like French, Seoul Korean no longer uses accent to distinguish words. The few apparent exceptions are due to intonation: nu-ga wassŏ (spoken with a rising pitch) ‘Did someone come?’, nu-ga wassŏ (spoken with a falling pitch) ‘Who came?’.
Koreans began putting spaces between words in 1896. As in English, judgment varies on what constitutes a word rather than a phrase. Earlier, Koreans wrote syllables as distinct blocks but failed to separate words. That was the Chinese tradition, which is still alive in Japan, where the mixture of kanji (Chinese characters) and kana (syllabic symbols based on kanji) helps the eye detect phrase breaks. The Chinese comma and period (a hollow dot) are commonly used, and modern punctuation marks have been taken from English.
Korean borrowed many words from Classical Chinese, including most technical terms and about 10 percent of the basic nouns, such as san ‘mountain’ and kang ‘river.’ The borrowed words are sometimes written in Chinese characters, though that practice is increasingly avoided except when the characters are used as aids in explaining technical terms.
Korean spelling is complicated. Words are usually written morphophonemically rather than phonemically, so that a given element is seen in a constant form, even though its pronunciation may vary when it is joined with other elements. For example, the word for ‘price’ is always spelled kaps though it is pronounced /kap/ in isolation and /kam/ in kaps-man ‘just the price.’ From the 15th century on there has been a steady trend toward ignoring predictable alternants.
All transcriptions of Korean include digraphs of one kind or another and use separators to distinguish a string of two letters in their separate values from their single value as a digraph. When no other mark (such as a hyphen or space) is in order, the McCune-Reischauer system uses the apostrophe to distinguish such pairs as hangŏ (= hang-ŏ) ‘resistance’ and han’gŏ (= han-gŏ, usually pronounced as if hang-gŏ) ‘a cloistered life.’
