Lahnda language, also called Lahndi or Western Punjabi,  group of Indo-Aryan dialects spoken in and around the western districts of Punjab province in Pakistan. The Punjabi word lahnda, literally meaning “west,” was first used in this sense by Irish linguist Sir George Grierson in the Linguistic Survey of India (1903–28) as a convenient label to distinguish these dialects, which he classified alongside Sindhi, from what he defined as the “Punjabi proper” of central and eastern Punjab, which he grouped with the neighbouring Western Hindi. Although the name Lahnda has never been adopted in local usage, it has continued to enjoy a certain currency in the linguistic literature, usually in the more natural feminine form Lahndi.
Over the years since Grierson first proposed his scheme, it has appeared increasingly questionable, both as a consequence of his own somewhat arbitrary selection of linguistic criteria to distinguish between related local varieties of Indo-Aryan speech and as a result of increasingly sharp disagreements over the classification of languages and dialects in the region. What Grierson termed “Southern Lahnda” has locally come to be called Siraiki. Under this label it has come to be increasingly recognized internationally as a language in its own right, although this claim continues to be disputed by many Punjabi speakers who regard it as a dialect of Punjabi.
The local varieties of Grierson’s “Northern Lahnda” are less homogeneous than Siraiki and have been less cultivated for writing. As yet, they have accordingly rather less claim to be recognized as any sort of separate language. When they are written, the Urdu script is used. They go by different local names, including Mirpuri in Azad Kashmir, Pothohari in the area around Rawalpindi, and Hindko in the northwestern districts of Pakistan’s Punjab province and the adjacent regions of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, where there is a historical pattern of diglossia with Pashto. Linguistically, those northern dialects may be broadly characterized as intermediate between Punjabi and Siraiki.
