National Theatre of the Deaf (NTD),  American theatre, established in 1965 and based in Waterford, Connecticut, that was the world’s first professional deaf-theatre company and was in the early 21st century the oldest continually producing touring-theatre company in the United States. The National Theatre of the Deaf has had a strong influence in the U.S. theatrical community; a large proportion of the country’s deaf theatre artists have trained there, and a number of NTD alumni started their own deaf-theatre companies across the country and abroad. NTD has also educated generations of hearing audiences about American Sign Language (ASL) and deaf culture, and it has provided intercultural experiences for both deaf and hearing audiences.
In the late 1950s Edna S. Levine, a psychologist and an expert in deafness as well as a supporter of deaf amateur performances, conceived the idea of a professional theatre company for deaf actors. She gained the support of actress Anne Bancroft, who had consulted Levine in connection with her role as Helen Keller’s teacher, Annie Sullivan, in the 1959 Broadway play The Miracle Worker. Support also came from the play’s director, Arthur Penn; another director, Gene Lasko; and Broadway set designer David Hays. Hays and Levine pursued federal funding with the assistance of faculty at Gallaudet University; Mary Switzer, an administrator of the U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (later Health and Human Services) and an accomplished advocate of rehabilitation for people with disabilities; and administrators of the Vocational Rehabilitation Administration. In 1965 the proposed theatre received its first federal grant, which enabled the formal establishment of NTD in 1967.
NTD began with a troupe of 12 actors in 1967, only one of whom had formal theatrical training. Thus, one of NTD’s aims was to provide stage training for actors, and it established its Professional Theatre School in its first year. The company gave its first public performance at Wesleyan University in Middletown, Connecticut, and its first permanent home was the Eugene O’Neill Theater Center in Waterford, Connecticut. It moved to Chester, Connecticut, in 1983 and to Hartford in 2000 before returning to the O’Neill in 2012.
In seeking to appeal to both deaf and hearing audiences, NTD developed a unique theatrical style that is a hybrid of corporeal and spoken languages. Hays recognized that the sculptural qualities of sign language theatre had the potential to revolutionize theatre aesthetics as a whole. In contrast to traditional Western theatre’s focus on spoken text and realistic acting styles, NTD’s performance style emphasizes the spatial and dancelike qualities of human communication. The resulting style blends the spoken word, ASL, sign-mime, invented theatrical sign language, music, and stylized individual and ensemble movement. NTD employs both deaf and hearing performers. Deaf performers most often portray main characters, with hearing actors located on the stage’s periphery voicing the main characters’ lines, a technique called shadowing.
During its early years, while the company was in the process of inventing its theatrical vocabulary, deaf members of the audience complained that the performance of the ASL in the productions was too quick and that invented signs were cryptic, hindering their intelligibility. Furthermore, deaf audiences also felt that the material was more often than not geared toward hearing audiences and that deaf cultural issues went unexplored. The fact that the company’s leadership was made up almost entirely of hearing people was another problem. To address those concerns, NTD began developing original work for deaf audiences about deaf culture. As deaf theatre artists became trained and experienced, they moved into leadership positions within the organization and took on more directing and design assignments. While the majority of NTD’s audiences has remained hearing (about 90 percent), the company has over the years dedicated portions of its season to work by, for, and about the deaf community.
The NTD repertoire includes adaptations of canonical dramatic literature (both Western and non-Western), children’s literature, poetry, letters, novels, and fables. The company’s work has appeared onstage, in film, and on television. NTD strives for cultural diversity, a goal furthered by exchanging company members with international deaf-theatre companies and the regular inclusion of international artists in its professional training programs.
Throughout its history, NTD has collaborated frequently with Gallaudet University faculty and students. Hearing-theatre luminaries who have worked with NTD include directors Peter Brook and Arvin Brown and such artists as Colleen Dewhurst, Bill Irwin, Marcel Marceau, Chita Rivera, Jason Robards, and Peter Sellers. In addition to its theatrical productions and professional school, NTD has included at different times a touring theatre for young audiences (Little Theatre of the Deaf, founded in 1968), workshops and demonstrations, such as one for deaf playwrights, and educational outreach programs. NTD has performed throughout the United States and around the world.
