Number symbolism,  cultural associations—including religious, philosophic, and aesthetic—with various numbers.
Humanity has had a love-hate relationship with numbers from the earliest times. Bones dating from perhaps 30,000 years ago show scratch marks that possibly represent the phases of the Moon. The ancient Babylonians observed the movements of the planets, recorded them as numbers, and used them to predict eclipses and other astronomical phenomena. The priesthood of ancient Egypt used numbers to predict the flooding of the Nile. Pythagoreanism, a cult of ancient Greece, believed that numbers were the basis of the entire universe, which ran on numerical harmony. The Pythagoreans’ ideas were a mixture of prescience (the numerical features of musical sounds) and mysticism (3 is male, 4 is female, and 10 is the most perfect number). Numbers were associated with names for magical purposes: the biblical “number of the beast,” 666, is probably an example of this practice. More recently, cranks have sought the secrets of the universe in the dimensions of the Great Pyramid of Giza, an aberration so common that it even has a name—pyramidology. Millions of otherwise rational people are terrified of the number 13, to the extent that hotels omit it from their floors, airplanes do not have a row 13, and the numbers for Formula 1 racing cars skip from 12 to 14 so that, for example, 22 cars would be numbered from 1 to 23. Learned tomes are written about the significance of such stalwarts as the golden number (1.618034), which does occur in flowering plants and modern architecture but does not occur in the shell of the nautilus and ancient Greek architecture, despite endless myths to the contrary. Many religions have their sacred numbers, as do organizations such as Freemasonry; Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart’s music, notably the Magic Flute (1791), includes many intentional references to Masonic numerology.
Mathematics is the study of numbers, shapes, and related structures. Number mysticism belongs elsewhere and is generally categorized as numerology. Numerology sheds light on the innermost workings of the human mind but very little on the rest of the universe. Mathematics, meanwhile, sheds light on much of the universe but, as yet, very little on human psychology. Between the two lies fruitful scientific ground, yet to be cultivated extensively.
Numerical coincidences abound, and they are often so remarkable that it is difficult to explain them rationally. Not surprisingly, many people become convinced that these coincidences have irrational explanations. What, for example, should be made of the following similarities (not all of them numerological) between U.S. Presidents Abraham Lincoln and John F. Kennedy, taken from a far more extensive list in Martin Gardner’s The Magic Numbers of Dr. Matrix (1985)?
One explanation for coincidences of this kind is selective reporting. Anything that fits is kept; anything that does not is discarded. Thus, the coincidence of day of the week for the assassinations is emphasized; the differences in month and number of day in the month are ignored. (Lincoln was assassinated on April 14, Kennedy on November 22.) More subtly, only one choice is made from many possibilities, the one that maintains the numerological pattern. Sometimes the date of birth is used, sometimes the date of election. If those do not work, how about the dates of college graduation, marriage, firstborn child, first election to office, or death? Moreover, some “facts” turn out to be false. The correct birth date for Booth is now thought to be 1838, not 1839, and Booth actually fled to a barn. It is common for coincidences to be exaggerated in this manner. And once one starts looking…Lincoln had a beard. Did Kennedy? No, he was clean-shaven. Do not mention beards, then.
Many of the coincidences listed here are exaggerations, lies, elaborations chosen from an infinite range of potential targets, or the result of a hidden selective process. Still, a few of the coincidences are quite startling. Although rational explanations exist, a true believer cannot be convinced. It is in this fertile territory that number mysticism thrives.
Arithmomancy, also called arithmancy, from the Greek arithmos (“number”) and manteia (“divination”), was practiced by the ancient Greeks, Chaldeans, and Hebrews; its successor is numerology. In these forms of number mysticism the letters of an alphabet are assigned numbers by some rule, typically A = 1, B = 2,…, Z = 26, or its equivalent. Words become numbers when their letter values are added together. People’s names, in particular, convert into numbers that are considered to have special significance. Thus, Ian Stewart, the name of the author of this article, becomes 9 + 1 + 14 + 19 + 20 + 5 + 23 + 1 + 18 + 20 = 130. The significance is clear: the year of his birth, 1945, was exactly 130 years after the Battle of Waterloo. Since 130 = 10 × 13, both the unlucky 13 and the perfect 10 are of importance; between themselves they explain just about anything, just like the superstition that seeing a praying mantis brings either good luck or bad luck—depending on what happens.
The best-known instance of numerology is the “number of the beast,” 666, from the biblical Revelation to John (13:18). Curiously, Revelation is the 66th book in the Bible, and the number of the beast occurs in verse 18, which is 6 + 6 + 6. But who is the beast? The German Protestant scholar Andreas Helwig in 1612  added up the Roman numerals in the phrase Vicarius Filii Dei (“Vicar of the Son of God,” a title falsely ascribed to the pope) and omitted all the other letters (that is, I = 1, V [and U, which appears as V in Latin inscriptions] = 5, L = 50, C = 100, D = 500) and got 666, proving that the beast is the Roman Catholic Church. This interpretation was taken up by some Seventh-day Adventists in the 19th century, but the same method applied to the name Ellen Gould White, a founder of Seventh-day Adventism, also yields 666, provided that the W counts as two V’s. Hitler sums to 666 if one uses the code A = 100, B = 101, and so on. Two 16th-century numerologists were Michael Stifel and Peter Bungus. Stifel decoded 666 as Pope Leo X, Bungus as Martin Luther. Not coincidentally, Stifel was a Protestant theologian and Bungus a Catholic.
The name of Jesus in Greek has the numerological value 888, three repetitions of the number 8, which is often considered auspicious. Many people have discerned numerical patterns in the Bible. For example, consider the King James Version. The phrase Old Testament consists of two words, one with three letters, the other with nine. Concatenate the two digits to get 39, the number of Old Testament books. New also has three letters, and 3 × 9 = 27, the number of New Testament books.
Methuselah is said to have lived 969 years. This number is a palindrome, meaning that it looks the same when reversed. It is also the 17th tetrahedral number, meaning that if you pile up spheres so that successive layers form the triangular numbers 1, 3, 6, 10, and so on, by layer 17 the total number of balls will be 969. Does 17 have any other significance? Well, the 17th triangular number 1 + 2 + ⋯ + 17 is 153. According to John 21:11 precisely that number of fish were caught in an unbroken net. And so on. The Bible contains so many numbers that such games can be played indefinitely; the question is what conclusions (if any) should be drawn from them.
