Papuan languages,  group of languages spoken in New Guinea and its surrounds. The area includes the entire island of New Guinea and the offshore islands of New Britain, New Ireland, Sorenarwa (Yapen), and Biak, as well as the adjoining areas of eastern Indonesia, especially the islands of Timor, Alor, and Halmahera. Some 1,100 languages—about a quarter of the world’s known languages—are spoken in this region. These include the approximately 800 Papuan languages as well as some 300 Austronesian languages.
Unlike the Austronesian languages, the Papuan languages do not constitute a single, genetically unified language family (hence they are often referred to by a common negative characterization, Non-Austronesian). Instead, they are organized into several dozen different language families. Comparative work will undoubtedly combine some of these families into larger genetic groupings, just as the Celtic, Germanic, and Slavic families were eventually combined with others to form the Indo-European language family. At the beginning of the 21st century, however, such claims were still speculative in regard to Papuan languages.
Papuan languages are spoken by some three to four million individuals. The average Papuan language family has about 25 member languages. Because there are many hundreds of Papuan languages, most of them are spoken by relatively few individuals: the number of speakers of individual languages is generally less than 3,000. Although the most commonly spoken Papuan language, Enga, has some 165,000 speakers, many Papuan languages have fewer than 100 speakers and some fewer than 50.
The small size of many Papuan speech communities has encouraged multilingualism. Most often, the members of a given community learn the languages of adjoining groups. The concentration of so many speech communities in a relatively confined area has also fostered the development of trade jargons. There are examples of the shifting of language allegiance (that is, the choice of which language to use in a given setting) to the languages of more powerful or economically advantaged neighbours.
Existing within such a complex, fragmented linguistic environment, Papuan languages exhibit a pattern of enormous cross-influence in all areas. All types of linguistic features, including basic vocabulary, pronouns, grammatical patterns, and discourse styles, have been borrowed from one language into another. This borrowing makes the establishment of genetic links among Papuan languages difficult. Such determinations are also hindered by a lack of documentation, which for the vast majority of these languages stretches no further back than the mid-20th century. As a result of these factors, it is difficult to separate genetically inherited material from borrowed material, especially when the borrowings in question are from genetically related contiguous languages or from languages that are now extinct.
Consequently, the comparative linguistic analysis of Papuan languages must proceed with the greatest care and the utmost rigour. Bound morphological forms that appear cognate are the most reliable guide to genetic relationships among Papuan languages, because such forms seem to be the most resistant to borrowing (although they are not entirely immune). The languages in New Guinea stretching from the Huon Peninsula to the highlands of the Indonesian province of Papua  provide an apt example. These languages mark the object of a transitive verb with a set of verbal prefixes: a first person singular uses /n-/, and second person singular uses a velar stop. The likelihood of such a system being borrowed is vanishingly small, indicating that these languages are all genetically related. Careful comparative work along these lines in Papuan languages is now in its infancy, and as yet very little is known about these wider genetic relations.
The largest family of Papuan languages is the Trans-New Guinea family, which is typified by the object prefixes mentioned above. More than 650,000 people, or about 20 percent of the total Papuan-speaking population, speak one of the languages in this family. Groups of languages belonging to this family include the Finisterre-Huon group (some 60 to 65 languages with more than 130,000 speakers), the Eastern Highlands group, and the Papuan Highlands group. Eastern Highlands languages are further subdivided into the four Kainantu languages (with 46,000 speakers) and the eight Gorokan languages (close to 200,000 speakers). The Papuan Highlands group can be divided into the six Dani languages (250,000 speakers) and the four Wissel Lakes languages (100,000 speakers). It is highly likely that the large Madang family of more than 80 languages (with some 80,000 speakers), which is spoken in Madang province of Papua New Guinea, is also part of this Trans-New Guinea family.
A number of other language families are possible members of the Trans-New Guinea family. However, their relationship to the family, if any indeed exists, is less obvious than that among the groups already mentioned and has yet to be demonstrated through careful comparative work. The list of potential Trans-New Guinea members includes the Enga family of languages, spoken by more than 400,000 people in Enga province and adjacent areas of west-central Papua New Guinea, and the Chimbu family of some 10 languages spoken in Chimbu and Western Highlands provinces of Papua New Guinea. The Binandere family (14 languages spoken by more than 50,000 people in Oro province, P.N.G.) may also be part of the Trans-New Guinea group, as may the Angan language family of the Eastern Highlands, Morobe, and Gulf provinces (12 languages with about 70,000 speakers). The Ok family of languages (14 languages spoken by some 50,000 speakers in the mountainous hub of New Guinea near the border between Papua New Guinea and Papua) may also be a member of the Trans-New Guinea group, as may the Awyu, Mek, and Asmat families and several small language families of southeast Papua New Guinea, such as Koiarian and Goilalan. If all of these language families are ultimately demonstrated to be part of the Trans-New Guinea family, then it will include almost 300 languages and two million speakers, no less than 50 percent of the total Papuan-speaking population.
There are still many Papuan language families for which no evidence of genetic relation with the Trans-New Guinea group has been found. Many such examples exist in the lowlands areas of the north coast of New Guinea, which tend to be extremely complex linguistically and to contain a number of distinct language families. In the Sepik-Ramu basin of the north coast of Papua New Guinea, the major language groups are the Lower Sepik-Ramu family (spoken along the lower reaches of the Sepik and Ramu rivers and adjoining riverine and coastal regions); the Sepik family (found in the middle region of the Sepik River and adjoining areas to the north and south); and the Sko family, which is spoken along the north coast of New Guinea and near the border between Papua and Papua New Guinea.
The Torricelli family, which is spoken in the Torricelli Mountains between the north coast and the Sepik River, is highly divergent from other Papuan languages of the Sepik-Ramu basin as well as from the Trans-New Guinea family. It consists of nearly 50 languages spoken by more than 80,000 speakers.
Along the north coast of Papua and the Mamberamo River basin there are several other major language families: the Sentani family, spoken immediately to the west of Jayapura; the Lakes Plain family, a phonologically highly exotic family spoken in the flooded plains area of the Mamberamo River basin; and the Cenderawasih Bay family, spoken on Yava Island in Cenderawasih Bay and the adjoining mainland, which may form a larger genetic grouping with the Lakes Plain family. Finally, there are the East Bird’s Head family, spoken on the eastern side of the Doberai (Vogelkop or Bird’s Head) Peninsula in the far west of Papua, and the West Bird’s Head family, found on the western side and central area of the Doberai Peninsula. The West Bird’s Head family is probably related to Papuan languages farther west in the eastern Indonesian island of Halmahera.
There are too many other Papuan language families to list. The lowlands areas of New Guinea are particularly complex, with many small language families with relatively low numbers of speakers. This is especially notable in the West Sepik, Western, and Gulf provinces of Papua New Guinea and adjoining areas of Papua, which also contain a number of isolate languages that cannot be classified with any larger language family. One notable lowland group is the Marind family of the south coast of Papua, comprising six languages with more than 20,000 speakers. One other important family is the South Bougainville family, found on the large Papua New Guinea island of the same name. The South Bougainville group is possibly related to a small group of languages in the northern half of the same island, to some other Papuan languages in the large islands of Papua New Guinea (notably New Britain and New Ireland), and to some languages farther south in the Solomon Islands; recent work, however, has rendered this hypothesis increasingly unlikely.
