Pashto language, Pashto also spelled Pashtu, also called Pakhtu,  member of the Iranian division of the Indo-Iranian group of Indo-European languages. Extensive borrowing has caused Pashto to share many features of the Indo-Aryan group of the Indo-European languages as well. Originally spoken by the Pashtun people, Pashto became the national language of Afghanistan in 1936. It is spoken by more than 35 million people, most of whom reside in Afghanistan or Pakistan. Smaller speech communities exist in Iran, Tajikistan, the United Arab Emirates, and the United Kingdom.
Scholars have found it difficult to reach consensus regarding specific claims about Pashto’s origins. Nonetheless, it is clear that the speech community’s location in a contested part of the ancient world instigated extensive contact with, and borrowing from, other languages, including varieties of ancient Greek, Saka, Parthian, and Persian. Pashto also converged with the northwestern Indian languages, especially the Prakrits, Balochi, and Sindhi. From these languages, Pashto acquired retroflex sounds (sounds produced with the tip of the tongue curled against the roof of the mouth) and approximately 5,550 loanwords.
The dialects of Pashto fall into two main divisions: the southern, which preserves the ancient /sh/ and /zh/ sounds, and the northern, which uses /kh/ and /gh/ sounds instead. Aspirates—sounds accompanied by an audible breath—are common to most of Pashto’s neighbouring Indo-Aryan languages but are uncommon in Pashto.
The slight changes that denote loanwords from the Prakrits, Sindhi, and Balochi are generally quite easy to identify. For instance, gadi ‘a cart’ in Sindhi is rendered as gari in Hindi and gadai in Pashto. Likewise, the term for ‘male buffalo’ is rendered sand in Hindi and sanr in Pashto. A number of words are identical in Hindi, Sindhi, and Pashto, including sadak ‘road,’ peda ‘a sweet,’ and khirki ‘window.’
The Pashto language has also borrowed words from Tajik (a form of Persian) and Uzbek (a Turkic language); examples include ruai-jirge ‘a common platform’ and ilghar ‘attack.’ A number of Arabic words or their Persianized forms have also been assimilated into Pashto, as have several Persian verbs. The sound /n/ of Persian is replaced by /l/ in Pashto.
The sentence construction of Pashto is akin to that of Hindi. Unlike Persian, but as in the Prakrits, the Pashto noun comes after the adjective and the possessor precedes the possessed in the genitive construction. The verb generally agrees with the subject in both transitive and intransitive sentences. An exception occurs when a completed action is reported in the past tense. In such cases, Pashto forms are the same as Hindi forms: the verb agrees with the subject if it is intransitive and with the object if it is transitive.
Pashto is written with a modified Arabic alphabet. The earliest literary form is poetry; Mohammad Hotak’s Pata Khazana (1728–29; “The Hidden Treasure”) is a collection of Pashto poetry from the 8th century onward. The national poet of Afghanistan, Khushhal Khan Khatak (1613–94), wrote spontaneous and forceful poetry of great charm. His grandson Afzal Khan was the author of an early history of the Pashtun.
