Rhaetian dialects, also called Rhaeto-Romance,  group of Romance dialects spoken in Switzerland and northern Italy, the most important of which are two dialects, Sursilvan and Sutsilvan, that constitute the main dialects of the Romansh language. Other Rhaetian dialects are Engadine, Ladin, and Friulian.
The Rhaetian, or Rhaeto-Romanic, dialects derive their conventional name from the ancient Raeti of the Adige area, who, according to Classical authors, spoke an Etruscan dialect (see Raetian language). In fact, there is nothing to connect Raetic with Rhaetian except geographic location, and some scholars deny that the different Rhaetian dialects have much in common, though others claim that they are remnants of a once-widespread Germano-Romance tongue. Three isolated regions continue to use Rhaetian.
Romansh, the standard language of Graubünden canton, has been a national language in Switzerland, used for cantonal but not federal purposes, since 1938. A referendum in 1996 accorded it semiofficial status. The proportion of Rhaetian speakers in Graubünden fell from two-fifths in 1880 to one-fourth in 1970, with a corresponding increase in the Italian-speaking population. In the early 2000s, speakers of Romansh formed about 0.5 percent of the population of Switzerland. Nevertheless, interest in Romansh remains keen, and several newspapers and magazines publish in Romansh.
The main Romansh dialects, usually known as Sursilvan and Sutsilvan, are spoken on the western and eastern banks of the Rhine, respectively. Another important Swiss Rhaetian dialect, Engadine, is spoken in the Protestant Inn River valley, east of which there is a German-speaking area that has encroached on former Romance territory since the 16th century. The dialects from the extreme east and west of the Swiss Rhaetian area are mutually intelligible only with difficulty, though each dialect is intelligible to its neighbour.
Sursilvan (spoken around the town of Disentis) has one text dating from the beginning of the 12th century but then nothing else until the work of Gian Travers (1483–1563), a Protestant writer. The Upper Engadine dialect (spoken around Samedan and Saint Moritz) is attested from the 16th century, notably with the Swiss Lutheran Jacob Bifrun’s translation of the New Testament. Both dialects have had a flourishing local literature since the 19th century. In many ways the Swiss Rhaetian dialects resemble French, and speakers seem to feel more at home with French than with Italian.
In the Trentino–Alto Adige region of northeastern Italy, some 30,000 persons speak Ladin (not to be confused with Ladino). Some Italian scholars have claimed that it is really an Italian (Veneto-Lombard) dialect. The other main language spoken in this now semiautonomous region, much of which was Austrian until 1919, is German, a non-Romance language. Although sometimes said to be threatened with extinction, Ladin appears to retain its vitality among the mountain peasantry. It is comprehensible without too much difficulty to a student of Romance languages. As it appears that those remote valleys were very sparsely populated until the 1960s, the number of speakers there is likely to have grown. Since the 1940s Ladin has been taught in primary schools in the Gardena and Badia valleys, in different conventionalized dialect forms. Although a Ladin document of the 14th century (from the Venosta Valley to the west of the modern Ladin-speaking region) is known from references, the earliest written material in Ladin is an 18th-century word list of the Badia dialect. There are also a few literary and religious texts.
In Italy north of Venice—stretching to the Slovenian border on the east and to the Austrian border on the north, its western extent almost reaching the Piave River—is the Friulian dialect area, centred around the city of Udine, with some 800,000 speakers. This dialect is much closer to Italian than are Ladin and Romansh, and it is often claimed to be a Venetian dialect. Venetian proper has gained ground at the expense of Friulian to both the east and west since the 1800s. Friulian retains its vitality in the well-populated industrialized region, however, and supports a vigorous local literature; its most-notable poet was Pieri Zorut (1792–1867). The first written specimen of Friulian (apart from a doubtful 12th-century inscription) is a short text dating to approximately 1300, followed by numerous documents in prose, as well as some poems, up to the end of the 16th century, when a rich poetic tradition began.
