Ronald L. Rivest,  (born 1947, Schenectady, N.Y., U.S.), American computer scientist and cowinner, with American computer scientist Leonard M. Adleman and Israeli cryptographer Adi Shamir, of the 2002 A.M. Turing Award, the highest honour in computer science, for their “ingenious contribution for making public-key cryptography useful in practice.” The three scientists patented their “Cryptographic Communication System and Method,” commonly known as RSA encryption, and assigned the patent rights to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).
Rivest received a bachelor’s degree (1969) in mathematics from Yale University and a doctorate (1974) in computer science from Stanford University. After leaving Stanford, Rivest went to MIT (1974– ), where he met Adleman and Shamir. In 1977 they produced the first public-key encryption system using digital signatures. Their data-encryption scheme relied on the enormous difficulty of factoring the product of two very large prime numbers, which form a cryptographic key. In 1983 they founded RSA Data Security in order to pursue commercial applications, which led to the creation of VeriSign, a widely used digital certification system on the Internet. Millions of people use RSA encryption to secure e-mail and other digital transactions.
In 2006 Rivest published a voting system that he called the ThreeBallot, which he placed in the public domain. ThreeBallot is a paper system that allows voters to verify that their votes are properly recorded and produces an end-to-end audit trail.
Rivest is the Viterbi Professor of Computer Science at MIT, a member of the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory and the MIT Theory of Computation Group, and a founding member of the MIT Cryptography and Information Security Group. Rivest is a coauthor, with Thomas H. Cormen and Charles E. Leiserson, of Introduction to Algorithms (1990).
Rivest was elected to the U.S. National Academy of Engineering, the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, the Association for Computing Machinery, the International Association for Cryptographic Research, and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In addition to the Turing Award, Rivest, Adleman, and Shamir were awarded the 2000 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Koji Kobayashi Computers and Communications Award.
