Theophylactus Of Ochrida, also spelled Theophylact Of Ohrid,  (born c. 1050, Euboea, Aegean island of Greece—died c. 1109), Greek Orthodox archbishop of Ochrida (modern Ohrid, Macedonia), theologian and linguistic scholar, who helped disseminate Byzantine culture among the Balkan Slavs during the early Middle Ages.
Having studied in Constantinople under the Neoplatonist philosopher Michael Psellus, Theophylactus became the first teacher of rhetoric in the patriarchal academy, was appointed tutor to the heir presumptive to the throne, and was made a deacon for the basilica of Hagia Sophia. During this period he composed his Paideia basilikē (“The Education of Monarchs”).
By his election c. 1078 as archbishop of Ochrida, then under the Bulgars, Theophylactus in effect became the agent of the Byzantine policy of assimilating colonial peoples into the empire’s governmental and cultural structure. His voluminous correspondence (to imperial and ecclesiastical authorities in Constantinople) is the best surviving source from this period on the state of the Bulgarian church and on its relations with the Greek world. In his letters Theophylactus expresses deep displeasure at being exiled to such a dreary outpost of the empire and shows an overriding sense of cultural superiority over the barbarian (i.e., ignorant of Greek) Bulgars, by apologizing for having sometimes to mention Slavic proper names. Nonetheless, he vigorously defended the Slavs against the extortionist Byzantine tax collectors. This grievance, he wrote, was compounded by the often arbitrary practices of local Greek officials, and he cautioned the authorities in Constantinople to treat the Bulgars with restraint lest they revolt.
Sincerely complimenting the Slavic people, Theophylactus wrote the Life of Clement of Ochrida, the first Slavonic bishop, lavishing praise on Cyril and Methodius, the apostles to the Slavs and creators of the Slavic alphabet.
In his Allocutio de iis quorum Latini incusantur (c. 1090; “Address on Matters for Which the Latins Are Attacked”), Theophylactus sharply criticized his Greek co-religionists for slandering Western Christianity. Nonetheless, he disputed the papal claims to primacy over all Christendom and Western theological speculation on the Trinity. Viewing these as fundamental questions, he refused to compromise his Orthodox position.
