Anthony Wayne, byname Mad Anthony Wayne,  (born January 1, 1745, near Paoli, Pennsylvania [U.S.]—died December 15, 1796, Presque Isle, Pennsylvania, U.S.), prominent American general during the Revolutionary War, who later destroyed the Northwest Indian Confederation at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in Ohio (August 20, 1794).
The owner of a tannery and extensive property in Pennsylvania, Wayne was commissioned a colonel in the Continental Army in January 1776. That spring his regiment was sent to reinforce the remnants of Benedict Arnold’s Canadian expedition, which was retreating south after a disastrous campaign against Quebec. Wayne was then put in command of Fort Ticonderoga, New York. Promoted to the rank of brigadier general in early 1777, he played a prominent role that fall in the battles of Brandywine, Paoli, and Germantown, Pennsylvania. After spending the winter at the Valley Forge encampment, he led an attack on the British at the indecisive Battle of Monmouth, New Jersey, the following June.
His most brilliant exploit of the war was the successful storming of the British fort at Stony Point, New York (July 16, 1779). This feat gave a huge boost in morale to the American armies. Wayne earned the name “Mad Anthony” because of his tactical boldness and his personal courage in the field. In September 1780, when it was learned that Arnold had planned to betray West Point to the British, Wayne moved promptly to safeguard the fort. In 1781 he was sent south to assist the marquis de Lafayette, and at Green Springs, Virginia, on July 6, he engaged Lord Cornwallis’s larger army but extricated himself with a small loss. Wayne then moved with 1,000 men to join in the successful Siege of Yorktown, Virginia. After Cornwallis’s surrender, Wayne was dispatched to join Gen. Nathanael Greene’s army in the South. He served largely in Georgia, recovering that state and defeating the Indians allied to the British. Elected in 1790 to the Georgia House of Representatives, Wayne served nearly two years before his seat was declared vacant because of election frauds.
In 1792 Wayne was appointed by Pres. George Washington to serve as commander in chief of the modest U.S. Army, which had suffered several defeats at the hands of the intertribal Northwest Indian Confederation formed to resist the white man’s incursions into the Midwest. Wayne trained his enlarged army for two years before advancing slowly north of the Ohio River. At the Battle of Fallen Timbers, Wayne effectively ended Indian resistance when his seasoned force of 1,000 men routed the 2,000 warriors gathered for a final confrontation near Fort Miami on the Maumee River. This victory enabled Wayne to negotiate the Treaty of Greenville (August 1795), by which the Indians ceded most of Ohio and large sections of Indiana, Illinois, and Michigan.
