Anthony Kennedy, in full Anthony McLeod Kennedy,  (born July 23, 1936, Sacramento, California, U.S.), associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States from 1988 to 2018.
Kennedy received a bachelor’s degree from Stanford University in 1958 and a law degree from Harvard University in 1961. He was admitted to the bar in 1962 and subsequently practiced law in San Francisco and Sacramento, California. In 1965 he was appointed professor of constitutional law at the University of the Pacific’s McGeorge School of Law, where he taught until 1988. In 1975 Kennedy was appointed by U.S. Pres. Gerald R. Ford to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, and in that capacity he established himself as a distinguished candidate to fill the vacant seat on the U.S. Supreme Court created by the retirement of Justice Lewis Powell in 1987. Instead, Pres. Ronald Reagan nominated Robert H. Bork, whose outspoken demeanour and sharply conservative views on constitutional law and social policy led to his rejection by the Senate. The quieter Kennedy was eventually nominated and was unanimously confirmed.
Early in his tenure, Kennedy proved to be markedly conservative. In his first term, he voted with Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justice Antonin Scalia, two of the Court’s most conservative members, more than 90 percent of the time. With Justice Sandra Day O’Connor, Kennedy contributed critical votes that led to winning conservative majorities in cases limiting congressional authority under the commerce clause of the Constitution of the United States and striking down portions of gun-control legislation. In subsequent years, however, his decisions were more independent. Parting ways with his conservative colleagues, Kennedy rejected congressional term limits. In 1992 he coauthored (with O’Connor and Justice David Souter) the Court’s majority opinion in Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey, which held that legal restrictions on access to abortion must not constitute an “undue burden” on a woman’s exercise of her right to abortion as established in Roe v. Wade (1973).
Kennedy’s episodic departure from conservative jurisprudence reflected a civil-libertarian perspective on certain individual rights. For example, although he was generally deferential to the government on criminal law and related matters, he voted, along with Scalia and the Court’s liberals, to declare unconstitutional a Texas law that prohibited the desecration of the American flag, on the grounds that the Constitution protects such acts as symbolic speech. He also wrote the Court’s decisions in Romer, Governor of Colorado v. Evans (1996), which voided an amendment to the Colorado state constitution that prohibited laws barring discrimination against homosexuals; in Lawrence v. Texas (2003), which declared unconstitutional Texas’s law criminalizing sodomy between two consenting adults of the same sex; in Boumediene v. Bush (2008), which upheld the habeas corpus rights of “enemy combatants” held by the United States; in Kennedy v. Louisiana (2008), which banned capital punishment for child rape; in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission (2010), which struck down U.S. campaign finance laws banning corporate and union spending on political advertising; in United States v. Windsor (2013), which struck down the federal Defense of Marriage Act (1996) in its definition of marriage as a union between a man and a woman; and in Obergefell v. Hodges (2015), which invalidated state bans on same-sex marriage and on recognizing same-sex marriages performed in other jurisdictions.
