assassination of Abraham Lincoln,  murderous attack on Abraham Lincoln, the 16th president of the United States, at Ford’s Theatre in Washington, D.C., on the evening of April 14, 1865. Shot in the head by Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth, Lincoln died the next morning. The assassination occurred only days after the surrender at Appomattox Court House of Gen. Robert E. Lee and the Army of Northern Virginia to Union forces led by Gen. Ulysses S. Grant, which had signaled the effective end of the American Civil War. Lincoln’s death plunged much of the country into despair, and the search for Booth and his accomplices was the largest manhunt in American history to that date.
Booth was a member of one of America’s most renowned families of actors. His brother Edwin Booth was widely regarded as the country’s leading actor, a mantle he had inherited from their father, Junius Brutus Booth, and John Wilkes Booth was an acclaimed performer in his own right, celebrated for his charisma, athleticism, and dashing good looks. He grew up in the border state of Maryland but was particularly popular as an actor in Richmond, Virginia, and considered himself a Southerner. Moreover, he passionately advocated the slave system. Having promised his mother that he would not fight for the Confederacy, Booth remained in the North during the Civil War, and his hatred of abolitionists and Lincoln deepened. In March 1865 he and a group of conspirators in Washington, D.C., plotted to abduct Lincoln, though none of those plans came to fruition.
On the morning of April 14, 1865, Booth—distraught over the collapse of the Confederacy—learned that the president would be attending a performance of the comedy Our American Cousin that evening at Ford’s Theatre. Gathering his fellow conspirators, Booth outlined a plan to assassinate not just President Lincoln but also Vice Pres. Andrew Johnson and Secretary of State William Seward. Booth tasked Lewis Powell, a tall and powerful former Confederate soldier, with the attack on Seward, to be aided by David Herold. George Atzerodt, a German immigrant who had acted as a boatman for Confederate spies, was to kill Johnson. Booth himself was to assassinate Lincoln. All three attacks were to occur at the same time (about 10:00 pm) that night.
In the event, Atzerodt failed to carry out his assignment and never approached Johnson. Powell invaded Seward’s home and slashed him repeatedly with a knife. Seward survived the attack, but his face was permanently disfigured.
At Ford’s Theatre Booth made his way to the private box in which Lincoln and his wife, Mary Todd Lincoln, were watching the play with their guests, Clara Harris and her fiancé, Union officer Maj. Henry Rathbone (there because a number of more prominent people had declined the Lincolns’ invitation). Finding the president’s box essentially unguarded, Booth entered it and barred the outside door from inside. Then, at a moment in the play that he knew would elicit a big laugh, Booth burst in through the box’s inner door. He shot Lincoln in the back of the head once with a .44 calibre derringer, slashed Rathbone in the shoulder with a knife, and leapt from the box to the stage below, breaking his left leg in the fall (though some believe that injury did not occur until later). What Booth said while committing the attack and when he said it are a matter of some dispute. Audience members variously reported that he exclaimed, “Sic semper tyrannis” (“Thus always to tyrants,” the state motto of Virginia) or “The South is avenged!” or both, before disappearing through a door at the side of the stage where his horse was being held for him. On the other hand, in a note written a few days after the assassination, Booth claimed that he had shouted “Sic semper” before he fired (though it seems likely that this was Booth’s attempt at dramatizing history). In any case, Booth rode off into the night and out of Washington, meeting up in Maryland with Herold, who had fled the scene of the Seward attack without Powell.
Lincoln was attended to immediately by several doctors who were in the audience. It was felt that the president should not be moved far, so he was taken across the street to the house of William Petersen, who rented extra rooms to lodgers. In one of those rooms Lincoln was laid diagonally across a bed, for which he was otherwise too tall. Doctors had little hope that the unconscious Lincoln would recover, and throughout the night various cabinet members, officials, and physicians kept vigil in the small room. Mary grieved hysterically. When Lincoln was pronounced dead at 7:22 am on April 15, Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton famously pronounced, “Now he belongs to the ages” (or “to the angels”; witnesses disagree).
The next day was Easter Sunday, and throughout America sermons in Christian churches equated Lincoln’s martyrdom with Jesus’ sacrificial death. A period of national mourning ensued. Observers reported that African Americans felt Lincoln’s loss particularly keenly. Historians have noted that Lincoln—whom many even in the North deeply disliked—became much more revered in death than in life as the myth surrounding him grew. After public viewing in both the White House and the Capitol, Lincoln’s body, in an elaborate open coffin, was taken on a 13-day train journey across the country to his home in Springfield, Illinois, stopping en route to lie in state in Independence Hall in Philadelphia and to be paraded in a hearse down 5th Avenue in New York City, among other stops. Millions of people lined the train route to pay their respects.
As for the perpetrators, the fleeing Booth had his leg treated in Maryland by Dr. Samuel Mudd, who would later be convicted of conspiracy, though his descendants waged a protracted battle to prove his innocence. While a massive manhunt, fueled by a $100,000 reward, filled the countryside surrounding Washington with troops and other searchers, Booth and Herold, aided by a Confederate sympathizer, hid for days in a thicket of trees near the Zekiah swamp in Maryland. While hiding, Booth kept a diary in which he recorded his incredulity at the almost universal condemnation of his actions. He had expected to be heralded as a hero. Having undertaken further efforts to escape, Booth and Herold were tracked down by federal troops on April 26 at a farm in Virginia, near the Rappahannock River. There Herold surrendered before the barn in which he and Booth were hiding was set aflame. Refusing to surrender, Booth was shot, either by a soldier or by himself, and died shortly thereafter. Rumours persisted that it was not Booth but another man thought to be him who was killed, but there is no acceptable evidence to support that notion.
Eight “conspirators” were tried by a military commission for Lincoln’s murder (several of them had participated in the plot to kidnap Lincoln but were less clearly involved in the assassination attempt). Herold, Powell, Atzerodt, and Mary Surratt, who ran a boarding house in Washington frequented by members of the Confederate underground, were found guilty and hanged. Also found guilty, Mudd, Michael O’Laughlen, and Samuel Arnold were sentenced to life in prison, and Edman Spangler received a six-year sentence. Another conspirator, John Surratt, Jr., fled the country but was later captured and stood trial in 1867, though his case was dismissed.
