Battle of Horseshoe Bend,  also known as the Battle of Tohopeka, (27 March 1814), a U.S. victory in central Alabama over Native Americans opposed to white expansion into their terroritories and which largely brought an end to the Creek War (1813–14).
Chief Tecumseh’s death in 1813 did not end conflict between the United States and American Indian tribes. In the southeastern Mississippi Territory (central Alabama today), hostile Creeks known as Red Sticks raided settlers, sparking an intratribal war and threatening an alliance with the pro-British Spanish in Florida.
Unable to divert troops from the Canadian campaigns, the United States mobilized territorial militia to attack the Red Sticks. In the fall of 1813, multiple columns of militia were sent into hostile territory with meager results. There were several fights and Indian towns burned, but the Red Sticks defiantly held out. In early 1814 Major General Andrew Jackson’s Tennessee militia were reinforced by the regular 39th Infantry Regiment and fresh militia, and these were trained into a disciplined force of 2,700.
On 27 March Jackson’s force plus allied Cherokee and "White Stick" Creek warriors surrounded the Red Stick stronghold of Tohopeka. The village was located inside a bend of the Tallapoosa River, with the river on three sides and a strong earth-and-timber breastwork on the fourth. Colonel John Coffee’s militia and Indian allies occupied the riverbank opposite the village. Jackson’s offer to evacuate the women and children was refused and he began a bombardment by his two small field guns. They did little damage to the earthwork but created a diversion during which Coffee’s men took Red Stick canoes and crossed the river to attack the rear of the village.
Jackson then ordered the regulars and militia to charge. They stormed over the breastworks using bayonets and clubbed muskets. The Red Sticks made a desperate stand but were crushed in a five-hour hand-to-hand battle through the burning village.
Losses: U.S., some 150 dead or wounded; American Indian allies, 23 dead, 46 wounded; Red Stick Creeks, nearly 1,000 dead or wounded.
