Battle of the Saintes,  (April 9–12, 1782), in the American Revolution, major naval victory for Britain in the West Indies that restored British naval mastery in the area and ended the French threat to nearby British possessions. After the Siege of Yorktown (September 29–October 19, 1781), the independence of the new United States was assured, but Britain and France still fought over colonial territories in the Caribbean. As a result of this victory, in the Treaty of Paris (September 3, 1783) that ended the revolution, Britain regained most of its islands in the West Indies.
The French planned an attack on British-owned Jamaica, and a British fleet, under Admiral Sir George Rodney, was sent to block the move. In early April 1782, Rodney’s fleet met the French force, led by Admiral de Grasse, off the north of Dominica—near a group of islands called the Saintes—for which the battle is usually named. After some initial maneuvers and minor clashes, a full-scale battle was joined on April 12, by which time the British had thirty-six ships of the line in action against thirty French ones.
The engagement began with the two fleets sailing parallel to one another in line of battle, the British having the better of the exchange of broadsides partly because some of their guns were equipped with new flintlock firing mechanisms. The French line was somewhat loosely formed and, at a crucial moment, Rodney exploited a shift in the wind and cut across the line, raking the French ships on either side with his broadsides. Other British ships imitated their commander, and the French lost all formation, their ships suffering heavily as a melee developed.
De Grasse surrendered his flagship late in the day with some 400 of his crew killed. Four other French ships were also captured, one of them destroyed at nightfall by an explosion. The victory could have been more complete if Rodney, a conservative admiral, had organized a more vigorous pursuit of the remainder of the French fleet.
Losses: British, no ships, 1,000 dead or wounded men; French, 4 ships captured, 1 ship destroyed, 5,000 dead, wounded, or captured men.
