Battle of Chapultepec,  (12–14 September 1847), an engagement of the Mexican-American War. The fortified castle of Chapultepec sat on a rocky hill overlooking causeways leading to Mexico City’s two western gates. It was the last obstacle that U.S. Major General Winfield Scott had to secure before attacking the city, defended by the 15,000-man army of General Antonio López de Santa Anna.
To defend the castle, Santa Anna installed General Nicolas Bravo with 1,000 troops, fifty military cadets, and some artillery in buildings and supporting earthworks. Beginning on 12 September, Winfield Scott’s artillery bombarded the castle; on 13 September, he launched his main attack.
Two divisions advanced abreast from the west: Major General Gideon Pillow’s division, with Brigadier General William Worth’s in support, on his left; Brigadier John Quitman’s division approached from the south along a causeway. Pillow’s brigades fought through a grove of trees at the base of Chapultepec hill and up the slope, then faltered at the walls when the scaling ladders failed to appear. Quitman’s men were also stopped by artillery defending the causeway. He sent a brigade to flank the position and another with ladders to assist Pillow.
When the ladders appeared, the U.S. assault surged over the walls. The troops from the three divisions became intermixed as they scrambled into the castle. By 9:30 AM, the castle was taken. Quitman then led a rush of infantry along the southern causeway to capture one gate, while Worth—with an artillery gun section—pushed forward and seized the other gate. By dusk, Worth’s and Quitman’s troops were in the city, but had to halt as darkness fell. Early in the morning of 14 September, a Mexican delegation told Scott that Santa Anna and his army had fled the city.
The battle is rich in lore. Five teenage military cadets who refused to retreat and who defended the castle to their death—one jumped from the castle with the Mexican flag wrapped around his body, so the Americans could not capture it—are widely memorialized in Mexico as "Los Niños Héroes." Thirty captured members of the Saint Patrick’s Battalion, formed of immigrant deserters from the U.S. army who fought on the Mexican side of the war, were executed during the battle. U.S. Major General William Harney ordered the executions to occur at the exact moment the U.S. flag replaced the Mexican one on top of the castle. Additionally, the famed line in the U.S. "Marines’ Hymn" ("From the Halls of Montezuma . . .") was inspired by the Marines’ role in this battle (90 percent of the Marines’ officer corps who fought in the battle were killed) and on the attack on the city gates of Belen and San Cosmos that followed, leading to the fall and occupation of Mexico City by U.S. forces on September 14. Finally, although it actually predates the Mexican War, the scarlet "blood" stripe on the dress blue trousers worn by Marines has long been hailed as a commemoration of those who died at Chapultepec.
Losses: U.S., 130 dead, 703 wounded, 29 missing; Mexican, at least 1,000 dead, wounded, or captured.
