Battle of Germantown,  (October 4, 1777), in the American Revolution, abortive attack by 11,000 American troops upon 9,000 British regulars stationed at Germantown (now part of Philadelphia) under General Sir William Howe. Not discouraged by his defeats at Brandywine (September 11)  and Paoli (September 20), which had forced Congress and its rebel supporters to evacuate Philadelphia, Continental General George Washington conceived a daring and imaginative plan to conduct a surprise attack (as he had done at the Battle of Trenton on Christmas, 1776) simultaneously from four different directions. The raid at dawn failed partly because it was too complicated and partly because of a dense fog that confused the Americans, who even fired on one of their own columns.
Washington’s strategy was to push the British into Philadelphia and then cut their land-bound supply line. He moved 11,000 Continentals and militia against  Germantown after nightfall on 3 October. Washington’s tactical plan was to hit Howe simultaneously with four columns converging from different directions. It was a difficult plan for his inexperienced army, which, delayed in the dark, was then confused by thick fog at dawn.
Washington led the central attack that forced the British back through the town. The attack on the right, however, was stalled by Hessian resistance, while the American units on the left remained lost in the fog until the fighting was well underway. A British group used a stone house as a strongpoint that Washington’s troops initially bypassed, then tried in vain to reduce with cannon fire. Hearing the fighting at the house, a brigade from the American left column moved in that direction and, confused by powder smoke and fog, fired into the flank of a center unit. Believing themselves attacked by British troops and low on ammunition, that unit fell back. This exposed the flanks of joining units to the continued British resistance, and started a general withdrawal. British reinforcements arrived, and, sensing the American lines wavering, Howe counterattacked, trapping one of the advanced Continental units. Washington made a skillful fighting retreat for 10 miles (16 km), ending the battle.
Although the number of American losses were double that suffered by the British, when combined with the American victory at the Battles of Saratoga (September—October 1777) the Germantown engagement was important to the American war effort.  It impressed the French with Washington’s strategic ability, contributing to France’s decision to enter the war on America’s behalf the following year.
Losses: American, 152 dead, 521 wounded, 400 captured; British and Hessian, 71 dead, 450 wounded, 14 captured.
