Battle of Brandywine,  (September 11, 1777), in the American Revolution, engagement near Philadelphia in which the British defeated the Americans but left the Revolutionary army intact. The British general Sir William Howe was lured to Philadelphia in the belief that its large Tory element would rise up when joined by a British army and thus virtually remove Pennsylvania from the war. That move left the forces of General John Burgoyne in northern New York to fend for themselves, directly resulting in the British disaster at the Battles of Saratoga on September 19 and October 11, American victories that convinced France to join the American war effort, marking a major turning point in the war.
Howe’s campaign to capture Philadelphia, the American capital, began in mid-1777. The forces had skirmished earlier as General George Washington avoided committing his retrained but untested Continental Army. Confident of success, Howe hoped to draw  Washington into a decisive battle.  Embarking from New York City in July 1777, Howe’s army of about 16,000 troops met General George Washington’s Continental Army of about 15,000 in the vicinity of Chadds Ford, on Brandywine Creek in southeastern Pennsylvania, about 25 miles (40 km) southwest of Philadelphia.
Howe divided his army, with General Charles Cornwallis leading one column of about 9,000 while Lieutenant General Wilhelm von Knyphausen commanded another 7,000. Washington’s plan was to block all of the fords across Brandywine Creek, especially the north ford at Wistar and the furthest south ford at Pyle, thereby forcing Howe to engage Washington toward the middle, at Chadds Ford, where Washington controlled the high ground with two divisions with artillery.  Howe, however—aided by local Loyalist scouts—had been tipped off about unguarded fords unbeknownst to Washington further north of Wistar, where Howe’s troops could cross without incident and proceed to march south for a surprise attack on Washington’s right flank. This superior scouting and  reconnaissance would be Washington’s downfall at Brandywine.
Knyphausen’s advance guard did attack at Chadds Ford as Washington had planned, arriving early in the morning on 11 September. Intense fighting followed between the British and the well-entrenched Americans. But the main British column was now concurrently and secretly heading south on Washington’s right flight, an exhausting nine-hour march for the British. Washington at first disregarded a scout’s report about a pending flanking action by British troops heading south, but by 2:00 p.m. Howe’s advance was confirmed, leading Washington diverted all but one division to face Howe. But the countermeasure was too little, too late.  Confused in the haste to counter the move, the Americans were unable to mount a coordinated defense when the British attacked around 4 pm. With Howe’s attack from the north and Knyphausen’s push through the middle at Chadd, the Americans were soon in full retreat. Fighting was ferocious in places, but the Americans were soon in full retreat, pulling back to nearby Chester and leaving behind strategic cannons. The retreating force was aided by Lafayette, who was shot in the leg during this first battle for him of the war but who gallantly fought on and rallied the troops, facilitating an orderly retreat for Washington’s men. The battle ended with dusk, and darkness and fatigue on the part of Howe’s troops prevented any British pursuit of the retreating Americans.
In the end, the British troops occupied the battlefield, but they had not destroyed Washington’s army nor cut it off from the capital at Philadelphia. Over the next two weeks the American Continental Congress had time to evacuate the capital and remove important papers and military supplies before the British finally occupied the city unopposed on September 26. Losing the capital was a major blow to the Americans, foreshadowing the difficult winter to come for Washington at Valley Forge, but the Continental Army and the revolution had survived.
Losses: American, 200–300 dead, 500-600 wounded, 400 captured; British and German, 80–90 dead, 488 wounded, 6 missing.
