Battle of Bennington,  (August 16, 1777), in the American Revolution, victory by American militiamen defending colonial military stores in Bennington, Vermont, against a British raiding party.
After capturing Fort Ticonderoga (see Siege of Fort Ticonderoga) in July 1777, the British commander, General John Burgoyne, pushed into western New York State toward Albany.  His long supply line to Canada could not provide adequate supplies, and so hoping to capture needed provisions and overawe New Englanders, he dispatched a well-equipped regiment to Bennington under the German colonel Friedrich Baum. The raiding force, numbering 800 Germans, British, Loyalists, and Indians, departed on 9 August and plundered the countryside for five days. On 14 August, a group of American militia sent by Vermont Brigadier General John Stark lost a skirmish with Baum’s raiders near Bennington. The American force grew to 1,100 men the next day when Stark arrived with reinforcements in a heavy rain. Baum realized he was badly outnumbered. He sent a courier to Burgoyne requesting more troops and had his men build earth breastworks in the meantime for defense.
On 16 August, Stark led his militia in a multipronged assault against Baum’s positions. The complex American plan worked perfectly, hitting the positions simultaneously from several directions. The Loyalists and Indians ran at the first volley, but the British and German regulars fiercely defended their redoubt for two hours until their ammunition was gone. In a vain attempt to break out, Baum had his dismounted Hessian cavalrymen draw sabers and attack on foot. Baum fell fatally wounded, and the survivors surrendered. Reinforcements sent by Burgoyne were delayed by the rain and arrived after the battle. Stark reformed his celebrating men and attacked the arriving Germans. In the fight, the German commander was killed and the rest forced to retreat. The outcome of this engagement went far in enhancing American morale.
The battle, which took place at the site of the present village of Walloomsac, New York (several miles west of Bennington), contributed to the eventual defeat of Burgoyne (see Saratoga, Battles of). It is commemorated by a historical park near Walloomsac and by a 306-foot (93-metre) obelisk at the village of Old Bennington.
Losses: American, some 30 dead, 42 wounded; British and Loyalist, 207 dead, 700 captured.
