Battle of San Juan Hill,  (1 July 1898), also known as the Battle of San Juan Heights, the most significant U.S. land victory, and one of the final battles, of the Spanish-American War.  After the Battle of Las Guasimas in Cuba, Major General William Shafter planned to take Santiago de Cuba, the island’s second largest city. Reports of Spanish reinforcements on route to the city caused him to accelerate his plans. He ordered head-on assaults against three hilltop fortified positions that made up the city’s outer defenses.
In Shafter’s plan, the 2d Division was to take El Caney, then swing south to join in a coordinated attack at 10:00 AM with the 1st Division, led by Brigadier General Jacob Kent, and the dismounted Cavalry Division, led by Brigadier General Samuel Sumner, against the two hills that sat on the San Juan ridgeline: San Juan Hill and Kettle Hill. Entrenchments, block houses, barbed wire, and several cannon protected the Spanish defenders.
Shafter’s plan quickly fell apart. The march to attack positions was delayed, and unit deployment was confused by the narrow, crowded trail and enemy fire. At 8:00 AM, 1 July, artillery began firing on the Spanish positions, then ceased to avoid counterbattery fire. Although it was well after noon before all the units were on line, the 2d Division was still heavily engaged at El Caney. Finally, at 1:00 PM, and under galling Spanish fire, an aide of Shafter’s gave approval to attack. The Cavalry Division’s two brigades, led by the 1st Volunteer Cavalry under Colonel Theodore Roosevelt, charged and captured Kettle Hill, though suffering heavy casualties.  Roosevelt himself was exposed to heavy enemy fire.  "We had a bully fight," gloated the future U.S. president, whose political career was greatly aided by his leadership this day. More than a century later, for his conspicuous valor in this battle, Roosevelt was posthumously award the Medal of Honor in 2001.
Meanwhile, the Spanish on San Juan Hill tenaciously held back 1st Division’s infantrymen. Two American Gatling guns appeared, and their rapid volume of fire let the U.S. infantry renew their charge and break into the Spanish trenches. At the same time, cavalrymen attacked from Kettle Hill 500 yards (457 m) away, taking another section of San Juan Hill. By 2:00 PM, the last elements of Spanish resistance had been eliminated.
Participating in some of the heaviest fighting of this decisive American victory were the famed, all-black "Buffalo Soldiers," one of whose officers was John "Black Jack" Pershing, soon to be commander of U.S. forces in World War I.
Losses: U.S., some 205 dead, 1,200 wounded; Spanish, some 215 dead,  376 wounded.
