Battle of Atlanta,  (July 22, 1864), American Civil War engagement that was part of the Union’s summer Atlanta Campaign. Union Major Generals  William Tecumseh Sherman and James B. McPherson successfully defended against a Confederate offensive from Lieut. Gen. John Bell Hood on the eastern outskirts of Atlanta, Georgia. Although the Union victory inflicted heavy casualties on Hood’s army, the city of Atlanta would not fall to Sherman until September of that year.
In May of 1864, Sherman began his Atlanta Campaign. At the direction of Lieut. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant, Sherman intended to advance on Atlanta, Georgia, from his station in Chattanooga, Tennessee. Atlanta was a major strategic city for the Confederacy that served as a railroad terminus, supply depot, and manufacturing hub. Given Atlanta’s position south of the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia, capturing the city would severely threaten the stability of the Confederacy. If Atlanta fell, Union leadership hoped that it would bring the already bloody war to a swift end. Furthermore, the Atlanta Campaign held a special significance for Union Pres. Abraham Lincoln. In the North, 1864 was a presidential election year, and, with the war dragging on longer than either side expected, both Republicans and Democrats wanted hostilities to cease. War dissatisfaction already threatened Lincoln’s chances at reelection. His ability to serve a second term thus largely hinged on the Atlanta Campaign’s success or failure.
Sherman marched toward Atlanta at the helm of three Federal armies totaling approximately 100,000 men: the Army of the Cumberland, the Army of the Tennessee, and the Army of the Ohio. Attempting to slow Sherman’s advance was Confederate Gen. Joseph E. Johnston’s army of 60,000 soldiers. Sherman and Johnston regularly engaged at strategic points throughout the former’s march south, with Resaca, Georgia, and Kennesaw Mountain being of particular importance. Johnston’s defensive approach resulted in his army being forced to retreat behind Atlanta’s defenses. Unfortunately for Johnston, these repeated withdrawals infuriated Confederate Pres. Jefferson Davis. On July 17 Davis relieved the general of his post and transferred command of his army to Lieut. Gen. John Bell Hood. Unlike Johnston, Hood aimed to take the battle to Atlanta’s assailants at every possible moment. He began by attacking the Army of the Cumberland on its flank at Peachtree Creek on July 20. He was handily repulsed, but he resolved to strike Sherman’s forces on its eastern flank two days later.
Upon hearing of Sherman’s departure from Chattanooga earlier in the summer, Atlanta’s Confederate defenders had forced their slaves to construct two rings of fortifications around the city. The inner ring was heavily defended, and the outer ring had a series of earthen palisades and trenches to slow Union troops. Cannon batteries were positioned along both rings of defenses. It was from these fortifications that Hood’s army departed on the night of July 21. He left two corps behind the inner ring and ordered an infantry and cavalry corps numbering 17,000–18,000 soldiers to separately advance south and east in the general direction of Sherman’s left flank. In the early morning the infantry would swing north and strike the Union army in a weakened rear. The cavalry would wheel around to destroy Sherman’s supply train in hopes that it would be mostly unprotected.
Meanwhile, Sherman had sent the Army of the Tennessee, under the command of young Maj. Gen. James B. McPherson, to cut off and destroy the Georgia Railroad that entered Atlanta from the east. Sherman himself had moved his field headquarters to nearby Decatur, Georgia, and established temporary headquarters at the Augustus Hurt House, located on a hill some 2 miles (3.2 km) east of central Atlanta. While McPherson advanced westward toward the Georgia capital, Sherman took in a commanding view of Atlanta’s defenses from the hilltop. When he learned just before dawn on July 22 that Hood’s forces had left the outer ring, he ordered his army to hunt them down. However, Union intelligence noted the continued presence of some Confederate defenders, which contradicted his initial survey of the situation. Sherman retracted his orders. Sherman would have also sent an infantry corps away from his left flank had McPherson not cautioned his superior to consider the serious vulnerability that would result from such a strategy. Sherman took McPherson’s advice and left the infantry in place, a decision which proved crucial in maintaining the Union’s position during the ensuing battle. McPherson arranged his nearly 35,000 troops in a lengthy L-shape, with the vertical arm running north-south and the horizontal arm running east-west. He reinforced his flank by placing cannon on Bald Hill (later renamed Leggett’s Hill for the Union general who captured it) and fortifying his line with trenches.
While Hood’s plan of attack was logical, his forces suffered from difficult terrain and a delayed start to their march. Furthermore, he possessed little intelligence about the extent of McPherson’s line, which meant that the commander of his infantry corps could not accurately determine when to swing north. Instead of surprising McPherson from the rear, Hood’s infantry assumed its final position both six hours behind schedule and to the south of an entrenched left flank.
The Confederate infantry engaged McPherson’s east-west line shortly after noon. McPherson could hear the gunshots from his post and made sure that the Union leaders on that flank were holding the line before inspecting the rest of his army. There was a sizable chink in his position at the intersection of the vertical and horizontal arms. McPherson galloped toward this intersection, which happened to be the site of an intensifying Confederate assault. Hood’s infantry in this area quickly noticed the Union general and shot him from his saddle. He died shortly thereafter. McPherson, a youthful and promising protégé of Grant, was one of the highest-ranking Union generals to be killed in combat.
Despite McPherson’s untimely death, Union troops continued to hold their positions, particularly atop Bald Hill along the north-south line. The fighting was mostly concentrated around this strategic high ground, which was the highest elevated point between Atlanta and Decatur. Both sides engaged in vicious combat as Confederate troops rushed the hill in successive waves. Despite exploiting a gap in the Union line and nearly succeeding in attacking the position from several directions, Hood’s infantry was unable to seize the hill.
In the late afternoon, Confederate soldiers assaulted another weak point at an exposed railroad cut to the north. Union forces were forced to retreat eastward, losing the Troup Hurt House and Capt. Francis DeGress’s artillery battery in the process. However, a Union commander led a strong counterattack buttressed by Sherman’s artillery, which fired on and behind Hood’s line and prevented reinforcements from arriving. Having been repulsed several times with significant bloodshed, Hood’s infantry retreated to Atlanta by nightfall. His cavalry half-succeeded in their mission: the corps took Decatur from Sherman, but a tenacious Union commander stalled the Confederate cavalry from destroying the wagon train. When the cavalry corps’ leader learned of the infantry corps’ sound defeat, he ordered his men to fall back to Atlanta as well.
Of the 34,863 Union troops engaged at the Battle of Atlanta, 3,722 were killed, wounded, captured, or reported missing. Confederate forces suffered an estimated 5,500 casualties (of 40,438 engaged). While the Union victory at the Battle of Atlanta dealt a crippling blow to the Confederacy’s defensive forces, it was not itself decisive. Sherman had succeeded in cutting off Atlanta from the eastern railroad and killing, wounding, or capturing over 10 percent of Hood’s army, but Atlanta remained a heavily fortified city with two major railroads still accessible from the west. Given this, Sherman began intensifying his shelling of Atlanta and repositioned the Army of the Tennessee in order to sever the city’s western railroads. He would not force a surrender, however, until the first week of September. After torching everything of military value in Atlanta, Sherman and his men would lay waste to the Georgia countryside on his momentous and utterly devastating March to the Sea.
For Lincoln’s part, the repeated victories at Atlanta and the eventual capture of the city bolstered his reelection campaign. With Grant and Sherman having turned the tide in the war, an end to the death and destruction was now in sight.
