Belle Boyd, in full Isabelle Boyd,  (born May 9, 1844, Martinsburg, Virginia [now in West Virginia], U.S.—died June 11, 1900, Kilbourne [now Wisconsin Dells], Wisconsin), spy for the Confederacy during the American Civil War and later an actress and lecturer.
Boyd attended Mount Washington Female College in Baltimore, Maryland, from 1856 to 1860. In Martinsburg, Virginia, at the outbreak of the Civil War, she joined in fund-raising activities on behalf of the Confederacy. When the town was occupied by Union forces in July 1861, she associated freely with officers, gleaning bits of military information that she sent by messenger to Confederate authorities. She and her mother denied entry to Union soldiers who wanted to raise a flag over their house in Martinsburg. When one of the soldiers tried to force his way in, Belle Boyd shot and killed him. She was tried and was acquitted on a defense of justifiable homicide.
Union officers under the command of Gen. James Shields were quartered in the same residence as Boyd in Front Royal, and Boyd overheard their plans for a withdrawal from that town. She undertook a hazardous journey through the lines to inform Gen. T.J. (“Stonewall”) Jackson of the Union plans to destroy the town’s bridges as part of their retreat. This was the only major success in intelligence work she is known to have had. After her return to Martinsburg, Boyd continued to spy openly for the Confederates and served also as a courier and scout with J.S. Mosby’s guerrillas.
In 1862 Boyd was arrested on a warrant signed by U.S. Secretary of War Edwin Stanton; she was eventually released as part of an exchange of prisoners. Arrested again after her return to Union-held Martinsburg, Boyd was again released, in 1863, after a bout with typhoid fever in prison. Her usefulness in the North at an end, she was thenceforth employed as a courier.
In 1864 she sailed on a blockade runner to England bearing letters from Confederate Pres. Jefferson Davis. After her ship was intercepted by a Union vessel, she utterly distracted an officer named Hardinge who was placed aboard as prize master. He allowed the Confederate captain of the vessel to escape and for that was court-martialed and discharged from the navy, after which he went to England, where he married Boyd in August 1864.
In 1865 she published her two-volume memoir, Belle Boyd in Camp and Prison. Soon after, she began living as a widow, though scholars are divided on the actual fate of Hardinge. Most believe he died in 1865 or 1866 after returning to the United States to face charges of aiding and abetting a spy (Boyd). Others believe he may have lived much longer and may even have rejoined Boyd in England. In 1866 she turned to the stage, making her debut in The Lady of Lyons in Manchester and then returning to the United States to make a tour of the South. She appeared in New York in The Honeymoon in 1868. She retired the following year, but in 1886, her third marriage having brought her into financial difficulties, she began a career as a lecturer on her own exploits. Boyd died during a speaking tour in Wisconsin.
