Board of Regents v. Roth,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 29, 1972, ruled (5–3) that nontenured educators whose contracts are not renewed have no right to procedural due process under the Fourteenth Amendment unless they can prove they have liberty or property interests at stake.
The case centred on David Roth, a nontenured assistant professor at Wisconsin State University, Oshkosh. When his one-year fixed-term contract expired in 1969, school officials opted not to renew it. When they notified Roth of their decision, the officials provided no reasons for dismissing him, nor did they grant him a hearing to challenge their actions. Roth subsequently filed suit, alleging a violation of his right to procedural due process of law, which requires that individuals be given notice and opportunities to be heard before being deprived of liberty or property. In addition, Roth claimed that he had been fired as a result of critical comments he had made about the administration, and he thus asserted that his First Amendment freedom of speech rights had also been violated. A federal district court entered a judgment in favour of Roth, ordering that he be provided reasons for his dismissal and a hearing. However, the court stayed the proceedings concerning the freedom of speech allegations. The Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed.
On January 18, 1972, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. It noted that persons are entitled to procedural due process rights only if their liberty or property is deprived by government action. The court observed that liberty interests are wide ranging and include the right of persons to enter into contracts, to marry, to raise children, and to enjoy privileges recognized as vital to the pursuit of happiness and to good name or integrity. Insofar as the decision not to renew Roth’s contract was not based on charges that could have damaged his reputation or ability to procure future employment, the court found that his liberty interests were not at stake.
The Supreme Court next addressed property interests. It noted that such interests are created not by the Constitution but rather by contracts, statutes, rules, and regulations. The court noted that Roth’s contract “made no provision for renewal.” In addition, the court observed that there were no state laws or university policies “that secured his interest in re-employment or that created a legitimate claim to it.” On the basis of those findings, the court held that Roth had no property or liberty interests that required school officials to grant a hearing. Thus, the university had not violated his procedural due process rights. (Given that the district court had not ruled on the alleged violation of his freedom of speech rights, the Supreme Court did not address it.) The decision of the Seventh Circuit was overturned. (Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr., was not involved in deciding the case.)
