Charles Gravier, count de Vergennes,  (born December 28, 1719, Dijon, France—died  February 13, 1787, Versailles), French foreign minister who fashioned the alliance with the North American colonists that helped them throw off British rule in the American Revolution; at the same time, he worked, with considerable success, to establish a stable balance of power in Europe.
Vergennes’s father was president of the Parlement (high court of justice) of Dijon. He accompanied his uncle, the diplomat Théodore Chevignard de Chavigny, on embassies to Portugal and Germany in the 1740s, and in 1750 he was made ambassador to Trier (now in Germany). After serving on an embassy to Hanover (1752), Vergennes became ambassador to Ottoman Turkey in 1754. Two years later France, in alliance with its traditional enemy, Austria, went to war against Prussia and Great Britain (Seven Years’ War, 1756–63). During the conflict, Vergennes ably defended French policies to the Turks, who were bitterly anti-Austrian. After the war, Vergennes, on orders from his government, set about stimulating tensions between Turkey and Russia. He was recalled to Paris at the outbreak of the Russo-Turkish War (1768–74).
Appointed ambassador to Sweden in 1771, Vergennes assisted King Gustav III (ruled 1771–92) in the coup d’état (August 1772) by which Gustav greatly strengthened his authority at the expense of the Swedish nobles. In June 1774 the newly crowned French monarch Louis XVI recalled Vergennes and made him minister of foreign affairs.
As early as December 1775, eight months after the outbreak of the American Revolution, Vergennes was advocating that France provide secret financial assistance to the insurgent American colonists. In this way, he hoped to strike a blow at Great Britain that would avenge France’s defeat in the Seven Years’ War. His schemes were vigorously opposed by the comptroller general, Anne-Robert-Jacques Turgot, who claimed that such aid would strain French finances, but by the time Turgot fell from power, in May 1776, Vergennes had won the support of the king. In February 1778 he concluded an alliance with the colonists, and France then declared war on Great Britain. Although French volunteers and a French fleet helped the colonists gain their decisive victory at the Siege of Yorktown in 1781, Vergennes did not try to regain former French territory in North America when he negotiated peace with Great Britain in 1783.
Meanwhile, Vergennes sought to prevent the Holy Roman emperor Joseph II from using the Franco-Austrian alliance as a means of gaining French support for Austrian expansion into Bavaria. When Joseph went to war with Prussia over this issue (War of the Bavarian Succession, 1778–79), Vergennes helped mediate the peace settlement. In addition, he blocked Joseph’s attempts (1784–85) to exchange the Austrian Netherlands for Bavaria and to force the Dutch to open the Scheldt River to Austrian shipping. In the months immediately preceding his death, Vergennes concluded commercial treaties with Great Britain and Russia.
