 The U.S. Supreme Court is neither democratic nor easily changed, to some Americans’ delight and others’ dismay. No one would seriously propose that we elect justices—just take a look at the tawdry contests in states that put their supreme courts and various judicial posts on the ballot. But is the third federal branch so perfect that it is immune from reform?
This question is worth asking again since we probably face yet another, and possibly more than one, Court appointment in the near future. Many have noted the ages of Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Anthony Kennedy, 83 and 80, respectively, after the election of Pres. Donald Trump in 2016. Prior to the election, Democrats (and perhaps the justices themselves) had anticipated that Hillary Clinton would be responsible for filling any vacancies on the Court.
[Learn why Madeleine Albright fears the effects of an ongoing war on democracy.]
The American public just might be ready to consider a judicial reform or two. While the Supreme Court’s approval level in most recent surveys remains close to 50 percent, citizens are not inclined to view the Court as positively as they once did. Conservatives still remember the liberal Warren Court and many unpleasant (to them) decisions since, not least Roe v. Wade, while liberals harrumph when they recall Bush v. Gore in 2000 or, more recently, the Citizens United decision that some say has opened the floodgates even more for corporate money in the election process.
For starters, what about abolishing lifetime tenure of Supreme Court justices (and maybe lower federal court judges) and moving toward a nonrenewable fixed term of 15 to 18 years? One could argue that the Constitution doesn’t guarantee lifetime tenure anyway, saying only that justices shall serve “during good Behaviour.” When justices stay on the Supreme Court for decades—well into their 70s, 80s, and beyond—they often become insular and out of touch with new mores, advanced technologies, and younger generations. Structured properly, staggered appointments of fixed-term seats would also ensure that each new president, reflecting the mandate of his or her election, would get an appointment or two.
Given that judicial salaries are low compared with those in the private sector, perhaps additional highly qualified individuals would be willing to serve in term-limited judicial posts. Chief Justice John Roberts favored a term limit before he was nominated to the Court—and a sizable number of legal scholars have also endorsed this reform. As it is, presidents are overlooking many of the ablest and most experienced legal minds, preferring to seek out young, less-veteran attorneys so that they can leave a long-lasting legacy on the Court.
Absent a term limit, which would be my preference, the nation might want to consider a generous mandatory retirement age. Justices Ginsburg and Kennedy seem vigorous enough, but Court scholars well remember William O. Douglas, who had been incapacitated by a stroke and was infirm at age 76 yet fought to stay on the Court anyway.
Inevitably, these reforms will have political consequences, although they are not immediately predictable. So what? The political nature of the Court has been on display at the confirmation hearings of every recent appointee, particularly with President Obama’s nomination of Judge Merrick Garland following the death of Justice Antonin Scalia. The Republican-controlled Senate refused to even hold a confirmation hearing, instead opting to wait for the end of President Obama’s term, leaving the nomination to the next president. Following the election of President Trump, Garland was passed over for conservative Judge Neil Gorsuch.
Court politics also came to the fore at the 2010 State of the Union address. In an extraordinary precedent that went well beyond FDR’s criticism of the Court in the 1930s, President Obama sharply rebuked the Court for its Citizens United ruling while Democratic congressmen stood and cheered. Justice Sam Alito, appointed by Pres. George W. Bush, could be seen to shake his head and mouth the words “not true.” This was the latest proof that the Court is naturally political—and that it does not reside on Mount Olympus, in the view of many citizens in and out of public life.
A public opinion survey about the Court, conducted by Fairleigh Dickinson University in January and February 2010, confirmed the public’s evolving views and desire for a more open and accessible Court. By a margin of 61 to 26 percent, respondents said that “televising Supreme Court hearings would be good for democracy, rather than undermining the [Court’s] dignity or authority.” Democrats, Republicans, and Independents were in agreement—a rarity in this polarized era.
[Defending every American’s right to vote is the only way that America can fulfill its promise, says Henry Louis Gates, Jr. But there are too many threats against that today.]
More remarkably, Americans of all partisan stripes endorsed “limiting any Supreme Court Justice to a maximum term of 18 years on the bench.” Overall, respondents favored this proposal by a margin of 56 to 35 percent. (The telephone survey included a random sample of 1,002 registered voters, with a margin of error of 3 percent.)
The people of the United States have come to accept a large role for the judicial branch, despite its undemocratic nature. But the inherent distrust of concentrated, seemingly unlimited power has also given many Americans pause. Under the right set of circumstances, and despite the enormous difficulties involved in changing the Constitution, a constitutional amendment to restructure the Court might receive serious consideration.
This essay was originally published in 2018 in Encyclopædia Britannica Anniversary Edition: 250 Years of Excellence (1768–2018).
