Edward Douglass White,  (born Nov. 3, 1845, near Thibodaux, La., U.S.—died  May 19, 1921, Washington, D.C.), ninth chief justice of the United States (1911–21), whose major contribution to U.S. jurisprudence was his “rule of reason” decision in 1911 that federal courts have since applied to antitrust cases.
The son of a judge, U.S. congressman, and Louisiana governor, White received a Roman Catholic Jesuit education and fought briefly for the Confederacy in the Civil War, after which he was trained in a New Orleans law office. Entering Louisiana politics as a Democrat, he was elected a state senator in 1874 and was appointed to the state Supreme Court in 1878. Elected to the U.S. Senate in 1890, he was elevated to the U.S. Supreme Court by President Grover Cleveland in 1894.
As an associate justice, he formulated the concept of the “incorporation” of territories that the United States had acquired in 1898 by the Spanish-American War. In a concurring opinion in Downes v. Bidwell (1901), one of a group called the Insular cases, White argued that “incorporation” into the United States, by treaty or statute, determined the availability of constitutional safeguards to residents of a new U.S. possession. This vague criterion was adopted by a majority of the court in 1905 and was invoked to deny constitutional protection in Hawaii and the territories won from Spain, which were held to be “unincorporated.”
Promoted to the chief justiceship by President William Howard Taft in 1910, White assumed office early the next year. In Standard Oil Company of New Jersey v. United States and United States v. American Tobacco Company (both 1911) he promulgated the idea that a restraint of trade by a monopolistic business must be “unreasonable” to be illegal under the Sherman Act. His failure to define a “reasonable” restraint, coupled with the imprecise brevity of the Sherman Act, made subsequent antitrust decisions very difficult to predict.
During World War I, White wrote two important decisions in favour of federal emergency powers. Wilson v. New (1917) sustained the Adamson Act of 1916, fixing minimum wages and maximum hours for railroad workers. Military conscription was upheld in the Selective Draft Law Case (Arver v. United States; 1917).
