Elena Kagan,  (born April 28, 1960, New York, New York, U.S.), associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States from 2010. She also was the first woman to serve as U.S. solicitor general (2009–10).
Kagan, the daughter of Robert Kagan, a lawyer, and Gloria Gittelman Kagan, an elementary school teacher, was raised in New York City. She received a B.A. in history from Princeton University in 1981 and then studied on a fellowship at the University of Oxford, where she received an M.Phil. in 1983. Afterward she attended Harvard Law School, where she was awarded a J.D. in 1986. Upon receiving her law degree, Kagan spent several years clerking, first for Abner Mikva, who served on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, and then for Thurgood Marshall, associate justice of the U.S. Supreme Court.
Kagan spent a few years in private practice in Washington, D.C., before becoming a law professor at the University of Chicago (where the future U.S. president Barack Obama also taught). Plucked out of academia by Pres. Bill Clinton, she served as associate White House counsel (1995–96) and then as deputy assistant (1997–99) to Clinton on his Domestic Policy Council. In 1999 Clinton appointed Kagan to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, but the Republican-controlled Senate Judiciary Committee scheduled no hearings on her nomination. Future chief justice of the United States John G. Roberts was subsequently nominated to the post after George W. Bush became president.
Thereafter she returned to academia at Harvard Law School, where she taught administrative law, constitutional law, and civil procedure and in 2003 was appointed dean (by Harvard president Lawrence H. Summers, who went on to serve in the Obama administration), overseeing fund-raising, improving student life, and developing a reputation as a pragmatist able to reduce tension among Harvard’s notoriously fractious law faculty. In 2009 she was appointed by Obama to serve as the U.S. solicitor general; she was confirmed (61–31) by the U.S. Senate on March 19, becoming the first woman to occupy the post.
On May 10, 2010, Kagan was nominated by Obama to replace retiring justice John Paul Stevens on the U.S. Supreme Court. Because of her reputation for reaching out to conservatives—she had recruited several conservative professors at Harvard, hosted a dinner honouring conservative justice Antonin Scalia, and received a standing ovation from the conservative Federalist Society—some liberals feared that she might not be a reliable vote for the court’s liberal minority, though she was a passionate advocate of civil rights, including gay rights. Kagan was confirmed (63–37) by the Senate in August 2010.
