Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC),  committee established by U.S. Pres. Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1941 to help prevent discrimination against African Americans in defense and government jobs.
On June 25, 1941, Roosevelt signed Executive Order 8802, which banned “discrimination in the employment of workers in defense industries or government because of race, creed, color, or national origin.” At the same time, the Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC) was established to help enforce the order.
Roosevelt took this action in response to concerns raised by African American leaders such as labour organizer A. Philip Randolph, Mary McLeod Bethune (director of minority affairs in the National Youth Administration), and others, who were outraged that black soldiers were fighting for the United States in segregated units in the military and returning home to a society that still violated their basic rights.
After the executive order was signed, many African Americans applied for defense jobs, but the industry as a whole refused to cooperate, leading Roosevelt to strengthen the FEPC in 1943 by increasing its budget and replacing a Washington-based part-time staff with a full-time staff located around the country.
Enforcement of the order led to some positive changes for African Americans. By the end of World War II, in 1945, African Americans held 8 percent of the jobs in the defense industry, up from 3 percent before the war. In addition, about 200,000 African Americans held government jobs, three times more than before the war had begun. Most of the jobs were relatively low-paying, unskilled positions.
After World War II the U.S. Congress debated making the FEPC permanent, but two bills designed to do that were defeated. In 1945 Congress, whose most important committees were headed by Southerners, cut off funding to the FEPC, which then formally dissolved in 1946. It took another 20 years before the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission was established to deal with many of the same issues.
