Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin, also called Fisher II,  legal case, decided on June 23, 2016, in which the U.S. Supreme Court affirmed (4–3) a ruling of the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals that had upheld the undergraduate admissions policy of the University of Texas at Austin, which incorporated a limited program of affirmative action with the aim of increasing racial and ethnic diversity among its students. In an earlier version of the same case, subsequently known as “Fisher I,” the Supreme Court had vacated and remanded (7–1) the Fifth Circuit’s endorsement of the admissions policy on the ground that the appeals court had failed to apply the standard of strict scrutiny (the most-demanding form of judicial review) in its determination that the policy was “narrowly tailored” to serve the state’s compelling interest in “the educational benefits that flow from a diverse student body.” Specifically, the Supreme Court ruled, the Fifth Circuit had misinterpreted Grutter v. Bollinger (2003; see Bollinger decisions) in giving deference to the university’s judgment that each applicant was evaluated as an individual and that its consideration of race was “necessary” to achieve the educational benefits of diversity. After the Fifth Circuit reexamined the policy in keeping with the Supreme Court’s ruling and again found it to be constitutional, the plaintiff, Abigail Fisher, a white student who had been denied admission to the University of Texas at Austin in 2008, again appealed to the Supreme Court, which agreed in June 2015 to rehear the case, thereafter known as “Fisher II.” Oral arguments were heard on December 9, 2015.
In its opinion, written by Justice Anthony M. Kennedy and joined by Justices Stephen Breyer, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Sonia Sotomayor, the court held that the university’s admissions policy, as reviewed by the Fifth Circuit, did satisfy strict scrutiny and thus did not violate Fisher’s constitutional right to equal protection of the laws. Justice Samuel A. Alito, Jr., wrote a dissenting opinion that was joined by Chief Justice John G. Roberts, Jr., and Justice Clarence Thomas. Thomas also wrote a separate dissenting opinion. Justice Elena Kagan was recused.
