Franklin v. Gwinnett County Public Schools,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on February 26, 1992, ruled (9–0) that students who are subjected to sexual harassment in public schools may sue for monetary damages under Title IX of the Federal Education Amendments of 1972. Franklin was the first case wherein the Supreme Court held that monetary damages could be awarded in Title IX cases.
The case involved Christine Franklin, a sophomore at a high school in Georgia’s Gwinnett County Public School District. Franklin alleged that in 1986–88 she was subjected to sexual harassment and abuse by Andrew Hill, a teacher and sports coach. According to Franklin, Hill engaged her in sexually explicit conversations, forced kissing, and coercive intercourse on school grounds. Franklin claimed that although teachers and administrators were aware of the harassment—to which other students were also subjected—they did nothing to stop it, even discouraging her from bringing charges against Hill. The school launched an investigation, but it was closed when Hill resigned in 1988.
Franklin subsequently sued for monetary damages under Title IX, which states that
A federal district court dismissed Franklin’s suit, stating that Title IX did not allow for monetary relief. The Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the decision.
On December 11, 1991, the case was argued before the Supreme Court. When considering the issue of remedies, the court followed the traditional presumption that “absent clear direction to the contrary by Congress, the federal courts have the power to award any appropriate relief in a cognizable cause of action brought pursuant to a federal statute.” The court found no evidence that Congress intended to abandon the traditional presumption when it passed Title IX. Moreover, the justices dismissed the notion that allowing monetary damages would extend the federal courts’ power into an area that belonged to the executive and legislative branches.
The court further rejected the argument that because Title IX was enacted pursuant to the spending clause of the U.S. Constitution (Article 1, Section 8, clause 1), monetary awards were not permitted. In Pennhurst State School and Hospital v. Halderman (1981), the court had limited remedies under a spending-clause statute, but that case had involved unintentional violations. The violation in Franklin was intentional and thus did not fall under the earlier ruling. Although some maintained that Title IX allowed only for back pay or an order that the violation end, the court found such remedies were largely useless to students. In Franklin the student had no claim to back pay, and she was no longer at the school. In addition, Hill had already resigned. The court therefore ruled that monetary damages are available in cases involving violations of Title IX. The Eleventh Circuit’s decision was reversed, and the case was remanded. It was later resolved with an out-of-court settlement, the terms of which were not disclosed.
