Fred Shuttlesworth, original name in full Freddie Lee Robinson,  (born March 18, 1922, Mount Meigs, Alabama, U.S.—died October 5, 2011, Birmingham, Alabama), American minister and civil rights activist who established, with Martin Luther King, Jr., and others, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) and who worked to end segregation in the South.
Shuttlesworth, the eldest child of a large family, grew up poor on his stepfather’s farm in rural Alabama. Following his high school graduation, he worked as a truck driver until he was inspired to pursue a life in the church. While studying at Selma University (B.A., 1951) and Alabama State College (now Alabama State University; B.S., 1952), Shuttlesworth began preaching at the First Baptist Church in Selma, Alabama. He left Selma in 1952 to take over as pastor of Birmingham’s Bethel Baptist Church.
In Birmingham Shuttlesworth became increasingly involved with the civil rights movement. He worked with such organizations as the Civic League and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) on efforts that included increased voter registration among African Americans. In 1956 he founded the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights, which sought to overturn Birmingham’s segregation laws. The following year he helped establish the SCLC. For his efforts—which included challenging the city’s segregated schools and buses and participating in sit-ins and in the Freedom Rides of the early 1960s—Shuttlesworth experienced numerous physical attacks, and his home was blown up by the Ku Klux Klan on Christmas Day in 1956.
In 1961 Shuttlesworth moved to Cincinnati, Ohio, where he founded the Greater New Light Baptist Church in 1966. He helped organize the historic march for voting rights from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama, in 1965. In an effort to provide a source of low-income housing, he established the Shuttlesworth Housing Foundation in Cincinnati in the 1980s. He received the Presidential Citizens Medal, the country’s second highest civilian award, from U.S. Pres. Bill Clinton in 2001. Five years later Shuttlesworth retired from the ministry.
