Gabriel Duvall,  (born Dec. 6, 1752, Marietta, near Buena Vista, Md. [U.S.]—died  March 6, 1844, Prince George’s county, Md., U.S.), associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States (1811–35).
Duvall, the great-grandson of Marin (Mareen) Du Val (Duval), a merchant and wealthy planter who emigrated to Maryland from Nantes in the mid-17th century, was the sixth child of Benjamin Duvall and Susanna Tyler Duvall. By the time that Duvall was admitted to the bar at age 26 he had already served for three years (1775–77) as clerk of the revolutionary Maryland Convention and as clerk for the Council of Safety, the convention’s executive wing. In 1777, after Maryland’s government was established, he became the clerk of its House of Delegates and served as the commissioner charged with controlling and protecting British property in America. In 1782 Duvall won election to the Maryland State Council, and from 1787 to 1794 he served in the House of Delegates. In 1787 he was selected as a delegate to the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia, but he and the four other Maryland delegates chose not to attend. (Subsequently, Maryland selected five new delegates, three of whom signed the Constitution of the United States.)
Duvall won election to the U.S. House of Representatives as an Anti-Federalist (Democratic-Republican) in 1794. Two years later he was named to the Maryland Supreme Court, and in 1802 Pres. Thomas Jefferson selected him to serve as the first comptroller of the U.S. Treasury. Pres. James Madison appointed Duvall to the U.S. Supreme Court in November 1811.
A colleague of the prolific Chief Justice John Marshall and Justice Joseph Story, Duvall wrote relatively few opinions. Although he notably dissented in the Dartmouth College case (1819), in which the Supreme Court ruled that the New Hampshire legislature could not abrogate the charter of Dartmouth College granted by King George III of England in 1769, he generally voted with Marshall. He is best remembered for his support of the rights of slaves in Mima Queen and Child v. Hepburn (1812)—in which he objected to Marshall’s exclusion of hearsay evidence that substantiated the freedom of two slaves—and Le Grand v. Darnall (1829). Despite deafness and failing health, he kept his seat for a number of years to prevent the appointment of someone he considered “too much of a politician” for the Supreme Court. Upon learning that Pres. Andrew Jackson planned to nominate Roger B. Taney, a fellow Marylander, as his replacement, Duvall resigned from the bench in 1835; Taney subsequently was elevated to chief justice and wrote the majority opinion in the controversial Dred Scott decision (1857).
