Gebser v. Lago Vista Independent School District,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 22, 1998, ruled (5–4) that, under Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, damages cannot be awarded in a teacher-student sexual harassment case unless a school official “who at a minimum has authority to institute corrective measures…has actual notice of, and is deliberately indifferent to, the teacher’s misconduct.”
In 1991–92 Alida Star Gebser was a ninth-grade student in the Lago Vista Independent School District, a public school system in Texas that received federal funds. Frank Waldrop, a male teacher, made sexually suggestive comments to Gebser in school and initiated sexual contact with her during a home visit. For about a half year, Waldrop engaged Gebser in sexual relations but never on school grounds. In addition, Gebser never notified school officials about the relationship. In January 1993 police arrested Waldrop after the two were discovered while having sexual intercourse. The board fired the teacher, and his credentials were revoked. At that time the board did not have an antiharassment policy or an official grievance procedure as required by federal regulations.
In 1993 Gebser and her mother sued the school board for monetary damages under Title IX, which states that
Both a federal district court and the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in favour of the board. According to the latter court, “there was insufficient evidence to suggest that a school official should have known about Waldrop’s relationship with Gebser.”
On March 25, 1998, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. It noted that per its ruling in Franklin v. Gwinnett County Public Schools (1992), students who are sexually harassed by teachers in public schools may sue for monetary damages under Title IX. However, that decision did not “define the contours of liability,” and the court set out to address that issue in Gebser. It rejected the petitioners’ claims that, under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, damages could be awarded even if school officials were not notified of the misconduct. The court distinguished Title IX suits from Title VII claims in refusing to apply common-law agency principles to teacher-student harassment. The court pointed out that Title VII governs employment discrimination, and it is applicable to staff-to-staff sexual harassment in schools. The court explained that Title VII explicitly defines employer to include any “agent,” and it holds the employer responsible for its employees’ misconduct of sexual harassment on the basis of the principles of respondeat superior (“that the master must answer”) and constructive notice. In other words, the court ruled that a school board can be liable only if harassment is aided by a person in authority and in situations where that person should have known about the behaviour but failed to discover it or prevent it from occurring (or both).
The court also held that Title IX is “contractual” in nature, with Congress awarding federal funds conditioned on the recipients’ compliance with federal nondiscrimination law. When Congress does not explicitly provide a private course of action, the court reasoned, Congress’s duty was to reconcile its judicial power in granting all appropriate relief with congressional purpose. The court was of the opinion that Congress did not intend to grant monetary damages to private parties when funding recipients are unaware of discrimination, which was the case in Gebser. Furthermore, the court held that the school board’s failure to develop an antiharassment policy or a grievance procedure did not constitute actual notice or deliberate indifference. On the basis of those findings, the Supreme Court ruled that the school board was not liable for damages under Title IX. The Fifth Circuit’s decision was upheld.
