Gong Lum v. Rice,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on November 21, 1927, ruled (9–0) that a Mississippi school board had not violated the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection clause when it classified a student of Chinese descent as “colored” and barred her from attending a white high school.
Gong Lum, a taxpaying resident of Rosedale, Mississippi, was the father of nine-year-old Martha Lum. Martha, a native-born citizen of the United States, attended the first day of school at the all-white Rosedale Consolidated School. However, at the noon recess, the superintendent, acting on an order issued by the board of trustees, notified her that she would not be allowed to return to the school because “she was of Chinese descent, and not a member of the white or Caucasian race.” Martha’s father subsequently filed suit.
A state trial court entered a mandamus order in favour of Gong Lum, directing officials to readmit his daughter. It held that Martha should not have been classified as “colored.” The Supreme Court of Mississippi, however, reversed, citing the state constitution, which called for separate schools for white and “colored” students. Furthermore, the court held that Martha was of “the Mongolian or yellow race” and could not be considered white.
The case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court on October 12, 1927. It began its review by noting “the right and power of the state to regulate the method of providing for” public education. The court then cited Cumming v. Richmond County Board of Education (1899), in which it had upheld a state law that allowed separate high schools for black and white students. That opinion also stated that “the education of the people in schools maintained by state taxation is a matter belonging to the respective states.” According to Cumming, any interference on the part of the federal judiciary with the management of the schools could not be justified “except in the case of a clear and unmistakable disregard of rights secured by the supreme law of the land.”
The Supreme Court next addressed whether Martha had been denied equal protection when educational officials classified her among the “colored” races and “furnished facilities for education equal to that offered to all,” no matter what “color.” The court pointed out that since that was not a new question, it did not call for a full argument. Instead, it cited a long list of cases, notably Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), which upheld the “separate but equal” doctrine in public education. According to the court, the classification of students on the basis of race to receive the benefit of education is within the constitutional power of the state legislature of Mississippi; still further, the U.S. Constitution protected that action from the intervention of the federal judiciary. The decision of the Supreme Court of Mississippi was upheld.
In 1954 the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Cumming with its decision in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka.
