Good News Club v. Milford Central School,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 11, 2001, ruled (6–3) that, under the First Amendment’s freedom of speech clause, a religious group in New York state could not be denied the use of a local public school’s facilities after school hours, since the facilities were available to other groups promoting similar issues (in this case, the moral and character development of children).
The case involved Milford Central School’s community-use policy, which governed after-hours use of its facilities. District residents could use the school for “instruction in any branch of education, learning or the arts” as well as for “social, civic and recreational meetings and entertainment events, and other uses pertaining to the welfare of the community.” By allowing its facilities to be available to groups that met defined criteria, the board created a limited public forum. In 1996 the Good News Club, a private Christian group using Bible lessons and religious songs for children between the ages of 6 and 12, sought to conduct its meetings in the school cafeteria after the school day was over. The Milford Board of Education, however, denied the group’s request on the grounds that its activities amounted to religious instruction and was a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment’s establishment clause, which generally prohibits the government from establishing, advancing, or giving favour to any religion.
In 1997 the Good News Club filed suit, alleging that the denial of its request violated the First Amendment’s freedom of speech clause and the rights to equal protection and religious freedom in the Fourteenth Amendment. A federal district court in New York and the Second Circuit Court of Appeals rejected the club’s arguments. The courts determined that the school’s actions were constitutional because the club’s activities were “quintessentially religious.” Because the school had not allowed other religious groups to use the facilities, it had not engaged in “unconstitutional viewpoint discrimination.”
On February 28, 2001, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. Writing the majority opinion, Justice Clarence Thomas noted that when a state actor, such as a public school board, creates a limited public forum, it is free to restrict certain types of speech as long as the limitations do not discriminate on the basis of viewpoint and are reasonable in light of the purpose that the forum serves. In its analysis the court acknowledged that the school allowed a variety of groups to use its facilities for purposes dealing with the welfare of the community, such as moral and character development. The court observed that the club clearly promoted community welfare through moral development but did so from a religious perspective and through openly religious activities, such as religious songs and biblical stories, unlike other groups, such as the Boy Scouts, the Girl Scouts, and the 4-H Club, which approached the same issues from secular perspectives. Noting that the school disregarded the club’s primary purpose as being the moral development of children, which was a goal closely aligned with its community-use policy, the court ruled that the board discriminated against the club because of its religious grounding. To that end, the court held that the board’s exclusion of the club was unconstitutional viewpoint discrimination.
The Supreme Court also rejected the school’s contention that its desire to avoid an establishment-clause violation warranted its exclusion of the club. The court was not persuaded that elementary schoolchildren would have experienced coercive pressure to participate in the club’s activities or that students would have perceived the school’s actions as endorsing the Good News Club. With respect to the threat of coercion, the court explained that insofar as children could not participate in the club’s activities without the written permission of their parents, it was unlikely that they would have felt coerced to participate in the club’s religiously motivated activities. On the basis of those findings, the court decided that the school had violated the free speech rights of the club, and it overturned the Second Circuit’s decision.
