Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on May 25, 1964, ruled (9–0) that a Virginia county, in an attempt to avoid desegregation, could not close its public schools and use public funds to support private segregated schools. The court held that the policy broke the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection clause.
In Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954), the Supreme Court held that in the field of public education, the doctrine of “separate but equal” has no place. According to the court, segregated educational facilities are inherently unequal. However, during the years immediately after Brown, many governments and school boards experimented with various devices to avoid desegregation. In Virginia, officials undertook a policy called “Massive Resistance,” which resulted in a series of antidesegregation efforts that were ultimately ruled unconstitutional. The state legislature then passed a freedom-of-choice program, in which students could choose the school they wished to attend; the policy largely resulted in segregated schools. At that time the state also repealed its compulsory attendance laws, making school attendance optional. Against that background Prince Edward county did not levy school taxes for the 1959–60 school term, which led to the closure of all its public schools in 1959; public schools in all other counties of Virginia remained open. Families were directed to send their children to private schools that were segregated, and state and local funding was provided to those private schools. A private group formed to operate the schools for white children in the county, while local African Americans, including L. Francis Griffin on behalf of his children, engaged in a legal battle to desegregate the public schools.
A federal district court ruled that the closing of the county’s public schools was a violation of the equal protection clause, which guarantees that no person or group will be denied the protection under the law that is enjoyed by similar persons or groups. However, an appellate court reversed the ruling, finding that the district court should have abstained until the state court had rendered its decision. The Supreme Court of Appeals of Virginia subsequently ruled in favour of Prince Edward county. It held that the county had the right to close its public schools and that state funds could be used at the segregated private schools.
On March 30, 1964, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. In a unanimous opinion it held that the schoolchildren of Prince Edward county were treated differently from the schoolchildren of other Virginia counties. The Supreme Court also reasoned that the closing of the Prince Edward public schools weighed more heavily on black children, since the white children could attend accredited private schools, whereas black children had to either attend temporary schools or not attend school at all. Further, the court pointed out that all the private schools were racially segregated but received state and county financial support. The Supreme Court maintained that though Virginia had wide discretion in deciding whether or when laws operate statewide, the record in Prince Edward county demonstrated that public schools were closed and private schools were operated in their place—with state and county funding—solely to keep white and black children from attending the same schools. The court therefore held that the closing of the Prince Edward county schools denied black students equal protection of the law.
The court then added that the time for desegregating “with all deliberate speed” had run out and that there was no justification for “denying these Prince Edward County school children their constitutional rights to an education equal to that afforded by the public schools in other parts of Virginia.” The court concluded that a decree should be issued guaranteeing students in Prince Edward county the kind of education that was available in all state public schools. The federal appellate court’s decision was reversed, and the district court’s ruling was affirmed.
