Harris v. Forklift Systems,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on November 9, 1993, ruled (9–0) that plaintiffs in Title VII workplace-harassment suits need not prove psychological injury. However, the court acknowledged that an offensive joke or comment is unlikely to be grounds for sexual-harassment suits.
The case involved Teresa Harris, a rental manager for Forklift Systems, Inc., a company based in Tennessee. She alleged that, from 1985 to 1987, the president, Charles Hardy, created a hostile work environment through his abusive, vulgar, and offensive sexual comments and actions. His conduct reportedly included calling Harris “a dumb ass woman” and suggesting they “go to the Holiday Inn to negotiate [Harris’s] raise.” In addition, he also allegedly requested that Harris and other female employees retrieve coins from the front pockets of his pants, and he dropped items on the floor and asked the women to pick them up. After Harris complained to Hardy in 1987, he briefly stopped before resuming the harassment. Later that year Harris quit, and she subsequently filed suit, claiming that the sexual discrimination violated Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which makes it unlawful for employers to discriminate on the basis of sex, race, religion or natural origin.
A federal district court found that although Hardy’s behaviour was offensive, it did not create a hostile work environment. The court held that his conduct did not seriously impact Harris’s “psychological well being,” and it thus ruled in favour of Forklift Systems. The Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the ruling.
On October 13, 1993, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. Writing the majority opinion, Justice Sandra Day O’Connor dismissed the requirement that the harassment cause “concrete psychological harm.” Instead, the court set forth a standard that “takes a middle path between…conduct that is merely offensive” and that which results in “a tangible psychological injury.” According to the court, hostile-environment violations require both an objective and a subjective dimension. First, O’Connor explained, the conduct must be “severe or pervasive enough to create an objectively hostile or abusive work environment.” Second, a victim must “subjectively perceive the environment to be abusive.”
While acknowledging the lack of a precise test when determining whether an environment is hostile or abusive, the court held that all circumstances should be evaluated. Such conditions include the frequency of the conduct, its severity, whether it was physically threatening or was merely an offensive comment, and whether it unreasonably interfered with an employee’s work performance. On the basis of those findings, the Supreme Court reversed the Sixth Circuit’s decision, holding that it had applied an erroneous legal standard, and the case was remanded. Soon thereafter, the suit was settled out of court, the terms of which were not disclosed.
