Jackson v. Birmingham Board of Education,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on March 29, 2005, ruled (5–4) that an athletic coach who was removed from his position allegedly because he had complained about sexual discrimination in his school’s athletic program could file suit under Title IX of the Federal Education Amendments of 1972.
Roderick Jackson was a physical education teacher and the girls basketball coach at Ensley High School in Birmingham, Alabama. After investigating the level of support for the boys basketball program, in 2000 he began to complain that the girls program was receiving unequal funding and did not have the same access to facilities and equipment. Eventually, he received negative evaluations about his coaching and was removed from those duties; however, he continued to be employed as a teacher. Jackson then filed suit, claiming that the board retaliated against him for voicing his complaints under Title IX, which states that
After a federal district court dismissed his complaint, the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed, ruling that “Title IX does not provide a private right of action for retaliation.”
On November 30, 2004, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. It reviewed precedents and concluded that plaintiffs have a private right to action for damages under Title IX. The court explained that discriminating against employees who complain about sex discrimination is itself sex discrimination. Furthermore, the court rejected the school board’s argument that the plaintiff was an indirect victim of discrimination and thus not entitled to damages. Although the coach was not the original subject of discrimination, the court held that retaliating against him made him a victim of discrimination. Title IX would have little meaning, the court thought, if schools systems were allowed to retaliate against people who report such discrimination.
The board also argued that it was not liable for damages because Title IX was enacted pursuant to the spending clause of the U.S. Constitution (Article 1, Section 8, clause 1), which requires that those receiving federal funds be given adequate notice that they could be sued for certain conduct. In Jackson the board argued it had not been given notice that it could be held liable for retaliating against people who allege Title IX violations. The court disagreed, however, noting that previous rulings should have placed the school system on notice insofar as Title IX prohibits many diverse forms of sexual discrimination. On the basis of those findings, the Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Eleventh Circuit, and the case was remanded for further consideration.
In November 2006 the Birmingham Board of Education reached a settlement with the plaintiff, naming him head coach at another high school and paying damages. The board also agreed to implement various measures to ensure compliance with Title IX.
