Jane Currie Blaikie Hoge, née Jane Currie Blaikie,  (born July 31, 1811, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.—died Aug. 26, 1890, Chicago, Ill.), American welfare worker and fund-raiser, best remembered for her impressive organizational efforts to provide medical supplies and other material relief to Union soldiers during the Civil War.
Jane Blaikie was educated at the Young Ladies’ College in Philadelphia. In 1831 she married Abraham H. Hoge, a Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, merchant. Over the next several years, in addition to caring for her large family, Jane Hoge was secretary of the Pittsburgh Orphan Asylum. In 1848 the Hoges moved to Chicago, where in 1858 Jane Hoge helped found and direct the Home for the Friendless. The enlistment of two of her sons in the Union Army at the beginning of the Civil War drew her into volunteer nursing work at Camp Douglas, near Chicago.
By late 1861 Hoge and her friend Mary A. Livermore were working with the Chicago (later Northwestern) Sanitary Commission under Eliza Chappell Porter. About that time they also were appointed agents of Dorothea Dix, superintendent of army nurses, to recruit nurses for service in hospitals in the Western Department (i.e., Illinois and the states and territories west of the Mississippi River, as far west as the Rocky Mountains and including New Mexico). In March 1862 they made a tour of army hospitals in Cairo and Mound City, Illinois, in St. Louis, Missouri, in Paducah, Kentucky, and elsewhere. In December 1862, after attending a general conference of U.S. Sanitary Commission leaders in Washington, D.C., Hoge and Livermore were appointed associate directors of the Chicago branch. The work demanded of them was great and ceaseless. By letters, addresses, and other means they aroused and maintained at high pitch the work of upwards of a thousand local aid societies throughout the Northwest in collecting and forwarding clothing, medical and hospital supplies, food, and other materials. During 1863 Jane Hoge made three trips to the front in the Vicksburg, Mississippi, campaign, combining her inspection of the logistics system with the nursing of soldiers.
Hoge’s account of her wartime experiences was published as The Boys in Blue (1867). In 1871 she organized a fund-raising campaign that financed the founding of the Evanston (Illinois) College for Ladies, which opened in September of that year under Frances Willard. From 1872 to 1885 she headed the Woman’s Presbyterian Board of Foreign Missions in the Northwest.
