Johnson v. Eisentrager,  U.S. Supreme Court case in which the court ruled in 1950 that nonresident enemy aliens do not have the legal right to petition U.S. courts for writs of habeas corpus—a prisoner’s petition requesting that the court determine the legality of his or her incarceration. This landmark Supreme Court case was reexamined in 2008 in light of the detention of alleged al-Qaeda and Taliban terrorists following the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
After the Japanese surrender at the end of World War II, the U.S. Army arrested and imprisoned more than 20 members of the German military. They were apprehended in China and charged with gathering and transmitting intelligence about the U.S. military to the Japanese in the months after the German surrender in May 1945.
U.S. Army officials transferred the German agents to Landsberg Prison in Germany, a prisoner-of-war camp maintained by the U.S. occupation forces. The German men were convicted of violating the terms of the German surrender, which had ordered that all hostilities toward the Allied forces end. One of those convicted, Lothar Eisentrager, filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in a U.S. district court on his own behalf and for that of 20 of his imprisoned colleagues.
After a series of appeals and court hearings, the case was heard in the Supreme Court. Speaking for the 6–3 majority who ruled against the petitioners, Justice Robert H. Jackson stated that the German prisoners were not permitted to petition U.S. courts, because they were neither U.S. citizens nor situated on U.S. soil when they were arrested. Therefore, they could not receive the protection of due process as set forth in the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution. Justice Jackson added that there had never been a case in any nation in which a writ of habeas corpus was recognized under those circumstances.
In a dissenting opinion, Justice Hugo L. Black countered that an enemy alien imprisoned by the U.S. government during peacetime has the right to submit a habeas corpus petition, even if he or she is not in a U.S. territory and has never been to the United States. He argued that U.S. jurisdiction includes any place where the U.S. government is in command. In this case, U.S.-occupied Germany was indeed under the jurisdiction of the United States at the time.
After the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and the Afghan War that followed, the administration of President George W. Bush authorized the arrest and detainment of a number of suspected terrorists. Most of the alleged al-Qaeda and Taliban members, both foreign nationals and U.S. citizens, were incarcerated at the U.S. naval base at Guantánamo Bay in Cuba.
On June 28, 2004, the Supreme Court decided two cases—Rasul v. Bush and Hamdi v. Rumsfeld—involving detainees in the war on terrorism. In their decisions, the court reversed the ruling it had made more than 50 years earlier in Johnson v. Eisentrager. In a 6–3 decision, the court held that U.S. courts may respond to the habeas corpus petitions of nonresident enemy aliens.
