John Singleton Mosby,  (born Dec. 6, 1833, Edgemont, Va., U.S.—died May 30, 1916, Washington, D.C.), Confederate ranger whose guerrilla band frequently attacked and disrupted Union supply lines in Virginia and Maryland during the American Civil War.
Reared near Charlottesville, Va., Mosby entered the University of Virginia in 1849 and graduated in 1852. While there he shot at and wounded a few students, but his resulting jail sentence was later annulled by the state legislature. In 1855 Mosby was admitted to the bar, and he practiced law in Bristol, Va., until the start of the Civil War in 1861. Enlisting in the Confederate cavalry, he saw action at Bull Run and spent most of 1862 as a scout with Gen. J.E.B. Stuart’s forces. It was not until Jan. 2, 1863, that Mosby, with just nine men, launched the ranger attacks for which he is best remembered.
Mosby’s band struck isolated Union posts in northern Virginia and Maryland in an effort to cut communications and disrupt supply lines. The rangers furnished their own guns (mostly revolvers), food, horses, and uniforms. They did not keep a common camp, boarding instead where they chose. At the end of a mission or when danger threatened, they scattered, only to link up once again at a predetermined time and location. They divided captured goods among themselves, leading Union officials to regard them as criminals rather than soldiers.
The lack of regimentation, combined with Mosby’s success as a commander, drew additional rangers to his band. The best known of their exploits took place on March 9, 1863, when they slipped through federal lines at Fairfax Court House and captured a Union general along with 100 of his men. This mission and subsequent triumphs earned Mosby promotions to captain, major, and, eventually (December 1864), colonel.
By April 1865 Mosby had eight companies of well-equipped, well-trained rangers under his command. But his last raid took place on April 10, the day following Robert E. Lee’s surrender at Appomattox. On April 21 he disbanded his men, and two months later he personally surrendered.
Mosby returned to private law practice in Warrenton, Va. At first a hero to Southerners, he lost their admiration when he entered politics as a Republican and backed Ulysses S. Grant for president. From 1878 to 1885 he served as U.S. consul at Hong Kong, and from 1904 to 1910 he was an assistant attorney in the Justice Department. He wrote two books about his war experiences: Mosby’s War Reminiscences, and Stuart’s Cavalry Campaigns (1887) and Stuart’s Cavalry in the Gettysburg Campaign (1908).
