John A. Logan, in full John Alexander Logan,  (born February 9, 1826, Jackson county, Illinois, U.S.—died December 26, 1886, Washington, D.C.), U.S. politician, Union general during the American Civil War (1861–65), and author who played a pivotal role in the creation of Memorial Day. Logan served in both the U.S. House of Representatives and the Senate and was a candidate for vice president.
The namesake son of a prominent former slave-owning physician and state legislator, Logan received his early education through tutors and private schools in southern Illinois. He worked as a jockey and raced his father’s Thoroughbreds in several states. Logan entered the Mexican-American War as a second lieutenant in the 1st Illinois Infantry but remained in Santa Fe (now in New Mexico) and saw no action. After a brief stint as the county clerk of Jackson county, Illinois, he received a law degree from the University of Louisville (Kentucky) in 1851 and won a four-year term as an Illinois prosecuting attorney shortly after his admission to the bar.
Logan (nicknamed “Black Jack” for his swarthy complexion and jet-black hair and mustache) won election to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1858 and again in 1860 as a Jacksonian Democrat from Illinois’s 9th congressional district, a region with partisan and divided loyalties at the beginning of the Civil War. Logan attempted a neutral stance during the opening months of the Civil War before entering the Union army as a colonel in the 31st Illinois Infantry, which he had organized primarily from his congressional district. From the outset he served under Gen. Ulysses S. Grant. Having been severely wounded at the Battle of Fort Donelson (February 1862), Logan recuperated with a promotion to brigadier general in March 1862 and resigned his congressional seat to accept it. One year later Grant won Logan a commission as a major general in charge of a division in the XVII Corps of Grant’s Army of the Tennessee. During the Vicksburg Campaign of 1863, Logan proved instrumental in the Union victories at Port Gibson, Raymond, and Champion Hill. Grant awarded Logan the honour of leading the first Union troops into the captured city of Vicksburg on July 4 at the end of the campaign.
Promoted to command the Army of the Tennessee’s XV Corps in 1864, Logan served in Maj. Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman’s Military Division of the Mississippi during the Atlanta Campaign (May–September 1864), winning the Battle of Dallas, Georgia (May 28), where his corps fought unaided. After Maj. Gen. James B. McPherson was killed early in the pivotal Battle of Atlanta (July 22), Logan succeeded him as commander of the Army of the Tennessee. Although he was inspirational to the Union battle victory, Logan was demoted back to corps command four days later in favour of Maj. Gen. Oliver O. Howard, whom Sherman deemed more capable of handling the comprehensive duties of a military department. Still in Georgia, Logan won the Battle of Ezra Church (July 28) and the first day (August 31) of the two-day Union victory at Jonesboro, which subsequently led to the fall of Atlanta two days later.
In response to special orders from Washington, Logan was temporarily released from the army to campaign in Illinois for Pres. Abraham Lincoln’s reelection. In the eyes of some historians, his performance as a “political” general in May–October 1864 has never been surpassed. Having returned to command the XV Corps in January 1865, Logan participated in the victorious march through the Carolinas. He was restored to command of the Army of the Tennessee at the close of the war. He mustered out his army on July 13, 1865.
Logan declined Grant’s offer of a brigadier generalship in the postwar U.S. army and returned to politics, this time as a Republican and an advocate of African American civil rights. He won three more U.S. House elections (1866, 1868, 1870) and served as the chair of the Ways and Means and Military Affairs committees. He was also one of the seven impeachment managers in the trial of Pres. Andrew Johnson in 1868. Moreover, Logan served as the second commander of the Grand Army of the Republic (GAR), an organization of Union army veterans, which Logan strengthened as a powerful political lobby during his three successive terms as its head. Logan parlayed his political and military influence with the GAR to nationalize a multiregional grave-decorating ceremony of soldiers’ graves into Decoration Day (later renamed Memorial Day), celebrated every May 30 from 1868 to 1971, when it began to be observed on the last Monday in May.
Logan subsequently won three U.S. Senate elections (1871, 1878, 1885) but failed twice to become the Republican Party’s presidential nominee. In 1884 he was the vice presidential candidate on the Republican ticket that lost the general election in which Grover Cleveland became president for the first time. Logan was the author of two opinion-filled historical tomes and a work of fiction in the 1880s, and by 1886 he was widely considered the front-runner to become the 23rd U.S. president before he succumbed to the effects of rheumatism and died in his Washington, D.C., home on December 26, 1886. Prior to his burial in Rock Creek Cemetery in Washington, D.C., Logan became the seventh person to lie in state at the Capitol Rotunda. He was posthumously honoured across the U.S. with five statues and a Colorado fort named in his honour. His is one of only three surnames mentioned in the state song of Illinois, and a museum and college were named for him in southern Illinois.
