Ken Starr, in full Kenneth Winston Starr,  (born July 21, 1946, Vernon, Texas, U.S.), American lawyer best known as the independent counsel (1994–99) who headed the investigation that led to the impeachment of U.S. Pres. Bill Clinton.
The son of a minister, Starr sold bibles door-to-door to earn money for college. After attending George Washington University (B.A., 1968) and Brown University (M.A., 1969), he earned a Juris Doctor degree (1973) from Duke University. He held government positions, serving as a law clerk (1975–77) to Chief Justice Warren Burger, as a counselor to the U.S. attorney general (1981–83), as an appellate judge (1983–89), and as U.S. solicitor general (1989–93).
In August 1994 Starr was named the independent counsel to lead the investigation into the so-called Whitewater affair, which involved a land deal in Arkansas during the time Clinton, a Democrat, was that state’s governor. As a result of the investigation, 11 people—including Clinton associates James and Susan McDougal—were convicted of crimes. Starr later looked into the suicide of White House counsel Vincent Foster, a longtime friend of the Clintons, but the matter was eventually closed. He subsequently was directed to investigate what came to be known as Travelgate, involving the firing of longtime White House workers, and Filegate, pertaining to FBI files on Republicans that were found in the White House. In 1998, however, allegations of an affair between Clinton and White House intern Monica Lewinsky became the focus of Starr’s attention.
Controversy surrounded Starr’s investigation, which included the media’s relentless reporting of lurid information, and both Starr and the White House were charged with making improper leaks. There were accusations that the investigative activities of Starr, a Republican, were politically motivated. Starr also was criticized for continuing to represent clients of his law firm, Kirkland & Ellis, and he was eventually forced to take an unpaid leave from the firm. After repeatedly denying the affair, in August 1998 Clinton publicly admitted to having a sexual relationship with Lewinsky. Less than a month later Starr released his report, which supported the charges that Clinton had committed perjury, obstructed justice, tampered with a witness, and abused his power as U.S. president. In the report, which was accompanied by voluminous evidence that included a semen-stained dress, tapes of telephone conversations, and grand jury testimony, Starr found that Clinton had lied under oath about a sexual relationship with Lewinsky and had taken steps to cover it up. The report was both legalistic in its tone and salacious in its explicit descriptions of sexual encounters between the two. Based on Starr’s findings, the House of Representatives voted to impeach the president in December 1998. The Senate acquitted Clinton the following year.
Starr drew sharp criticism for his work as independent counsel, and in 1999 he resigned. (He was replaced by Robert W. Ray, and the investigation continued until 2002, but no criminal charges were ever filed against Clinton.) Starr subsequently returned to private practice. He notably was on the defense team for financier Jeffrey Epstein, who was accused of various crimes, including sex trafficking. In what many saw as a lenient deal, Epstein pleaded guilty to solicitation charges in 2008. Starr later served as dean of Pepperdine University’s law school (2004–10) before becoming president of Baylor University in 2010; he also became chancellor in 2013. During his tenure at Baylor, the school drew criticism for its response to a series of alleged sexual assaults, a number of which were reportedly committed by football players. In May 2016 an independent investigation released a report that claimed the university had seriously mishandled the accusations. Shortly thereafter Starr was removed as president, and he later resigned as the school’s chancellor. In 2018 he published Contempt: A Memoir of the Clinton Investigation. Two years later Starr joined Pres. Donald Trump’s defense team for his first impeachment trial in the Senate; Trump was ultimately acquitted.
