Lamb’s Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free District,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 7, 1993, ruled (9–0) that a New York state school board’s refusal to allow a religious group to use school facilities after hours to show a film series about parenting issues violated the First Amendment’s guarantee to freedom of speech.
In 1988 New York state passed a law that allowed school boards to permit groups to use their facilities and property during nonschool hours for a wide array of outside purposes, including social, civic, and recreational meetings and entertainment. However, the law did not include the use of meetings for religious purposes. Lamb’s Chapel, an evangelical church, subsequently requested, on several occasions, to use school facilities at Center Moriches Union Free School District, outside school hours, to show a six-part video series dealing with parenting issues that centred on Christian family values. Board officials denied the church’s repeated requests, claiming that the film was “church related.”
In 1990 Lamb’s Chapel sued the board, alleging various constitutional violations, notably of the First Amendment’s freedom of speech and establishment clauses. A federal district court granted a summary judgment for the school board, dismissing the church’s claims. The court maintained that the school’s facilities were only a limited public forum—a nonpublic forum that the government has opened to the public for some specified activities—and it noted that the board had not allowed other religious groups to use the facilities. Thus, according to the court, the denial of Lamb’s Chapel’s request was viewpoint neutral, meaning that the board had exhibited neither a positive nor a negative attitude toward religion. The Second Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed in favour of the board.
The case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court on February 24, 1993. It found that insofar as the only reason the board rejected the organization’s request was solely that the group was of a religious nature, denying it access for that reason was a violation of the “viewpoint neutrality” standard. The Supreme Court was of the opinion that the board, by allowing school facilities to be used by civic and social groups that discuss “family issues and childrearing,” could not then deny access to Lamb’s Chapel, which planned to address similar topics from a religious standpoint. The court reasoned that opening school doors for some groups but not specifically for religious groups violates both the notion of viewpoint neutrality and their rights to free speech as protected by the First Amendment, even if the speech has its basis in religion or is made for religious purposes.
Likewise, the court observed that allowing a group to use school facilities for religious purposes does not imply that school or board officials promote or establish religion. The court pointed out that Lamb’s Chapel would have used the facilities during nonschool hours, and the school was not sponsoring the meetings. In addition, the meetings were open to the public. On the basis of those findings, the Supreme Court overturned the Second Circuit’s decision.
