Martinez v. Bynum,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on May 2, 1983, ruled (8–1) that a Texas residency requirement concerning children seeking a free public education while living apart from their parents or guardians was a bona fide residence requirement that met “constitutional standards.”
The case centred on Roberto Morales, who was born in McAllen, Texas, and was thus a citizen of the United States. After his birth Morales and his parents, Mexican citizens, settled in Mexico, where he lived until he was eight years old. In 1977 his mother and father sent him to live with his sister, Oralia Martinez, in McAllen. Martinez did not become his guardian. The family’s goal was that Morales would attend American public schools and learn English. Even though he was a U.S. citizen, local school board officials refused to grant him a tuition-free education pursuant to a state statute that denied such an education to children who were not living with their parents or guardians and who were present in districts merely to obtain an education. Martinez and four other adult custodians filed a lawsuit claiming that the statute was unconstitutional, violating provisions of the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection, due process, and privileges and immunities clauses. Raymon L. Bynum, the Texas commissioner of education, was named as a respondent.
A federal district court ruled in favour of the school board. It noted that the board had been liberal in allowing students to attend school without benefit of a parent or guardian if they resided in the district for any reason other than to obtain an education. However, the court determined that Morales planned on living in the district only until he finished his education. It also found that while Martinez served as his custodian, she had no intention of becoming his guardian. After Martinez and the other plaintiffs amended their complaint, the district court again decided for the school board, finding that Texas had a substantial interest in “protecting and preserving the quality of its educational system and the right of its bona fide residents to attend state schools on a preferred tuition basis.” The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the decision.
The case was argued before the Supreme Court on January 10, 1983. The court noted that it had previously ruled that bona fide residence requirements concerning public education were constitutional. It held that such requirements, when “appropriately defined and uniformly applied,” advanced the state interest in ensuring that services intended for state residents were used only by them. Thus, according to the court, the central question was whether the Texas statute was in fact a bona fide residence requirement. It defined residence as generally being physically present and having an intent to stay. The court found that the Texas statute was liberal when compared with more traditional standards for residency. Rather than requiring an intention to remain in the district, the statute allowed for any reason to reside in the district as long as the reason was not solely to receive an education. The court thus held that the Texas statute was a bona fide residence requirement and did not violate the U.S. Constitution. The Fifth Circuit’s decision was upheld.
