McDaniel v. Barresi,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on April 20, 1971, ruled (9–0) that a Georgia public school board had not violated the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection clause when it took race into account when redrawing attendance zones in order to desegregate its elementary schools. Furthermore, the court ruled that the plan’s use of busing was not a violation of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Following Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954)—in which the Supreme Court ruled that racial segregation in public schools was unconstitutional—school boards had undertaken desegregation plans with varying degrees of success. The board of Clarke county, Georgia, had initially adopted a freedom-of-choice plan, in which students could decide which school to attend. The policy, however, left a number of schools segregated. For the 1969–70 school year, the board devised a new plan that involved reassigning African American elementary students who resided in heavily segregated areas to other school attendance zones, which necessitated that they walk longer distances to school or be transported by bus. Opponents, including Joseph Barresi, Jr., asked for an injunction, contending that the policy violated the equal protection clause by treating students differently on the basis of race. They also claimed the plan was in violation of Title IV of the Civil Rights Act, because it required busing students. Charles McDaniel, superintendent of schools, was named as a respondent.
After a state trial court denied the request for an injunction, the Supreme Court of Georgia sided with the plan’s opponents, ruling that the policy violated both the equal protection clause and Title IV.
On October 13, 1970, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. It reasoned that the school board had acted within its affirmative duty to replace its segregated school system with a unitary racially balanced school system when it established attendance lines and reassigned students solely on the basis of race. Although the equal protection clause typically prohibits any disparate treatment on the basis of race, the court was of the opinion that the use of race was permissible in this case. The court explained that the formulation of such a remedy for unconstitutional racial segregation invariably required that the students be treated differently on the basis of their races. The court acknowledged that “any other approach would freeze the status quo that is the very target of all desegregation processes.” The court also rejected the claim that Title IV bars students from being bused. On the basis of those findings, the decision of the Georgia Supreme Court was overturned.
