McDonald v. City of Chicago,  case in which on June 28, 2010, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled (5–4) that the Second Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which guarantees “the right of the people to keep and bear Arms,” applies to state and local governments as well as to the federal government.
The case arose in 2008, when Otis McDonald, a retired African American custodian, and others filed suit in U.S. District Court to challenge provisions of a 1982 Chicago law that, among other things, generally banned the new registration of handguns and made registration a prerequisite of possession of a firearm. The next day the National Rifle Association and others filed separate lawsuits challenging the Chicago law and an Oak Park, Ill., law that generally prohibited the possession or carrying of handguns and the carrying of other firearms except rifles or shotguns in one’s home or place of business. Each suit alleged that the law violated the right of individuals to possess and carry weapons, which the Supreme Court had found to be protected by the Second Amendment in District of Columbia v. Heller (2008). (Anticipating this finding, the plaintiffs in McDonald v. City of Chicago filed suit on the same morning that the decision in Heller was announced.) The crucial question, however, was whether the Second Amendment is applicable to the states and their political subdivisions. Citing “selective incorporation,” the Supreme Court’s gradual application to the states of most of the protections of the Bill of Rights through the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment (which prohibits the states from denying life, liberty, or property without due process of law), the plaintiffs argued that the Second Amendment is applicable through that clause as well as through the amendment’s “privileges or immunities” clause (which forbids the states from abridging the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States).
The district court dismissed the suits. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit consolidated the cases and affirmed the lower court’s decision, noting that it was compelled to adhere to precedents in which “the Supreme Court…rebuffed requests to apply the second amendment to the states.” The Supreme Court granted certiorari to the plaintiffs in McDonald on Sept. 30, 2009, and oral arguments were heard on March 2, 2010.
In its ruling, the Supreme Court reversed and remanded the appellate court’s decision. Writing for the majority, Samuel A. Alito, Jr., argued on the basis of Heller that the Second Amendment is incorporated—i.e., that it should be selectively incorporated as applicable to the states through the due process clause—because the individual right to possess and use firearms for traditionally lawful purposes, particularly self-defense, is fundamental to the American “scheme of ordered liberty and system of justice.” Essentially that standard, the court maintained, was applied by the Supreme Court in the 1960s to incorporate a number of rights related to criminal procedure, including the right to trial by jury (Duncan v. Louisiana [1968]). The court held that the Duncan standard constituted a departure from the less-inclusive test that had been used in incorporation cases since the late 19th century—namely, whether the right is of “the very essence of a scheme of ordered liberty” (Palko v. Connecticut [1937]) or a “principle of natural equity, recognized by all temperate and civilized governments” (Chicago, B. & Q.R. Co. v. Chicago [1897; Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad Co. v. Chicago]). The incorporation precedents established on the Duncan standard thus compelled the court to reject on stare decisis grounds the defendant’s main argument, that the Second Amendment is not incorporated because it is possible to imagine (and indeed there are) civilized legal systems in which an individual right to possess and use firearms is not recognized. The plaintiff’s argument that the Second Amendment is incorporated under the privileges or immunities clause was also dismissed. Alito’s opinion was joined in full by John G. Roberts, Jr., and in part by Anthony Kennedy, Antonin Scalia, and Clarence Thomas; Scalia and Thomas also filed separate concurring opinions.
In his dissenting opinion, which was joined by Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Sonia Sotomayor, Stephen Breyer claimed that Heller’s historical analysis was flawed and that historical evidence bearing upon the fundamental character of a “private armed self-defense right” was unclear at best. Whether the right is incorporated, therefore, must be decided on the basis of other factors, such as the ascertainable motivations of the framers of the Constitution; whether there is contemporary agreement that the right is fundamental; and whether enforcing the right against the states would (as it does in the case of other incorporated rights) further the broader objectives of the Constitution, including fostering equal respect for individuals, maintaining a democratic form of government, and creating well-functioning institutions based on a constitutional separation of powers. When properly considered, according to Breyer, each of those factors argues against incorporation.
John Paul Stevens, in a separate dissent issued on the last day of his tenure on the Supreme Court, held that the majority had misunderstood the scope and purpose of the Palko and Duncan standards and that its strictly historical approach to incorporation was untenable.
