Mitchell v. Helms,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 28, 2000, ruled (6–3) that a federal program—Chapter 2 of the Education Consolidation and Improvement Act of 1981—that loaned instructional materials and equipment to schools, including those that were religiously affiliated, was permissible under the First Amendment’s establishment clause, which generally prohibits the government from establishing, advancing, or giving favour to any religion.
In 1985 Mary L. Helms and other residents in Jefferson Parish, Louisiana, filed suit over the constitutionality of Chapter 2, which permitted local educational agencies (LEAs), usually public school boards, to use federal monies to purchase “secular, neutral, and nonideological” materials and equipment and lend them to nonpublic schools; Guy Mitchell, a parent of a child whose nonpublic school was eligible for Chapter 2 aid, became one of the respondents. During an average year in Jefferson parish, about 30 percent of the Chapter 2 funds were allocated for nonpublic schools, the vast majority of which were religiously affiliated. Officials at the LEA, a public entity, used the funds to purchase library and media materials and instructional equipment, such as books, computers, computer software, slide, movie, and overhead projectors, maps, globes, and films that were then lent to the private schools. The nonpublic schools were selected for participation on the basis of the applications they submitted to the LEA.
In 1990 a federal district court upheld the constitutionality of Chapter 2. The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, however, reversed, citing Meek v. Pittenger (1975) and Wolman v. Walter (1977), two cases in which the Supreme Court had ruled that though the loaning of textbooks to nonpublic schools was permissible, providing other kinds of aid was not.
On December 1, 1999, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. In its analysis, the court focused on the so-called Lemon test, which it had outlined in Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971) and then modified in Agostini v. Felton (1997). According to the revised test—which is used in evaluating federal and state aid to religiously affiliated schools and their students—legislation must have both a secular purpose and a primary effect that neither advances nor inhibits religion. Because the first issue concerning secular purpose was not challenged by the respondents or the lower courts, the justices focused on whether the government assistance was neutral toward religion.
To that end, the court sought to answer two fundamental questions, the first of which was whether Chapter 2 aid “results in governmental indoctrination.” The justices held that it did not, because the benefits were “offered to a broad range of groups or persons without regard to their religion.” Furthermore, Chapter 2 aid reached private institutions “only as a result of the genuinely independent and private choices” of parents. The second question was whether Chapter 2 “define[s] its recipients by reference to religion” and if the criteria for allocating the aid create a “financial incentive to undertake religious indoctrination.” The court ruled that Chapter 2 did neither. The program, according to the court, used neutral secular eligibility criteria that neither favoured nor disfavoured religion. In addition, there was no financial incentive to undertake religious indoctrination, because the aid was offered to a broad array of both public and private schools without regard to their religious affiliations.
On the basis of those findings, the judgment of the Ninth Circuit was reversed. Furthermore, the Supreme Court’s decision struck down parts of Meek and Wolman.
