Morse v. Frederick,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 25, 2007, ruled (5–4) that Alaskan school officials had not violated a student’s First Amendment freedom of speech rights after suspending him for displaying, at a school event, a banner that was seen as promoting illegal drug use.
The case arose in 2002 when the torch relay in advance of the Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, Utah, passed through Juneau, Alaska. Deborah Morse, the principal at Juneau-Douglas High School, allowed students and staff, who supervised the activity, to leave class to watch the relay as an approved social event. Joseph Frederick and several friends were positioned on a sidewalk across from the school, and when the torch passed, they displayed a 14-foot (4.3-metre) banner reading “BONG HiTS 4 JESUS.” On seeing it, Morse ordered them to take it down, and all the students except Frederick complied. She then destroyed the banner and suspended Frederick for 10 days, because she thought that the sign advocated the use of an illegal drug (marijuana). Frederick, who claimed the banner was “just nonsense meant to attract television cameras,” appealed to the school district superintendent, who upheld the suspension but shortened to time served (eight days). Frederick subsequently filed suit, claiming a violation of his free speech rights; Morse and the school board were named as respondents.
The federal district court rejected Frederick’s request for an injunction and damages, finding that the principal did not violate his First Amendment rights. The court held that the sign “directly contravened the Board’s policies relating to drug abuse prevention.” It also ruled that the school board and Morse were entitled to qualified immunity from personal liability. The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, however, reversed in favour of Frederick. It held that his right to display the banner was so obviously established that Morse should have known her actions were unconstitutional. Thus, according to the court, Morse was not entitled to qualified immunity for destroying the banner.
On March 19, 2007, the case was argued before the Supreme Court. In the majority opinion, Chief Justice John G. Roberts, Jr., began his analysis by noting that the court had agreed to hear an appeal on “whether Frederick had a First Amendment right to wield his banner, and, if so, whether that right was so clearly established that the principal may be held liable for damages.” As to the first issue, the court rejected Frederick’s claim that the banner was not school speech. The event took place during school hours, was sanctioned by Morse, and teachers and administrators served as supervisors. Thus, it was a school event, and the rules concerning student conduct were in force. The court then held that it was reasonable for the principal to believe that the banner promoted illegal drug use, a violation of the school’s policy. Citing earlier court decisions—particularly Bethel School District No. 403 v. Fraser (1986), in which the court found that a public school could discipline a student for vulgar speech—Roberts noted that the rights of students are not equal to those of adults and must be considered in light of the special circumstances in schools. To this end, he observed that educators have an important interest in deterring illegal drug use. Thus, the court held that school officials may limit student speech that they think encourages such behaviour.
Having ruled against Frederick on the free-speech issue, the issue of the principal’s liability was moot. The ruling of the Ninth Circuit was reversed.
