Mt. Healthy City Board v. Doyle,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on January 11, 1977, ruled (9–0) that an Ohio public school teacher’s dismissal by a school board—which cited conduct that was protected by the First and Fourteenth amendments—would not be unconstitutional if the board could demonstrate that it would have made the decision regardless of the protected conduct.
The case centred on Fred Doyle, a nontenured Ohio high-school teacher. He was hired by the Mt. Healthy City Board of Education in 1966, and his employment contract was renewed several times subsequently. In 1969 he was elected president of the teachers association, and he later served on its executive committee. During his time with the association, there reportedly was tension between it and the school board. In 1970 Doyle was involved in an argument with another teacher who ultimately slapped him. Doyle refused to accept the teacher’s apology, and his insistence that the teacher be punished resulted in both being suspended for a day; the suspensions were lifted after several teachers staged a walkout. That was the first in a series of incidents that included Doyle arguing with school cafeteria employees over the amount of spaghetti he was served, referring to students as “sons of bitches,” and making an obscene gesture to two girls after they failed to obey his commands when he was cafeteria supervisor. In 1971 he called a local radio station to discuss his principal’s memo about a new school dress code, which he criticized. Doyle later apologized to the principal for contacting the radio station without first talking with administrators about the policy. Shortly thereafter, however, the board elected not to renew his contract. When he asked for reasons for the board’s decision, officials told Doyle that he demonstrated “a notable lack of tact in handling professional matters,” and it specifically cited his use of obscene gestures and his contact with the radio station.
Doyle subsequently filed suit, alleging that the school board had violated his rights under the First and Fourteenth amendments. A federal district court was of the opinion that Doyle’s telephone call to the radio station was protected First Amendment speech and that it played a substantial part in the nonrenewal of his contract. It dismissed the board’s claims that federal courts did not have jurisdiction in the case. Based on those findings, the court awarded Doyle back pay and reinstatement. The Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the decision.
On November 3, 1976, the case was argued before the Supreme Court. After holding that the federal courts had jurisdiction, the court addressed the school board’s claim that it had immunity under the Eleventh Amendment, which shields states from suits brought by citizens of other states or foreign countries. The court ruled that the board was not entitled to the protection of sovereign immunity, because, according to Ohio law, it is a political subdivision, not an arm of the state. The court explained that although local school boards in Ohio are subject to some direction from the state board of education and receive state funds, they have “extensive powers to issue bonds…and to levy taxes within certain restrictions of state law.”
Turning to the issue of free speech, the court pointed to its decision in Board of Regents v. Roth (1972). In that case it had ruled that nontenured employees may be dismissed without cause, but such employees may have grounds for reinstatement if issues of constitutionally protected free speech play major roles in the termination of their contracts. In its Doyle decision the court then referenced Pickering v. Board of Education (1968), in which it had ruled that the question of free-speech issues involves finding “a balance between the interests of a teacher, as a citizen, in commenting upon matters of public concern and the interest of the State, as an employer, in promoting the efficiency of the public service it performs through its employees.” The court held that Doyle’s communication with the radio station was protected by the First and Fourteenth amendments.
With Doyle having “satisfied the burden of showing that his conduct was constitutionally protected and was a motivating factor” in the school board’s decision not to renew his contract, the court reasoned, it then must be determined whether the board had demonstrated “by a preponderance of the evidence that it would have reached the same decision…even in the absence of the protected conduct.” However, the lower courts had not made such a determination. The Supreme Court thus remanded the dispute for a consideration of whether factors other than the First Amendment issue would have led the board not to renew Doyle’s contract. The Sixth Circuit subsequently ruled that the board would have made the same decision even if he had not contacted the radio station.
