National Labor Relations Board v. Yeshiva University,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled (5–4), on February 20, 1980, that faculty members of a private university were de facto managerial employees and therefore were not entitled to the protections afforded to regular employees by the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA), or Wagner Act (1935), with regard to forming collective bargaining units. In Yeshiva, the court affirmed that, because full-time faculty members at Yeshiva University exercised what it described as “absolute” authority in helping to establish guidelines with regard to academic matters such as scheduling classes, selecting teaching methods, setting grading policies, determining teaching loads, establishing pay scales and benefits packages, and deciding who is awarded tenure, promotion, and sabbaticals, they essentially exercised managerial duties. The controlling consideration in the case was that the faculty of Yeshiva University exercised authority that in any other context unquestionably would have been considered managerial. Thus, consistent with general principles of labour law that managers or supervisors and regular employees should not be in the same bargaining unit because they represent significantly different communities of interest, the faculty members were not entitled to the collective-bargaining protections guaranteed by the NLRA.
The litigation in the case originated in the fall of 1974, when the Faculty Association at Yeshiva University filed a petition with the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), the federal body governing private-sector labour relations in the United States. The association filed its petition in an attempt to gain recognition as the exclusive bargaining representative for full-time faculty members at the religiously affiliated private university. University officials opposed the petition, arguing that the faculty members were not employees within the meaning of the NLRA. University officials maintained that, because faculty members were policy-setting employees, their status was closer to that of managers, so they were not permitted to engage in bargaining. Nevertheless, the NLRB directed university officials to conduct an election under its supervision in which voters selected the Faculty Association as its bargaining representative. After university officials refused to recognize or bargain with the association, the NLRB filed suit over its refusal.
The Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit denied the NLRB’s petition to enforce its order on the basis that, because the full-time faculty members served as managers, they were not employees within the meaning of the NLRA. The court did not review their status as supervisors. (Managers and supervisors are terms with significantly different legal meanings.)
In its ruling, the Supreme Court affirmed in favour of the university. The court observed that there was no evidence that Congress had intended the NLRA to cover full-time faculty members in higher education. Furthermore, in the court’s view, the absence of clear congressional direction denied the NLRB jurisdiction over the dispute. At the heart of its opinion, the Supreme Court rejected the NLRB’s assertion that the decision-making authority of faculty members was not managerial in the ordinary sense of the word because they exercised independent professional judgment in engaging in routine academic tasks.
The Yeshiva case has had a long-term impact on labour relations with regard to faculty bargaining in private colleges and universities in the United States. Because of Yeshiva, faculty unions are less common on private campuses than in public institutions of higher education. Of course, as reflected in subsequent litigation on faculty unions, nothing forbids states from granting faculty members, especially those in private colleges and universities, the right to bargain collectively with officials of their universities.
