New York slave rebellion of 1741, also called New York Conspiracy of 1741 or the Great Negro Plot of 1741,  a supposed large-scale scheme plotted by Black slaves and poor white settlers to burn down and take over New York City. Possibly fueled by paranoia, the city’s white population became convinced that a major rebellion was being planned. After a witch-hunt-like series of trials, no specific plot was ever uncovered.
The details of the events that took place in New York City in the spring and summer of 1741 are recorded in numerous historic and later accounts, many of which contain contradictory information. According to nearly all accounts, a fire on March 18, 1741, at Fort George—then Lieutenant Governor George Clarke’s home—was the first in a series of fires in the city that may or may not have been set by slaves. The fires occurred at regular intervals and then with increased frequency until April 6, when four fires were set in a single day. Rumours raced across the city when a witness claimed to have seen a Black man, identified as a slave named Cuffee, running from the scene of one of the fires. 
A month or so earlier that year, in a seemingly unrelated incident, three slaves had robbed a small store owned by a white couple, Robert and Rebecca Hogg. One of the slaves, Caesar, had brought his booty to a dockside tavern owned by John Hughson, who was known for dealing in stolen goods from slaves and for selling them alcohol. His tavern had a reputation as a meeting point for the city’s deviants. Caesar and one of his partners in crime, a slave named Prince, were arrested. When it came time to investigate the fires, Daniel Horsmanden, a judge who was appointed to lead the investigation and preside over the robbery trials, was eager to uncover a plot and its perpetrators and therefore connected the fires to the burglary. 
The notion of a conspiracy was brewing. Meanwhile overseas, England had been at war for the previous two years with Spain, inciting a fear of Spanish attack on New York City and a general sentiment of anti-Catholicism. Causing widespread suspicion was a group of Black Spaniards who had been free citizens of Spain until they were captured by the British in the Caribbean and sold into slavery when they reached Manhattan in 1740. Harbouring resentment, the Spaniards continued to declare themselves free and that, when captured, they should have become “prisoners of war,” not slaves. Thus, Roman Catholics, African-born slaves, and Spanish-born Blacks were all under suspicion. 
A jury was impaneled on April 21, and Mary Burton, a young indentured servant at Hughson’s tavern, was brought to testify before the jury. Under duress, Burton testified that three slaves—Caesar, Prince, and Cuffee—along with a contingent of poor white settlers, had plotted to burn the fort and the city and kill its inhabitants. Burton also implicated a white prostitute named Peggy Kerry, who had ties to Caesar.  Kerry was then forced to testify and implicated many Blacks in the conspiracy, and, on the basis of her testimony, those named were kept in custody. Those held in custody were also forced to provide testimony and name names, which they did.
In May Caesar and Prince were charged not with conspiracy but with burglary and were hanged. Kerry (who was pregnant with Caesar’s child), Hughson, and his wife were arrested next and were publicly executed in June. Hughson’s body (and possibly those of his wife and Kerry as well) was left hanging for all to observe. Still desperate to uncover a plot, Horsmanden offered rewards (of varying amounts, depending on the informant’s skin colour and status) to anyone who would provide evidence of a conspiracy. Over the course of the three-month investigation, some 150 people were arrested and “confessed” or testified. Burton continued her accusations throughout the summer, eventually accusing more than 20 white people, including a Latin teacher named John Ury who was accused of using his Catholic faith to influence the rebellion. By the end of summer, the hysteria had died down and the accusations stopped.
As a result of the rumours, false confessions, and finger-pointing, approximately 30 Blacks and 4 whites (the Hughsons, Kerry, and Ury) were executed, and some 80 more people, mostly Black but some white, were exiled.  A journal written by Horsmanden in 1744 served as an important primary source on the proceedings of the 1741 conspiracy, revealing important details and offering valuable insight into the context in which the trials took place. In the 21st century, historians of the event were wary of Horsmanden’s factual accuracy, as his book was likely published as justification for his actions, and they remained agnostic about the actuality of a slave conspiracy.
