New York v. Cathedral Academy,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on December 6, 1977, ruled (6–3) that a New York statute that allowed nonpublic schools—including those with religious affiliations—to be reimbursed for state-mandated services was a violation of the establishment clause, which generally prohibits the government from establishing, advancing, or giving favour to any religion.
In 1970 New York state enacted a statute that enabled nonpublic schools to recover costs for record keeping, testing, and other state-imposed services. Several years later, however, a district court (and later the Supreme Court) struck down the statute in Levitt v. Committee for Public Education and Religious Liberty, finding that it violated the First Amendment’s establishment clause, which is extended to states by the Fourteenth Amendment. Any payments under that statute were permanently enjoined. The state legislature then enacted a new statute that allowed for reimbursement to nonpublic schools for services performed in the 1971–72 school year and asked that the New York Court of Claims audit reimbursement requests. Cathedral Academy subsequently sued to recover costs, and the court of claims ruled that the revised statute was unconstitutional. However, the New York Court of Appeals ruled in favour of the school.
On October 3, 1977, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. In its analysis, the court relied on its rulings in Lemon v. Kurtzman (I) (1971) and Lemon v. Kurtzman (II) (1973). In the former case, the court had developed the so-called Lemon test, which stated that (1) a “statute must have a secular legislative purpose,” (2) “its principal or primary effect must be one that neither advances nor inhibits religion,” and (3) the statute cannot promote “an excessive government entanglement with religion.” According to the court in Cathedral Academy, the revised New York statute failed the latter two points.
The court then applied its ruling from Lemon II, in which it had permitted Pennsylvania to reimburse nonpublic schools for costs incurred before Lemon I invalidated the statute that allowed for such payments. The court thus indicated in Lemon II that it was willing to tolerate some constitutional infirmities “if other equitable considerations predominate.” However,  in Cathedral Academy, because the district court had prohibited payments for costs “heretofore or hereafter expended” the Supreme Court found Lemon II inapplicable.According to the Supreme Court, the New York state legislature thus broke the district court order when it granted reimbursement of already-incurred costs. According to the court, the revised statute was “a new and independently significant infringement of the First and Fourteenth Amendments.” Based on those findings, the decision of the New York Court of Appeals was reversed.
