nullification crisis,  in U.S. history, confrontation between the state of South Carolina and the federal government in 1832–33 over the former’s attempt to declare null and void within the state the federal Tariffs of 1828 and 1832. The resolution of the nullification crisis in favour of the federal government helped to undermine the nullification doctrine, the constitutional theory that upheld the right of states to nullify federal acts within their boundaries.
The doctrine of nullification had been advocated by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison in the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions of 1798–99. The union was a compact of sovereign states, Jefferson asserted, and the federal government was their agent with certain specified, delegated powers. The states retained the authority to determine when the federal government exceeded its powers, and they could declare acts to be “void and of no force” in their jurisdictions.
The so-called Tariff of Abominations of 1828 was passed at the instigation of Northern manufacturers, but it distressed many Southern planters who depended on foreign trade for their livelihoods. Agriculture in South Carolina was undergoing grave difficulties owing to soil exhaustion, and many believed that the extraordinarily high tariffs would damage the state’s economy irreparably. During 1828, protests were voiced through Southern newspapers and town meetings, and finally, on December 19, the state legislature issued South Carolina Exposition and Protest, which declared the tariff unconstitutional. Secretly drafted by Vice Pres. John C. Calhoun (whose name did not appear on it), the paper outlined the state’s grievances and furthered the nullification doctrine.
Calhoun took the position that state “interposition” could block enforcement of a federal law. The state would be obliged to obey only if the law were made an amendment to the Constitution by three-fourths of the states. The “concurrent majority”—i.e., the people of a state having veto power over federal actions—would protect minority rights from the possible tyranny of the numerical majority.
When the Tariff of 1832 only slightly modified the Tariff of 1828, the South Carolina legislature decided to put Calhoun’s nullification theory to a practical test. The legislature called for a special state convention, and on November 24, 1832, the convention adopted the Ordinance of Nullification. The ordinance declared the Tariffs of 1828 and 1832 “null, void, and no law, nor binding upon this State, its officers or citizens.” It also forbade appeal of any ordinance measure to the federal courts, required all state officeholders (except members of the legislature) to take an oath of support for the ordinance, and threatened secession if the federal government tried to collect tariff duties by force. In the meantime, Calhoun resigned the vice presidency to speak for his state in the Senate. In the address that he wrote to accompany the Ordinance of Nullification, he further elucidated his states’ rights theory of the Constitution, stating in part that
Pres. Andrew Jackson regarded the South Carolina Ordinance of Nullification as a clear threat to the federal union and to national authority. He reacted by submitting to Congress a Force Bill authorizing the use of federal troops in South Carolina if necessary to collect tariff duties. On December 10, 1832, Jackson issued his “Proclamation to the People of South Carolina,” asserting the supremacy of the federal government and warning that “disunion by armed force is treason.” In rebutting Calhoun’s states’ rights position, Jackson argued:
Jackson’s proclamation evoked a defiant response from South Carolina in the resolutions of December 20, including the declaration “that each state of the Union has the right, whenever it may deem such a course necessary for the preservation of its liberties or vital interests, to secede peaceably from the Union” and that the South Carolina legislature “regards with indignation the menaces which are directed against it, and the concentration of a standing army on our borders—that the state will repel force by force, and, relying upon the blessings of God, will maintain its liberty at all hazards.”
In its attempts to have other Southern states join in nullification, South Carolina met with total failure. On March 1, 1833, Congress passed the Force Bill. South Carolina’s isolation, coupled with Jackson’s determination to employ military force if necessary, ultimately forced South Carolina to retreat. But, with the help of Sen. Henry Clay of Kentucky, a moderate tariff bill more acceptable to South Carolina also was passed on March 1. The South Carolina convention responded on March 15 by rescinding the Ordinance of Nullification but three days later maintained its principles by nullifying the Force Bill.
The nullification crisis made President Jackson a hero to nationalists. But Southerners were made more conscious of their minority position and more aware of their vulnerability to a Northern majority as long as they remained in the union.
