Peter Vivian Daniel,  (born April 24, 1784, Crows Nest, Stafford county, Va., U.S.—died  May 31, 1860, Richmond, Va.), associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States (1841–60).
Daniel, born into a prominent Virginia family that had settled in the area in the early 17th century, was the son of Travers Daniel, a plantation owner, and Frances Moncure Daniel. He attended the College of New Jersey (now Princeton University) in 1802, but after one year he returned to Virginia, where he subsequently studied law under former Virginia governor and U.S. attorney general Edmund Jennings Randolph. In 1808 he was admitted to the bar, was elected to the Virginia House of Delegates, and married Randolph’s daughter Lucy.
In 1812 Daniel was elected by his peers to a seat on the Virginia Privy Council, an executive (gubernatorial) advisory and review board. Quickly ascending in rank, he served as both presiding officer of the council and as lieutenant governor from 1818 to 1835. During the 1830s he was a member of the Richmond Junto, a powerful element of the Jacksonian Democrats, and a strong supporter of both Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren. His support of Jackson landed him an offer to become Jackson’s attorney general, but Daniel declined the post because of his opposition to the spoils system and because he considered the salary inadequate.
In 1836 he was appointed judge of the U.S. District Court for eastern Virginia. On Feb. 27, 1841, two days after the death of Supreme Court justice Philip P. Barbour and just days before Whig president-elect William Henry Harrison was due to take office, President Van Buren nominated Daniel to fill the vacancy. Whig senators rallied opposition to Daniel’s nomination, but during a midnight confirmation vote they failed to block a quorum, and on March 2–3, 1941, Daniel won confirmation from the Senate 22–5.
While on the court, Daniel was a staunch supporter of states’ rights and slavery. Gradually, he became increasingly hostile toward Northerners, especially as attacks against slavery intensified. In Prigg v. Pennsylvania (1842), for example, he argued that the Missouri Compromise of 1820 was unconstitutional, claiming that the federal government could not restrict slavery in territories, and in the Dred Scott decision (1857) he joined the majority, arguing in a concurring opinion that freed black slaves who had previously been held as property could not be considered citizens of the United States. During his tenure, he wrote only one majority opinion for the court.
