Philip H. Sheridan, in full Philip Henry Sheridan,  (born March 6, 1831, Albany, N.Y., U.S.?—died  Aug. 5, 1888, Nonquitt, Mass.), highly successful U.S. cavalry officer whose driving military leadership in the last year of the American Civil War was instrumental in defeating the Confederate Army.
A graduate of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, N.Y. (1853), Sheridan served mostly at frontier posts until the spring of 1862, when he was appointed colonel of the 2nd Michigan Cavalry. In July he skillfully split his outnumbered command to rout a large Confederate force at Booneville, Miss. Made a brigadier general, he led the 11th Division, Army of the Ohio, at Perryville, Ky., in October, as it held its position against repeated attacks. At the Battle of Stones River, or Murfreesboro, Tenn. (December 1862–January 1863), he was made a major general of volunteers for his unyielding defense of the Federal right centre.
Sheridan was unable to prevent defeat at the Battle of Chickamauga, Ga. (September 1863), but his assault on Missionary Ridge below Chattanooga, Tenn., in November, brought his fighting in the West to a brilliant close. This victory so impressed General Ulysses S. Grant that Sheridan was called east in the spring of 1864 to head the cavalry of the Army of the Potomac. Following action in the Battle of the Wilderness (May 1864), he led a raid toward Richmond, Va., that destroyed considerable Confederate supplies and rolling stock and resulted in the death of the South’s great cavalry leader, Gen. J.E.B. (“Jeb”) Stuart.
On August 4 Sheridan was given command of the Army of the Shenandoah and charged with forcing the Confederates from that valley and its rich farms, which had sustained the defense of the Southern capital for more than three years. In the Third Battle of Winchester, Va. (September), he drove General Jubal A. Early out of Winchester and gained two more victories during the next few weeks. Sheridan systematically destroyed the capacity of the Shenandoah Valley to support military operations by the South. For this feat he was made a major general and received the thanks of Congress.
Having completed his mission in the valley, Sheridan rejoined his cavalry before Petersburg in March 1865. With the 5th Corps Infantry added to his command, he circled south and west of the city to cut the Confederate general Robert E. Lee’s rail communications. At the end of the month, he twice broke into the Confederate right and rear, forcing Lee to retire westward from his Richmond-Petersburg lines. Sheridan continued his pressure against Lee’s southern flank and at the end helped close off his escape near Appomattox.
After the war Sheridan reported to the Gulf of Mexico, where his presence along the Texas border hastened the fall of Maximilian, the French puppet emperor in Mexico, in 1867. He was later named military commander of Louisiana and Texas (1867), but his harsh administration of Reconstruction measures led to his removal soon thereafter by President Andrew Johnson. He spent the remaining years until 1883 in Western command. He planned and conducted a successful Indian campaign (1868–69), after which he was promoted to lieutenant general. He became general-in-chief of the army in 1883 and five years later was commissioned as general of the army of the United States. He spent his last months writing his memoirs.
