Quanah Parker,  (born 1848?, near Wichita Falls, Texas, U.S.—died February 23, 1911, Cache, near Fort Sill, Oklahoma), Comanche leader who, as the last chief of the Kwahadi (Quahadi) band, mounted an unsuccessful war against white expansion in northwestern Texas (1874–75). He later became the main spokesman and peacetime leader of the Native Americans in the region, a role he performed for 30 years.
Quanah was the son of Chief Peta Nocona and Cynthia Ann Parker, a white woman captured by the Comanches as a child. Quanah later added his mother’s surname to his given name. The family’s history was forever altered in 1860 when Texas Rangers attacked an Indian encampment on the Pease River. Accounts of this incident are suffused with myth and exaggeration, and the details of its unfolding are contentious. All versions of the event agree that Cynthia Ann and her young daughter, Prairie Flower, were captured. How many participants were involved on both sides, whether Nocona was killed, and whether Quanah and Nocona were even present are all disputed issues, though it seems likely that Nocona neither perished nor was present.
Tall and muscular, Quanah became a full warrior at age 15. A series of raids established his reputation as an aggressive and fearless fighter. He became a war chief at a relatively young age.
Quanah moved between several Comanche bands before joining the fierce Kwahadi—particularly bitter enemies of the hunters who had appropriated their best land on the Texas frontier and who were decimating the buffalo herds. In order to stem the onslaught of Comanche attacks on settlers and travelers, the U.S. government assigned the Indians to reservations in 1867. Quanah and his band, however, refused to cooperate and continued their raids. Attempts by the U.S. military to locate them were unsuccessful. In June 1874 Quanah and Isa-tai, a medicine man who claimed to have a potion that would protect the Indians from bullets, gathered 250–700 warriors from among the Comanche, Cheyenne, and Kiowa and attacked about 30 white buffalo hunters quartered at Adobe Walls, Texas. Although the raid was a failure for the Native Americans—a saloon owner had allegedly been warned of the attack—the U.S. military retaliated in force in what became known as the Red River Indian War. Quanah’s group held out on the Staked Plains for almost a year before he finally surrendered at Fort Sill.
Eventually Quanah agreed to settle on a reservation in southwestern Oklahoma, and he persuaded other Comanche bands to conform. He soon became known as the principal chief of all Comanche, a position that had never existed. During the next three decades he was the main interpreter of white civilization to his people, encouraging education and agriculture, advocating on behalf of the Comanche, and becoming a successful businessman. Quanah also maintained elements of his own Indian culture, including polygamy, and he played a major role in creating a Peyote Religion that spread from the Comanche to other tribes. A national figure, he developed friendships with numerous notable men, including Pres. Theodore Roosevelt, who invited Quanah to his inauguration in 1905. Shortly thereafter Roosevelt visited Quanah at the chief’s home, a 10-room residence known as Star House, in Cache, Oklahoma.
After his death in 1911, Quanah was buried next to his mother, whose assimilation back into white civilization had been difficult. Her repeated attempts to rejoin the Comanche had been blocked by her white family, and in 1864 Prairie Flower died. Cynthia Ann reportedly starved herself to death in 1870.
