Robert A. Toombs,  (born July 2, 1810, Wilkes County, Ga., U.S.—died Dec. 15, 1885, Washington, Ga.), American Southern antebellum politician who turned ardently secessionist, served briefly as Confederate secretary of state, and later sought to restore white supremacy in Georgia during and after Reconstruction.
Born into a wealthy planter family, Toombs entered and withdrew from the University of Georgia before graduating in 1828 from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y. Admitted to the bar in 1830, he quickly developed a lucrative legal practice in Washington, Ga. In addition, he owned a plantation and many slaves in southwestern Georgia.
From 1837 to 1840 and again from 1842 to 1843, Toombs served in the Georgia legislature, establishing himself as an expert in fiscal matters. A Whig, he joined the U.S. House of Representatives in 1844. He was reelected to the House in 1846, 1848, and 1850.
In 1850 Toombs began to emerge as a states’ rights, and ultimately secession, advocate. In his “Hamilcar” speech, he demanded that the South not be denied its rights in the newly acquired territories. Yet he worked for passage of the Compromise of 1850 and its acceptance in Georgia, and he helped organize the Constitutional Union Party in Georgia as a political vehicle for conservatives unhappy with the Whigs but not ready to support the secession-minded Democrats.
Running on the Constitutional Union ticket in 1852, Toombs won election to the U.S. Senate. Shortly thereafter he joined the Democrats, but he remained a moderate on the states’ rights issue until 1860.
Not until Abraham Lincoln’s election as president and the failure of the Crittenden Compromise of 1860 did Toombs publicly call for secession. He led the movement for a Georgia convention to vote to secede from the Union. In 1861 he resigned from the Senate and was a delegate to the Montgomery convention that established the Confederacy. Severely disappointed at not being selected president of the Confederate States of America, he nonetheless accepted appointment by Jefferson Davis to become secretary of state. Within a few months, however, he broke with Davis and left the government.
In July 1861 Toombs took command of a Georgia brigade as a brigadier general. His military experience was undistinguished, though he did take a bullet in his left hand at Antietam. When no promotion followed, Toombs angrily resigned his commission. He stayed out of the war until near the end, and he continually criticized Davis’ leadership and Confederate policies—especially conscription, suspension of habeas corpus, and reliance upon credit to finance the war effort.
In May 1865 Toombs fled—by way of New Orleans and Havana—to London. He returned to Georgia in 1867, but he refused to seek a pardon or take the oath of allegiance. Instead, he devoted himself to rebuilding his law practice and to overthrowing Radical Reconstruction in Georgia. In 1877 he broke with other Democrats in welcoming President Rutherford Hayes’s plans to end Reconstruction, and, the same year, he played a prominent role at the convention that revised the state constitution in favour of white supremacy.
Toombs’s last major public activity was to seek legislation that would give the state control over railroads and corporations.
