Rogers v. Paul,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on December 6, 1965, ruled (5–0) that an Arkansas school board’s gradual desegregation plan—which desegregated one grade per year and limited classes offered at the African American schools—was unconstitutional.
At issue in Rogers was the constitutionality of a “grade-per-year” desegregation plan that had been adopted in 1957 by the school board in Fort Smith, Arkansas. By 1965 the 10th through 12th grades were still segregated. Moreover, African American students in the segregated schools were not allowed to take courses that were available only at the high school for white students. In 1963 Corine Rogers filed a class-action lawsuit on behalf of her daughters, Janice and Patricia, and all other African American minors in the school district, alleging violations of the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection and due process clauses. Edgar F. Paul, a member of the school board, was among the respondents.  A federal district court ordered revisions to the desegregation plan but allowed the board to continue to desegregate one grade per year. The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the decision, noting that the school board’s plan “constitutes good faith implementation of the governing constitutional principles.”
The case then moved to the Supreme Court, and, in a per curiam (unsigned) opinion, the court vacated the lower court’s order in favour of the plaintiffs. In its analysis, the Supreme Court held that the gradual desegregation plan was constitutionally impermissible pursuant to the reasons set forth in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954). Furthermore, the court stressed that delays in the desegregation of schools “are no longer tolerable.” Therefore, the court ordered the immediate desegregation of the schools in Fort Smith, and, pending the implementation of that plan, African American students were entitled to transfer out of their high schools so they could avail themselves of the more-extensive curriculum at the high school for whites. In addition, the court found that petitioners had standing to challenge the constitutionality of the allocation of faculty on a racial basis because of the denial of equal educational opportunities. The court remanded for further consideration on that point.
