Rumsfeld v. Forum for Academic and Institutional Rights,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on March 6, 2006, turned back constitutional challenges to the Solomon Amendment, a modification in a federal statute that required the U.S. Department of Defense to deny funding to institutions of higher education that refused to give military representatives access and assistance for recruiting purposes. The Supreme Court held that the Solomon Amendment did not impose an unconstitutional condition on the receipt of federal funds, did not compel educational institutions to speak the government’s message, did not regulate inherently expressive conduct, and did not violate the plaintiffs’ First Amendment freedoms of speech and association.
When some law schools began restricting the access of military recruiters to their students because of disagreement with the federal government’s Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell (DADT) policy on homosexuals in the military, Congress responded in 1994 by adding the Solomon Amendment to the defense appropriations bill, with further changes to the amendment in 1997, 1999, and 2004. Named after its sponsor, New York Representative Gerald B.H. Solomon, the amendment denied funds to institutions of higher education that did not allow military recruiters access to their campuses equal to that accorded other recruiters or that prohibited or in effect prevented students from enrolling in reserve military units on their campuses. The prohibition applied to funds distributed through five different federal agencies.
After the September 11 attacks in 2001, the Defense Department began applying an informal policy of requiring that its recruiters be granted equal access on college campuses. The department apparently anticipated that its approach would lead law schools to suspend their policies banning discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and to allow military recruitment. In September 2003, an association of law schools and law faculties functioning under the title Forum for Academic and Institutional Rights (FAIR) filed suit in a federal trial court in New Jersey, seeking to enjoin enforcement of the Solomon Amendment. All of the members of the association had adopted policies prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation. The court denied FAIR’s request for a preliminary injunction, finding that the plaintiffs were unlikely to prevail on the merits of their claims that the amendment infringed their First Amendment free speech and association rights to oppose sexual orientation discrimination, that it constituted viewpoint discrimination, and that it was unconstitutionally vague. On appeal, a panel of the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit reversed the trial court’s decisifon in a 2–1 judgment and remanded the case to the trial court with an order to grant a preliminary injunction.
In a unanimous (8–0) opinion written by Chief Justice John G. Roberts, Jr., the Supreme Court reversed the judgment of the Third Circuit. (Associate Justice Samuel A. Alito, Jr., did not take part in the decision.) The court reasoned that Congress could require law schools to provide equal access to military recruiters without violating the schools’ First Amendment speech and expressive-association rights. As to the authority of Congress to enact and enforce the Solomon Amendment, the court observed that the First Amendment did not prohibit Congress from imposing directly the amendment’s access requirement on law schools.
In terms of compliance with the Solomon Amendment’s equal access requirement, the law schools had argued that they could comply with the law by denying access equally to all recruiters who violated their sexual orientation nondiscrimination policies, not just military recruiters. However, the Supreme Court rejected that position in determining that because the amendment focused not on the content of the schools’ policies but rather on the results they achieved, the schools could not be in compliance if the enforcement of their policies resulted in a greater level of access for other recruiters than for those from the military.
Turning to the law schools’ most substantial claim—that enforcement of the Solomon Amendment violated their rights of speech and expressive association—the Supreme Court noted that the amendment regulated conduct, not speech. Being required to provide the same services for military recruiters as for others, including sending e-mails to students about the presence of recruiters on campus, was not the kind of compelled speech that the Supreme Court had addressed in West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette (1943). In that case, the Supreme Court had held that students could not be required to pledge allegiance to the U.S. flag in violation of their religious beliefs as Jehovah’s Witnesses.
In addition, the court rejected any comparison of Rumsfeld to Boy Scouts of America v. Dale (2000), wherein the Supreme Court had agreed that a state law that required the Boy Scouts to accept a homosexual scoutmaster violated the organization’s right to expressive association. The court maintained that even though military recruiters might interact with law school personnel, the recruiters were not part of the schools, and thus the Solomon Amendment did not violate the First Amendment.
