Spencer v. Kugler,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on January 17, 1972, summarily (without argument or briefs) affirmed a lower court’s ruling that the state of New Jersey’s practice of aligning school districts with municipal boundaries was constitutional. Unusually, the court did not issue a majority opinion in the case. The plaintiffs—two African American students on behalf of themselves and all similarly situated African American students in the state—had claimed that the practice resulted in schools with disproportionate numbers of minority or white students and that such de facto racial segregation violated the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and the Civil Rights Act of 1871 (see Civil Rights Cases). In finding against the plaintiffs, the Supreme Court effectively established that the courts cannot impose remedies (such as busing programs) to eliminate de facto segregation in public schools.
In the initial round of litigation before a district court in New Jersey, the plaintiffs had contended that the racial patterns in the state’s schools adversely affected the quality of education afforded to African American students. The district court, however, refused to grant the relief the plaintiffs sought (race-based reassignment of students to other districts, redrawing of districts, or compensatory educational programs for African American students) on the grounds that the state’s districting system was not unreasonable and was not intentionally designed to produce segregated schools. The district court accordingly rejected the plaintiffs’ argument that the de facto segregation in the state’s schools amounted to segregation de jure (by law), which the Supreme Court had declared unconstitutional in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954). Concluding that the plaintiffs had failed to establish a claim upon which relief could be granted, the district court dismissed the suit.
In his dissent, Justice William O. Douglas noted that the Supreme Court had previously embraced the remedy of redistricting to protect the right to vote. “The right to education in the environment of a multi-racial community,” he added, “seems equally fundamental.”
