Stanley F. Reed, in full Stanley Forman Reed,  (born Dec. 31, 1884, Minerva, near Maysville, Ky., U.S.—died  April 3, 1980, Huntington, N.Y.), associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States (1938–57).
Reed was the only child of John A. Reed, a physician, and Frances Forman Reed, who at one time was registrar general of the Daughters of the American Revolution. After earning undergraduate degrees from Kentucky Wesleyan College (1902) and Yale University (1906), Reed studied law at the University of Virginia, Columbia University, and the Sorbonne in Paris. Although he never earned a degree in law, he was admitted to the bar in 1910 and began to practice law in eastern Kentucky. He won election to the Kentucky legislature, serving from 1912 to 1916. During World War I he served in the U.S. Army in the intelligence division.
After World War I, Reed returned to his legal practice. His role as counsel to the Burley Tobacco Growers’ Association led in 1929 to his appointment as counsel to the Federal Farm Board. Three years later Reed was appointed by Pres. Herbert Hoover to serve as general counsel for the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, where he was involved with emergency New Deal financial measures and with cases involving gold repurchase during the Great Depression. In 1935 Pres. Franklin D. Roosevelt appointed Reed first as special assistant to the attorney general and then as U.S. solicitor general, a post in which he was responsible for presenting the administration’s arguments on contested New Deal programs to the U.S. Supreme Court. His record as solicitor general was impressive; he won 11 of 13 cases argued before the Supreme Court, though one of the losses—the court’s invalidation of the National Industrial Recovery Act of 1933—was a major defeat for the administration and prompted Roosevelt to pursue a court-reorganization (“court-packing”) plan. Based upon his loyalty to the administration, as well as his legal credentials, Reed was nominated by Roosevelt to the U.S. Supreme Court on Jan. 15, 1938; he was easily confirmed by the U.S. Senate two weeks later.
An economic liberal and social conservative, Reed sided with the liberal majority on the court on most economic issues but otherwise sided with Justice Felix Frankfurter as an advocate of judicial restraint. Convinced that controlling judicial precedents should be reversed only when necessary, Reed avoided the pull of the court’s liberals who sought an expansive incorporation of the Fourteenth Amendment’s due process clause to the states, most notably in Adamson v. California (1947), in which Reed wrote for the majority that the reach of each of the amendments of the Bill of Rights did not automatically extend to the states (in this case the Fifth Amendment’s right against self-incrimination). He voted with the majority in Wolf v. Colorado (1949) and Irvine v. California (1954), both of which ruled that illegally obtained evidence may be admissible in state courts, and upheld the conviction of (and denial of speech rights to) American communists who were arrested for violating the prohibition against advocating the violent overthrow of the U.S. government according to the Smith Act in Dennis v. United States (1951). He was also the lone dissenter in McCollum v. Board of Education School District 71 (1948), in which the court ruled that religious instruction in public schools violated the establishment clause of the U.S. Constitution, even if different religions were involved and even if the parents gave their consent to the teaching.
On economic matters, a spate of early decisions demonstrated his commitment to the welfare state and the right and responsibility of government to regulate economic and commercial activity. In upholding the Agricultural Marketing Act in United States v. Rock Royal Cooperative (1939), which allowed milk regulation orders by the secretary of agriculture, and supporting increased federal control over inland waterways and power sources in United States v. Appalachian Electric Power Co. (1940), Reed was instrumental in expanding the coverage of the commerce clause as well as federal regulatory authority.
Reed’s conservatism on social issues and liberalism on economic issues apparently clashed with regard to civil rights, and the result was a clearly centrist position that found Reed quietly supportive of the court’s increasingly progressive attitude regarding racial discrimination. On several major civil rights cases—from Smith v. Allwright (1944), in which Reed wrote the majority opinion declaring whites-only primaries unconstitutional, to Morgan v. Virginia (1946), which upheld the Interstate Commerce Commission’s prohibition on segregated seating on interstate buses, to Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954), which declared segregation in public schools unconstitutional—Reed joined the majority.
Reed retired from the bench on Feb. 25, 1957, and was replaced by Charles E. Whittaker. He served briefly as chair of the Civil Rights Commission established by Pres. Dwight D. Eisenhower, and for the next decade he was active in a number of legal and political forums (including service on the Court of Claims and the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit).
