Stanley Matthews,  (born July 21, 1824, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.—died March 22, 1889, Washington, D.C.), associate justice of the United States Supreme Court (1881–89).
After studying law in Cincinnati, Matthews was admitted to the bar in 1842 and began to practice law in Columbia, Tennessee, while also editing a weekly paper, the Tennessee Democrat. After his return to Cincinnati in 1844 he continued to divide his time between journalism (as editor of the antislavery Cincinnati Morning Herald ) and the law and was soon appointed assistant prosecuting attorney. He served briefly as clerk of the Ohio House of Representatives and then as a judge of common pleas but soon resigned and returned to private practice. He served in the Ohio Senate from 1855 to 1858 and was then appointed U.S. attorney for Ohio’s southern district. In this capacity he was obliged to prosecute a reporter, W.B. Connelly, under the Fugitive Slave Law, generating an ironic notoriety that dogged his professional career.
He joined the Union Army, but during the Civil War he was elected to the Cincinnati Superior Court and resigned his commission to serve. He returned to private practice after the war but again gained national notice in 1877 as counsel before the electoral commission that decided the Hayes–Tilden presidential contest. That same year he was elected to the U.S. Senate, in which he introduced the “Matthews Resolution” making silver legal tender.
Upon the resignation of Noah H. Swayne in 1881, President Rutherford B. Hayes nominated Matthews to the U.S. Supreme Court. The Senate refused to confirm him, citing his past support of Hayes, his prosecution of Connelly, and the fact that he had served as attorney for powerful railroad and corporation interests. The opposition to Matthews continued into the James A. Garfield administration, when his name was again submitted to fill the still vacant seat and he was approved by only a one-vote majority.
Matthews joined with the bloc of justices that were bringing about an extension of federal powers by liberal interpretation of the Constitution, particularly in the areas of commerce and federal borrowing. He gave the court’s opinion in the Virginia Coupon Cases, which struck down prohibitions against the use of state bond coupons in payment of taxes. In Bowman v. Chicago and North Western Railway Company he declared that a state prohibition of common carriers transporting liquor into the state was unconstitutional because it constituted state regulation of interstate commerce. His most important opinion, given for the court in Yick Wo v. Hopkins (1886), held that even a law fair and impartial on its face was unconstitutional if it was administered in such a way as to deprive citizens of the equal protection of the laws as required by the 14th Amendment.
