Wade Hampton, in full Wade Hampton III,  (born March 28, 1818, Charleston, South Carolina, U.S.—died  April 11, 1902, Columbia, South Carolina), Confederate Civil War hero who restored white rule to South Carolina following Radical Reconstruction. After gaining office in the contested gubernatorial election of 1876, he served as the governor of South Carolina from 1877 to 1879.
Born into an aristocratic plantation family, Hampton graduated from South Carolina College in 1836 and studied law. He never practiced, however, instead devoting himself to the management of his family’s landholdings in Mississippi and South Carolina.
From 1852 to 1861 Hampton served in the South Carolina legislature. He consistently upheld a conservative position on slavery and secession. When the South seceded, Hampton gave unstintingly of himself and his fortune to the Confederacy. Though lacking military experience, he organized and commanded “Hampton’s Legion” of South Carolina troops. He rose from colonel to lieutenant general and saw combat in many key battles. He served as second in command to Gen. Jeb Stuart and, after Stuart’s death, led the cavalry corps. Wounded three times, he survived to become a military hero to the defeated South and a symbol of the supposed nobility and gallantry of the “Lost Cause.”
Hampton backed U.S. Pres. Andrew Johnson’s plans for Reconstruction and sought reconciliation between North and South, but, with the imposition of Radical Reconstruction policies, he took the lead in South Carolina in the fight to restore white supremacy. However, while the Republicans were firmly in control of the state, from 1868 to 1876, he devoted himself primarily to attempting to restore his greatly depleted fortune. In 1876 he campaigned vigorously as the Democratic candidate for governor, becoming the most prominent representative of the party’s then dominant conservative aristocratic (“Bourbon”) faction. Held in November, the gubernatorial election is said to have been the most corrupt in South Carolina history and was characterized by polling-place intimidation and violence as well as ballot rigging, stealing, and stuffing. The Republican incumbent, Daniel Henry Chamberlain, was initially declared the winner, but a second count of the votes, including previously ignored ballots from Laurens and Edgefield counties, showed Hampton to be the winner. The commissioners of those counties then reported voting fraud, calling the election results into question again. Both Hampton and Chamberlain ended up claiming to be governor until Chamberlain left the state in 1877 when federal troops, who had been keeping a modicum of public order, withdrew. Although Hampton would claim that his triumph owed much to the support he claimed to have received from Black voters, it was in fact largely attributable to systematic efforts by his backers to prevent Black people from voting. Hampton publicly decried the violence that surrounded the election, but he tacitly countenanced the widespread campaign of intimidation practiced against Blacks and white Republicans by the Red Shirts, the army of armed and often mounted Hampton supporters who accompanied him on his campaign appearances.
Hampton was reelected in 1878 but resigned the following year after being elected to the U.S. Senate. He served as a senator until 1891, having been defeated for reelection the previous year by John Irby. More broadly, the transition of the leadership of the Democratic Party from Hampton to the populist Ben Tillman represented the end of rule by genteel antebellum aristocrats in the South. Hampton served as a commissioner of Pacific Railways from 1893 to 1897 before retiring to Columbia, South Carolina.
