West Memphis Three,  three American men who in 1994, while teenagers, were found guilty of murdering three young boys in West Memphis, Arkansas, allegedly as part of devil worship. The men garnered national attention due to a series of documentaries and books that questioned their convictions as well as the vocal support of numerous celebrities. After the discovery of new DNA evidence, the three entered Alford pleas in 2011 and were released for time served. The West Memphis Three are Damien Echols (b. December 11, 1974, West Memphis, Arkansas, U.S.), Jason Baldwin (b. April 11, 1977, West Memphis, Arkansas, U.S.), and Jessie Misskelley, Jr. (b. July 10, 1975).
On May 5, 1993, Christopher Byers, Michael Moore, and Stevie Branch—all of whom were eight years old—went bike riding in West Memphis. Later that evening, their parents reported the boys missing. The following day, law officers found their naked and hog-tied bodies in a drainage ditch in a forested area known as Robin Hood Hills. The boys had been beaten, and Byers’s body showed signs of mutilation. The police believed that the murders were connected to Satan worship. Almost immediately they interviewed Damien Echols, an 18-year-old high-school dropout and self-proclaimed Wiccan who was considered a troublemaker. In addition, he had a history of mental issues, notably depression. Echols denied knowing the boys or being involved in their deaths.
Police, however, remained focused on Echols, and they soon received help from Vicki Hutcheson, whose 8-year-old child was friends with the victims and claimed to have witnessed their murders but was unable to identify the assailants. In a meeting with police, she was told that Echols had been interviewed, and she offered to “play detective” by meeting him. With the encouragement of law officers, she enlisted the help of Misskelley, a 17-year-old neighbour who knew Echols. According to Hutcheson, on May 19, 1993, she, Misskelley, and Echols attended a gathering of witches at a nearby field. She then claimed that the proceedings devolved into an orgy, at which point she asked Echols to take her home; Misskelley stayed. Hutcheson later related the events to the police and reportedly passed a polygraph test.
Armed with this information, police interviewed Misskelley, who reportedly had an IQ of about 72. Despite initially denying involvement in the crime, he eventually confessed, saying that he had helped detain the three young boys but left before Echols and 16-year-old Jason Baldwin, who were best friends, committed the murders. All three were arrested in June 1993, though no physical evidence connected them to the crime and each had alibis.
Misskelley was tried separately, and his trial began in January 1994. His attorney focused on Misskelley’s confession, which he alleged had been coerced. Notably, early versions of his statements differed from the physical evidence; he falsely claimed that the boys had been sexually assaulted and that they had been tied with rope (they had actually been bound with shoelaces), among other discrepancies. The police claimed that Misskelley was simply “confused.” On February 4, 1994, he was found guilty of first-degree and second-degree murder and was sentenced to life without the possibility of parole.
The trial of Echols, who was seen as the trio’s leader, and Baldwin started shortly thereafter. Misskelley refused to testify, and the prosecution was forced to rely on circumstantial evidence, notably Echols’s interest in the occult. The prosecution also introduced evidence it believed incriminating, such as the fact that Echols read Stephen King and listened to Metallica. In addition, a fellow inmate testified that Baldwin had confessed to the murders, and two girls claimed to have overheard Echols confess during a softball game. The defense sought to introduce other suspects, notably a local teenager who left for California shortly after the bodies were discovered and who said that he might have committed the crimes before recanting. However, the judge refused to let him testify before the jury. On March 18, 1994, Echols and Baldwin were found guilty of first-degree murder. Echols was later sentenced to the death penalty, and Baldwin was given life without the possibility of parole.
The cases had attracted the attention of filmmakers Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky, and their resulting documentary, Paradise Lost: The Child Murders at Robin Hood Hills, aired on HBO in 1996. It raised serious doubts about the guilt of Echols, Baldwin, and Misskelley, and it brought national awareness to the three men, who had become known as the West Memphis Three. The cases gained an even higher profile with the airing of Paradise Lost 2: Revelations in 2000. In addition to the Paradise Lost series, various books and films covered the cases, and a number of celebrities, including Johnny Depp and Pearl Jam frontman Eddie Vedder, became vocal supporters of the defendants.
Their cause was further aided by a series of noteworthy events. In 2004 Hutcheson recanted, claiming that she had lied at the urging of the police, who had allegedly threatened to implicate her in the murders if she did not cooperate. Then in 2007 a hair found in a knot on one of the victims was sent for DNA testing, the technology of which was not available in the 1990s. It was determined that the hair was not consistent with the hair of Echols, Misskelley, or Baldwin. However, it was consistent with the hair of Terry Hobbs, the stepfather of Stevie Branch. In addition, another hair found at the crime scene was consistent with the hair of a friend of Hobbs. However, Hobbs denied any involvement in the murders.
Based on this and additional evidence—including allegations that during deliberations in the trial of Echols and Baldwin, the jury foreman introduced Misskelley’s confession, which was inadmissable—a judge vacated all three convictions on August 19, 2011. Immediately thereafter, Echols, Baldwin, and Misskelley pled guilty while maintaining their innocence; the rare legal maneuver is known as an Alford plea. They were released after each was sentenced to time served and received a 10-year suspended sentence. These developments were chronicled in Paradise Lost 3: Purgatory (2011). While other suspects were discussed on the Internet and in such media projects as the documentary West of Memphis (2012), law officials closed the cases.
Echols later published the books Life After Death (2012) and Yours for Eternity: A Love Story on Death Row (2014); the latter was written with his wife, Lorri Davis, whom he met while in prison.
