William Johnson,  (born December 27, 1771, Charleston, South Carolina [U.S.]—died August 4, 1834, Brooklyn, New York, U.S.), associate justice of the United States Supreme Court from 1804 who established the practice of rendering individual opinions—concurring or dissenting—in addition to the majority opinion of the court. A deeply sensitive man and a learned, courageous jurist, he set himself against the dominance exercised over the court by Chief Justice John Marshall.
After serving in the South Carolina House of Representatives (1794–99; speaker, 1798–99), Johnson was elected by the legislature to the Court of Common Pleas, at that time the highest tribunal in the state. During his tenure as a state judge he was active in organizing at Columbia a college that later became the University of South Carolina.
Appointed by President Thomas Jefferson in March 1804, Johnson was the first Democratic-Republican justice of the U.S. Supreme Court. In attempting to secure the court’s position as the interpreter of the law and the Constitution (largely according to Federalist Party principles), Chief Justice Marshall discouraged the writing of seriatim (separate) opinions, delivered the opinion of the court in most major cases, and strove for unanimity among his colleagues. Johnson, however, often expressed independent views; he had been accustomed to preparing seriatim opinions in the state court, and in this predisposition he was supported by Jefferson, a political opponent of Marshall.
Although Jefferson and Johnson remained friends until the former’s death in 1826, Johnson did not always sustain Jeffersonian policy. In Gilchrist v. Collector of Charleston (1808), Johnson, while holding federal circuit court, allowed clearance from the port of Charleston to a ship detained under Jefferson’s Embargo Act of 1807, a measure intended to preserve U.S. neutrality in the Napoleonic Wars. In Supreme Court cases Johnson usually agreed with Marshall’s insistence on broad federal power unhampered by state action. More than his fellow justices, however, Johnson favoured cooperation rather than antagonism between federal and state governments and economic regulation in the public interest. Concurring with Marshall’s opinion in Gibbons v. Ogden (1824), he defended the regulatory power of Congress over interstate and foreign commerce; over one of Marshall’s few dissents, he upheld, in Ogden v. Saunders (1827), state power to alleviate economic distress. Late in his life Johnson angered many in his state by his circuit court decision in Holmes v. United States (1832), rejecting state nullification of federal statutes.
