William H. Seward, in full William Henry Seward,  (born May 16, 1801, Florida, New York, U.S.—died October 10, 1872, Auburn, New York), U.S. politician, an antislavery activist in the Whig and Republican parties before the American Civil War and secretary of state from 1861 to 1869. He is also remembered for the purchase of Alaska in 1867—referred to at that time as “Seward’s Folly.”
Admitted to the New York State Bar in 1822, Seward began the practice of law the following year at Auburn. He gradually developed a taste for politics and became active in the Antimasonic Party in 1828, serving in the New York Senate from 1830 to 1834. At about this time he allied himself with other opponents of the Jacksonian Democrats in forming the new Whig Party. Under this banner Seward served as governor of New York for four years (1839–43), soon becoming recognized as leader of the antislavery wing of the party.
In 1849 Seward was elected to the U.S. Senate, where the antagonism between free and slave labour became the theme of many of his speeches. During the turbulent 1850s he increasingly resisted the Whig attempt to compromise on the slavery issue, and when the party collapsed (1854–55), Seward joined the newly organized Republican Party, which took a firm stand against expansion of slavery into the territories. Although Seward was the recognized Republican leader, he was twice thwarted (1856, 1860) in his wish to be nominated for the presidency.
When Abraham Lincoln took office as president on the eve of the Civil War (March 1861), he promptly named Seward secretary of state. On most issues he was Lincoln’s closest and most influential adviser, despite early differences over the reinforcement of Fort Sumter, South Carolina, and Seward’s irresponsible suggestion that a foreign war be provoked to distract the country from its civil conflict at home. Seward gradually rose to the challenge of the office and was particularly successful in preventing foreign governments from giving official recognition to the Confederacy. While he did not succeed in preventing the French occupation of Mexico or the acquisition by the Confederacy of the warship Alabama from England, his diplomacy prepared the way for a satisfactory adjustment of the difficulties with these powers at a later date. Although a treaty in 1862 for the suppression of the slave trade conceded to England the right to search U.S. vessels for slaves in African and Cuban waters, he secured a similar concession for U.S. war vessels from the British government. By his course in the Trent Affair, concerning the capture and imprisonment of two Confederate agents from a British ship, he virtually committed Great Britain to the U.S. attitude concerning the right of search of vessels on the high seas.
On April 14, 1865, nine days after he was severely injured in a carriage accident, the bedridden Seward was stabbed in the throat by Lewis Powell (alias Lewis Payne), a fellow conspirator of John Wilkes Booth, who had that night assassinated Lincoln. Seward made a remarkable recovery and retained his cabinet post under Pres. Andrew Johnson until 1869. He chose to support Johnson’s unpopular Reconstruction policies and had to share some of the bitter congressional obloquy bestowed upon his chief. Seward’s last act of public renown was the purchase of Alaska from Russia for $7,200,000 in 1867.
