Zelman v. Simmons-Harris,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 27, 2002, ruled (5–4) that an Ohio school-voucher program did not violate the establishment clause of the First Amendment, which generally prohibits the government from establishing, advancing, or giving favour to any religion.
In 1995 the Cleveland City School District was placed under state control by a federal district court, which had declared a “crisis of magnitude.” In response, the state established the Pilot Project Scholarship Program, which granted vouchers for tuition assistance to qualifying students—those from low-income families were given preference—who lived within any school district that was under state supervision and management pursuant to a federal court order. At the time, Cleveland was the only district to which it was applicable. As part of the program, parents could choose between various participating schools, which included both public and private institutions. By 1999 the vast majority of the private schools in the program were religiously affiliated, and nearly all the participating students were attending those schools. That year a group of Ohio taxpayers, which included Doris Simmons-Harris, filed a suit in federal court, claiming that the program violated the establishment clause of the First Amendment; Susan Tave Zelman, superintendent of public instruction in Ohio, was named as one of the respondents. Others filed a similar suit, and the two cases were eventually consolidated. In December 1999 a federal district court ruled that the voucher program was in violation of the establishment clause. The case moved to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals, which affirmed the lower court’s ruling.
On February 20, 2002, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. In several previous cases—notably Zobrest v. Catalina Foothills School District (1993) and Agostini v. Felton (1997)—the court had held that a government-assistance program is
In Zelman the court stressed that the parents in Cleveland had a variety of nonreligious choices, including options among public schools. Accordingly, the court characterized the funding through the Cleveland voucher plan as offered to a broad class of people, not just to those seeking religious schools. Further, the court noted that the program did not offer financial incentives that would encourage parents to select a religiously affiliated school over a secular institution. For those reasons, the court held that the program was not in violation of the establishment clause and reversed the Sixth Circuit’s decision.
