Bernarr Macfadden, originally Bernard Adolphus McFadden,  (born August 16, 1868, near Mill Spring, Missouri, U.S.—died October 12, 1955, Jersey City, New Jersey), American physical culturist who, by sometimes eccentric means, spread the gospel of physical fitness and created a popular magazine empire.
Macfadden, often dubbed the “father of physical culture,” grew up in poverty in the eastern Ozark Mountains of Missouri. After his parents died young from ill health when he was 11, he spent his life fighting early death and overcoming physical challenges. Macfadden thrived on hard work and outdoor living. Inspired by the Police Gazette, he took up boxing, wrestling, and gymnastics to harden his body and rejected alcohol, tobacco, and meat to preserve his health. Always energetic, the irrepressible Macfadden often worked several jobs and frequently wrestled professionally in circuses.
In 1897 Macfadden traveled to England where he collaborated with bicycle entrepreneur Hopton Hadley to market the wall-mounted muscle developer that he had created. With Hadley’s support, Macfadden founded an early muscle magazine, Physical Development (1898), and later an even more successful American version, Physical Culture (1899). Macfadden also toured widely to promote his message of vigorous physical exercise and to preach about the dangers of alcohol, drugs, gluttony, corsets, prudishness, tea, coffee, and white bread. Shocking to Victorian sentiments was his advocacy of a diet consisting of carrots, beans, nuts, and raw eggs, sleeping on the floor, and nudity and his zeal for “physical love.” To promote such “love,” he encouraged openness about sexual matters and invented a glass cylinder device attached to a vacuum pump to enlarge men’s penises. To exemplify fitness, he walked five miles daily to his office in Manhattan in bare feet while carrying a 40-pound bag of sand. In 1903 Macfadden staged the first physique (bodybuilding) contest in America and in similar competitions in 1921 and 1922 fostered the emergence of physical culture’s greatest icon, Charles Atlas.
As America’s foremost health crusader, Macfadden founded various recuperative centres where followers could engage in kinesitherapy (therapeutic movements) or hydrotherapy and even obtain a doctorate in “physcultopathy.” Macfadden enjoyed association with notables of his era such as social reformer Upton Sinclair, playwright George Bernard Shaw, actor Rudolph Valentino, U.S. President Franklin Roosevelt, and Italian dictator Benito Mussolini. Adhering to the philosophy that releasing inner emotions and resolving personal problems was necessary for self-improvement, he published a wide variety of fictional romance magazines, including True Story (1919), True Romances (1923), and True Detective Mystery Magazine (1924), to teach the lessons of life in story form. By 1935 his pulp publishing empire had a total of 35 million readers. Macfadden died a multimillionaire in 1955 after refusing medical treatment for a digestive disorder.
