Cecil G. Sheps,  (born July 24, 1913, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada—died February 8, 2004, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, U.S.), Canadian-born physician, researcher, and educator who was one of the founders of the field now known as health services research. He held many positions of leadership through his career, notably as founding director (1968–72) of the Health Services Research Center (renamed in 1991 the Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research) at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC-CH).
Sheps was born and raised in Winnepeg, Manitoba, Canada, and he earned a medical degree in 1936 at the University of Manitoba. He served with the Royal Canadian Medical Corps during World War II. Once the war was over, Shep moved to the United States, and he earned a Master of Public Health degree from Yale University in 1947. He went to Chapel Hill that same year and was first employed in UNC’s Office of Planning for the newly created Division of Health Affairs. Shep taught basic courses in public health administration, biostatistics, and epidemiology in UNC’s School of Public Health until he departed for Boston in 1953 to become director of Beth Israel Hospital, one of the principal teaching hospitals affiliated with Harvard Medical School, where he held a faculty position.
In 1960 he left Boston to become professor of public health and head of the graduate program in medical care administration at the Graduate School of Public Health at the University of Pittsburgh. After only five years in that position, he was lured back into an administrative position as director of Beth Israel Hospital in New York and as a professor at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
In 1968 UNC-CH received one of five major grants from the U.S. Public Health Service to begin a multidisciplinary centre for health services research. A search for an initial director of the new centre began, and several faculty members suggested that an approach be made to Sheps to return to Chapel Hill to launch the centre. Sheps and his wife decided to accept separate offers to return to North Carolina, he as director of the Health Services Research Center and as professor of family medicine and she as professor of biostatistics in the UNC School of Public Health. Sheps also served as the university’s vice chancellor for health affairs (1971–76), and in 1980 he was named the Taylor Grandy Distinguished Professor of Social Medicine and Epidemiology at UNC-CH.
Sheps had developed a keen interest in multidisciplinary problem-focused research, especially research focused on the issues of concern to the field of health care. He had formed a multidisciplinary unit to carry out that sort of research at Beth Israel in Boston, one of the first hospital-based research institutes of its kind. Several of the investigators he attracted to work in that unit later became leading figures in the emerging field of health services research, a field he helped to create and name. He was the first chairperson of the initial study section of the U.S. Public Health Service, giving grants to support the work of scholars in what was then called health care studies.
Sheps published more than 140 articles and was the author, coauthor, or editor of several books, including Needed Research in Health and Medical Care: A Biosocial Approach (1954) with Eugene E. Taylor, Evaluation of Neighborhood Health Centers: A Plan for Implementation (1967) with Donald L. Madison, The Sick Citadel: The American Academic Medical Center and the Public Interest (1983) with Irving J. Lewis, and Cecil G. Sheps in First Person: An Oral History (1993) with John A. Lowe.
