Charles Atlas, original name Angelo Siciliano,  (born October 30, 1892, Acri, Calabria, Italy—died December 24, 1972, Long Beach, New York, U.S.), Italian-born American bodybuilder and physical culturist who, with Frederick Tilney and Charles P. Roman, created and marketed a highly popular mail-order bodybuilding course.
In 1904 Angelo Siciliano immigrated to the United States with his mother and settled in Brooklyn, New York. Skinny and weak, he suffered beatings by a neighbourhood bully and his uncle. The statues of Hercules and other mythological heroes that he saw in a local museum inspired him to build his body. Too poor to afford barbells, he devised a system, later called Dynamic-Tension, that pitted one muscle group against another. Neighbourhood friends soon started likening him to a statue of Atlas. This association was then combined with the nickname “Charley” to form the name by which he eventually became famous.
With his newfound muscles and confidence, Atlas joined the circus-vaudeville circuit and appeared in Coney Island sideshows, where he performed a variety of strongman feats. He also worked as an artist’s model for many sculpted works of classic American heroes on public buildings in New York City, Washington, D.C., and Cleveland, Ohio, and he won such titles as the World’s Most Handsome Man and the World’s Most Perfectly Developed Man at contests staged by physical culturist Bernarr Macfadden at Madison Square Garden in 1921 and 1922, respectively.
Assisted by Tilney, an English naturopath, Atlas employed Dynamic-Tension principles to develop a mail-order course that was the basis for a multimillion-dollar bodybuilding business. Then in 1928, in partnership with Roman, he conducted one of the most-celebrated advertising campaigns in American history. Slogans such as “You can have a body like mine” were accompanied by photographs of the muscular Atlas clad in a leopard breechclout. The most famous image, however, was that of the 97-pound weakling who, after having sand kicked in his face at the beach, employs Dynamic-Tension to build a herculean physique and to challenge the beach bully. For generations, comic books and men’s magazines have carried Atlas’s advertisements, making his name synonymous with manly strength and muscular development.
