Environmental health,  area of study in the field of public health that is concerned with assessing and controlling the impacts of humans on their environment and the impacts of the environment on humans. The environment, including its vegetation, other animals, and natural and historic landmarks, is a vital tool that has been used as a source of food, shelter, and energy by people for thousands of years. Relatively recent developments such as industrialization, however, have led to increased consumption of natural resources, which has had adverse affects on both the environment and humankind.
Researchers and specialists in the field of environmental health explore many different aspects of human health and natural and human-made environments. Areas of focus range from food safety and the safety of drinking water to the control of air and noise pollution to disaster emergency preparedness and waste management. Physicians may specialize in environmental health as it applies to humans, while other specialists work to ensure safe food and water supplies or carry out any of a variety of activities related to securing environmental and human health. Environmental health crosses boundaries with other fields in the area of public health, including epidemiology and toxicology.
Environmental pollution, which can result in the contamination of air and water with foreign material and thereby cause disease in people who have been exposed, is a major area of concern in environmental health. Synthetic chemicals in the environment can enter the human body through inhalation or ingestion and can have chronic affects on the individual exposed to them. Certain chemical and physical environmental pollutants may also have hereditary consequences, causing infertility in the exposed individual or in his or her progeny. Environmental ionizing radiation is an example of a type of environmental pollutant that can affect the health of one’s offspring because of its ability to induce genetic mutations in germ cells (i.e., sperm and egg).
Many herbicides have caused significant damage to the environment and humans. An example is the defoliant herbicide mixture known as Agent Orange, which was used by the U.S. military during the Vietnam War. Agent Orange was used to destroy the foliage under which the Viet Cong took cover to hide the movement of their troops and set up ambushes. But while Agent Orange successfully destroyed the plant life, it caused extensive and long-term environmental damage. Exposed Vietnamese developed cancers and a variety of other health disorders, and their children suffered an abnormally high incidence of birth defects. In addition, servicemen from the United States and other countries were later affected by cancers and other health conditions that were traced to their exposure to Agent Orange.
Maintaining clean water supplies is another major area of interest in environmental health. The contamination of a water supply is dangerous because the contamination often spreads rapidly and has the potential to affect all the people who rely on the affected water. Some examples of drinking water contaminants are microorganisms, such as E. coli and Vibrio cholerae (the bacterium that causes cholera); inorganic chemicals, such as arsenic, lead, and mercury; organic chemicals, such as acrylamide and toluene; and radionuclides, such as uranium.
Air pollution shares the same dilemma as water pollution, because once started, the pollution spreads quickly and is almost impossible to contain outdoors. It too is an important focus within environmental health. Common sources of outdoor air pollutants include vehicle exhaust and fossil fuel combustion from industrial sources (e.g., power stations). Specific pollutants that may be found in these sources include nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, lead, and particulate matter. Carbon monoxide, tobacco smoke, solid fuels combustion, radon, and biological particulates (e.g., mold particles) are responsible for many instances of indoor air pollution. Ozone is another important air pollutant.
