Resistance training,  a form of exercise that is essential for overall health and fitness as well as for athletic performance. Resistance training often is erroneously referred to as weight training or “lifting,” but is more complex.
Resistance training adaptations are both acute and chronic. Acute responses to resistance training occur primarily in the neurological, muscular, and endocrine systems. Chronic responses to resistance training are seen in the muscular, skeletal, endocrine, cardiovascular, and neurological systems. Anthropometric (body composition) adaptations are also seen as chronic adaptations to resistance training.
When a force is applied to a muscle, a signal is transmitted that activates the muscle cells. When a person performs resistance training, the number and intensity of signals that are transmitted to that muscle are increased until the muscle gets tired. The two neurological factors that govern muscle force are motor unit recruitment and rate coding. The former is simply the size of the muscle force created by the muscle contraction for a given task. For example, fewer motor units in the biceps brachii muscle are recruited when performing a biceps curl with a 10-pound (4.5-kg) dumbbell than with a 50-pound (22.5-kg) dumbbell. According to kinesiologist and author Roger Enoka, motor unit recruitment is based on the size principle, which states that the motor units that recruit slow-twitch fibres recruit fewer fibres than the motor units that recruit fast-twitch fibres. Rate coding governs motor unit firing. During resistance training, the muscles grow more tired with each repetition of a given movement pattern, and, as a result, the rate coding becomes impaired and the firing sequence becomes less and less precise.
Chronic neurological adaptations result in a more efficient sequence of recruitment of motor units, making the muscle less apt to tire from neuromuscular factors. Other chronic adaptations to the neurological system include increased motor unit firing and decreased co-contraction of the antagonist muscles. Co-contraction takes place when both agonist and antagonist muscles fire at the same time. The decrease in the co-contraction of antagonist movement when the agonist muscles are being called on for work allows for greater movement efficiency.
One of the acute effects in  muscle during resistance training is the depletion of metabolic substrates, such as creatine phosphate and glycogen. The depletion of those two fuel sources during resistance training causes muscle power production to decrease. Another significant acute muscle adaptation during resistance training is the intramuscular elevation of hydrogen. That results in a “burning” sensation in the muscles on multiple repetitions. The elevation of hydrogen ions in the muscle results in decreased intramuscular pH.
Chronic adaptations to resistance training include increased cross-sectional size of the muscle fibres, also known as muscle hypertrophy. Hypertrophy of muscle occurs in type I (slow-twitch) and type II (fast-twitch) muscle fibres; however, type II muscle fibres have a greater response. Manipulation of volume and intensity of resistance training will cause more or less hypertrophy to those respective muscle fibre types. The chronic adaptation of increased cross-sectional size of the muscle fibres results in an increase of muscle strength and power. Another chronic adaptation to the muscles, which has been proven in animals but not yet in humans, is a phenomenon called hyperplasia. That occurs when the number of muscle fibres increases. The resulting hypertrophy and possible hyperplasia of muscle fibres cause a relative increase in protein synthesis, which is essential for the repair of muscle fibres in acute response to resistance training.
There are two major types of hormones produced by the pituitary glands that respond to resistance training: protein and steroid hormones. Growth hormones and insulin are major protein hormones, and testosterone and estrogen are major steroid hormones. Resistance training acutely increases the concentration and release of both anabolic and catabolic proteins and steroid hormones. Growth hormones, testosterone, and insulin are anabolic hormones that facilitate the growth and recovery of muscle tissue after a resistance training session. However, equally muscle-degrading hormones, or catabolic hormones, are released during and after resistance training. The increase of cortisol, epinephrine, and norepinephrine secretion during resistance training can have positive short-term effects, but the long-term effects are negative. Higher volume and intensity of resistance training routine elicits a greater release of epinephrine. Therefore, it is prudent to eat proteins and carbohydrates before and after resistance training to prevent a catabolic effect from cortisol, epinephrine, and norepinephrine. Chronic adaptations to the endocrine system include an increased resting level of testosterone and increased sensitivity of tissue response to the release of protein and steroid proteins.
