weight training,  system of physical conditioning using free weights (barbells and dumbbells) and weight machines (e.g., Nautilus-type equipment). It is a training system rather than a competitive sport such as Olympic weightlifting or powerlifting.
There is evidence of weight training even in ancient Greece, where Milo of Croton was perhaps the first strength athlete to gain renown for his athletic feats. He supposedly developed his strength by lifting and carrying a calf on his shoulders each day from its birth. As the animal grew in size, so did his strength. The principle used by Milo of progressively increasing the load or resistance to build strength and muscle mass has been verified in modern times as an effective means of developing strength in people of all ages.
The benefits of lifting weights or performing resistance exercise are quite diverse and include not only the somewhat obvious increase in strength and muscle size but also improved muscle endurance, increased bone density, increased resting metabolic rate that aids weight loss and weight control, increased “good” cholesterol, improved posture, a small increase in aerobic capacity, improved flexibility, and reduced insulin resistance. The net result of these broad benefits is improved athletic performance; reduced injury in sports, work, and daily activities; a reduced rate of falling and overall increased spontaneous physical activity of senior citizens; and overall improved health. The value in prevention and treatment of disease is especially noteworthy. For these reasons, weight training is recommended for the general public by many national and international medical groups.
Effective weight training programs can vary from as little as two or three times a week for 20 minutes for children, adolescents, and senior citizens to as much as several hours a day for competitive and professional athletes, weightlifters, and bodybuilders. Because recuperative abilities vary among different muscles and different individuals, designing an exercise regime requires balancing challenging workouts with adequate rest between workouts and proper nutrition. Thus, for all but the most advanced bodybuilders trying to add a few inches here and there to their bodies, most lifters find that a program which concentrates on performing different powerlifting multijoint exercises (squat, bench press, deadlift) three or four days per week gives the most benefit in the least amount of exercise time.
The number of nonstop repetitions (“reps”) of an exercise movement, known as a set, varies according to the exercise and the main goal, although the weight used should be sufficient to make the completion of the last few repetitions fairly challenging. A relatively high number of repetitions (10–12) is generally most effective in developing type I (“slow twitch”) muscle fibres, which have the greatest capacity for producing muscle volume. Fewer repetitions (2–4) are most effective in developing type II (“fast twitch”) fibres, which have the greatest capacity for generating bursts of strength or power. Intermediate repetition schemes (6–8) often produce the best results in terms of combined strength and size gains. Physiological research shows that substantial increases in stimulation of muscle growth occur with each additional set performed from one to three, smaller benefit from three to four, marginal benefit from four to five, and very little added benefit for further sets of a particular exercise within an exercise session. Rest periods from one to five minutes between sets, with longer rests for lower repetition schemes, are common. In order to compress workout times, lifters often alternate two or more exercise sets (a “superset”) with no rest interval.
