World AIDS Day,  annual observance aimed at raising awareness of the global epidemic of AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) and the spread of HIV (human immunodeficiency virus). World AIDS Day occurs on December 1 and was established by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 1988 to facilitate the exchange of information among national and local governments, international organizations, and individuals. When the first World AIDS Day was held in 1988, an estimated 90,000 to 150,000 people were infected with HIV, which causes AIDS. Within two decades more than 33 million people were living with HIV infection, and since 1981, when the first AIDS case was reported, some 25 million people died of the disease. As a result, AIDS awareness became increasingly concerned with educating societies about HIV/AIDS through the unification and monetary support of international organizations.
A primary goal of World AIDS Day activities is the distribution of information. Each country creates and organizes its own agenda for World AIDS Day, and some countries launch weeklong campaigns. In addition, many countries and cities hold ceremonies that serve to commence World AIDS Day activities on international, national, and local levels. For example, in the United States the president delivers an annual proclamation, and in other countries, such as South Africa, Bermuda, and Brunei, ministers of health make annual speeches drawing attention to AIDS concerns. Typical World AIDS Day activities include concerts, rallies, memorials to those who have died from AIDS, discussions, and debates. A major international symbol of World AIDS Day is the red ribbon, worn as a demonstration of commitment to the fight against AIDS. In the United States a symbol commemorating those who have died of AIDS is the AIDS Memorial Quilt, sections of which are displayed in various cities and towns throughout the country on World AIDS Day.
WHO organized World AIDS Day, developing the annual themes and activities, until 1996, when these responsibilities were assumed by UNAIDS, the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS. In 1997 UNAIDS created the World AIDS Campaign (WAC) to increase AIDS awareness and to integrate AIDS information on a global level. In 2005 the WAC became an independent body, functioning as a global AIDS advocacy movement, based in Cape Town, S.Af., and Amsterdam, Neth. In addition to ensuring the support of leaders and AIDS organizations, the WAC prepares information that is distributed for World AIDS Day. World AIDS Day’s first theme was “Communication.” For 2005 to 2010 the WAC fostered the theme “Stop AIDS. Keep the Promise,” which the organization used not only on World AIDS Day but also throughout the year to raise awareness of AIDS.
