coffee,  beverage brewed from the roasted and ground seeds of the tropical evergreen coffee plant of African origin. Coffee is one of the three most-popular beverages in the world (alongside water and tea) and one of the most-profitable international commodities. Though coffee is the basis for an endless array of beverages, its popularity is mainly attributed to its invigorating effect, which is produced by caffeine, an alkaloid present in coffee.
Two species of the coffee plant, Coffea arabica and C. canephora, supply almost all of the world’s consumption. Arabica is considered a milder, more-flavourful and aromatic brew than Robusta, the main variety of C. canephora. The flatter and more-elongated Arabica bean is more widespread than Robusta but more delicate and vulnerable to pests, requiring a cool subtropical climate; it must grow at higher elevations (2,000–6,500 feet [600–2,000 metres]) and requires a lot of moisture, sun, and shade. Latin America, eastern Africa, Asia, and Arabia are leading producers of Arabica coffee. The rounder, more-convex Robusta bean, as its name suggests, is heartier and can grow at lower altitudes (from sea level to 2,000 feet). Robusta coffee is cheaper to produce, has twice the caffeine content of Arabica, and is typically the bean of choice for inexpensive commercial coffee brands. Western and central Africa, Southeast Asia, and Brazil are major producers of Robusta coffee.
Wild coffee plants, probably from Kefa (Kaffa), Ethiopia, were taken to southern Arabia and placed under cultivation in the 15th century. One of many legends about the discovery of coffee is that of Kaldi, an Arab goatherd who was puzzled by the strange antics of his flock. About 850 ce Kaldi supposedly sampled the berries of the evergreen bush on which the goats were feeding and, on experiencing a sense of exhilaration, proclaimed his discovery to the world.
Whatever the actual origin of coffee, its stimulating effect undoubtedly made it popular. Ironically, though Islamic authorities pronounced the drink intoxicating and therefore prohibited by the Qurʾān, many Muslims were attracted to the beverage as a substitute for alcohol, also prohibited by the Qurʾān. Despite the threat of severe penalties, coffee drinking spread rapidly among Arabs and their neighbours and even gave rise to a new social and cultural entity, the coffeehouse.
Called qahveh khanehs, coffeehouses first appeared in Mecca in the 15th century and in Constantinople (now Istanbul) in the 16th. They became popular meeting places where men of learning often gathered to converse, play chess or backgammon-type games, sing and dance, listen to music, discuss politics and news of the day, and smoke and drink. They became known as “schools of wisdom” because of the clientele they attracted, and, though political and religious leaders feared the free and frank discourse common in such establishments, their frequent bans on coffeehouses were impossible to maintain. The drink had already become ingrained in daily ritual and culture.
Coffee was introduced into one European country after another throughout the 16th and 17th centuries. Many accounts are recorded of its prohibition or approval as a religious, political, and medical potion. By the end of the 17th century, coffeehouses were flourishing across Britain, the British colonies in America, and continental Europe.
Until the close of the 17th century, the world’s limited supply of coffee was obtained almost entirely from the province of Yemen in southern Arabia. But, with the increasing popularity of the beverage, the propagation of the plant spread rapidly to Java and other islands of the Indonesian archipelago in the 17th century and to the Americas in the 18th century. Coffee cultivation was started in the Hawaiian Islands in 1825.
By the 20th century the greatest concentration of production was centred in the Western Hemisphere—particularly Brazil. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, industrial roasting and grinding machines came into use; vacuum-sealed containers were invented for ground roasts; and decaffeination methods for green coffee beans were developed. After 1950 the production of instant coffee was perfected. The popularity of instant coffee led to increased production of the cheaper Robusta beans in Africa.
The ripened fruits of the coffee shrub are known as coffee cherries, and each cherry generally contains two coffee seeds (“beans”) positioned flat against one another. About 5 percent of cherries contain only one seed; called peaberries, those single seeds are smaller and denser and produce, in the opinion of some, a sweeter, more-flavourful coffee.
The cherries are processed by disengaging the coffee seeds from their coverings and from the pulp and by drying the seeds from an original moisture content of 65–70 percent water by weight to 12–13 percent; all beans must be removed from their fruit and dried before roasting. Three techniques are used for processing the coffee: the dry, or “natural,” process, the wet (and washed) process, and a hybrid process called the semi-washed, or “pulped natural,” method. The coffee resulting from those processes is called green coffee, which is then ready for roasting.
The oldest and simplest method of processing coffee, requiring little machinery, is practiced in dry climates such as those of Brazil and Ethiopia. After the fruits have been sorted (often by hand) and cleaned (via running water or washing canals or in large tanks), they are placed in the sun to dry on concrete, brick patios, or raised mats. The cherries are frequently raked or turned by hand to shift them onto the driest surface and to prevent fermentation and mold. The drying process may take several days or up to four weeks. The drying process is critical: overdried coffee will break, forming defective beans, and coffee too moist can deteriorate quickly if attacked by fungi and bacteria. When the fruits have been dried to a water content of about 12–13 percent, they are mechanically hulled to free the seeds from their coverings. In rainy regions where humidity and rains during harvest time are common, the dry process is obviously not practical.
The wet process requires more equipment than the dry method but produces beans that are better preserved and more homogeneous and have fewer defects. Most Arabica coffees are produced by the wet method, and they generally command a higher price.
In the first step of the wet process, the skin and the pulp of the fresh fruit are removed by a pulping machine, which consists of a rotating drum or disk that presses the fruit against a sharp-edged or slotted plate, disengaging the pulp from the seed. Pulp still clings to the coffee seed, however, as a thin mucilaginous layer. That layer is eliminated by fermentation, actually a form of digestion in which naturally occurring pectic enzymes decompose the pulp while the wetted seeds are held in tanks for one to three days. Washing clears all remaining traces of pulp from the coffee seeds, which are then dried either by exposure to sunlight on concrete terraces or by passing through hot-air driers. The dry skin around the seed, called the parchment, is then mechanically removed, sometimes with polishing.
A third method, called pulped natural, is a hybrid of dry and wet processing. Pulps are removed mechanically, but the beans are dried without any intermediate fermentation, and the mucilage is not removed until after drying. Beans thus treated have a good balance of sweet and acidic notes, with robust body.
The practice of grading and classifying coffee gives sellers and buyers a guarantee concerning the origin, nature, and quality of the product to aid their negotiations. Each coffee-producing country has a certain number of defined types and grades—based on characteristics such as growing altitude and region, botanical variety, method of processing, roast appearance, and bean size, density, and defects—but there is no universal grading and classification system. Fair Trade coffee, part of the larger Fair Trade movement, arose to ensure that coffee is harvested and processed without child labour and dangerous herbicides and pesticides and that growers and exporters, particularly in the poorer regions of the coffee-growing world, are paid a fair price. How well such Fair Trade standards are enforced is a matter of controversy.
The prolonged storage of coffee in the producing countries presents problems, especially in the warm and humid coastal regions, where molds and parasites may develop and cause damage; for that reason, coffee from those areas is exported as quickly as possible. In moderate climates the conservation of dry lots does not pose a problem as long as they are stocked in well-ventilated places.
