Air France flight 4590,  flight of a Concorde supersonic airplane that crashed in Gonesse, a suburb of Paris, on July 25, 2000. The airplane went down in flames almost immediately after takeoff, killing all 109 people on board and 4 others on the ground. It was the first fatal crash of a Concorde in 24 years of regular passenger service. The event is believed to have hastened the end of all Concorde operations in 2003.
Flight 4590 was a charter flight from Paris to New York City. The aircraft was an Air France Concorde, registration number F-BTSC. Most of the passengers were German tourists on their way to board a Caribbean-bound cruise ship in New York City. At approximately 4:43 pm the plane began its takeoff from Charles de Gaulle Airport. However, as it accelerated down the runway, ground observers noticed a fire on the left side, under the wing. The aircraft veered left on the runway, and, at about the time it left the ground, one of the two left-side engines failed. The pilot was unable to climb higher than about 200 feet (60 metres), and, about 90 seconds after the commencement of takeoff, the other left-side engine failed. At this point the aircraft dropped from the sky and crashed into a small hotel and restaurant in suburban Gonesse. All on board—100 passengers and 9 crew members—died. In addition, four people on the ground perished, and six others suffered injuries.
Air France grounded its remaining Concordes immediately; British Airways, the only other operator of the aircraft, followed suit in August. Both airlines resumed service in November 2001, but less than two years after that, all Concorde service ceased permanently.
A French government investigation into the crash later determined that the Concorde ran over a strip of metal on the runway, causing a tire to blow out. A large fragment of rubber then struck a fuel tank on the underside of the wing. (Fuel accounted for more than half the total weight of the fully loaded Concorde.) The impact most likely led the completely full tank to rupture from within. The spilling fuel quickly ignited, probably from an electrical arc in the landing gear wiring, and the fire caused the engines to fail.
The strip of metal on the runway was found to be a jet engine part that had fallen from a Continental Airlines DC-10 in the course of its own takeoff, a few minutes ahead of the Concorde. The engine part (a thrust reverser wear strip) had recently been replaced in routine maintenance. The mechanic who did the work used a strip made of an alloy with 90 percent titanium content, not stainless steel as specified by the manufacturer of the engine.
Critics of the official report pointed out other possible contributory factors that had been largely discounted by the French investigators. The aircraft exceeded recommended takeoff weight, and it was missing a “spacer” in the landing gear mechanism, possibly causing the aircraft to skid down the runway. There also had been a wind shift before takeoff, resulting in an undesirable tailwind. In addition, the flight crew may have shut down an engine prematurely.
In 2010 a French court ruled that Continental Airlines (by this time involved in a merger with United Airlines) and its mechanic were guilty of involuntary manslaughter, citing poor workmanship and use of improper materials. The court disregarded claims by defense lawyers that the fire had started before the tire encountered the metal strip. An appeals court overturned the criminal convictions two years later but kept a fine on the airline in force.
