Costa Concordia disaster,  the capsizing of an Italian cruise ship on January 13, 2012, after it struck rocks off the coast of Giglio Island in the Tyrrhenian Sea. More than 4,200 people were rescued, though 32 people died. Several of the ship’s crew, notably Capt. Francesco Schettino, were charged with various crimes.
The Costa Concordia was owned by Costa Crociere, a subsidiary of Carnival Corporation & PLC. When launched in 2005, it was Italy’s largest cruise ship, measuring 951 feet (290 metres) long with a passenger capacity of 3,780; by comparison, the Titanic was 882.5 feet (269 metres) long and could accommodate up to 2,435 passengers. The Concordia was known for its luxuries. It featured four swimming pools, a casino, and reportedly the largest spa on a ship. In July 2006 the vessel undertook its maiden voyage, a seven-day cruise of the Mediterranean Sea, with stops in Italy, France, and Spain. That became its standard route.
On January 13, 2012, the Concordia left Civitavecchia, Italy, at approximately 7:18 pm. On board were 1,023 crew members and 3,206 passengers. As the Concordia approached Giglio Island several hours later, it deviated from its standard course, moving closer to the small Tuscan island for a maritime “salute,” a common practice that included the cruise ship sounding its horn; the Concordia had performed several in the past. The area was known for rock outcroppings, and at some point, such a formation was noticed in the ship’s path. Schettino, a captain of more than seven years, ordered a change in course, but due to language issues, the Indonesian helmsman steered the boat in the opposite direction. It reportedly took 13 seconds to correct the maneuver. The boat’s bow ultimately swung clear, but the stern collided with the reef at approximately 9:45 pm. Confusion on the bridge resulted in conflicting orders, but the damage had been done: the Concordia’s port (left) side had suffered a 174-foot (53-metre) tear.
An assessment of the damage revealed that five compartments, including the engine room, were flooding, and the ship soon lost power. In addition, with neither the engines nor rudder functioning, the ship could not be steered. However, the wind and the stuck position of the rudder caused the Concordia to turn back toward the island. While the change in direction made the later rescue easier, it caused the ship to start listing to the starboard side. The drifting Concordia eventually ran aground near the shore. During this time, a panicked passenger contacted her daughter in Italy, and the Italian coast guard called the Concordia at about 10:14 pm. Schettino, however, downplayed the damage, only noting that the vessel had experienced a blackout. Some 10 minutes later the coast guard contacted the ship again, and at this time the crew admitted that the vessel was taking on water. However, Schettino’s only request was for tugboats.
At 10:39 pm the first rescue vessel arrived. Approximately 15 minutes later, Schettino finally ordered the Concordia abandoned, though according to reports, lifeboats had already been launched. At around 11:20 pm Schettino left the bridge and soon after abandoned ship; he subsequently claimed that he fell off the Concordia and landed in a lifeboat. Some 13 minutes later the last crew member departed the bridge, even though approximately 300 people were still on the ailing vessel. By 12:00 am on January 14, the Concordia had a severe list, making the release of lifeboats difficult and forcing many to use ladders.
At 12:40 am a coast guard captain called Schettino, who was in a lifeboat with other Concordia officers, and ordered him to return to the vessel and oversee the evacuation. He refused. By this time, however, the rescue operations included 25 patrol boats, 14 merchant vessels, and numerous helicopters, and by early morning, 4,194 people were evacuated from the Concordia and taken to Giglio Island, which had a permanent population of less than 1,000. At 6:17 am on January 14 search efforts were temporarily suspended, but the following day divers rescued three more from inside the Concordia. They were the remaining survivors. Thirty-two people died in the disaster, and the last body was not recovered until November 2014.
Almost immediately questions were raised concerning the conduct of Schettino and other crew officers. In July 2013 four crew members and Costa Crociere’s crisis coordinator pled guilty to various charges, including manslaughter. They received sentences of less than three years. That same month Schettino went on trial after being denied a plea bargain. He was charged with manslaughter as well as causing the wreck and abandoning ship. During the 19-month trial, prosecutors claimed that he was an “idiot,” while Schettino countered that his actions had saved lives and that he was being scapegoated. In addition, he noted the steering error by the helmsman, but a maritime expert testified that regardless of the mistake, the collision was unavoidable. In February 2015 Schettino was convicted on all charges and sentenced to more than 16 years in prison. He appealed the verdict, but it was upheld in May 2017; Schettino began serving his sentence shortly thereafter.
With Giglio Island lying in a protected marine area, environmental issues relating to the Concordia wreck were of particular concern. The vessel was on the edge of an underwater cliff, leading to worries that the ship might slip and break apart, causing an oil spill.  To lessen any potential damage, oil booms were placed around the wreckage, and in February 2012 salvage workers began removing more than 2,000 tons of fuel; the undertaking was completed the following month.
During this time, work also began to remove the vessel in what was the largest maritime salvage operation in history.  It was not until September 2013 that the 114,000-ton Concordia was finally righted. The 19-hour process involved specially built underwater platforms, cranes, and some 500 people. In July 2014 the Concordia—outfitted with a number of steel containers serving as flotation devices—was towed to Genoa, Italy, where it was dismantled for scrap.
