Cyclone Pam,  large and destructive tropical cyclone in the South Pacific Ocean that affected Vanuatu, Tuvalu, Kiribati, and New Zealand during March 2015. Cyclone Pam produced high winds, coastal storm surges, heavy rains, and flooding in the affected countries and was classified for a time as a category 5 storm. Worst hit by far was Vanuatu, where the storm killed 16 people and caused widespread damage. About 166,000 people required immediate food aid. With maximum sustained winds at landfall that measured 165 miles (270 km) per hour, Pam was among the most-powerful tropical cyclones ever recorded.
Cyclone Pam originated in the South Pacific Ocean near the Solomon Islands. It was given the designation “TD11F” by the Fiji Meteorological Service on March 6, 2015. Pam continued to grow in size and strength over the next few days, becoming officially recognized as a tropical depression on March 8 and maturing into a tropical cyclone at 5:00 pm local time (7:00 pm New Zealand Daylight Time) on March 9. The tropical cyclone made its way southward between Vanuatu and Fiji and continued to intensify, growing into a category 2 storm on March 10 and a category 4 storm by the early morning of March 12.
By the morning of March 12, Pam had turned south-southwest on a path toward the island of Éfaté, on which is Port-Vila, the capital of Vanuatu. During the early hours of March 13, as Pam approached the eastern shore of Éfaté with maximum sustained winds of 165 miles (270 km) per hour, it was reclassified as a category 5 cyclone by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. Pam made landfall on Éfaté at 7:05 pm local time. The cyclone then turned southward, passing the islands of Erromango and Tanna in the early hours of March 14, and its winds later fell to 95–111 miles (about 153–179 km) per hour.
After striking Vanuatu, Pam continued southeasterly and declined in intensity. The weakened tropical cyclone passed the eastern part of New Zealand’s North Island between March 15 and 17, bringing heavy rains and tropical-storm-force winds to some parts of North Island’s coast, as well as to the Chatham Islands, before dissipating.
Measurements from aircraft revealed that Cyclone Pam’s atmospheric pressure reached its lowest point (a condition that typically indicates the strongest winds) by 1 pm on March 14, declining to 896 millibars. Satellite data analysis, however, suggested that Cyclone Pam’s central pressure may have fallen as low as 879 millibars at that time.
Pam damaged housing and infrastructure in Vanuatu, Tuvalu, Kiribati, and New Zealand. Vanuatu was hit hardest. Humanitarian organizations reported that some 50 to 90 percent of all homes, schools, churches, places of business, and other structures in the country suffered some damage from the storm, and winds and water had denuded many of the country’s forestlands and croplands. Shortly after the storm’s passing, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, in conjunction with the government of Vanuatu, estimated that 166,000 people spread across 22 islands needed immediate food aid, since much of the country’s livestock and poultry had been killed. In addition, many of Vanuatu’s water sources were contaminated, and most household vegetable gardens, upon which much of the population depends for food, had been wiped out. Few people, however, lost their lives as a direct result of the storm. As of late March 2015, the government of Vanuatu reported 11 deaths, whereas the United Nations attributed 16 deaths to the storm. No storm-related deaths were reported in other countries.
Other countries in the region were significantly damaged but fared better than Vanuatu. Shortly after the storm passed over Tuvalu, the country’s prime minister, Enele Sopoaga, declared a state of emergency, noting that 45 percent of Tuvalu’s 9,900 people were displaced by the storm, many because of storm surges and flooding, which damaged homes, contaminated drinking water, and killed livestock. The storm also damaged hundreds of homes in Kiribati, especially on the islands of Arorae and Tamana, and damaged the primary causeway in the Tarawa Atoll connecting Betio island with Bairiki. Flooding also damaged shorelines along New Zealand’s North Island and on Chatham Island.
