EgyptAir flight 990,  flight of an EgyptAir jet airliner that crashed into the Atlantic Ocean about 60 miles (100 km) south of Nantucket, Massachusetts, in the early morning hours of October 31, 1999. All 217 people on board died. The U.S. National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) stated that the actions of the copilot caused the crash, but Egyptian authorities blamed mechanical failure.
Flight 990 originated in Los Angeles and made a stop in New York City, after which it was to continue on to Cairo. The airplane, an extended-range Boeing 767-366, registration number SU-GAP, had two crews for the 10-hour transatlantic leg of the flight. It took off from John F. Kennedy International Airport at about 1:20 am. Less than 25 minutes later  the airplane leveled at its assigned altitude of 33,000 feet (10,000 metres). However, at approximately 1:50 am it began to descend rapidly, at a very steep angle of 40°, to an altitude of about 16,000 feet (4,900 metres). During the dive it approached the speed of sound, far exceeding the maximum safe speed for a Boeing 767. Less than a minute later the descent stopped, and the airplane regained altitude, up to about 25,000 feet (7,600 metres), and changed direction. Then the plane began its fatal descent, losing its left engine before crashing into the ocean. All those on board—203 passengers and 14 crew members—were killed. Among the passengers were a large group of Egyptian military officers who were returning from a training exercise in the United States. Their presence led some to suspect at first that the flight had been targeted by Egypt’s enemies.
International aviation agreements gave Egypt the right to investigate the crash, but that country initially deferred to the American NTSB. More than 70 percent of the airplane was recovered from water about 230 feet (70 metres) deep. From the cockpit voice recorder it was learned that relief first officer (relief copilot) Gamil al-Batouti (surname also spelled El Batouty) took over the copilot seat only 22 minutes after takeoff, at his own insistence. The captain left the cockpit to visit the restroom, during which time the autopilot was disconnected, and the plane began its first descent. The dive was so rapid as to simulate zero gravity within the aircraft. The captain managed to return to the cockpit and asked, “What’s happening? What’s happening?” Al-Batouti was heard stating repeatedly (in Arabic) “I rely on God.” As the rate of descent decreased, the left and right elevators—the hinged panels in an airplane’s tail that control ascent and descent—became set in opposite directions: for ascent on the left (captain’s) side, and for descent on the right (copilot’s) side. The engines were shut off about 15 seconds before the electrical system failed and flight data recording ceased. The NTSB attributed the crash to the actions of al-Batouti.
In Egypt, where EgyptAir was the flag carrier (national airline), the NTSB findings were unpopular. The Egyptian Civil Aviation Authority carried out its own investigation and issued a report that rejected the possibility that al-Batouti had caused the crash. The Egyptians found that sheared rivets in the elevator control mechanism caused the problem, and that everyone in the cockpit was working together to regain control up to the time the plane hit the water.
