Hillsborough disaster,  incident in which a crush of football (soccer) fans resulted in 96 deaths and hundreds of injuries during a match at Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield, England, on April 15, 1989. The tragedy was largely attributed to mistakes by the police.
An FA Cup semi-final match was scheduled between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest on April 15, 1989, at Hillsborough, a neutral venue. The sold-out game was expected to draw more than 53,000 fans. To prevent hooliganism, fans for the two teams were directed to enter from different sides of the stadium. Liverpool supporters with tickets for the standing terraces were to enter along Leppings Lane. There they were to pass though one of seven turnstiles, after which there were two tunnels that opened into “pens,” areas enclosed by high fences with a narrow gate. Central pens 3 and 4 were accessed from the main tunnel, while the other side pens were entered through the less prominent corridor.
Due to the limited number of turnstiles, a bottleneck formed as approximately 10,100 fans attempted to enter the stadium on the Leppings Lane side. By about 2:30 pm, some 30 minutes before kickoff, more than half of those fans were still outside. Hoping to ease congestion, Yorkshire Police Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield, who had little experience policing soccer matches at Hillsborough, approved the opening of exit gate C at approximately 2:52 pm. Some 2,000 fans entered through that gate, and although the side pens were relatively empty, the majority headed to the main tunnel and the already crowded pens 3 and 4. As fans rushed into those pens, a deadly crush resulted, with people frantically trying to escape. A number of law officials initially believed the problem to be unruly fans, and it was not until five minutes after kickoff that the match was halted. However, police never “fully activated the major incident procedure.” Poor communications and coordination further complicated rescue efforts, and in numerous cases fans provided assistance and medical attention. In total 96 people were killed, the last of whom died in 1993 when he was taken off life support. In addition, more than 760 were injured.
Immediately after the disaster, police blamed the incident on Liverpool fans, whom they alleged were drunk and disorderly.  In addition, Duckenfield claimed that fans had forced open gate C. A 1989 interim report, however, faulted law officials, notably citing their failure to close the main tunnel after pens 3 and 4 reached capacity. The following year an inquest held that there was insufficient evidence to bring criminal charges. The coroner’s report was released in 1991, and it stated that all those who died were beyond saving by 3:15 pm—when the first ambulance arrived—thus blocking an investigation into the rescue efforts. In addition, the deaths were ruled accidental. 
Calls continued for further investigations, and in 2009 an independent panel was formed to review the tragedy. Three years later it announced that the police had engaged in a far-reaching cover-up, faulting fans and falsifying reports in an effort to hide their own mistakes. The panel found no evidence that alcohol—or unruly behaviour—had played a role in the disaster, and it believed that as many as 41 deaths could have been averted by better rescue efforts.  In December 2012 the coroner’s finding that the deaths were accidental was overturned.
Another inquest began in 2014, and the following year Duckenfield testified that he had lied about fans opening gate C, an allegation that been discredited years earlier but continued to be advanced. In addition, he admitted that his failure to close the main tunnel leading to the central pens directly caused the deaths. In 2016 the jury found that the 96 victims had been “unlawfully killed.” The following year criminal charges were filed against six individuals connected to the disaster. Notably, Duckenfield faced 95 charges of manslaughter; because of legal issues, he could not be prosecuted for the victim who died in 1993.
