Hurricane Mitch,  hurricane (tropical cyclone) that devastated Central America, particularly Honduras and Nicaragua, in late October 1998. Hurricane Mitch was recognized as the second deadliest Atlantic hurricane on record, after the Great Hurricane of 1780. With millions left homeless and property damage of roughly $6 billion, it was also one of the most destructive.
Hurricane Mitch formed as a tropical depression in the southwestern Caribbean Sea on October 22. After being upgraded to a hurricane on October 24, Mitch entered a period of rapid intensification, and, by the afternoon of October 26, it had grown into a category 5 hurricane—the highest rating on the Saffir-Simpson hurricane scale. It reached its peak wind speed of 180 miles (290 km) per hour off the northeastern coast of Honduras on October 26 and 27, when it dumped heavy rain on much of Central America, particularly on Honduras and Nicaragua. As the storm weakened and stalled near the northern coast of Honduras, the rains increased in intensity, causing flash floods and mud slides, which devastated coastal regions and the Honduran island of Guanaja.
Mitch made landfall in northern Honduras on October 29 and then moved slowly inland while continuing to produce tremendous amounts of rain. The rains reached a rate of about 4 inches (100 mm) per hour, with total rainfall exceeding 30 inches (750 mm) along the coast and 50 inches (1250 mm) in the interior areas. After wreaking havoc on Central America, Hurricane Mitch moved east-northeast, regaining its strength in the Bay of Campeche and hitting Florida as a tropical storm on November 5. After clearing Florida, it finally dissipated over the Atlantic.
The floods, mud slides, and wind damaged Honduras’s entire infrastructure, ruined its agricultural crops, and demolished population centres throughout the country. Parts of Nicaragua, Guatemala, Belize, and El Salvador were also devastated, with hundreds of thousands of homes obliterated, residents swept away, and crops wiped out. The storm killed more than 11,000 people (mostly in Honduras and Nicaragua, but also in Guatemala, El Salvador, Mexico, and Costa Rica), and thousands more were missing afterward.
Reconstruction projects were extensive and time-consuming, particularly in Honduras and Nicaragua. International relief efforts provided significant help. In 1999 the name Mitch was retired for hurricanes by the World Meteorological Organization.
