Kashmir earthquake of 2005,  disastrous earthquake that occurred on October 8, 2005, in the Pakistan-administered portion of the Kashmir region and in the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP; called Khyber Pakhtunkhwa after 2010) of Pakistan; it also affected adjacent parts of India and Afghanistan. At least 79,000 people were killed and more than 32,000 buildings collapsed in Kashmir, with additional fatalities and destruction reported in India and Afghanistan, making it one of the most destructive earthquakes of contemporary times.
The devastating earthquake struck at 8:50 am local time (03:50 UTC), with its epicentre located 12 miles (19 km) northeast of Muzaffarabad, the administrative centre of the Pakistani-administered Azad Kashmir area, and approximately 65 miles (105 km) north-northeast of Islamabad, the capital of Pakistan. Measured at a magnitude of 7.6 (slightly less than that of the 1906 San Francisco quake), the earthquake caused major destruction in northern Pakistan, northern India, and Afghanistan, an area that lies on an active fault caused by the northward tectonic drift of the Indian subcontinent. The Muzaffarabad area was the worst hit, and a number of villages there were totally destroyed. At least 32,335 buildings collapsed in various cities in the Kashmir region—including Anantnag and Srinagar in Jammu and Kashmir state (now union territory), India—with additional property losses reported in the Pakistani cities of Islamabad, Lahore, and Gujrat, among others. The official death toll was 79,000 for Pakistani-administered Kashmir and the NWFP, although other sources put it at 86,000, with the number injured estimated at more than 69,000. At least 1,350 people were killed and 6,266 injured in Jammu and Kashmir state in India, and the tremors were felt at a distance of up to 620 miles (1,000 km), as far away as Delhi and Punjab in northern India. Four fatalities and 14 injured survivors were reported in Afghanistan. The property loss caused by the quake left an estimated four million area residents homeless. The severity of the damage and the high number of fatalities were exacerbated by poor construction in the affected areas.
The relief effort for the survivors was hampered by numerous aftershocks, as well as by the ensuing landslides and falling rocks, which damaged highways and mountain roads and made parts of the affected region inaccessible for several days. In a display of goodwill, five crossing points were opened in the line of control (the military demarcation line between the Indian- and Pakistani-administered parts of Kashmir) to facilitate rescue efforts and the flow of relief goods. North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) troops and various international aid agencies played significant roles in the subsequent relief and rescue efforts.
