L’Aquila earthquake of 2009,  severe earthquake that occurred on April 6, 2009, near the city of L’Aquila in the Abruzzi region of central Italy.
The magnitude-6.3 tremor struck at 3:32 am local time, extensively damaging the 13th-century city of L’Aquila, located only about 60 miles (100 km) northeast of Rome. The earthquake resulted from normal faulting on the northwest-southeast-trending Paganica Fault. It and several neighbouring faults are related to extensional tectonic forces associated with the opening of the Tyrrhenian Basin to the west. For more than three months after the main earthquake, the National Institute of Geophysics and Volcanology, using a portable network of seismometers, continued to detect thousands of aftershocks. The aftershocks from the country’s worst earthquake in 30 years rippled through central Italy, fraying both public and political nerves. In all, more than 300 people died, and an estimated 60,000 were left homeless.
At the insistence of Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, the Group of Eight summit that had been scheduled to take place on Maddalena Island, off the coast of Sardinia, was moved to L’Aquila. The summit was held there in July under makeshift conditions to focus global attention on the catastrophe. By September 2009 vigorous assistance efforts had succeeded in moving some of the dispossessed into new homes, though thousands remained housed in temporary facilities. The town’s historic centre remained off-limits more than a year after the quake as restoration efforts proceeded slowly, and officials involved in the reconstruction effort were later investigated for wrongdoing in the awarding of public contracts.
In September 2011 six scientists and a government official were placed on trial for manslaughter in connection with a statement they had made prior to the earthquake. Prosecutors alleged that the individuals, all members of a government risk-assessment commission, did not properly communicate the increased risk of a major earthquake in the wake of the smaller tremors that preceded the April 6 quake. Critics countered that there exists no precise method for predicting the occurrence of an earthquake and that the trial would serve as a disincentive for scientists to advise the government in the future. In October 2012 an Italian court found the seven individuals guilty of multiple manslaughter, and each was sentenced to six years in prison. Those convictions were overturned on appeal in November 2014.
