Pakistan Floods of 2010,  flooding of the Indus River in Pakistan in late July and August 2010 that led to a humanitarian disaster considered to be one of the worst in Pakistan’s history. The floods, which affected approximately 20 million people, destroyed homes, crops, and infrastructure and left millions vulnerable to malnutrition and waterborne disease. Estimates of the total number of people killed ranged from 1,200 to 2,200, while approximately 1.6 million houses were damaged or destroyed, leaving an estimated 14 million people without homes.
Record monsoon rains began to fall in Pakistan’s mountainous northwest region about July 22, causing flash floods in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Punjab, and Balochistan provinces. The unprecedented volume of rainwater overwhelmed flood defenses, sweeping away roads and bridges and inundating large areas of land. By August 1 at least 1,000 people had been killed by flooding and at least 1,000,000 had been forced from their homes. As the floodwaters surged downriver into Balochistan and Sindh provinces in August, rain continued to fall in the northwest. With one-fifth of Pakistan affected by mid-August, rescuers and humanitarian aid workers struggled to reach victims stranded by rising water and by extensive damage to roads and bridges.
Rescue efforts were led by the Pakistani armed forces while humanitarian aid was provided by the Pakistani government, by foreign governments including the United States, Saudi Arabia, and the United Kingdom, and by nongovernmental organizations as well as local charities, some with ties to militant Islamic groups. The Pakistani government was criticized within Pakistan for its response to the floods: many saw it as sluggish and disorganized, and the preferential treatment given to some areas was cited as evidence of governmental corruption. In early August Pres. Asif Ali Zardari furthered the perception that Pakistan’s leaders were indifferent to flood victims’ suffering when, rather than staying in the country to monitor the rescue and relief efforts, he went on a scheduled 10-day trip to Europe. By October 2010 the water levels of the Indus had largely returned to normal. Large floodwater lakes  lingered in some low-lying areas until the early months of 2011.
The damage caused by the floods promised to have a long-lasting impact in Pakistan. Months after the floods had subsided, hundreds of thousands of people remained in temporary camps with inadequate sanitation and food supply. Many of the people who were most severely affected by the floods were small farmers; an estimated 5.4 million acres (2.2 million hectares) of crops were destroyed, along with an estimated 1.2 million head of livestock. The floods also devastated Pakistan’s public services and physical infrastructure, damaging or destroying more than 10,000 schools and 500 clinics and hospitals while sweeping away more than 5,000 miles (8,000 km) of railways and roads. The Pakistani government estimated that economic losses from the floods totaled $43 billion. A year after the floods, international aid from countries, humanitarian organizations, and private individuals totaled $1.3 billion.
