Red Cross and Red Crescent, in full International Movement of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, formerly (until 1986) International Red Cross,  humanitarian agency with national affiliates in almost every country in the world. The Red Cross movement began with the founding of the International Committee for the Relief of the Wounded (now the International Committee of the Red Cross) in 1863. It was established to care for victims of battle in time of war, but later national Red Cross societies were created to aid in the prevention and relief of human suffering generally. Its peacetime activities include first aid, accident prevention, water safety, training of nurses’ aids and mothers’ assistants, and maintenance of maternal and child welfare centres and medical clinics, blood banks, and numerous other services. The Red Cross is the name used in countries under nominally Christian sponsorship, while Red Crescent (adopted on the insistence of the Ottoman Empire in 1906) is the name used in Muslim countries.
The Red Cross arose out of the work of Henri Dunant, a Swiss humanitarian, who, at the Battle of Solferino, in June 1859, organized emergency aid services for Austrian and French wounded. In his book Un Souvenir de Solferino (1862; A Memory of Solferino) he proposed the formation in all countries of voluntary relief societies, and in 1863 the International Committee for the Relief of the Wounded was created. This organization in turn spawned national Red Cross societies.
The Geneva Convention of August 22, 1864, the first multilateral agreement on the Red Cross, committed signatory governments to care for the wounded of war, whether enemy or friend. Later, this convention was revised, and new conventions were adopted to protect victims of warfare at sea (1907), prisoners of war (1929), and civilians in time of war (1949).
The worldwide structure of the Red Cross and Red Crescent now consists of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC; Comité International de la Croix-Rouge); the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (Fédération Internationale des Sociétés de la Croix-Rouge et du Croissant-Rouge); and the national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies. The governing committee of the ICRC is an independent council of 25 Swiss citizens with headquarters at Geneva. During wartime the ICRC acts as an intermediary among belligerents and also among national Red Cross societies. It also visits prisoners in war camps and provides relief supplies, mail, and information for their relatives. The ICRC was awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace in 1917 and 1944 and shared a third Nobel Prize for Peace with the League of Red Cross Societies (now International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies) in 1963. The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, which has a secretariat in Geneva, helps provide relief after natural disaster and aids in the development of national societies.
