Super Typhoon Haiyan, also called Typhoon Haiyan or Typhoon Yolanda,  massive and highly destructive storm in the North Pacific Ocean that affected Palau, the Philippines, Vietnam, and China during early November 2013. The tropical cyclone produced high winds, coastal storm surges, heavy rains, and flooding in the land areas over which it passed. By far the worst-hit region was the central Philippines, where the storm produced widespread devastation and killed thousands of people. Many considered it to be the country’s worst natural disaster. With maximum sustained winds at landfall there that measured 195 miles (314 km) per hour, Haiyan was among the most powerful tropical cyclones ever recorded, if not the most powerful, to strike land.
The typhoon began as an area of convection located in the equatorial Pacific Ocean some 230 nautical miles (425 km) east-southeast of Pohnpei on November 2. Later that day, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, reclassified the disturbance as a tropical depression, naming the storm Tropical Depression 31W. The system traveled westward across the tropical Pacific Ocean over the next few days, growing in size and strength. The Japan Meteorological Agency reclassified the phenomenon as a tropical storm at midnight Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) on November 4 and assigned the name Haiyan, after its winds had reached a measured speed of 40 miles (64 km) per hour. With winds increasing to 75 miles (120 km) per hour sometime during the early afternoon on November 5, Haiyan had become a typhoon.
The storm continued to increase in intensity, and the JTWC upgraded Haiyan to a super typhoon (equivalent to a strong category 4 or category 5 hurricane, with maximum sustained one-minute surface winds of at least 150 miles [241 km] per hour) at 2:45 pm GMT (10:45 pm local time) on November 6. At that moment Haiyan was located some 113 nautical miles (209 km) east-northeast of Palau and was moving westward at about 21 miles (about 34 km) per hour. Later in the day, the storm swelled to more than 500 miles (about 800 km) in diameter with a 9-mile- (14.5-km-) wide eye. Early in the morning of November 7, the storm’s eye wall passed over Palau’s Kayangel Islands with winds that, according to some reports, approached 155 miles (250 km) per hour. Haiyan’s winds continued to increase through the day, rising to 195 miles (314 km) per hour with gusts measured at 235 miles (378 km) per hour.
Haiyan made landfall in the Philippines at the city of Guiuan on the island of Samar at 4:40 am local time on November 8. The storm’s atmospheric pressure at that point was measured at 895 millibars (its lowest reading), and Haiyan had maximum sustained winds of 195 miles (314 km) per hour, the highest wind speed ever recorded at landfall. By 8:00 am local time, Haiyan had reached the city of Tacloban on the island of Leyte, with winds in excess of 185 miles (298 km) per hour.
The storm then moved across northern Leyte. After crossing the northern tip of Cebu and then Bantayan Island, its eye was centred over northern Panay by the early afternoon of November 8, and its maximum sustained winds had diminished slightly to 165 miles (265 km) per hour. By late evening the eye had moved west into the South China Sea, where its winds had fallen below 145 miles (233 km) per hour, and it was again reclassified as a typhoon.
Haiyan struck land once again near Ha Long Bay in Vietnam’s Quang Ninh province at 5:00 am on November 10. By then the storm’s winds had weakened to less than 85 miles (138 km) per hour at landfall. It turned northward into China’s Zhuang Autonomous Region of Guangxi by November 11, where it further weakened and was downgraded to a tropical storm.
Haiyan caused significant property damage in Palau, but no people were reported to have been killed there. Its passage through the Philippines, however, was catastrophic, beginning with its landfall at Guiuan. There the violent winds combined with a storm surge, causing widespread damage and hundreds of deaths. The storm’s ferocity became even more pronounced as it slammed into Tacloban, and there were reports of 20-foot (6-metre) storm surges that hurled boats inland, collapsed buildings, and swept debris and people out to sea. The city was left largely in ruins, with thousands of people feared dead.
Haiyan continued its destructive path as it moved westward over the central Philippines. Cities reporting widespread devastation included Ormoc on the island of Leyte and Roxas on Panay. The storm also produced heavy and sustained downpours that dropped as much as 11 inches (280 mm) of rain and caused flooding and mudslides.
As Haiyan made its way across the South China Sea, Vietnamese officials ordered hundreds of thousands of people to evacuate areas in the storm’s expected path. In its more-diminished state, Haiyan caused wind damage and again brought heavy rains after it came ashore in northeastern Vietnam. The total number of deaths in both Vietnam and China, however, was some two dozen and included people who had died before the storm made landfall.
Rescue and relief efforts got under way almost immediately in the Philippines, but the extent of the destruction severely hampered access by aid workers, especially in the worst-hit and remoter areas. Even major cities like Tacloban were initially almost unreachable. The delay in providing relief supplies precipitated widespread looting in Tacloban and other cities in the first several days after the storm’s passing. Relief personnel and supplies slowly began reaching affected areas as roads were cleared and airports made usable again. The Philippine government was aided by United Nations agencies, international relief organizations, and a large number of foreign countries. Included in the latter was a contingent of U.S. Marines brought into the Philippines from Japan to help with relief efforts. In addition, a U.S. Navy aircraft carrier arrived in the area about a week after the storm had passed, and its fleet of helicopters was used to deliver supplies to stricken areas. Among other countries providing aid or personnel in the aftermath of the disaster were Australia, Japan, South Korea, Indonesia, China, the United Arab Emirates, and the United Kingdom.
Overall casualty figures for the Philippines were sketchy in the early days after the disaster, especially because so many of the worst-affected areas were remote and had been rendered inaccessible by the storm. The official death toll quickly mounted from the hundreds to the thousands, surpassing 5,000 within two weeks of the storm. The number of people killed or missing continued to climb as relief workers expanded their searches and reached more isolated areas. Although early estimates for the final casualty count ranged up to 10,000 or more, by two months after the disaster the official toll for those dead or missing was about 8,000. By the end of the first week after the storm, the Philippine government was reporting that more than 800,000 people had been displaced and that some 8.7 million people were in some way affected by the storm. As relief work continued, however, the official numbers quickly rose to approximately 4 million displaced and in excess of 16 million overall affected. In addition, more than a million homes were reported to have been damaged, of which about half were completely destroyed.
