Toya Maru ferry disaster,  deadliest ship disaster in Japanese history. On Sept. 26, 1954, the Toya Maru, a Japanese commercial ferry, sank during a severe typhoon in the Tsugaru Strait, killing an estimated 1,150 to 1,170 passengers and crew members.
The typhoon (known as “No. 15” in Japan and named “Marie” in the West) had been moving northeastward through the Sea of Japan (East Sea; along Japan’s western coast) at speeds exceeding 40 miles (65 km) per hour and struck northern Honshu and southern Hokkaido (which are separated by the Tsugaru Strait) on the afternoon of September 26. Although the Toya Maru’s voyage from Hakodate (on Hokkaido) to Aomori (on Honshu) had earlier been canceled because of the severe storm, the ship’s captain decided to depart in the evening after the weather had appeared to improve. The typhoon gained strength shortly after the Toya Maru left the Hakodate dock (about 6:40 pm) with a full load of passengers and railway cars. The ship quickly dropped anchor in the harbour in order to ride out the typhoon, but the anchor failed against the severity of the storm. The ship was dragged out of the harbour and onto rocks by the gale-force winds and high waves. Cast adrift, the ship listed severely, and water was able to enter the lower decks and the engine room, rendering the ship’s engine inoperable. With its cargo of train cars breaking loose from their moorings and crushing passengers, its engines out of order, and water continuing to pour into the ship, the Toya Maru could not be saved. It eventually capsized and sank a short distance off the shore of Hakodate, killing most of the people on board. The disaster was compared to the sinking of the Titanic in Japanese reports at the time.
Typhoon No. 15 sank several other cargo ferries and some 200 other sea vessels on September 26. Although the other ferries did not carry passengers, approximately 275 crew members were killed, which brought the total number of fatalities at sea to more than 1,430. The total death toll (on land and sea) across Japan from the typhoon exceeded 3,000, with the number of vessels destroyed, damaged, or sunk estimated at about 1,130.
A significant outcome of the Toya Maru ferry disaster was the decision to build the Seikan Tunnel beneath the Tsugaru Strait to carry railway traffic. It was completed in 1988 and is the longest undersea tunnel in the world.
