USS Arizona, in full United States Ship (USS) Arizona,  U.S. battleship that sank during the Japanese attack on the naval base at Pearl Harbor, Oahu island, Hawaii, on December 7, 1941. More than 1,170 crewmen were killed. The Arizona is commemorated by a concrete memorial that spans the wreckage.
The Arizona was built at the naval yard in Brooklyn, New York, in 1914–15. It was commissioned on October 17, 1916, and joined the Pennsylvania as the only two battleships of the Pennsylvania class. At the time, the Arizona was one of the U.S. Navy’s most heavily armed vessels. It boasted a dozen 14-inch guns and 22 5-inch guns.  In addition, the Arizona was the largest ship in the navy’s fleet, with a length of 608 feet (185 metres) and a displacement of 31,400 tons.
During World War I, the Arizona—which operated on bunker fuel oil, then scarce in the United Kingdom, where coal-burning U.S. battleships were based—did not see battle and instead monitored the eastern coastline. However, in December 1918 it was among the ships that escorted the George Washington, which was transporting Pres. Woodrow Wilson to the Paris Peace Conference. Over the next decades, the Arizona engaged in various exercises and training maneuvers. In addition, in 1929–31 it underwent a major overhaul. Notably, a number of protective measures were taken, including the addition of new armour, and the engines and various munitions were also upgraded. After the work was completed, the Arizona was eventually ordered to the Pacific Ocean, where it remained for the rest of its service.
Faced with the United States’ possible entrance into World War II, naval officials ordered the Arizona to undergo additional improvements in 1940–41. Rear Admiral Isaac Kidd subsequently took command of the battleship. During the ensuing months the Arizona participated in various exercises, including one in late October 1941 in which the battleship was struck by the Oklahoma. It took several weeks to repair the resulting hole on the Arizona’s port side. The battleship subsequently continued its training.
On December 6, 1941, the Arizona returned to its base at Pearl Harbor. The next morning, at approximately 7:55 am, Japan launched a surprise attack on the naval base. For nearly two hours, more than 350 Japanese aircraft—which included torpedo planes, bombers, and fighters—dropped bombs on U.S. vessels. At approximately 8:10 am, the Arizona was struck by a 1,760-pound (800-kg) projectile. The impact caused munitions and fuels to ignite, creating a massive explosion that reportedly lifted the battleship out of the water. As it sank, the ship was struck by more bombs. In addition, some claimed that the Arizona was also hit by torpedoes, though no evidence was found to support that assertion. While 334 crew members survived—some sources give 355—the death toll on the Arizona was 1,177.
The Arizona was among four battleships that sank during the attack; in addition, the Oklahoma capsized. Various other vessels were damaged, and some 2,400 people were killed. The attack unified the American public and ended most support for U.S. neutrality in the war. On December 8, 1941, the United States declared war on Japan and effectively entered World War II.
The Arizona sank in about 40 feet (12 metres) of water, though some parts were not submerged, and the ship continued to burn for more than two days. Almost immediately, efforts were undertaken to retrieve bodies, but eventually the decision was made to leave more than 900 entombed in the ship’s wreckage. In early 1942 the Arizona was deemed a total loss, and unlike other vessels that sank at Pearl Harbor, it was not raised. Instead, over the next several years, various parts of the battleship were salvaged and reused for the war effort. In addition, sections of the ship above water were removed. Although the Arizona was deleted from the navy’s register in late 1942, the ship was symbolically recommissioned in 1950.
In 1958 legislation was approved that called for the creation of a memorial to the Arizona. However, no federal money was allotted for its construction, and instead donations were solicited; in 1961 Elvis Presley notably staged a benefit concert at Pearl Harbor. Construction began in 1960, and work was completed two years later. On May 30, 1962, the USS Arizona Memorial was officially dedicated. The white concrete and steel structure is 184 feet (56 metres) long and spans the wreckage. It was designed by Alfred Preis, an Austrian-born architect who was sent to a U.S. internment camp after the Pearl Harbor attack. His simple design features a concave silhouette, with the middle representing the country’s low point following the attack and the raised ends symbolizing victory. The 21 open-air windows are said to reference a 21-gun salute. In 1980 oversight of the memorial was transferred to the National Park Service. Approximately 1.8 million people visit the memorial each year.
