Leisure,  freedom provided by the cessation of coerced activities, particularly time free from disagreeable work or duties.
Leisure is universal. Under ordinary circumstances everyone experiences some of it, even if they may know it by another name. In some parts of the world it has no name, being only agreeable residual activity in which people engage when not seeking their livelihood (working). Taking leisure is also an ancient practice. Both Aristotle and Plato discussed the virtues of what can be described as serious leisure. Indeed, it is clear that leisure is as old as humanity.
Despite its universality, many people the world over have some trouble recognizing leisure even when they are engaging in it. The problem is, in part, linguistic, as it is difficult to find reasonably precise terms for that which is leisure and nonleisure. But a related part of the problem is defining leisure itself.
One can examine life’s ordinary activities according to three domains: work, nonwork obligation, and leisure. Work is defined as activity that one must do: an obligation that, when met, results in one’s livelihood. Most people dislike work as an activity. If they could find an appealing way of gaining that livelihood, they would be inclined to adopt it. Nonwork obligation is the domain of all those disliked activities one must do that are done outside the domain of work. Many ordinary, sometimes daily, household chores fall into that category (e.g., washing dishes, cleaning house, and shoveling snow). To be classified as such, however, they must be felt to be disagreeable. People who like cleaning house would not count it as a nonwork obligation.
Among the reasons that leisure can be difficult to recognize is that under certain conditions it overlaps the other two domains. What about those people who like their work? Or people who enjoy certain common nonwork obligations such as grocery shopping and walking their dog? Moreover, even activities commonly thought of as leisure can have obligatory aspects, such as promising to take a friend out for dinner. (Many of such obligations, however, are pleasant.) The apparent inconsistency in such examples is resolved when they are redefined as leisure rather than as work or nonwork obligation. That definition holds that leisure is uncoerced, contextually framed activity engaged in during free time, which people want to do and, using their abilities and resources, actually do in a satisfying or a fulfilling way (or both).
“Free time” in that definition refers to time away from unpleasant, or disagreeable, obligation, with pleasant obligation being treated as essentially leisure. In other words, a person at leisure feels no significant coercion to enact the activity in question. Some kinds of work described as “devotee work” may be conceived of as pleasant obligation, in that people who do such work, though they must make a living, do so as a highly intrinsically appealing pursuit. Work of that sort is also essentially leisure, in that getting paid to do it only makes possible pursuit of a deeply fulfilling interest.
Uncoerced, people at leisure believe that they are doing something they are not disagreeably obliged to do. In that definition emphasis is on the acting individual and the play of human agency. That in no way denies, however, that some people want to do things they cannot do. They find their choices frustrated by certain limiting social and personal conditions such as aptitude, ability, socialized leisure tastes, knowledge of available activities, and accessibility of activities. In other words, when using that definition of leisure—whose central ingredient is lack of coercion—one must be sure to understand leisure activities in relation to their larger personal, structural, cultural, and historical context. Consequently, leisure is not actually freely chosen, for choice of activity is significantly shaped by that background.
Free time, as conventionally defined, cannot be regarded in this discussion as synonymous with leisure. One can be bored in his or her free time, which can result from inactivity (having “nothing to do”) or from activity that is uninteresting or unstimulating. The same can, of course, happen at work and in obligated nonwork settings. Because boredom is a decidedly negative state of mind, it may be argued that, logically, it is not leisure at all. Leisure is typically conceived of as a positive state of mind, composed of, among other sentiments, pleasant expectations and recollections of activities and situations. Of course, it sometimes happens that expectations turn out to be unrealistic; individuals then get bored (or perhaps angry, frightened, or embarrassed) with the activity in question, transforming it in their view into something quite other than leisure.
For the foregoing condensed definition of leisure to be understood, its reference to “uncoerced activity” must be clarified by defining “activity.”  An activity is a type of pursuit wherein its participants mentally or physically (often both) do something motivated by the hope of achieving a desired end. Life is filled with activities, both pleasant and unpleasant: sleeping, mowing the lawn, taking the train to work, having a tooth filled, eating lunch, playing tennis, running a meeting, and on and on. Activities, as that list illustrates, may be categorized as work, leisure, or nonwork obligation. They are, furthermore, general. In some instances they refer to the behavioral side of recognizable roles—for example, as a commuter, tennis player, or chair of a meeting. In others one may recognize the activity but not conceive of it formally as  the embodiment of a role, such as someone sleeping, mowing a lawn, or eating lunch (not as a patron in a restaurant).
Most common of the various leisure activities are the “casual,” essentially hedonic pursuits that are undertaken mainly for the pure fun of doing so and that require minimal skill and knowledge. In many parts of the world, watching television is the number one casual leisure activity, while socializing, strolling, lounging, having sex, eating, and gambling are also popular. Most people generally think of leisure as the pursuit of casual activity.
Yet the leisure domain is further composed of two other types. One is “serious leisure,” the systematic pursuit of an amateur, hobbyist, or volunteer activity sufficiently substantial, interesting, and fulfilling for the participant to find a (leisure) career in its practice. In the process of pursuing serious leisure, the individual acquires and expresses a combination of its special skills, knowledge, and experience. The other type of leisure is “project-based leisure,” a short-term, reasonably complicated, one-shot or occasional though infrequent creative undertaking carried out in free time or time free of disagreeable obligation. Examples include making a macramé decoration from a kit, writing a family genealogy, organizing a 50th-wedding-anniversary celebration, and volunteering for a major arts festival. Both types sometimes lead to substantial community contributions, as in such serious leisure as community orchestra concerts, quilting exhibitions, and volunteer firefighting.
Serious leisure, in many ways, offers the greatest opportunity for finding self-fulfillment, though such is also possible on a much-more-limited scale with project-based leisure. Amateurs, hobbyists, and serious volunteers often find rest and relaxation in various casual interests, which they seek between sessions of serious activity.
