Ed Ruscha, in full Edward Joseph Ruscha,  (born December 16, 1937, Omaha, Nebraska, U.S.), American artist associated with West Coast Pop art whose works provide a new way of looking at and thinking about what constitutes the American scene, as well as connecting the verbal with the visual.
Ruscha was raised in Oklahoma City, and in 1956 he made his way to Los Angeles. There he attended Chouinard Art Institute (now CalArts), where he studied painting, photography, and graphic arts. He worked as a commercial artist, painting signs and creating graphic designs. As a result, he began to apply commercial techniques and styles to his own artwork. Initially, he experimented with Abstract Expressionism, but he soon turned to the found words and images drawn from vernacular culture that would come to inform all his work. He began to render words and images in the hard-edge style of advertising design. Later he experimented with painting words as if they had been written by using poured liquids. His signature works of dark humour included The Los Angeles County Museum of Art on Fire (1965–68), a painting depicting the institution in flames; Actual Size (1962), an image of a flying can of Spam (a precooked luncheon meat) beneath the Spam logo; Large Trademark with Eight Spotlights (1962), a dramatic representation of the Twentieth Century-Fox logo, and Oof (1963), a straightforward rendering of the expression used to communicate discomfort, surprise, or dismay.
Between 1963 and 1978 Ruscha systematically photographed southern California’s built environments—including vacant parking lots, swimming pools, and nightspots—which he made into wordless books, such as Every Building on the Sunset Strip. The 16 artist’s books he created in this manner were widely influential among a younger generation of artists. During this period Ruscha also made two short films, Premium (1969–70) and Miracle (1975), and in 1978 he collaborated with Lawrence Weiner on Hard Light, a film in book format.
In the 1980s Ruscha made work in grisaille in which images and texts, often as silhouettes, were softened and blurred. In the ’90s he featured the rugged mountain scenery often used in contemporary advertising for motor vehicles. Throughout the decades, his work continued to exhibit a deadpan viewpoint of consumerism in life and art.
Ruscha kept up his exploration of words and images in the 21st century. His notable art from this period included Pay Nothing Until April (2003), a juxtaposition of advertising language against a scene of snow-capped mountains, and He Up and Went Downtown (2018), a piece from a series of phrases Ruscha painted on drumskins. His work was exhibited in a number of group and solo shows and retrospectives, including “Word/Play: Prints, Photographs, and Paintings by Ed Ruscha” (2018) at the Joslyn Art Museum, Omaha.
