Arcade Fire,  Canadian alternative rock group that surged to international popularity in the early 21st century. Arcade Fire was founded in 2003 in Montreal when transplanted Texan singer and guitarist Win Butler (b. April 14, 1980) met multi-instrumentalist Régine Chassagne (b. August 18, 1977) at an art opening. The two formed a songwriting partnership and eventually married. The group’s original lineup was completed with Win’s brother, William Butler (b. October 6, 1982), playing synthesizer and percussion, along with keyboardist Richard Reed Parry (b. October 4, 1977) and bassist Tim Kingsbury. The band’s ranks continued to swell, including additional drummers, violinists, and others.
The seven-song EP Arcade Fire (2003) led to a recording contract with the independent North Carolina-based Merge Records, which released the full-length Funeral in 2004. Inspired by a spate of deaths in band members’ families, the album’s lyrics explored themes of mortality and mourning, yet the group’s energetic performance, lush instrumentation, and romantic sense of melody yielded unlikely anthems such as “Wake Up” and “Rebellion (Lies).” Upon its release, Funeral was reviewed reverently by online music magazine Pitchfork, leading to a barrage of mainstream press coverage. Almost immediately it outsold every prior release in Merge’s 15-year history. Additionally, Arcade Fire’s success helped cement Pitchfork’s reputation as an indie rock tastemaker.
On its ensuing concert tour in 2004 and 2005, the group appeared at major music festivals such as Chicago’s Lollapalooza and southern California’s Coachella. The band retreated to a church outside Montreal to record the bulk of Neon Bible (2007), which incorporated choral vocals, pipe organ, and even a live orchestra as part of a darker musical tapestry, with lyrics focusing on the conflict between spirituality and materialism in contemporary society.
Arcade Fire’s third album, The Suburbs (2010), departed from the elegiac sound of its predecessor, incorporating synthesizers and New Wave dance beats into a meditation on the cyclical nature of life. Despite the fact that the band continued to lack the marketing support of a major record label, the release debuted at number one on the Billboard album chart and in 2011 won album of the year at the Grammy Awards.
Arcade Fire released the double album Reflektor in 2013. Influenced by Haitian and Jamaican dance music as well as by the film Black Orpheus (1959), Reflektor was coproduced by LCD Soundsystem leader James Murphy. Everything Now (2017) mined themes of media consumerism and existential anxiety. Though it was less well received than its predecessors, it also debuted atop the Billboard album chart.
