Courtney Love, original name Love Michelle Harrison,  (born July 9, 1964, San Francisco, California, U.S.), American singer, songwriter, guitarist, and actress best known for her influential rock band Hole and for her troubled personal life, including her marriage to Kurt Cobain, front man for the alternative rock band Nirvana.
Love began her career as an actress, appearing in two Alex Cox films, Sid and Nancy (1986) and Straight to Hell (1987). During this time, Love formed the band Sugar Baby Doll with Kat Bjelland and developed her signature style of baby doll dresses, ripped stockings, and smeared makeup. Following a brief stint playing bass in Bjelland’s band Babes in Toyland, Love became the lead singer of Faith No More.
In 1989 Love formed Hole with the guitarist Eric Erlandson, the bassist Jill Emery, and the drummer Caroline Rue. Hole was known for its intense raw sound and unpredictable live shows, and the band quickly gained wide acclaim for its debut album, Pretty on the Inside (1991), produced by Sonic Youth’s Kim Gordon.
Love married Kurt Cobain on February 24, 1992, and later that year she gave birth to a daughter, Frances Bean Cobain. Reports that Love had taken heroin while pregnant resulted in the couple briefly losing custody of Frances. The Hole roster evolved during this time as Love and Erlandson were joined by the drummer Patty Schemel and the bassist Kristen Pfaff. Cobain committed suicide days before the release of Hole’s second album, Live Through This (1994). Two months later Pfaff died of a heroin overdose. In 1998 Hole released Celebrity Skin, a  commercial and critical success, but the group disbanded in May 2002.
Love began her solo career with the release of America’s Sweetheart (2004). Persistent abuse of drugs and alcohol, however, resulted in a cycle of arrests followed by periods of court-ordered rehabilitation. She lost custody of her daughter in 2003 and again in 2005. By 2007 Love was touring with a new band and was preparing for the release of her second solo album, but her tabloid behaviour continued to overshadow her music. Nobody’s Daughter was released in 2010 as a Hole album, although it was essentially a Love solo effort. In spite of songwriting assistance from Billy Corgan of the Smashing Pumpkins, the album was met with a poor critical reception.
Love had earned critical acclaim and a Golden Globe nomination for her role in the film The People vs. Larry Flynt (1996). Although she continued to perform as a musician, Love was more visible in the 2010s as an actress. She played recurring characters on the television series Sons of Anarchy, Empire, and Revenge, and she portrayed Kitty Menendez in the true-crime TV movie Menendez: Blood Brothers (2017). She also appeared in the big-screen biopic J.T. LeRoy (2018). In addition, in 2015 Love costarred with composer and lyricist Todd Almond in his musical theatre piece Kansas City Choir Boy in New York City, Boston, and Los Angeles. Dirty Blonde: The Diaries of Courtney Love (edited by Ava Stander) was published in 2006.
