Cream,  British rock trio that was the first “supergroup” (made up of musicians who had achieved fame independently before coming together as a band). Cream blended rock, blues, psychedelic rock, and a hint of jazz to create a unique sound. It was known for dexterous live improvisations that often turned into extended jam sessions. The members were Eric Clapton (b. March 30, 1945, Ripley, Surrey, England), Jack Bruce (b. May 14, 1943, Lanarkshire, Scotland—d. October 25, 2014, Suffolk, England), and Ginger Baker (b. August 19, 1939, London, England—d. October 6, 2019).
Cream was formed in 1966 while Clapton was still the lead guitarist of the prominent British blues band John Mayall’s Bluesbreakers. Before that he had been the lead guitarist of the Yardbirds (Jeff Beck and Jimmy Page [later of Led Zeppelin] would follow him in that position). Clapton was approached by drummer Baker to form a group focused on expanding the blues-jazz sound. Clapton accepted the invitation with the caveat that Bruce play bass guitar. Despite the long-standing hostility between Bruce and himself, Baker reluctantly agreed, and the three musicians formed Cream. The band’s beginning marked the end of Clapton’s Bluesbreakers’ stint. Before forming Cream, Baker and Bruce had already gained fame as members of British blues musician Alexis Korner’s Blues Incorporated and later as members of the popular Graham Bond Organisation, a jazz and rhythm-and-blues outfit. Bruce and Pete Brown, a poet who was sometimes called Cream’s fourth member, wrote most of band’s lyrics.
Clapton’s style as a guitarist had long been influenced by Chicago and Delta bluesmen such as B.B. King, Robert Johnson, Buddy Guy, Howlin’ Wolf, Muddy Waters, and Elmore James. Bruce (who was also the group’s lead vocalist) and Baker veered more toward jazz, with influences that included Art Blakey, Max Roach, Phil Seamen, Charles Mingus, Charlie Parker, and Dizzy Gillespie. Bruce was especially enamoured of bassist James Jamerson (who played in Motown’s house band, the Funk Brothers), and Baker was also inspired by world music, specifically African popular music.
Many of the tracks on the band’s first album, Fresh Cream (1966), still retained the bluesy sound that its members were accustomed to producing. Although widely considered mediocre by rock critics, it appeared on the top 100 album charts in both the United Kingdom and the United States.
Cream’s second album, Disraeli Gears (1967), veered farther away from the band’s blues comfort zone by incorporating Brown’s and Bruce’s mystical lyrics and guitar techniques that alternated between droning distortion and wailing effects-pedal-assisted riffs. Bruce sometimes played his bass as something of a lead instrument, and Baker’s drumming incorporated jazz tempos—approaches that had not been heard much in rock music at the time. The album broke into the top 10 on both sides of the Atlantic. Its second track, “Sunshine of Your Love,” highlighted the smooth transition from blues to a more psychedelic sound and was touted by critics as the perfect hybrid of hard rock, blues, and psychedelia. It was by far the most popular single from Disraeli Gears and the only Cream single to reach gold status (over 500,000 units sold) in the United States. Cream followed Disraeli Gears with its third and best-selling album, Wheels of Fire (1968), a mixture of studio and live recordings densely packed into two records that became the first platinum-selling (over 1,000,000 units sold) double album. It showcased “White Room,” arguably the group’s most popular song, which layered haunting vocals on top of shimmering guitars. The album also included a live rendition of Robert Johnson’s “Crossroads” that featured an oft-imitated solo by Clapton that is considered by many to be one of the greatest guitar solos ever.
In late 1968 Cream decided to disband—a decision that was largely a consequence of the animosity between Bruce and Baker. The band’s six-track farewell album, Goodbye (1969), featured “Badge,” which Clapton cowrote with George Harrison of the Beatles. The group’s lifespan was just under three years. At the tail end of the 1960s into the ’70s, the former members of Cream went on to establish other supergroups such as Blind Faith and Derek and the Dominos, and Cream’s style greatly influenced progressive rock acts such as Rush and the live “jam band” performances of groups such as the Allman Brothers Band.
Cream was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1993, and the group performed for the first time in 25 years at the induction ceremony. In 2006 the band received a Grammy Award for lifetime achievement.
