Death Cab for Cutie,  American indie rock group that helped define the emo genre of music in the early 2000s. Original members were lead singer Ben Gibbard (b. August 11, 1976, Bremerton, Washington, U.S.), guitarist Chris Walla (b. November 2, 1975, Bothell, Washington), bassist Nick Harmer (b. January 23, 1975, Bothell, Washington), and drummer Nathan Good. Later members included Michael Schorr and Jason McGerr.
Death Cab for Cutie founders Gibbard and Walla met in the mid-1990s at Western Washington University, in Bellingham, Washington, where they began to help each other write and record music in their dormitories. With Walla’s help, Gibbard produced a cassette, You Can Play These Songs with Chords, which earned him a local following. Soon after, additional members were brought in and the band began performing as Death Cab for Cutie, a name taken from a song by 1960s psychedelic rock group the Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band.
In 1998 the band’s debut album, Something About Airplanes, was released on Seattle’s Barsuk Records, and it created buzz on the indie rock scene. The group followed with We Have the Facts and We’re Voting Yes (2000) and The Photo Album (2001); the latter was highly praised for its exploration of relationships. (Between the second and third album, Good left the group and was replaced as drummer by Schorr, who was in turn [2003] succeeded by McGerr.) After touring, band members dispersed and devoted time to solo efforts. During this time Gibbard’s new wave–influenced side project, the Postal Service, produced Give Up (2003).
The title of Death Cab for Cutie’s next album, Transatlanticism (2003), refers to the distances that had separated the band members during the album’s preparation. The success of Transatlanticism, songs from which were featured on the 2003–07 television series The O.C., led the band to sign with Atlantic Records in 2005. Plans, the group’s major label debut, was released that year and yielded the hit singles “Soul Meets Body” and “I Will Follow You into the Dark.” It received the first in a string of Grammy Award nominations. In 2008 Death Cab for Cutie released Narrow Stairs, a darker album that hit number one on the Billboard charts in its first week of release and featured the single “I Will Possess Your Heart.” After The Open Door EP (2009), the band recorded Codes and Keys (2011), which focused on keyboards rather than guitar and included the popular “You Are a Tourist.” Death Cab for Cutie’s eighth studio release, Kintsugi (2015), was the last to feature founding member Walla, who left after its completion. It was the first recording not produced by him, and it exhibited a pop-rock sensibility. Thank You for Today (2018) featured Dave Depper and Zac Rae on guitar and keyboards and was met with mixed reviews.
