Fugazi,  American hardcore punk band known as much for its anticorporate politics as for its intense, dynamic music. The members were drummer Brendan Canty (b. March 9, 1966, Teaneck, New Jersey, U.S.), bass player Joe Lally (b. December 3, 1963, Rockville, Maryland), vocalist-guitarist Ian MacKaye (b. April 16, 1962, Washington, D.C.), and vocalist-guitarist Guy Picciotto (b. September 17, 1965,  Washington, D.C.).
Formed in 1987, the band emerged from the Washington, D.C., punk scene. All four members had already played in local bands; MacKaye had been a member of influential hardcore band Minor Threat and cofounded the independent label Dischord Records in 1980. By the time Fugazi had released its full-length debut, 13 Songs, in 1989, it had established a unique sound: building from the raw energy of 1980s hardcore bands such as Black Flag, Fugazi created its own brand of intricate song structures and stop-and-start dynamics, often fueled by call-and-response exchanges between dual singers MacKaye and Picciotto.
The group quickly developed a reputation for its integrity and its grassroots ethos. Despite lucrative offers from major labels, Fugazi remained self-managed and self-produced, releasing all its albums on Dischord. The band refused to charge more than $6 for admission to its exclusively all-ages shows and kept the price of its CDs under about $12—gestures intended to keep Fugazi accessible to its loyal fan base. Especially in light of the popular explosion of alternative and punk bands in the 1990s, Fugazi’s adherence to the punk movement’s original do-it-yourself populist stance earned the band a great deal of respect among its peers.
Over the course of the 1990s, on albums such as Repeater (1990), Steady Diet of Nothing (1991),  In on the Kill Taker (1992), Red Medicine (1995), and End Hits (1998), Fugazi retained its churning rhythms and raw emotion, but its song structures became more varied and its lyrics more oblique and less overtly political (the band had sometimes been criticized for being too didactic and politically correct in its earlier efforts). Fugazi became known for its intense live performances, marked by consistently tight sets and the magnetic stage presences of MacKaye and Picciotto. Onstage, the band utilized its trademark sound—the buildup of extreme tension followed by calm—to draw its audience into a visceral, emotional experience. Yet Fugazi stood out among its contemporaries in its opposition to slam dancing (the aggressive body-jarring collisions that were the preferred dance form of fans of hardcore).
In 1999 a documentary about the band, titled Instrument, was released, followed in 2001 by both a full album, The Argument, and an extended-play CD, Furniture. Shortly after a performance in London in 2002, the band announced an “indefinite hiatus.”
