George Harrison,  (born February 25, 1943, Liverpool, England—died November 29, 2001, Los Angeles, California, U.S.), British musician, singer, and songwriter, who gained fame as the lead guitarist of the Beatles, one of the most important and influential bands in the history of rock music. Harrison was the youngest of the “Fab Four” and was known as “the quiet Beatle.” He later achieved singular success as a songwriter and performer.
Harrison was born the youngest of four children in a working-class family. His father was a steward in the merchant navy before becoming a bus conductor, and his mother was a clerk in a grocery store. Harrison began playing guitar in secondary school. He later met Paul McCartney, who invited Harrison to join the Quarrymen, the rock band he and John Lennon had formed. The group underwent several name and lineup changes before becoming the Beatles and settling on Harrison as lead guitar, Lennon as vocalist and rhythm guitar, McCartney as vocalist and bass, and Ringo Starr as drummer.
Although Lennon and McCartney wrote and sang most of the songs the Beatles performed, Harrison also contributed original works, beginning with “Don’t Bother Me” (1963). A few of his later songs came to be regarded as some of the Beatles’ finest, including “While My Guitar Gently Weeps” (1968), “Here Comes the Sun” (1969), and “Something” (1969). In 1965 Harrison studied the sitar with Ravi Shankar and first featured his skills in “Norwegian Wood” (1965). Harrison’s interest in Indian culture grew, and in 1968 he and the Beatles, as well as a number of other celebrities, explored transcendental meditation with the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi in India. The trip influenced dozens of subsequent Beatles songs, but Harrison was the only member to make these religious practices part of his life.
Harrison released his first solo work in 1968 with the soundtrack to the psychedelic film Wonderwall. Following the breakup of the Beatles in 1970, he continued to put out solo recordings—notably the highly successful triple album All Things Must Pass (1970), which included the memorable “My Sweet Lord.” Other popular songs included “Give Me Love (Give Me Peace on Earth),” on Living in the Material World (1973), and “Got My Mind Set on You”, on Cloud Nine (1987). In 1971 Harrison staged two concerts to raise money to fight starvation in Bangladesh, which later became the prototype for star-studded fund-raising events. In 1979 he ventured into film production as a founder of Handmade Films. Among the company’s efforts were the Monty Python film Life of Brian (1979), Time Bandits (1981), and Mona Lisa (1986). Harrison was a frequent collaborator and often appeared on the albums of his former bandmates and other musicians. In the late 1980s he recorded and performed with the Traveling Wilburys, a musical group featuring Bob Dylan, Roy Orbison, Tom Petty, and Jeff Lynne.
After the murder of Lennon in 1980, Harrison maintained a low public profile. He was attacked in his home by an intruder in 1999 but survived with multiple stab wounds. Harrison was also treated for throat cancer in 1997 and for lung cancer and a brain tumour in 2001. He died at the age of 58 that year.
