John Mellencamp, also called Johnny Cougar or John Cougar Mellencamp,  (born October 7, 1951, Seymour, Indiana, U.S.), American singer-songwriter who became popular in the 1980s by creating basic, often folk-inflected hard rock and presenting himself as a champion of small-town values.
Growing up in southern Indiana—with which he is strongly identified—Mellencamp began playing in rock bands as a teenager. His first two albums, released in the late 1970s, disappeared without a trace; however, repackaged as a heartland rocker, he had his first hit, “I Need a Lover,” in late 1979. With two more big hits, “Hurts So Good” and “Jack and Diane,” the album American Fool (1982) made Mellencamp a star. Although criticized by some at this stage of his career as a humourless, self-important Bruce Springsteen manqué—patronizing his working-class subjects rather than celebrating them—Mellencamp suddenly matured as a songwriter. His lyrics grew more empathic, and his music acquired an incisive, crackling power, largely owing to his supertight backing band. Scarecrow (1985) and The Lonesome Jubilee (1987) were his commercial and artistic high points, exploring the impact of Ronald Reagan’s presidency on Middle America and producing the hits “Small Town,” “R.O.C.K. in the USA,” and “Cherry Bomb.” He also was a chief sponsor of the first Farm Aid concert, in 1985, which benefited distressed American farmers, and remained active on behalf of similar causes.
Mellencamp followed The Lonesome Jubilee with a series of albums that were generally successful commercially and critically though not as well received as his work from the mid-1980s. The most notable of these included Dance Naked (1994), which went gold on the strength of its cover version of Van Morrison’s “Wild Night”; Mr. Happy Go Lucky (1996), featuring the hit single “Key West Intermezzo (I Saw You First)”; the self-titled John Mellencamp (1998); and Trouble No More (2003), an album of stripped-down covers that topped the blues charts. Freedom’s Road (2007) yielded the minor hit “Our Country.” Later releases included the T Bone Burnett-produced No Better Than This (2010), Plain Spoken (2014), and Sad Clowns & Hillbillies (2017), which was recorded with Carlene Carter. Other People’s Stuff (2018) was another collection of covers.
In addition, Mellencamp collaborated with Burnett and writer Stephen King to create a stage musical, Ghost Brothers of Darkland County, which opened in Atlanta in 2012. In 2008 Mellencamp was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and in 2018 the Songwriters Hall of Fame.
