Kate Bush, byname of Catherine Bush,  (born July 30, 1958, Bexleyheath, Kent, England), British singer and songwriter whose imaginative and inventive art rock—marked by theatrical sensuality, textural experimentation, and allusive subject matter—made her one of the most successful and influential female musicians in Britain in the late 20th century.
Bush was the youngest child of an artistic family. Her father, who was a doctor, played the piano, and her mother, a nurse, had competed as a folk dancer in her native Ireland. As a child, Bush studied violin and piano and frequently joined her parents and older brothers in performing traditional English and Irish tunes at home. By age 14 she had begun writing her own musical compositions, and two years later a family friend introduced her to Pink Floyd guitarist David Gilmour, who helped her win a contract with EMI Records. For the next several years Bush took vocal lessons and studied dance and mime in London while preparing material for her first recording.
In 1978 Bush released her first single, “Wuthering Heights,” inspired by characters from Emily Brontë’s novel of the same name. Although its high keening vocals, florid instrumentation, and literary affectations were out of step with the punk rock that was then fashionable in Britain, the song became an unexpected number-one hit there and elsewhere and boosted sales of Bush’s debut album, The Kick Inside (1978), which featured similarly ornate and romantic fare. She quickly capitalized on her early success with another album, Lionheart (1978), after which she embarked on a European tour. The performance schedule exhausted Bush, however, and she subsequently focused primarily on recording.
Bush returned in 1980 with Never for Ever, which produced such hits as “Babooshka” and was praised for its musical sophistication. On The Dreaming (1982), the first album she produced entirely on her own, she employed new synthesizer technology to create densely layered arrangements for songs that explored such subjects as the life of Harry Houdini and the plight of Australian Aborigines. The album sold only modestly, however. Bush then reached a critical and commercial apex with the lush Hounds of Love (1985). Its moody otherworldly single “Running Up That Hill” even provided a breakthrough for Bush in the United States, although her following there ultimately remained limited. The greatest-hits collection The Whole Story (1986) and the single “Don’t Give Up” (1986), a duet with Peter Gabriel, further increased her popularity.
With The Sensual World (1989) and The Red Shoes (1993), Bush continued to draw out bold emotions and alluring pop melodies from songs that were elaborately constructed and sometimes inspired by erudite sources. (The title track of the former record, for instance, is a reimagining of Molly Bloom’s soliloquy in James Joyce’s Ulysses, and the latter record is named after the Powell-Pressburger ballet film.) She also collaborated with a number of guest musicians, including Gilmour, Prince, Eric Clapton, and a Bulgarian vocal trio.
After directing and starring in The Line, the Cross & the Curve (1993), a short film featuring songs from The Red Shoes, Bush took a 12-year hiatus from music. She resurfaced with the atmospheric Aerial (2005), a double record imbued with themes of domesticity and the natural world that earned her some of the most favourable reviews of her career. Bush later released Director’s Cut (2011)—for which she rerecorded songs from The Sensual World and The Red Shoes—and 50 Words for Snow (2011), a contemplative piano-focused set of new material. In 2014 Bush returned to the stage for the first time in 35 years. Her 22 concerts were stage spectaculars, featuring puppets, illusionists, and dancers, and they were followed by the three-disc live recording Before the Dawn (2016). Bush was made Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 2013.
