Nick Drake, in full Nicholas Rodney Drake,  (born June 19, 1948, Rangoon [now Yangon], Myanmar [Burma]—died November 25, 1974, Tanworth-in-Arden, England), English singer, songwriter, and guitarist known for emotive vocals, sombre lyrics, and rich melodies. Drake never achieved widespread recognition in his lifetime but inspired a cult following in the decades following his death.
Drake was raised principally in the English village of Tanworth-in-Arden and played the saxophone and clarinet in school. He took up the guitar at age 16 and began writing songs two years later. In 1968 he was discovered at a London performance by Ashley Hutchings of the folk rock group Fairport Convention and shortly thereafter signed a contract with Island Records. Drake’s debut album, Five Leaves Left (1969), which was shepherded by Fairport Convention’s renowned producer, Joe Boyd, juxtaposed gentle melodies and subtle melancholy lyrics. Featuring members of Fairport Convention and again produced by Boyd, Drake’s next album, Bryter Later (1970), revealed a more lush and buoyant sound.
Always averse to performing live, Drake, by 1970, had given it up entirely. He sank into prolonged periods of depression and grew increasingly reclusive, recording his final album, Pink Moon (1972), entirely alone and checking himself into a psychiatric institution for several weeks shortly after its completion. After recording a few more songs, in late 1974 he died at his parents’ home from an overdose of antidepressant medication. The coroner considered him a likely suicide, though some friends and family disagreed with the assessment.
Although none of his albums sold well while he was alive, Drake’s music continued to be discovered by new fans and performed by other singers. In the early 21st century his songs began appearing in films and television shows and commercials, bringing a new level of awareness to his music. Biographies included Nick Drake: The Biography (1997), by Patrick Humphries; Darker than the Deepest Sea: The Search for Nick Drake (2006), by Trevor Dann; and Nick Drake: Remembered for a While (2014), a compilation of letters, photographs, and essays collected by Gabrielle Drake, his sister.
