Patti Smith, in full Patti Lee Smith,  (born December 30, 1946, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.), American poet, rock songwriter, and singer.
Growing up in New Jersey, Smith won an art scholarship to Glassboro State Teachers College. In 1967 she moved to New York City, where she became active in the downtown Manhattan arts scene, writing poetry and living with the photographer Robert Mapplethorpe. Her performance-driven poetry readings soon took on a musical component, and from 1971 she worked regularly with the guitarist and critic Lenny Kaye. By 1973 they had formed a band and began performing widely in the downtown club scene. Smith’s mesmeric charisma, chantlike but hoarsely compelling musical declamation, visionary texts, and simple but ingenious rock music won her an intense cult following.
Signed to a contract with Arista Records, she released her first album, Horses, in 1975; it was produced by John Cale, the Welsh avant-gardist and cofounder (with Lou Reed) of the Velvet Underground. Her purest, truest album, it replicated her live shows better than any subsequent LP. Later albums of the 1970s moved in a more commercial direction, with a pounding big beat that bludgeoned away some of her subtlety; at the same time, her concerts often became sloppy and undisciplined. After Radio Ethiopia (1976) she released her most commercially successful album, Easter, in 1978. It included a hit single, “Because the Night,” written with Bruce Springsteen.
Following the album Wave in 1979, Smith disbanded her group and retired to Detroit, Michigan, where she raised a family with Fred (“Sonic”) Smith, founder of the band MC5. Although she recorded an album with her husband in 1988 (Dream of Life) and began working on new songs with him a few years later, it was only after his sudden death from a heart attack in 1994 that her comeback began in earnest. Gone Again appeared in 1996 and was followed by Peace and Noise (1997) and Gung Ho (2000). Smith continued releasing new records in the 21st century, among them Banga (2012). If anything, that late work showed her stronger than before, full of the old fire but purged of her more extreme excesses. She later collaborated with the international sound-art group Soundwalk Collective for a trilogy consisting of The Peyote Dance (2019), Mummer Love (2019), and Peradam (2020).
In 2010 Smith published the memoir Just Kids, which focused on her relationship with Mapplethorpe. The critically acclaimed work won the National Book Award for nonfiction. Her other memoirs are M Train (2015), about her travels and other experiences, and Year of the Monkey (2019), which includes some of her photographs. Devotion (2017) is an installment in Yale University Press’s Why I Write series. In 2016 Smith accepted Bob Dylan’s Nobel Prize for Literature on his behalf.
Although she never topped the charts, Smith precipitated punk rock in New York, London, Los Angeles, and beyond. A pioneer in the fusion of the bohemian sensibility with rock, she was able to translate the incantatory power of Beat writers such as Allen Ginsberg and William S. Burroughs into the rock mainstream. In 2007 Smith was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. She was named Commander of the Order of Arts and Letters by France’s Ministry of Culture in 2005, and in 2011 the Royal Swedish Academy of Music awarded her the Polar Music Prize for her contributions to music and art.
