Pixies,  American band whose unique blend of punk rock’s aggression and pop music’s infectious melodies helped establish the sound that would define alternative rock in the 1990s. The original members were Charles Michael Kitteridge Thompson IV (also know as Black Francis and Frank Black; b. April 6, 1965, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.), Joey Santiago (b. June 10, 1965, Manila, Philippines), Kim Deal (b. June 10, 1961, Dayton, Ohio, U.S.), and David Lovering (b. December 6, 1961, Burlington, Massachusetts, U.S.).
The Pixies formed in Boston in 1986, when singer-guitarist Thompson (using the stage name Black Francis) and his former Boston University roommate, guitarist Santiago, decided to put together a band. In response to the duo’s ad in a local newspaper for a “bassist into Hüsker Dü and Peter, Paul, and Mary,” Deal joined the group, bringing along her friend Lovering as a drummer. The Pixies quickly earned a reputation as part of the local Boston club scene and released their full-length debut, Surfer Rosa, in 1988. The album was an instant critical favourite and received considerable airplay on college radio and in Europe. While rougher than the Pixies’ later work, Surfer Rosa established the band’s signature sound: an aggressive blast of searing guitars and Thompson’s screeching vocals, which were oddly but effectively counterbalanced by enchanting pop melodies and Deal’s gentler backup vocals. Equally distinctive were the strange, cryptic lyrics penned by Thompson, which over the years would encompass references ranging from his Pentecostal upbringing to UFOs to Salvador Dalí and Luis Buñuel’s Surrealist film Un Chien andalou (1928; An Andalusian Dog).
In 1989 the group released Doolittle, its most revered album, which built upon the Pixies’ existing formula and perfected the stop-and-start dynamics that would perhaps become its greatest legacy to later alternative bands, especially Nirvana. Bossanova, a surf music-inspired variation on the earlier albums, followed in 1990. By this time, tensions were rising in the band—Deal, once a co-songwriter, contributed little to the album, and the group had effectively disbanded by the time of the release of Trompe le Monde (1991), which is generally considered the Pixies’ weakest effort.
With another name change, Thompson went on to release several memorable albums as Frank Blank or Frank Black and the Catholics, including Teenager of the Year (1993), Dog in the Sand (2001), and Honeycomb (2005). Deal shifted her focus to her onetime side project, the Breeders, the band she had fronted with Tanya Donelly of Throwing Muses, whose place was taken by Deal’s twin sister Kelley for the release of the candid, hook-laced Last Splash (1993), one of the landmark albums of the 1990s. In 2004 the Pixies reunited for a much-anticipated multicity tour, on which a limited amount of on-site CD recordings of each concert were instantly available to concertgoers. The tour was also captured in the documentary film loudQUIETloud (2006). Although Deal left the group in 2013, the Pixies continued to tour and record, using various bassists. Subsequent albums included Indie Cindy (2014) and Head Carrier (2016).
