PJ Harvey, in full Polly Jean Harvey,  (born October 9, 1969, Corscombe, near Yeovil, England), British singer-songwriter and guitarist whose mythically pitched, fanatically intense recordings and concerts set new standards for women in rock.
Harvey, born to countercultural parents in rural England, seems to have grown up with a sense of rock as simply another elemental force within the landscape. “Sheela-na-gig,” for instance, a single from her first album, Dry (1992), took as its central image the female exhibitionist carvings with gaping genitals found throughout Ireland and the United Kingdom, whose origins are the subject of debate. The song, like many others by Harvey, treats female sexuality as a ravaging, haunted force, but, instead of acting the victim, she theatrically embodies her obsessions, equates them with the alluring menace of rock and the blues, and builds herself into an archetype. In other hands—for example, those of the postpunk rocker Nick Cave, one of her major influences—such moves would run the risk of absurdity. But Harvey controls her self-presentation with extraordinary care: a skeletal figure with brightly reddened lips and an enigmatic smile, she uses polished diction even as the narrative takes her from teasing murmur to throttled scream.
Initially, the name PJ Harvey referred not just to Harvey but to the trio she formed with bassist Stephen Vaughan (b. June 22, 1962, Wolverhampton) and drummer Robert Ellis (b. February 13, 1962, Bristol). Under the engineering supervision of Steve Albini (whose reputation as a sonic extremist was based on his own bands, Big Black and Shellac, and on his production of groups such as the Pixies and Nirvana), they recorded Harvey’s most challenging album, Rid of Me (1993); a softer version of some of the same material, 4-Track Demos, came out later the same year. Following the tour in support of these releases, Ellis and Vaughan left PJ Harvey, which became the moniker for Harvey as a solo artist. To Bring You My Love (1995) featured an expanded band and more-accessible arrangements. When Harvey toured with this material, she set aside her rugged guitar playing for a more theatrical presentation and was received with the kinds of cult accolades that Bruce Springsteen had generated two decades earlier. Yet Harvey failed to capitalize on the enthusiasm. On Dance Hall at Louse Point (1996), a collaboration with John Parish, who had been her bandmate in Automatic Dlamini when they were teenagers, she gave up control of the music, which, far more than her lyrics, turned out to be her main strength.
The next PJ Harvey album, Is This Desire? (1998), was deliberately subdued, an exercise in art song. In 2000, however, Harvey came out with Stories from the City, Stories from the Sea, a return to anthemic rock with pop aspirations and an unlikely twist: for the first time, Polly Jean Harvey was singing about love and sex with wholehearted satisfaction. That album earned her the first Mercury Prize ever awarded to a woman. More collaborations with other artists followed—most notably with hard rockers Queens of the Stone Age, on whose side project Desert Session, Vol. 9–10 (2003) she was a major presence. In 2004 Harvey released the self-produced Uh Huh Her, on which she played all the instruments except percussion and continued her unique discourse on love, which from all indications had again turned bad for her. In 2006 Harvey’s live radio performances for renowned disc jockey and alternative tastemaker John Peel were released as The Peel Sessions, 1991–2004. Harvey’s 2007 album, White Chalk, was a return to art song: it was sung almost entirely in falsetto and accompanied by piano (an instrument Harvey barely knew) rather than guitar. Rarely had a rocker so capable of letting go also been so determined to hold back.
Harvey followed White Chalk with another collaboration with Parish—the wide-ranging A Woman a Man Walked By (2009). From the confrontational growl of the album’s title track to the softly spoken lines of “Cracks in the Canvas,” Harvey once again demonstrated that her voice was an instrument capable of conveying dramatic emotional range. She later surfaced with Let England Shake (2011), a rollicking folk-influenced album that alluded to the battles of World War I as part of a complex portrait of her relationship to her homeland. In 2011 Let England Shake earned Harvey her second Mercury Prize, making her the first two-time winner of that award. She focused on what she saw as American-made injustices on The Hope Six Demolition Project (2016), which she researched by touring Kosovo, Afghanistan, and parts of Washington, D.C.; the album was recorded in public behind one-way glass as part of an art installation. Belgian theatre director Ivo van Hove later chose Harvey to create the music for his 2019 London stage adaptation of the classic film All About Eve, and the largely instrumental soundtrack album also appeared that year. In 2013 Harvey was named a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE).
