Rage Against the Machine,  American alternative rock band known for incendiary political lyrics, social activism, and a hard-driving sound that incorporated elements of hip-hop and heavy metal.
Rage Against the Machine was formed in Los Angeles in the early 1990s and comprised vocalist Zack de la Rocha (b. January 12, 1970, Long Beach, California, U.S.), guitarist Tom Morello (b. May 30, 1964, New York, New York), bassist Tim Commerford (also known as Tim Bob, b. February 26, 1968, Irvine, California), and drummer Brad Wilk (b. September 5, 1968, Portland, Oregon).
The group self-released a 12-song cassette in 1992, which led to a contract with Epic Records. That same year the band’s eponymous debut album established a signature sound characterized by Morello’s inventive guitar work (which sometimes mimicked a deejay’s turntable scratching), Wilk’s pounding rhythms, and de la Rocha’s furious high-pitched rapping. Early hit “Killing in the Name” addressed police corruption, and other songs were similarly political. The group became involved in causes such as former Black Panther and death row inmate Mumia Abu-Jamal’s quest for a new trial, jailed Native American activist Leonard Peltier’s pursuit of parole, and the plight of sweatshop workers in less-developed countries.
Evil Empire (1996), which reprised the densely textured musical approach and militant lyrics of the band’s debut album, entered the Billboard albums chart at number one. The Battle of Los Angeles (1999) was also successful commercially. In the summer of 2000 the group staged a concert outside the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, after which a small riot erupted between some audience members and police. In October of that year, de la Rocha announced his departure from the band shortly before the release of Renegades, an eclectic collection of covers of rock and hip-hop artists, including Bob Dylan, the Rolling Stones, Afrika Bambaataa, and EPMD. The remaining three members went on to form Audioslave with former Soundgarden vocalist Chris Cornell. Audioslave produced three successful albums before breaking up.
In 2007 Rage Against the Machine reunited for the first of several concert tours, and the following year the band returned to its politically active roots by performing a protest concert in close proximity to the 2008 Republican National Convention. Although Rage Against the Machine never formally broke up, the band’s last appearance was in 2011, and in 2016 Morello, Commerford, and Wilk joined with Chuck D of Public Enemy, B Real of Cypress Hill, and turntablist DJ Lord to form Prophets of Rage, playing their first concert as a protest of that year’s Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Ohio. Their first album appeared the following year.
