In the early 1940s, recording sessions took place to document musical performances. Except for the presence of a microphone (and, perhaps, the absence of an audience), the procedure was exactly the same as a live performance: all members of the ensemble played and sang together “live,” and the music was etched onto an acetate disc. This was the master from which copies were made for commercial release. No editing was possible; corrections and revisions could be made only on subsequent performances. After World War II, however, the much-improved medium of magnetic tape offered both superior sound quality and the crucial advantage of editability. From the simple tape splice to the more recent cutting and pasting of digital audio, the ability to edit gave rise to a “record consciousness,” an approach that sought to move beyond the simple documentary function of the recording studio to exploit its potential for composition and experimentation.
Multitrack technology brings an additive dimension to recording: individual instruments, or groups of instruments, can be recorded separately and not necessarily simultaneously. All tracks are then fed through a mixing console, where individual volumes are set relative to the sound as a whole. For the mixing stage, signal modifying devices are used to enhance or, in some cases, transform the original timbre of the recorded material. Sam Phillips’s “slapback” delay treatment of Elvis Presley’s voice, Phil Spector’s distinctive use of the echo chamber, and the extraordinary innovations produced by digital sampling illustrate how seemingly “natural” sounds are technologically effected in the composition of popular music. Technology has therefore increased the control recording artists have over the process of creating popular music to the extent that the studio itself has become the primary site of the compositional process. Pop musicians often begin a recording project with little, if any, material beyond a broad conceptual framework and some sketches on a cassette. As the work progresses, the artist will shape the music through considerable experimentation with different structural and timbral possibilities. Thus, the tape machine is used as a notating device, and the principal mode of communication is oral. (Jimi Hendrix, for example, was known to leave the tape machine running for the entire recording session.) Moreover, most of the traditional distinctions between performer and composer, technician and artist have blurred as creative input comes from all participants regardless of their official role: a guitarist might suggest a bass line; an engineer might offer a useful critique of one take over another that results in a change in the music.
