Television,  American rock group that played a prominent role in the emergence of the punk–new-wave movement. With Television’s first single, “Little Johnny Jewel” (1975), and much-touted debut album, Marquee Moon (1977), the extended guitar solo found a place in a movement that generally rebelled against intricate musicianship. The principal members were Tom Verlaine (original name Thomas Miller; b. Dec. 13, 1949, Mount Morris, N.J., U.S.), Richard Hell (original name Richard Myers; b. Oct. 2, 1949, Lexington, Ky.), Billy Ficca (b. 1949), Richard Lloyd (b. Oct. 25, 1951, Pittsburgh, Pa.), and Fred Smith (b. April 10, 1948, New York, N.Y.).
Guitarist Verlaine (who took his name from the French Symbolist poet Paul Verlaine) and bassist Hell, former boarding-school roommates, formed the Neon Boys with drummer Ficca in New York City in the early 1970s. In 1973 guitarist Lloyd joined them; as Television they helped establish CBGB-OMFUG, a club in New York City’s Bowery, as the epicentre of a burgeoning punk scene. Principal songwriter Verlaine delivered his surreal lyrics with an elasticity that stretched from somber declarations to unearthly squeals, but what set Television apart from other punk–new-wave groups was the improvisational interplay of Verlaine and Lloyd’s guitars, which borrowed from avant-garde jazz and psychedelic rock. Patti Smith, with whom Verlaine wrote poetry and on whose debut single he played, described his guitar playing as the sound of “a thousand bluebirds screaming.”
Released on Elektra, Marquee Moon caused a stir among American critics but, like its more polished follow-up, Adventure (1978), sold much better in Britain. Prior to Marquee Moon, Hell left to form the Heartbreakers (with ex-New York Doll Johnny Thunders), then fronted the Voidoids. Television disbanded in 1978, reuniting briefly in 1992 for an eponymous album and tour. The group reunited again in 2001, performing a series of live dates in the United Kingdom, before once again splitting up. Interest in the band was rekindled in 2003 when remastered recordings of Television’s back catalog were released, along with Live at the Old Waldorf, a concert album that captured the group at the end of its 1978 tour. Verlaine also pursued a solo career.
