The Guess Who,  Canadian rock group that was the most successful band in Canada in the late 1960s and early 1970s and that country’s first rock superstars. The principal members were Chad Allan (original name Allan Kobel; b. c. 1945), Randy Bachman (b. September 27, 1943, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada), Garry Peterson (b. May 26, 1945), Jim Kale (b. August 11, 1943, Winnipeg), Burton Cummings (b. December 31, 1947, Winnipeg), Kurt Winter (b. April 2, 1946; d. December 14, 1997, Winnipeg),  and Greg Leskiw (b. August 5, 1947).
In the late 1950s, lead singer Allan formed the Silvertones with fellow Winnipeg teenagers Kale, a bassist; Bachman, a guitarist; and pianist Bob Ashley. With the addition of drummer Peterson, they became Chad Allan & the Reflections and by 1965 were Chad Allan & the Expressions. Heavily influenced by the British Invasion, the group developed a loyal following in Winnipeg, but its recordings suffered from the refusal by most radio stations in Canada to play Canadian groups. In 1965 their cover of Johnny Kidd and the Pirates’ “Shakin’ All Over” was released to radio stations under the moniker “Guess Who?” in the hope that disc jockeys would be more inclined to play a song by a mysterious new British band. Whether this marketing ploy had anything to do with the song’s success is debatable, but it was a chart-topping hit in Canada and reached No. 22 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100. Later that year keyboardist Cummings joined the group and took over as vocalist and frontman when Allan left in 1966. After a disappointing tour of the United Kingdom in 1967, the group served for two years as the house band on the CBC TV music-variety program Let’s Go, hosted by Allan. From 1966 to 1968, when the question mark was dropped from its name, the Guess Who landed a number of singles in the Canadian Top 40 but its albums sold poorly.
After acquiring the band’s contract from Quality Records for $1,000, producer Jack Richardson placed a second mortgage on his house to finance the album Wheatfield Soul (1969), which yielded the million-selling “These Eyes,” a Top 10 hit in both Canada and the U.S. Canned Wheat (1969) followed and included double-sided hit singles “Laughing” and “Undun.” It was the next album, American Woman (1970), however, that made the Guess Who stars. Its title track, the first recording by a Canadian rock group to hit No. 1 in the United States on the Billboard Hot 100, had serendipitous origins, beginning as a riff improvised by Bachman while tuning his guitar after breaking a string during a concert and was spontaneously augmented by the rest of the group, including Cummings, who added the memorable lyrics “American woman stay away from me.” “No Sugar Tonight,” the B-side for “American Woman,” also was a hit in both Canada and the U.S. “No Time,” which was originally included on Canned Wheat, was re-recorded for American Woman and became its third hit single. American Woman reached No. 9 on the Billboard Pop Albums chart, making it the only Guess Who album to reach the Top 10.
Wearied of the conflict between his religious beliefs and the band’s rock-and-roll lifestyle, Bachman, who had converted to Mormonism in 1966, left the Guess Who in 1970. He later reteamed with Allan to form Brave Belt, which evolved into Bachman-Turner Overdrive. Two guitarists, Winter—who became Cummings’s primary songwriting partner—and Leskiw, replaced Bachman. The first album with this new lineup, Share the Land (1970), featured several hits, including Winter’s “Hand Me Down World” and “Bus Rider,” along with Cummings’s title track and the Cummings-Winter collaboration “Hang On to Your Life.” So Long, Bannatyne (1971) followed a year later and included the popular singles “Rain Dance” and “Sour Suite.” A concert album, Live at the Paramount (1972), yielded the Canadian hit “Runnin’ Back to Saskatoon” and led renowned rock critic Lester Bangs to declare “The Guess Who is God.”
Lineup changes became more common as the band continued its prolific output. Rockin’, another 1972 release, preceded Artificial Paradise (1973), which contained the Canadian hit “Follow Your Daughter Home” but failed to match the success of the group’s earlier albums, as did #10 (1973). Road Food (1974) spawned the Canadian and U.S. hits “Clap for the Wolfman” and “Star Baby.” Guitarist Domenic Troiano, known for his work with Ronnie Hawkins and the James Gang, replaced Winter and McDougall and became Cummings’s songwriting partner for Flavours and Power in the Music (both 1975). Cummings then left the band after becoming disenchanted with the more progressive rock direction he saw the Guess Who taking with Troiano. The band continued into the 21st century with an ever-changing lineup that produced a series of mostly lacklustre recordings. There were also periodic reunions that involved the band’s seminal members, including Bachman and Cummings. One of those reunions produced the Running Back Thru Canada tour, one of the highest-grossing tours in Canadian music history, and a live double-platinum double album, issued in 2000.
Of the 14 Guess Who albums produced by Richardson during the 1960s and 1970s, 11 were certified gold (sales of 50,000) and five were certified platinum (sales of 100,000) in Canada, while five achieved gold (sales of 500,000) and three reached platinum (sales of one million) in the United States. The Guess Who forged an identity as a distinctly Canadian band, with a diverse sound that included different variations of rock, pop, psychedelia, and even jazz and lyrics that often contained explicit Canadian references. As Canada’s Walk of Fame noted upon the band’s induction in 2001, the Guess Who “were the guys who made it okay to be Canadian, who proved that you didn’t have to leave our shores to score big. And they’ve influenced just about every Canadian performer who has followed since.” In July 2013, Canada Post issued a stamp in the band’s honour.
