the Everly Brothers,  immensely popular American rock-and-roll duo, consisting of Don Everly (b. February 1, 1937, Brownie, Kentucky, U.S.—d. August 21, 2021, Nashville, Tennessee) and Phil Everly (b. January 19, 1939, Chicago, Illinois—d. January 3, 2014, Burbank, California), whose style of harmonizing influenced the Beatles, Simon and Garfunkel, and numerous country rockers.
Born into a musical family, Don and Phil first performed as part of their parents’ country music act, then moved to Nashville, Tennessee, to work as songwriters. In 1957 the duo signed with Cadence Records and had their first big success later that year with “Bye Bye Love.” Unlike the vocal harmonies in most early rock-and-roll recordings, which supported a moving vocal line with block harmonies, the Everly Brothers’ vocal approach was based on the high, lonesome sound of bluegrass and Appalachian music, supporting the lead vocal with a moving secondary line to create the effect of intertwined melodies. When contrasted with the brusque insistence of a rock-and-roll rhythm, the duo’s sweet, sad sound was almost as perfect a blend of rhythm and country as Elvis Presley’s and fueled a string of chart-topping hits, including “Wake Up Little Susie” (1957), “All I Have to Do Is Dream” (1958), and “Cathy’s Clown” (1960).
As vocal stylists, the Everlys were major inspirations for other rock groups such as the Beatles and the Hollies. Likewise, the Everlys’ interlocking harmonies provided an aural template for folk rockers Simon and Garfunkel, as well as inspiring country rock pioneers Gram Parsons and Emmylou Harris. But, even as their influence grew, the Everlys’ popularity waned. Sales in America slowed to a trickle after 1962, and, even though the duo maintained a large and loyal audience in Britain, their reign on the charts all but ended after 1965. Moreover, personal problems (including an addiction to amphetamines) began wearing away on the pair, and in 1973 the Everlys broke up during a concert at Knott’s Berry Farm in Buena Park, California. Both thereafter pursued solo careers.
In June 1983 Don and Phil reunited and released the album EB 84, which included the minor hit “On the Wings of a Nightingale.” The Everly Brothers were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1986.
