the Sex Pistols,  rock group who created the British punk movement of the late 1970s and who, with the song “God Save the Queen,” became a symbol of the United Kingdom’s social and political turmoil. The original members were vocalist Johnny Rotten (byname of John Lydon; b. January 31, 1956, London, England), guitarist Steve Jones (b. May 3, 1955, London), drummer Paul Cook (b. July 20, 1956, London), and bassist Glen Matlock (b. August 27, 1956, London). A later member was bassist Sid Vicious (byname of John Simon Ritchie; b. May 10, 1957, London—d. February 2, 1979, New York, New York, U.S.).
Thrown together in September 1975 by manager Malcolm McLaren to promote Sex, his London clothing store, the Sex Pistols began mixing 1960s English pop music influences (the Small Faces, the Who) with those of 1970s rock renegades (Iggy and the Stooges, the New York Dolls) in an attempt to strip rock’s complexities to the bone. By the summer of 1976 the Sex Pistols had attracted an avid fan base and successfully updated the energies of the 1960s mods for the malignant teenage mood of the ’70s. Heavily stylized in their image and music, media-savvy, and ambitious in their use of lyrics, the Sex Pistols became the leaders of a new teenage movement—called punk by the British press—in the autumn of 1976. Their first single, “Anarchy in the U.K.,” was both a call to arms and a state-of-the-nation address. When they used profanity on live television in December 1976, the group became a national sensation. Scandalized in the tabloid press, the Sex Pistols were dropped by their first record company, EMI, in January 1977; their next contract, with A&M Records, was severed after only a few days in March.
Signing quickly with Virgin Records, the Sex Pistols released their second single, “God Save the Queen,” in June 1977 to coincide with Queen Elizabeth II’s Silver Jubilee (the 25th anniversary of her accession to the throne). Although banned by the British media, the single rose rapidly to number two on the charts. As “public enemies number one,” the Sex Pistols were subjected to physical violence and harassment.
Despite a second top ten record, “Pretty Vacant,” the Sex Pistols stalled. Barely able to play in the United Kingdom because of local government bans, they became mired in preparations for a film and the worsening drug use of Rotten’s friend Vicious, who had replaced Matlock in February 1977. Their bunker mentality is evident on their third top ten hit, “Holidays in the Sun.” By the time their album Never Mind the Bollocks, Here’s the Sex Pistols reached number one in early November, Rotten, Vicious, Jones, and Cook had recorded together for the last time.
A short, disastrous U.S. tour precipitated the group’s split in January 1978 following their biggest show to date, in San Francisco. Attempting to keep the Sex Pistols going with the film project that became The Great Rock ’n’ Roll Swindle (1980), McLaren issued records with an increasingly uncontrollable Vicious as the vocalist. A cover version of Eddie Cochran’s “C’mon Everybody” became the group’s best-selling single following Vicious’s fatal heroin overdose in New York City in February 1979 while out on bail (charged with the murder of his girlfriend, Nancy Spungen). That same month McLaren was sued by Rotten, and the Sex Pistols disappeared into receivership, only to be revived some years after the 1986 court case that restored control of their affairs to the group.
A reunion tour in 1996 finally allowed the original quartet to play their hit songs in front of supportive audiences, and it was followed by further reunion tours in 2002–03 and 2007–08. This anticlimactic postscript, however, did not lessen the impact of their first four singles and debut album, which shook the foundations of rock music and sent tremors through British society. Another documentary film—The Filth and the Fury, told from the point of view of the artists—was released in 2000. In 2006 the Sex Pistols were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, though they scornfully declined to attend the ceremony.
