Youssou N’Dour,  (born October 1, 1959, Dakar, Senegal), Senegalese singer known for his extraordinary vocal range and for introducing international audiences to mbalax—a Senegalese popular music style that blends Wolof traditional instrumental and vocal forms primarily with Cuban and other Latin American popular genres. He served as Senegal’s minister for culture and tourism (2012–13).
N’Dour was raised in a devout Sufi Muslim household by a mother who was of Tukulor descent and a carrier of the bardic griot tradition and a father who was Serer. Like most other residents of Dakar since the mid-20th century, however, N’Dour grew up culturally and linguistically Wolof. He began singing at neighbourhood religious festivities when he was about 12 years old, and he and his band were performing outside various dance clubs in Dakar by the time he was in his early teens. (He was too young to play legally inside the clubs.) At age 16 N’Dour joined the regionally popular Star Band de Dakar. That group, with its incorporation of the Senegalese tama (talking drum) and Wolof and Malinke songs into the popular music repertoire, was a pioneer of the music genre that eventually became known as mbalax.
N’Dour’s impressive vocal range quickly propelled him to prominence within the Star Band, and in 1977 he and several other band members left the group to form Étoile de Dakar. Although it shared some stylistic features with its parent band, Étoile de Dakar proudly promoted a more strongly Africanized version of the emergent mbalax music. Most of the group’s songs were sung in Wolof, using an ornamented vocal style—sometimes sustained and soaring, sometimes low and declamatory—that drew directly from the griot tradition. In keeping with the griot’s heritage as a storyteller, the songs often recounted history and offered advice on politics, religion, and current events.
After some personnel changes in the early 1980s, Étoile de Dakar was renamed Super Étoile de Dakar. Under N’Dour’s leadership, the group stepped up its cultivation of mbalax, which by that time had become an established popular music genre. N’Dour further Africanized—and updated—the mbalax sound not only by adding a set of Senegalese sabar drums to the ensemble but also by distributing their rhythms between the keyboards and electric guitars. Moreover, in his song lyrics N’Dour increasingly addressed pressing political and social issues such as apartheid and the importance of maintaining African cultural identity in an interconnected world.
Super Étoile de Dakar took mbalax to Europe and North America on concert tours in the mid-1980s. In 1986 N’Dour sang on British rock musician Peter Gabriel’s international hit “In Your Eyes,” and the group toured with Gabriel as an opening act. In 1988 N’Dour received further exposure as a coheadliner with Gabriel, Bruce Springsteen, and other top-ranked rock artists on the Human Rights Now! concert tour to benefit Amnesty International. However, it was not until the release of his solo album The Guide (Wommat) (1994) that N’Dour was catapulted to global stardom.
Following the success of The Guide (Wommat), N’Dour shifted his focus toward matters in Senegal, where he established a recording studio, a record label, a media organization that included a radio station and a newspaper, and a network of Internet cafés. In 1999 he returned to the international scene by organizing the Great African Ball, an all-night concert and dance party held in New York City and Paris, which ran annually through 2008. N’Dour reclaimed his place as a world-class recording artist with Egypt (2004), an album in praise of luminaries of Senegalese Sufism; in 2005 the recording won a Grammy Award for best contemporary world music album. In 2008 filmmaker Elizabeth Chai Vasarhelyi premiered the highly acclaimed documentary I Bring What I Love, which chronicles a musically and spiritually turbulent period in N’Dour’s life and ultimately calls for a more tolerant practice of Islam. The film and soundtrack were released publicly in 2010. Also that year N’Dour added a television station to his media group.
In January 2012 N’Dour, a critic of Senegalese Pres. Abdoulaye Wade, announced that he was running in the following month’s presidential election. Later that month, however, Senegal’s Constitutional Council ruled that N’Dour was not eligible to stand in the election, claiming that he had failed to gather the required number of valid signatures that were needed as proof of popular support for his candidacy. Wade later lost his bid for reelection, and his successor, Macky Sall, appointed N’Dour minister for culture and tourism in April 2012. He lost the portfolio during a cabinet reshuffle in September 2013.
N’Dour resumed his music career, and his 34th album, Africa Rekk, was released in 2016. His later works included History (2019), which features reworkings of his earlier music. The Japan Art Association awarded N’Dour the Praemium Imperiale for music in 2017, a prize recognizing lifetime achievement in fields not usually covered by the Nobel Prize.
