Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten,  (born July 17, 1714, Berlin, Prussia [Germany]—died  May 26, 1762, Frankfurt an der Oder), German philosopher and educator who coined the term aesthetics and established this discipline as a distinct field of philosophical inquiry.
As a student at Halle, Baumgarten was strongly influenced by the works of G.W. Leibniz and by Christian Wolff, a professor and systematic philosopher. He was appointed extraordinary professor at Halle in 1737 and advanced to ordinary professor at Frankfurt an der Oder in 1740.
Baumgarten’s most significant work, written in Latin, was Aesthetica, 2 vol. (1750–58). The problems of aesthetics had been treated by others before Baumgarten, but he both advanced the discussion of such topics as art and beauty and set the discipline off from the rest of philosophy. His student G.F. Meier (1718–77), however, assisted him to such an extent that credit for certain contributions is difficult to assess. Immanuel Kant (1724–1804), who used Baumgarten’s Metaphysica (1739) as a text for lecturing, borrowed Baumgarten’s term aesthetics but applied it to the entire field of sensory experience. Only later was the term restricted to the discussion of beauty and of the nature of the fine arts.
In Baumgarten’s theory, with its characteristic emphasis on the importance of feeling, much attention was concentrated on the creative act. For him it was necessary to modify the traditional claim that “art imitates nature” by asserting that artists must deliberately alter nature by adding elements of feeling to perceived reality. In this way, the creative process of the world is mirrored in their own activity.
Baumgarten wrote Ethica Philosophica (1740; “Philosophic Ethic”), Acroasis Logica (1761; “Discourse on Logic”), Jus Naturae (1763; “Natural Law”), Philosophia Generalis (1770; “General Philosophy”), and Praelectiones Theologicae (1773; “Lectures on Theology”). His brother, Siegmund Jakob Baumgarten, was an influential Wolffian theologian.
