Alfred Firmin Loisy,  (born Feb. 28, 1857, Ambrières, Fr.—died  June 1, 1940, Ceffonds), French biblical scholar, linguist, and philosopher of religion, generally credited as the founder of Modernism, a movement within the Roman Catholic church aimed at revising its dogma to reflect advances in science and philosophy.
Loisy trained at the Institut Catholique in Paris, where he was influenced by the historian L.-M.-O. Duchesne, a pioneer in the application to church history of archaeology and other sciences. After being ordained in 1879, he became a lecturer in Oriental languages at the institute. Loisy, however, was deeply committed to historical and critical methods in his studies of the Bible and, particularly, to the introduction of new 19th-century developments in scholarship. He proposed a greater freedom of biblical interpretation in the development of religious doctrine, a position that brought him into conflict with the conservative popes Leo XIII and Pius X. In 1893 he was dismissed from the institute for his heretical views.
Loisy’s L’Évangile et l’Église (1902; The Gospel and the Church) became the cornerstone of Modernism. Ostensibly a reply to the rationalist approach to religion of the German Protestant historian Adolph von Harnack, whose theories were antithetical to those of Loisy, the book was actually a reinterpretation of the Catholic faith. Noting that critical science demonstrated that Jesus considered himself a prophet, with no thought of a church or sacraments following from his teachings, Loisy argued that the role of the church was to preach a message of hope, not an absolute, unchanging doctrine. New discoveries could thus be incorporated into the body of religion without conflicting with established dogma, thus allowing the church to reflect the times.
Loisy’s book produced a storm of condemnation in conservative theological circles, and in 1903 it was placed, along with four of his other works, on the church’s Index of Forbidden Books. Pope Pius X’s encyclical Pascendi Dominici Gregis (1907), which condemned Modernism as heresy, was aimed chiefly at Loisy and was the last of a series of papal censures dating from 1893. Although Loisy had reluctantly submitted to the first censure, Leo XIII’s encyclical Providentissimus Deus (on biblical scholarship), he refused to bow to this latest pressure and was excommunicated in 1908.
Loisy continued to teach, occupying the chair of history of religions at the Collège de France from 1909, and to develop his philosophy, regarding Christian religion and the Bible more as a system of humanistic ethics than as a historical verification of divine revelation. He also undertook comparative studies of pre-Christian religious phenomena and their influence on the formation of Christianity. Unlike other Modernists censured by the church, Loisy did not protest his excommunication and never recanted his views.
