Bernard-Henri Lévy, byname BHL,  (born November 5, 1948, Beni Saf, Algeria), French philosopher, journalist, filmmaker, and public intellectual who was a leading member of the Nouveaux Philosophes (New Philosophers).
Lévy spent his childhood in Morocco and France, where his family finally settled in 1954. His father was the wealthy founder of a timber company, which Lévy inherited in 1995 and sold in 1997. He studied at the Lycée Pasteur, Neuilly-sur-Seine, and at the Lycée Louis-le-Grand, Paris. In 1968 he entered the École Normale Supérieure, where he studied under Jacques Derrida and Louis Althusser and from which he received (1971) a teaching license in philosophy.
Lévy taught at the Lycée Robert de Luzarches, the University of Strasbourg, and the École Normale Supérieure, but he found his true calling when he began traveling to exotic and often dangerous parts of the world and writing about them. A trip to Mexico while he was still a student resulted in Lévy’s first published work, “Mexique: nationalisation de l’impérialisme” (1970; “Mexico: Nationalization of Imperialism”), in the journal Les Temps Modernes (“The Modern Times”). His first book, Bangla Desh: nationalisme dans la révolution (1973: “Bangladesh: Nationalism in the Revolution”), dealt with the Indo-Pakistani war of 1971. Lévy’s prolonged engagement with Pakistan and Afghanistan, including a stint in 2002 as an envoy of French Pres. Jacques Chirac, led to his books Qui a tué Daniel Pearl? (2003; Who Killed Daniel Pearl?), an examination of the early 2002 beheading of the American journalist by al-Qaeda militants, and the Rapport au président de la république et au premier ministre sur la participation de la France à la reconstruction de l’Afghanistan (2002; “Report to the President of the Republic and the Prime Minister on the Participation of France in the Reconstruction of Afghanistan”).
Lévy’s concerns regarding the war in the former Yugoslavia resulted in his collaboration on screenplays for the film Un Jour dans la mort de Sarajevo (1992: “A Day in the Death of Sarajevo”) and the documentary Bosna! (1994), which he also codirected. In addition, he wrote the book Le Lys et la cendre: journal d’un écrivain au temps de la guerre de Bosnie (1996: “Lilies and Ashes: Journal of a Writer at the Time of the Bosnian War”) and the play Hotel Europe (2014), which centres on a man giving a speech in Sarajevo. Lévy discussed the “forgotten war zones” of Angola, Burundi, Colombia, Sri Lanka, and Sudan in the essay collection Réflexions sur la guerre, le mal et la fin de l’histoire (2001; War, Evil, and the End of History). The United States was the target of his observations in the series “In the Footsteps of Tocqueville” in the Atlantic Monthly magazine in 2005 and a book-length expansion, American Vertigo (2005). L’Empire et les cinq rois (The Empire and the Five Kings: America’s Abdication and the Fate of the World) was published in 2018.
In the 1970s Lévy joined André Glucksmann and others in a loose-knit group that became known as the New Philosophers (Nouveaux Philosophes). They launched a severe critique of the Marxism and socialism that had dominated French intellectual life since World War II and to which Lévy himself had previously subscribed. His principal contribution to that movement was La Barbarie à visage humain (1977; Barbarism with a Human Face). Having suffered the criticism of the left for his attack on Marxism, Lévy aroused the ire of the right with L’Idéologie française (1981; “The French Ideology”), in which he criticized the long history of French anti-Semitism. Lévy made perhaps the clearest statement of his own philosophy in La Testament de Dieu (1979; The Testament of God), in which he argued for a humanistic ethics based on a biblical monotheism despite the fact that he was not a believer.
In Ce virus qui rend fou (2020; The Virus in the Age of Madness), Lévy examined the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on society.
