C.I. Lewis, in full Clarence Irving Lewis,  (born April 12, 1883, Stoneham, Mass., U.S.—died  Feb. 3, 1964, Cambridge, Mass.), American logician, epistemologist, and moral philosopher.
Educated at Harvard University, Lewis taught there from 1920 until his retirement in 1953, serving as a full professor of philosophy from 1930. He was honoured in 1950 as a formal logician by Columbia University, and in 1961 he received a $10,000 prize from the American Council of Learned Societies for “distinguished accomplishment in humanistic scholarship.” His principal works are Symbolic Logic (with Cooper Harold Langford; 1932), An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation (1947), and The Ground and Nature of the Right (1955).
In epistemology and ethics Lewis was a conceptualistic pragmatist within a Kantian framework; i.e., he sought to develop philosophical concepts in the manner of Kant as rooted in empirical reality. Knowledge, he believed, is possible only where there is a possibility of error. Thus, he modified the traditional view of sensory experience, which regards it as a guarantee of true knowledge and certainty about reality because an individual cannot possibly be mistaken about the sheer impressions given by the senses. According to Lewis, epistemological problems are instead a matter of the subjective interpretations that individuals make about their sensory experiences. The only possible certainty is that provided by what Lewis calls terminating judgment, which involves a statement about reality that has been verified empirically. Terminating judgments must refer to appearances, while nonterminating judgments may refer to other objects or values. Certainty and meaning may, however, exist in nonterminating judgments if a terminating judgment stands behind them.
In logic, Lewis criticized contemporary formal systems using material implication and proposed an alternative system of logic based upon strict implication. That is, he rejected systems that do not limit themselves strictly to what is implicit in experience. Because concepts arise from experience, in his system no concept is fixed or indispensable, and the abstract categories of traditional logic are subject to change.
