Daniel C. Dennett, in full Daniel Clement Dennett III, byname Dan Dennett,  (born March 28, 1942, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.), American naturalist philosopher specializing in the philosophy of mind. He became a prominent figure in the atheist movement at the beginning of the 21st century.
Dennett’s father was a diplomat and a scholar of Islamic history, and his mother was an editor and teacher. He received a B.A. in philosophy from Harvard University in 1963 and subsequently pursued graduate study at the University of Oxford. Studying under Gilbert Ryle, Dennett became interested in the nature of consciousness and wrote his doctoral thesis on the topic, which he later turned into his first book, Content and Consciousness (1969). He received a D.Phil. in philosophy in 1965, whereupon he returned to the United States to teach at the University of California, Irvine. In 1971 he moved to Tufts University in Medford, Massachusetts, where he was appointed University Professor and became director of the university’s Center for Cognitive Studies in 1985. He was appointed Austin B. Fletcher Professor of Philosophy at Tufts in 2000.
In addition to his formal philosophical training, Dennett made autodidactic forays into the fields of artificial intelligence, neuroscience, and cognitive psychology. He had become convinced that only by being informed by science could one have a productive philosophical debate about the mind and find a solution to the mind-body problem (the question of how the mental is related to the physical). His somewhat unorthodox approach, which reflected his skepticism of traditional methods of philosophy, cast him as a radical among his colleagues. Nevertheless, his interdisciplinary strategy became more prevalent among philosophers as scientific researchers gathered more information about the brain’s mechanisms. On the strength of his philosophical contributions to the emerging field of cognitive science, Dennett was appointed director of the Center for Cognitive Studies at Tufts in 1985. He was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1987.
From 1993 Dennett was involved with a team at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology that attempted to construct an intelligent, and perhaps even conscious, robot called Cog. He also continued to write. Throughout his career he authored a number of books that detailed his theories of consciousness. Two efforts, Consciousness Explained (1991) and Darwin’s Dangerous Idea (1995), examined how the mindless process of natural selection accounts for the evolution of the brain and human consciousness. Dennett continued to explore and to demystify those phenomena in Kinds of Minds (1996) and Intuition Pumps and Other Tools for Thinking (2013), which emerged from a freshman philosophy class he had taught.
Other philosophical works include Brainchildren: Essays on Designing Minds (1998) and Sweet Dreams: Philosophical Obstacles to a Science of Consciousness (2005). Neuroscience and Philosophy: Brain, Mind, and Language (2007) was a series of exchanges between Dennett, American philosopher John Searle, Australian neuroscientist Maxwell Bennett, and British philosopher Peter Hacker regarding the linguistic difficulties of describing (and attributing) action to the brain. From Bacteria to Bach and Back: The Evolution of Minds was published in 2017.
Dennett’s intellectual peregrinations increasingly converged with a movement that held all forms of religion to be false and that advocated an atheist worldview. His 2006 volume Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon advanced evolutionary explanations for the development of religious thought. He considered religious inclinations to be largely a by-product of instinct-driven social phenomena. He maintained, for example, that the ability to discern intent in fellow humans led people to ascribe intent where none was actually evident, as in the case of creationism. Dennett lectured and debated widely on the subject; a 2009 discussion with Christian philosopher Alvin Plantinga was published as Science and Religion: Are They Compatible? (2011). His alignment with the views of atheist activists Richard Dawkins, Christopher Hitchens, and Sam Harris led Hitchens to dub their cohort “the Four Horsemen of the Counter-Apocalypse.”
