Dong Zhongshu,  Wade-Giles romanization Tung Chung-shu,  (born c. 179, Guangchuan, China—died c. 104 bce, China), scholar instrumental in establishing Confucianism in 136 bce as the state cult of China and as the basis of official political philosophy—a position it was to hold for 2,000 years. As a philosopher, Dong merged the Confucian and Yinyang schools of thought.
As a chief minister to the emperor Wu (c. 140–87) of the Han dynasty, Dong was chiefly responsible for the dismissal of all non-Confucian scholars from government. His proposal that Confucianism become the unifying ideology of the Han empire was put into effect, as were his proposals to set up an imperial college (taixue) for training promising students and to require nobles and governors to recommend annually persons of talent and good moral character for official appointment. Out of these institutional means developed the civil service examinations that became the basis of recruitment into the bureaucracy, guaranteeing that men of humble birth and high ability might rise to positions of power and influence.
As a philosopher, Dong made the theory of the interaction between heaven (tian) and humanity (ren) his central theme. The emperor is heaven’s ambassador on earth, and natural catastrophes such as floods and droughts are heaven’s way of warning the emperor to examine his personal conduct and correct his mistakes. Yang (light, positive, male) and yin (dark, negative, female) are the two fundamental forces of the universe and as such should be kept in harmony. The ruler has the duty to preserve that harmony. He must prevent disturbances by caring for and educating his people. He may reform institutions when necessary but may never alter or destroy the basic moral principles of heaven. In Dong’s system the ruler has the central position—undoubtedly one of the major reasons that Confucianism was accepted by Emperor Wu. Confucian scholars, however, are given an equal if less obvious power. It is they who interpret the portents and thus exercise a check on the policies of the ruler.
Dong’s Chunqiu fanlu (“Luxuriant Dew of the Spring and Autumn Annals”) is one of the most important philosophical works of the Han period. In it, Dong interpreted the Confucian Classic “Spring and Autumn Annals” (Chunqiu), a chronicle of the events in Confucius’s native state of Lu between 722 bce and 481 bce, purportedly edited by Confucius. Dong felt that Confucius not only recorded events in such a way as to exercise judgment upon them but also laid down the rules to be used in governing future dynasties. According to Dong, Confucius understood the relationship between man and nature and, therefore, the way to interpret portents and omens.
