Sir Edmund Taylor Whittaker,  (born October 24, 1873, Southport, Lancashire, England—died March 24, 1956, Edinburgh, Scotland), English mathematician who made pioneering contributions to the area of special functions, which is of particular interest in mathematical physics.
Whittaker became a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1896. After being elected a fellow of the Royal Society of London in 1905, he was appointed the following year professor of astronomy at the University of Dublin and astronomer royal of Ireland. He served as professor of mathematics at the University of Edinburgh from 1912 until his retirement in 1946. He was knighted in 1945.
Whittaker excelled not only in mathematics but also as a historian of science. His prolific mathematical contributions were in mathematical physics as well as in dynamical problems, such as the three-body problem, and his work on differential equations and functions had great influence. His A Course of Modern Analysis (1902) was the first book in English to present the theory of functions of a complex variable at an undergraduate level. It advanced the study of such functions and their expansions as well as the study of special functions and their related differential equations. In 1902 he obtained the general solution of Laplace’s equation, and the following year he originated the confluent hypergeometric function, which is useful in obtaining solutions for a wide variety of applications involving differential equations (some modern applications include quantum mechanical descriptions of subatomic particles, magnetic states of “quantum dots” used in quantum computing, and laser propagation) and which has developed an extensive literature.
On the eve of the revolution in physics brought on by the theory of relativity, Whittaker published A Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles and Rigid Bodies, with an Introduction to the Problem of Three Bodies (1904), an epoch-making summary of classical dynamics. He also contributed pioneering work on the effects of the relativistic curved space on electromagnetic phenomena. In A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity, from the Age of Descartes to the Close of the Nineteenth Century (1910), expanded in 1953 to include the first quarter of the 20th century, Whittaker showed the philosophical depth behind his mathematical thought. Shortly after his arrival at Edinburgh, he instituted a mathematical laboratory, and his book The Calculus of Observations (1924) was based on his lectures on numerical analysis. Having adopted the Roman Catholic faith in 1930, he wrote several works on the relationship between science and natural theology.
