Edward Herbert, 1st Baron Herbert, Baron Herbert of Castle Island,  (born March 3, 1583, Eyton-on-Severn, Shropshire, Eng.—died  Aug. 5, 1648, London), English courtier, soldier, diplomat, historian, metaphysical poet, and philosopher (“the father of English Deism”), also remembered for his revealing Autobiography.
Brother of the devotional poet George Herbert, he was educated at Oxford. From 1608 to 1617 he campaigned in Holland and travelled in France and Italy. He was ambassador at Paris for five years and received Irish and English peerages (1624, 1629) for his political services.
De Veritate (“On Truth”) was published in Paris in 1624. Thereafter he devoted himself to philosophy, history, and literature. When the Civil War broke out he lacked enthusiasm for either cause; however, he opened Montgomery Castle to the Parliamentary forces in 1644 and met with severe criticism.
De Veritate was designed to establish instructed reason as the safest guide in a search for truth. Herbert examines freshly the nature of truth and concludes that there are five religious ideas that are God-given, innate in the mind of man. They are the belief in a Supreme Being, in the need to worship him, in the pursuit of a pious and virtuous life as the best form of worship, in repentance, and in rewards and punishments in the next world. Supplementary intuitions may be valid, but Herbert virtually rejected revelation.
De Veritate was further elaborated in his De Causis Errorum (“On the Causes of Errors”) and De Religione Laici (“On the Religion of the Laity”), published together in 1645; De Religione Gentilium (1663; “On the Religion of the Gentiles”); and A Dialogue Between a Tutor and His Pupil (c. 1645; published 1768; authorship disputed).
His works reflect the active and versatile mind of a competent writer. The Autobiography, ending at 1624, (published 1764), brings his human qualities into focus: his social gifts, adventurous spirit, studious bent, and worldly wisdom. Proud of his military experience and diplomatic skill, he nourished a crotchety regard for his personal honour, resulting in af-frays which he recalls with evident satisfaction.
Herbert also wrote historical works, including The Expedition to the Isle of Rhé (Latin 1656; Eng. trans., 1860) and The Life and Raigne of King Henry the Eighth (1649). Occasional Verses (1665) shows him to have been a talented and original poet as well.
