Ernst Cassirer,  (born July 28, 1874, Breslau, Silesia, Ger. [now Wrocław, Pol.]—died  April 13, 1945, New York, N.Y., U.S.), German Jewish philosopher, educator, and prolific writer, remembered for his interpretation and analysis of cultural values.
Educated in German universities, Cassirer was strongly influenced at the University of Marburg by Hermann Cohen, founder of the Marburg school of Neo-Kantianism. Cassirer taught in Berlin, worked as a civil servant during World War I, and in 1919 became professor of philosophy at the University of Hamburg, where he was rector from 1930. When Adolf Hitler came to power, he left Germany and taught at the Universities of Oxford (1933–35) and Gothenburg (Sweden; 1935–41) and at Yale (1941–44) and Columbia (1944–45) universities in the United States.
Cassirer’s philosophy, based primarily on the work of Immanuel Kant, extends that philosopher’s basic principles concerning the ways in which humans use concepts to structure their impressions of the natural world. Because scientific and cultural views had changed considerably since Kant’s day, Cassirer felt it necessary to revise Kantian doctrines to include a wider range of human experience. In his major work, Die Philosophie der symbolischen Formen, 3 vol. (1923–29; The Philosophy of Symbolic Forms), he examined the mental images and the functions of the mind that underlie every manifestation of human culture.
In another significant work, Substanzbegriff und Funktionsbegriff (1910; Substance and Function), he treated the related topic of concept formation. Attacking the view that a concept is formed by abstracting from a number of particular instances, he argued that the concept, as an instrument in organizing human knowledge, is already pre-existent before any task involving the classification of particulars can even be performed. After examining the various forms of man’s cultural expression, he concluded that man is essentially characterized by his unique ability to use the “symbolic forms” of myth, language, and science as a means of structuring his experiences and thereby understanding both himself and the world of nature.
Among Cassirer’s other writings are Sprache und Mythos (1925; Language and Myth), Die Philosophie der Aufklärung (1932; The Philosophy of the Enlightenment), An Essay on Man (1944), and The Myth of the State (1946).
