Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi,  (born Jan. 25, 1743, Düsseldorf, duchy of Berg [Germany]—died  March 10, 1819, Munich, Bavaria), German philosopher, major exponent of the philosophy of feeling (Gefühlsphilosophie) and a prominent critic of rationalism, especially as espoused by Benedict de Spinoza.
Succeeding his father as head of a sugar factory in 1764, Jacobi joined the governing council of the duchies of Jülich and Berg (1772). With the German poet Christoph Wieland, he founded (1773) the periodical Der Teutsche Mercur, in which he published part of his philosophical novel Eduard Allwills Briefsammlung (1776; “Edward Allwill’s Collected Letters”) and part of another novel, Woldemar: ein Seltenheit aus der Naturgeschichte (1777; “Woldemar: A Rarity of Natural History”). In 1779 he became privy councillor at the Bavarian court and the following year met the German writer Gotthold Lessing.
After Lessing told him he knew only the philosophy of Spinoza, Jacobi began to study Spinozism. Finding its rationalistic approach repulsive, he denounced it in Über die Lehre des Spinoza, in Briefen an den Herrn Moses Mendelssohn (1785; “On the Teachings of Spinoza, in Letters to Moses Mendelssohn”). With other Enlightenment thinkers, Mendelssohn attacked Jacobi’s notion of belief as obscurantist. Jacobi replied in David Hume über den Glauben, oder Idealismus und Realismus (1787; “David Hume on Belief, or Idealism and Realism”), showing his concept of belief to be no different from that held by such advanced philosophers as Hume.
To Jacobi, belief meant immediate conviction, not only of the reality of sense experience but also of truths present in the heart or in the spirit of man. Specifically disclaiming any intent to construct a philosophical system that would have necessitated the strict use of reason, Jacobi maintained that felt truths would be endangered by submitting them to mental processes.
In 1794 Jacobi moved from his home in Pempelfort to Hamburg in order to avoid the French Revolutionary armies, and in 1799 he detailed his theistic views in Jacobi an Fichte. Three years later he strongly criticized Immanuel Kant in his Über das Unternehmen des Kritizismus (“On the Enterprise of Criticism”). Kant had created a dualism of sensibility and understanding that denied the possibility for the limited, sense-bound human mind to understand transcendent phenomena, but Jacobi defended an intellectual intuition that began in feeling and resulted in faith. Because he did not limit his concept of knowledge to the rational processes of the mind, he did not find it necessary to deny, as Kant did, the possibility of knowing God.
After traveling for four years, Jacobi settled in Munich (1805), where he served as president of the Bavarian Academy of Science (1807–12). A collected edition of his works, which he began, was completed by F. Koppens, 6 vol. (1812–25).
