Giuseppe Peano,  (born August 27, 1858, Cuneo, Kingdom of Sardinia [Italy]—died April 20, 1932, Turin, Italy), Italian mathematician and a founder of symbolic logic whose interests centred on the foundations of mathematics and on the development of a formal logical language.
Peano became a lecturer of infinitesimal calculus at the University of Turin in 1884 and a professor in 1890. He also held the post of professor at the Accademia Militare in Turin from 1886 to 1901. Peano made several important discoveries, including a continuous mapping of a line onto every point of a square, that were highly counterintuitive and convinced him that mathematics should be developed formally if mistakes were to be avoided. His Formulaire de mathématiques (Italian Formulario mathematico, “Mathematical Formulary”), published from 1894 to 1908 with collaborators, was intended to develop mathematics in its entirety from its fundamental postulates, using Peano’s logic notation and his simplified international language. This proved hard to read, and after World War I his influence declined markedly. However, part of Peano’s logic notation was adopted by Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead in their Principia Mathematica (1910–13).
Peano’s Calcolo differenziale e principii di calcolo integrale (1884; “Differential Calculus and Principles of Integral Calculus”) and Lezioni di analisi infinitesimale, 2 vol. (1893; “Lessons of Infinitesimal Analysis”), are two of the most important works on the development of the general theory of functions since the work of the French mathematician Augustin-Louis Cauchy (1789–1857). In Applicazioni geometriche del calcolo infinitesimale (1887; “Geometrical Applications of Infinitesimal Calculus”), Peano introduced the basic elements of geometric calculus and gave new definitions for the length of an arc and for the area of a curved surface. Calcolo geometrico (1888; “Geometric Calculus”) contains his first work on mathematical logic.
Peano is also known as the creator of Latino sine Flexione, an artificial language later called Interlingua. Based on a synthesis of Latin, French, German, and English vocabularies, with a greatly simplified grammar, Interlingua was intended for use as an international auxiliary language. Peano compiled a Vocabulario de Interlingua (1915) and was for a time president of the Academia pro Interlingua.
