Godfrey of Saint-Victor,  (born c. 1125—died  1194, Paris), French monk, philosopher, theologian, and poet whose writings summarized an early medieval Christian Humanism that strove to classify areas of knowledge, to integrate distinctive methods of learning, and to recognize the intrinsic dignity of man and nature.
A student with the arts faculty at Paris, Godfrey was influenced early by dialectical thought. After a brief period of teaching, in about 1160 he entered the Augustinian abbey of Saint-Victor, Paris, where he further developed his cultural Humanism. An unsympathetic monastic superior, however, harassed Godfrey to such an extent that he was obliged to leave the abbey in about 1180 for the solitude of a rural priory. There he wrote his principal work, Microcosmus. After the superior’s death (c. 1190), he returned permanently to Saint-Victor.
The central theme of Microcosmus recalls the insight of classical philosophy and of the early Church Fathers, viz., that man is a microcosm, containing in himself the material and spiritual elements of reality. Microcosmus offers one of the first attempts by a medieval Scholastic philosopher to systematize history and knowledge into a comprehensive, rational structure. Godfrey used the symbolism of a biblical framework to treat the physical, psychological, and ethical aspects of man. He affirmed man’s matter–spirit unity and the basic goodness of his nature, tempering this optimism with the realization that human nature has been weakened (“fractured”) by sin, but not to an intrinsically corrupted and irreparable extent.
Godfrey admits four principal capabilities in man: sensation, imagination, reason, and intelligence. Man’s analytic reason and power of insight have the theoretical science of philosophy for their natural fulfillment. But a supernatural fulfillment, he maintains, consists in love. To this end divine intervention is needed to confer on man the perfective graces, or gifts, of enlightenment, affectivity, and perseverance.
In his other notable work, the Fons philosophiae (c. 1176; “The Fount of Philosophy”), Godfrey, in rhymed verse, proposed a classification of learning and considered the controversy between Realists and Nominalists (who held that ideas were only names, not real things) over the problem of universal concepts. Fons philosophiae is an allegorical account of the sources of Godfrey’s intellectual formation (e.g., Plato, Aristotle, and Boethius), symbolized as a flowing stream from which he drew water as a student.
Another treatise, “Anatomy of the Body of Christ,” appended to Fons philosophiae, is a leading example of medieval Christian symbolism. A long poem ascribing to each member and organ of Christ’s body some aspect of man’s natural and supernatural purpose, it assembled texts from the early Church Fathers and helped form medieval devotion to the humanity of Christ. Godfrey’s writings have won appreciation as a prime example of 12th-century Humanism only through relatively recent scholarship, although their fundamental concepts of the positive values of man and nature were recognized to a limited extent by the high Scholasticism of the 13th century. The works of Godfrey of Saint-Victor are contained in Patrologia Latina, J.P. Migne ed., vol. 196 (1864). A modern edition of the text with commentary by P. Delhaye appeared in 1951.
