Gotthold Ephraim Lessing,  (born Jan. 22, 1729, Kamenz, Upper Lusatia, Saxony [Germany]—died  Feb. 15, 1781, Braunschweig, Brunswick [Germany]), German dramatist, critic, and writer on philosophy and aesthetics. He helped free German drama from the influence of classical and French models and wrote plays of lasting importance. His critical essays greatly stimulated German letters and combated conservative dogmatism and cant while affirming religious and intellectual tolerance and the unbiased search for truth.
Lessing’s father, a highly respected theologian, was hard put to support his large family even though he occupied the position of pastor primarius (chief pastor). At the age of 12, Lessing, even then an avid reader, entered the famous Fürstenschule (“elector’s school”) of St. Afra, in Meissen. A gifted and eager student, Lessing acquired a good knowledge of Greek, Hebrew, and Latin, while his admiration for the plays of the Latin dramatists Plautus and Terence fired him with the ambition to write comedies himself.
In the autumn of 1746 Lessing entered the University of Leipzig as a student of theology. His real interests, however, lay toward literature, philosophy, and art. Lessing became fascinated by the theatre in Leipzig, which had recently been revitalized by the work of a talented and energetic actress, Caroline Neuber. Neuber took an interest in the young poet and in 1748 successfully produced his comedy Der junge Gelehrte (“The Young Scholar”). The play is a delightful satire on an arrogant, superficial, vain, and easily offended scholar, a figure through which Lessing mocked his own bookishness. The other comedies belonging to this Leipzig period of 1747–49 (Damon, Die alte Jungfer [“The Old Maid”], Der Misogyn [“The Misogynist”], Die Juden [“The Jews”], Der Freigeist [“The Free Thinker”]) are witty commentaries on human weaknesses—bigotry, prejudice, nagging, fortune hunting, matchmaking, intrigue, hypocrisy, corruption, and frivolity. Set against this background are virtuous men and women who are considerate and selfless, sensitive and helpful, forthright, and faithful in love. In Die Juden Lessing praised unappreciated nobility of mind and thus struck a blow against bigotry toward the Jews at a time when they were still confined to a ghetto life. Lessing had set himself the goal of becoming the German Molière: in these comedies he most interestingly begins to draw his characters as recognizable individuals, breaking away from the traditional dramatic “types.”
Early in 1748 Lessing’s parents, who disapproved of his association with the theatre in Leipzig, summoned him home. But he managed to win their consent to begin studying medicine and was soon allowed to return to Leipzig. He quickly found himself in difficulties because he had generously stood surety for some members of the Neuber company—although himself heavily in debt. When the company folded, he fled from Leipzig in order to avoid being arrested for debt. He eventually reached Berlin in 1748, where he hoped to find work as a journalist through his cousin Mylius, who was by this time an established editor. In the next four years he undertook a variety of jobs, mainly translating French and English historical and philosophical works into German. But he also began to make a name for himself through his brilliant and witty criticism for the Berlinische Privilegierte Zeitung, on which he was book review editor. He also launched a periodical of his own, Beiträge zur Historie und Aufnahme des Theaters (“Contributions to the History and Improvement of the Theatre”), which was discontinued in 1750.
From 1751 to 1752 Lessing was in Wittenberg, where he took his degree in medicine. He then returned to Berlin, where he started another periodical, Theatralische Bibliothek (“Theatrical Library”), but this too had to be closed down after only four volumes. The most significant event during this time was the publication in 1753–55 of a six-volume edition of his works. Apart from some witty epigrams, the edition contained the most important of his Leipzig comedies. It also contained Miss Sara Sampson, which is the first major bürgerliches Trauerspiel, or domestic tragedy, in German literature. Middle-class writers had long wanted to do away with the traditional class distinctions in literature, whereby heroic and tragic themes were played out by aristocratic figures, while middle-class characters appeared only in comedy. Lessing was, in fact, not the first German writer to challenge this tradition, but it is fair to say that his play marks the decisive break with the classical French drama that still dominated the German stage. Miss Sara Sampson was inspired by George Lillo’s London Merchant (1731) and by the novels of Samuel Richardson—with their praise of middle-class feminine virtue—and, to a lesser degree, by the sentimental comédie larmoyante (“tearful comedy”), originated in France by the early 18th-century dramatist Pierre-Claude de La Chausée. It is the first German play in which bürgerlich (middle-class) characters bear the full burden of a tragic fate, and it had its successful premiere at Frankfurt an der Oder in 1755. Its reflective prose skillfully lays bare the psychology of the situation—a conflict between the demands of virtue and the heart, between conscience and passion—and its characters are finely drawn. The plot centres on an innocent, sensitive heroine of a bourgeois family; she becomes the victim of Lady Marwood, her vampirelike rival in love, who disregards all restraints and inhibitions, and of Mellefont, a weak man who vacillates between the two women but finally atones for his guilt by his death.
Characteristic of Lessing’s writings at this period is his Rettungen (“Vindications”), which is outstanding for its incisive style and clarity of argument. In its four essays he aimed to defend independent thinkers such as the Reformation-period writers Johannes Cochlaeus and Gerolamo Cardano, who had been unjustly slandered and persecuted. His scintillating and biting polemic Ein Vade Mecum für den Herrn Samuel Gotthold Lange (1754) was directed against the carelessly corrupt translations of the poetry of Horace by the arrogant scholar S.G. Lange, whose literary reputation was demolished by Lessing’s attack. From this point on, Lessing was justly feared as a literary adversary who used his command of style as a finely honed weapon. The philosopher Moses Mendelssohn and the writer and publisher C.F. Nicolai stand out among Lessing’s Berlin friends. With these men Lessing conducted a truly epoch-making correspondence (Briefwechsel über das Trauerspiel, 1756–57; “Correspondence About Tragedy”) on the aesthetic of tragic drama. Tragedy, Lessing maintained, should not preach morality but rather should arouse admiration and pity in the audience as evidence of emotional involvement.
Between November 1755 and April 1758 Lessing lived again at Leipzig, but in May he moved back to Berlin. There he contributed regularly to Nicolai’s weekly, Briefe, die neueste Literatur betreffend (“Letters Concerning the Latest Literature”), writing a number of essays on contemporary literature. The central point of these was a vigorous attack on the influential theatre critic J.C. Gottsched for his advocacy of a theatre modeled on French drama, especially that of the 17th-century tragedian Pierre Corneille. Lessing maintained that the courtly, mannered drama of France was alien to the German mentality. Instead, he demanded a truly national drama, belonging to the people, based on faithfulness to nature and reality. He urged German playwrights to take Shakespeare as their model. In the 17th Literaturbrief he published a stirring scene from his own fragmentary Faust drama. In this scene, Lessing sketches out a “Faust without evil” whose relentless spirit of inquiry is justified before God, notwithstanding his pact with the devil. He thus paved the way for his young contemporary Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and his great dramatic version of the Faust story. In 1759 Lessing published some masterly prose fables, largely social criticism, and with them an essay on the fable form itself, in which he formulated the particular laws of the genre by analyzing its didactic and allegorical structure.
In 1760 Lessing went to Breslau as secretary to General Tauentzien, the military governor of Silesia. Lessing’s studies in philosophy and aesthetics there brought forth two important literary works. One is the great treatise Laokoon: oder über die Grenzen der Malerei und Poesie (1766; “Laocoon; or, On the Limits of Painting and Poetry”). Here he took issue with the contemporary art historian Johann Winckelmann, specifically over his interpretation of the “Laocoon,” a famous sculpture of Hellenistic times (c. 1st century bc), which shows the priest Laocoon and his sons as they are about to be killed by the serpents that hold them entwined. In the Laokoon Lessing attempted to fundamentally define the separate functions of painting and of poetry. He pointed out that whereas painting is bound to observe spatial proximity—and must, therefore, select and render the seminal and most expressive moment in a chain of events—poetry has the task of depicting an event organically and in its temporal sequence. The essence of poetry thus lies not in description but in the representation of the transitory, of movement.
The second great Breslau work is Minna von Barnhelm (1767), which marks the birth of classical German comedy. Goethe was to praise it for its contemporary relevance and for its central theme (the struggle between Prussia and Saxony in the Seven Years’ War), which was an event of national significance. The central characters are a Prussian officer, Major Tellheim, and a young gentlewoman from Thuringia, Minna. The upright officer’s conscientiousness and rigid interpretation of the code of honour has endangered his relationship with Minna. Charming and spirited, Minna takes matters into her own hands and, prompted by her heart’s perceptions, resolutely overcomes the obstacles that war and occupation have placed in the way of their union. She resolves the conflict between the claims of conscience and those of happiness. Thus, in thinking and acting like true representatives of the Enlightenment, the two eventually behave like ordinary people and so bear witness to Lessing’s concept of humanity. The two protagonists are supported by forcefully drawn secondary characters. Lessing’s dialogue enhances a lively dramatic action that still today commands the attention of theatre audiences.
On returning to Berlin in 1765 Lessing applied for the post of director of the royal library; but since he had quarreled with Voltaire, who lived as a favourite at Frederick the Great’s court, the king (who in any case thought little of German authors) rejected his application. Lessing then accepted the offer of some Hamburg merchants to act as adviser and critic in their privately funded venture of a national theatre. Within a year, however, the project collapsed, and Lessing recognized with some bitterness that the time for a German national theatre was not yet ripe. Even so, his reviews of more than 50 performances were published, in the form of 104 brief essays on basic principles of the drama, under the title of Hamburgische Dramaturgie (1767–69). Here, too, Lessing argued against tragedy modeled on that of Corneille and Voltaire, although he praised the realism of the contemporary French writer Denis Diderot’s descriptions of middle-class life. Lessing interpreted Aristotle’s concept of tragic catharsis (purging) as meaning the emotional release that follows tension generated in spectators who witness tragic events; he concludes that the sensations evoked by pity and fear should afterward exert a moral influence on the audience by being transformed into virtuous action. In 1768–69 he published Briefe antiquarischen Inhalts (“Letters of Antiquarian Content”), an attack on the pretentious learning and elitist attitudes of the Halle professor C.A. Klotz. Another result of this dispute was the lucid and perceptive essay Wie die Alten den Tod gebildet (“How the Ancients Depicted Death”).
