Gu Yanwu, Wade-Giles romanization Ku Yen-wu,  (born July 15, 1613, Kunshan, Jiangsu province, China—died  Feb. 15, 1682, Quwo, Shaanxi province), one of the most famous of the Ming dynasty loyalists, whose rationalist critiques of the useless book learning and metaphysical speculations of neo-Confucian philosophy (which had been the underpinning of the Chinese empire for almost 1,000 years) started a new trend in scholarship during the Qing dynasty. His works eventually provided the philosophical basis for the 19th-century movement that attempted to amalgamate Western learning and the Chinese tradition by searching for empirical roots within Confucianism.
Having fought against the establishment of the Manchu Qing dynasty as a young man, Gu spent the rest of his life traveling throughout China, studying the reasons for the Ming collapse. He viewed the decline of Chinese civilization as the result of the excessive orthodoxy of Chinese thought, which had confined Confucian thinking to certain set formulas and made it incapable of dealing with political and economic realities. As a remedy, Gu advocated knowledge “of practical use to society” (jingshi zhiyong). Moreover, he proposed that scholars abandon the neo-Confucian commentaries that interpreted Confucius and return to the original classic as well as the commentaries of the Han scholars who had been close to the sages. The school of Han learning, which Gu thus founded, advocated the use of a broad inductive method and philological research to determine the original meanings of the classics.
Gu’s travels and researches also resulted in the compilation of several valuable works on practical knowledge, including Tianxia junguo libingshu (“The Strategic and Economic Advantages of the Districts and States of the Empire”) and Rizhilu (“Notes on Knowledge Accumulated from Day to Day”). Because of his continued emphasis on the classics as the ultimate source of knowledge, however, his movement eventually deteriorated into a dry concern with philological research and textual criticism.
