Hayashi Razan, original name Hayashi Nobukatsu, Buddhist name Dōshun,  (born August 1583, Kyōto, Japan—died Feb. 4, 1657, Edo [now Tokyo]), Japanese scholar who, with his son and grandson, established the thought of the great Chinese Neo-Confucian philosopher Chu Hsi as the official doctrine of the Tokugawa shogunate (the hereditary military dictatorship through which the Tokugawa family ruled Japan from 1603 to 1867). Hayashi also reinterpreted Shintō, the Japanese national religion, from the point of view of Chu Hsi’s philosophy, laying the foundation for the Confucianized Shintō that developed in later centuries.
Hayashi began as a student of Buddhism but became a devoted adherent of Neo-Confucianism and a bitter opponent of Buddhism. In 1604 he became a pupil of the Confucian scholar Fujiwara Seika and on the recommendation of his master was employed by the shogunate, beginning in 1607. He served the first four Tokugawa shoguns, tutoring them in Neo-Confucianism and history. At the same time, he was engaged in scholarly activities and in the drafting of diplomatic documents. The first Tokugawa shogun, Ieyasu, may simply have wanted to make use of Hayashi’s vast knowledge for the purpose of practical politics and conduct of international affairs. But Hayashi’s philosophy, with its emphasis on loyalty, on a hierarchical social and political order, and on a static conservative point of view, proved to be a powerful support for the newly established government, giving the Tokugawa the ideology needed to rule the restless feudal lords under their control. In 1630 the third shogun gave Hayashi an estate in the capital city of Edo (now Tokyo), where he founded his private academy. This later came under the direct control and support of the government.
Gahō, Hayashi’s third son (also called Harukatsu), became his father’s successor as chief official scholar; and Dokkōsai, Hayashi’s fourth son (also called Morikatsu), was also employed by the shogunate. During their father’s lifetime they collaborated with him in compiling histories; and after his death they assembled the Hayashi Razan bunshū (“Collected Works of Hayashi Razan”) and the Razan Sensei shishū (“Master Razan’s Poems”), republished in two volumes in 1918 and 1921, respectively. His grandson (Gahō’s son Hōkō) was given the title daigaku-nokami (“head of the state university”), which was then handed down to the subsequent heads of the Hayashi family until the late 19th century.
