Henry Mayers Hyndman,  (born March 7, 1842, London—died  Nov. 22, 1921, London), the first important British Marxist, who strongly influenced, especially in the 1880s, many other leading British Socialists, although his difficult personality antagonized most of them and lessened his political effectiveness.
Educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, Hyndman played cricket for Sussex in county competitions (1863–68), travelled extensively, and worked as a journalist in London (1871–80). Converted to Marxism on reading Das Kapital in 1880, he joined several other radicals in founding the Democratic Federation. For its first conference (June 1881) he wrote England for All, the first socialist book published in England since the decline of Robert Owen’s reform movement in the 1830s. In this work he expounded the theories of Marx, who was offended, however, because in his view Hyndman did not make the necessary acknowledgment of this intellectual debt. Marx’s chief associate, Friedrich Engels, who disliked Hyndman, deliberately widened the breach, and so the only articulate British-born Marxist of the time ceased to be on speaking terms with Marx.
In 1884 the Democratic Federation was renamed the Social Democratic Federation (SDF). Within it many socialists, including William Morris, John Elliot Burns, and George Lansbury, were steered toward Marxism by Hyndman. With Engels’ assistance, however, Morris and others soon broke away to form the Socialist League. Although Hyndman’s control of British socialism was thereby weakened, he attained his greatest prominence in 1889, when it was widely though inaccurately believed that he directed the London dock-workers’ strike.
Convinced of what he called “the German menace” to Great Britain, Hyndman took a patriotic and pro-French line when World War I began. As a result, the British Socialist Party (as the SDF had become) removed him in 1915. He then formed the National Socialist Party, which later revived for itself the name Social Democratic Federation. During the war Hyndman was an adviser to the Ministry of Food. Among his writings is The Evolution of Revolution (1920).
