Herbert Marcuse,  (born July 19, 1898, Berlin, Germany—died July 29, 1979, Starnberg, West Germany [now Germany]), German-born American political philosopher and prominent member of the Frankfurt School of critical social analysis, whose Marxist and Freudian theories of 20th-century Western society were influential in the leftist student movements of the 1960s, especially after the 1968 student rebellions in Paris and West Berlin and at New York City’s Columbia University.
Marcuse studied at the University of Freiburg, where he was awarded a doctoral degree in German literature in 1922. After working as a bookseller in Berlin, he returned to Freiburg in 1928 to study with Martin Heidegger (1889–1976), under whose direction he completed his habilitation thesis, Hegel’s Ontology and the Theory of Historicity (1932). After the Nazi seizure of power in 1933, Marcuse joined the Frankfurt-based Institute for Social Research—whose members later came to be known collectively as the Frankfurt School—in its new location in Geneva. In 1934 he followed the Institute to Columbia University. Marcuse published several outstanding philosophical essays in the Institute’s journal, Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung (Journal for Social Research), during the 1930s and a second major study of Hegel, Reason and Revolution: Hegel and the Rise of Modern Social Theory, in 1941. Having become a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1940, he served as an intelligence analyst for the U.S. Office of Strategic Services (the precursor of the Central Intelligence Agency) from 1941 to 1944. After the war, he headed the Central European Section of the Office of Intelligence Research. From 1951 he taught at Columbia and Harvard universities (to 1954), Brandeis University (1954–65), and the University of California, San Diego (1965–76), where after retirement he was honorary emeritus professor of philosophy until his death.
Marcuse’s first major work, Eros and Civilization: A Philosophical Inquiry into Freud (1955), is a sweeping indictment of capitalism that is remarkable for not once mentioning Karl Marx (1818–83). The basis of Marcuse’s critique is the instinctive psychological drives posited by Sigmund Freud (1856–1939); according to Marcuse, these drives express longings that cannot be satisfied from within the psychological constraints imposed by capitalist forms of social organization. (Freud, conversely, was much less willing to “trust” the instincts in this way; he believed that they should be sublimated toward constructive social ends.) In many respects, Marcuse’s analyses anticipated the “libidinal” politics of various French thinkers of the 1960s, which characteristically conflated the ideas of political and sexual emancipation.
In his best-known and most influential work, One-Dimensional Man: Studies in the Ideology of Advanced Industrial Society (1964), Marcuse argued that the modern “affluent” society represses even those who are successful within it, while maintaining their complacency through the ersatz satisfactions of consumer culture. By cultivating such shallow forms of experience and by blocking critical understanding of the real workings of the system, the affluent society condemns its members to a “one-dimensional” existence of intellectual and spiritual poverty.
One-Dimensional Man was widely read, especially among the New Left, and its success helped to transform Marcuse from a relatively unknown university professor to a prophet and father figure of the burgeoning student antiwar movement. He lectured widely to antiwar activists, praising their resistance but also cautioning them about the historical limitations of their movement: they were not the modern equivalent of the proletariat in classical Marxist theory. Marcuse further developed his views on the scope and limits of alternative politics in An Essay on Liberation (1969) and Counterrevolution and Revolt (1972).
