Inoue Tetsujirō,  (born 1855, Buzen Province, Japan—died  1944), Japanese philosopher who opposed Christianity as incompatible with Japanese culture and who worked to preserve traditional Japanese values. At the same time, using Western philosophical methods, he helped to create a systematic history of the theories of Oriental philosophy and sought to develop a synthesis of Western philosophies (notably German idealism) and Oriental philosophies.
Inoue was the son of a physician in the administration for Kyushu (Chikuzen, now Fukuoka Prefecture). Graduated from Tokyo Imperial University (1880), he served in the Ministry of Education before returning to the university in 1882, lecturing on the history of Oriental philosophy.
His essay on new forms of poetry, Shintaishishō (1882), contributed to the introduction of Western poetry styles. After further studies at the universities of Heidelberg and Leipzig in Germany (1884–90), he became professor of philosophy at Tokyo Imperial University. He later served as dean of the university’s faculty of literature (1897–1904).
Inoue’s essay on the relations between the Imperial family and religion, Teishitsu to shūkyō no kankei, in 1890—the year in which the Imperial rescript on education was promulgated, demanding unquestioned acceptance of Imperial will and authority—considerably influenced public opinion. It attacked Christianity and urged the maintenance of Japan’s unique traditions. His most important anti-Christian polemic, however, was his article “Kokka to Yaso-kyō to no shōtotsu” (“Conflict Between the Nation and Christianity”), published the following year.
In 1900 Inoue published Nihon yōmei gakuha no tetsugaku, a study of the Japanese philosophy derived from the teachings of Wang Yangming. His biography of the Santama Buddha, Shakamuni-den, and a study of the philosophy in the Japanese classics, Nihon kogakuha no tetsugaku, both appeared in 1902. He dealt with the philosophy of the Japanese Zhu Xi school in Nihon shushi gakuha no tetsugaku (1905).
His prestige as a member of the Tokyo Academy (from 1895) and president of the Association of Philosophers (Tetsugaku-kai) considerably influenced the course of Japanese philosophy and thought. He edited a number of magazines, including Eastern Art and Sciences and Light in the Far East.
After resigning from Tokyo Imperial University (1923), he lectured at the Gakushūin (peers school) and Tōyō University. He entered the House of Peers as an Imperial nominee in 1925 but resigned in the following year.
