Jean Buridan, Latin Joannes Buridanus,  (born 1300, probably at Béthune, France—died  1358), Aristotelian philosopher, logician, and scientific theorist in optics and mechanics.
After studies in philosophy at the University of Paris under the nominalist thinker William of Ockham, Buridan was appointed professor of philosophy there. He served as university rector in 1328 and in 1340, the year in which he condemned Ockham’s views, an act that is sometimes called the first seed of theological skepticism. Buridan’s own works were condemned and placed on the Index of Forbidden Books from 1474 to 1481 by partisans of Ockham.
A defender of the principle of causality, Buridan asserted a modified version of traditional moral determinism, declaring that men must will what presents itself as the greater good but that the will is free to delay the reason’s judgment by suggesting a more thorough inquiry into the value of motives. The dilemma of a particular kind of moral choice, between two evidently identical items, is illustrated by the celebrated allegory of “Buridan’s ass,” though the animal mentioned in Buridan’s commentary on Aristotle’s De caelo (“On the Heavens”) is actually a dog, not an ass. His discussion centres on the method by which the dog chooses between two equal amounts of food placed before him. Discerning both a symmetry of information and a symmetry of preference about the two items, he concludes that the dog must choose at random; this outcome leads to the investigation of theories of probability.
Among Buridan’s achievements in mechanics was his revision of Aristotle’s theory of motion, which had maintained that a thing is kept moving by the air surrounding it. Buridan developed a theory of impetus by which the mover imparts to the moved a power, proportional to the speed and mass, which keeps it moving. In addition, he correctly theorized that resistance of the air progressively reduces the impetus and that weight can add or detract from speed. His studies of optical images prefigured modern developments in cinematics. In logic he explicated doctrines of Aristotle, Ockham, and Peter of Spain. In addition to commentaries on Aristotle’s Organon, Physics, De anima, Metaphysics, and Economics, his works include Summula de dialecta (1487) and Consequentie (1493).
