John of Saint Thomas, Spanish Juan de Santo Tomás, original name Juan Poinsat,  (born July 9, 1589, Lisbon, Port.—died  June 1644, Fraga, near Barcelona, Spain), philosopher and theologian whose comprehensive commentaries on Roman Catholic doctrine made him a leading spokesman for post-Reformation Thomism, a school of thought named after its foremost theorist, St. Thomas Aquinas (c. 1225–74), who systematically integrated Catholic teaching with Aristotelian concepts.
Born of a noble family involved in church and government, John entered the Dominican order in Madrid, assuming the religious name John of St. Thomas on July 18, 1610. From 1620 he taught theology at Madrid; at Piacenza, near Parma; and at the University of Alcalá, Spain, where he obtained the chair of theology in 1641. Two years later King Philip IV of Spain called him to Madrid to be his adviser and confessor. While accompanying Philip on military campaigns, John wrote a major treatise, De Donis Spiritus Sancti (Gifts of the Holy Spirit).
After he was appointed one of the theological interrogators for the Spanish Inquisition, the ecclesiastical heresy trials, John won a reputation for equity in defending the accused, particularly faculty members from Leuven (Louvain), which was at that time under Spanish jurisdiction. Among his principal works are the Cursus Philosophicus, 9 vol. (1632–36; “Course in Philosophy”) and the Cursus Theologicus, 7 vol. (1637–44; “Course in Theology”), explicating questions on major speculative themes such as the nature of theology and divine revelation, the demonstrability of God’s existence, human freedom, and the rationale for morality, Christian worship, and the church. The Cursus Philosophicus includes an exposition of formal logic that has served as the basis for traditional Roman Catholic teaching on the psychology of knowledge. Set forth in the academic manner of the 16th-century Dominican scholar Cajetan, John’s treatises refrained from the polemical style of later Counter-Reformation theological literature. His death was possibly the result of poison administered by envious Spanish courtiers. The Material Logic of John of St. Thomas: Basic Treatises and Outlines of Formal Logic, English translations, were published in 1955.
