Judah ben Saul ibn Tibbon,  (born 1120, Granada, Spain—died c. 1190, Marseille), Jewish physician and translator of Jewish Arabic-language works into Hebrew; he was also the progenitor of several generations of important translators.
Persecution of the Jews forced Judah to flee Granada in 1150, and he settled in Lunel, in southern France, where he practiced medicine, according to an account in 1160 by a contemporary traveller, Benjamin of Tudela.
In his Hebrew versions, which became standard, Judah made accessible various classic philosophic works by Arabic-speaking Jews who had frequently utilized the concepts of both Muslim and Greek philosophers. Thus, Judah’s translations served to disseminate Arabic and Greek culture in Europe. In addition he often coined Hebrew terms to accommodate the ideas of the authors he was translating. Among his outstanding renditions from Arabic into Hebrew are the following:
1. Amanat wa-iʿtiqadat of Saʿadia ben Joseph (882–942), a major rabbinic authority, translated as Sefer ha-emunot we-ha-deʿot (1186; Beliefs and Opinions, 1948). It is a Jewish philosophical classic discussing the relationship between reason and divine revelation.
2. Al-Hidayah ilā farāʾid al-qulūb of Bahya ben Joseph ibn Pakuda, a rabbinic judge, translated as Ḥovot ha-levavot (Duties of the Heart, 1925–47). This work, which became a widely read classic of Jewish devotional literature, examines the ethics of a man’s acts and the intentions that give the acts meaning.
3. Sefer ha-Kuzari (“Book of the Khazar”) by the Spanish Hebrew poet Judah ha-Levi (c. 1085–c. 1141), which recounts in dialogue form the arguments presented before the king of the Khazars by a rabbi, a Christian, a Muslim scholar, and an Aristotelian philosopher, with the subsequent conversion of the king to Judaism.
Judah ben Saul ibn Tibbon also translated the grammar of Abū al-Walīd Marwān ibn Janāḥ (c. 990–c. 1050), which became a basis for the work of future Hebrew grammarians. In addition, he wrote a well-known ethical will, Musar Ab (about 1190; “A Father’s Admonition”), to his son Samuel ben Judah ibn Tibbon, who subsequently also became a noteworthy translator.
