Eduard von Hartmann,  (born Feb. 23, 1842, Berlin—died  June 5, 1906, Gross Lichterfelde, Ger.), German metaphysical philosopher, called “the philosopher of the unconscious,” who sought to reconcile two conflicting schools of thought, rationalism and irrationalism, by emphasizing the central role of the unconscious mind.
Hartmann, the son of a Prussian artillery officer, was educated for the army, but a knee injury in 1861 made a military career impossible, and he began the study of philosophy. His numerous writings include studies of Immanuel Kant, Arthur Schopenhauer, and G.W.F. Hegel; metaphysical and psychological works; and studies in religion, politics, and ethics. His reputation, however, rests primarily on Die Philosophie des Unbewussten, 3 vol. (1870; The Philosophy of the Unconscious, 1884), which went through many editions. Notable for the diversity of its contents, its many concrete examples, and its vigorous and lucid style, the book also gained for Hartmann an exaggerated reputation for pessimism. Although he adopted the pessimistic view of the state of civilization held by Schopenhauer, he modified it with Hegel’s optimistic outlook for the future of mankind.
Hartmann centred his system on the single phenomenon of the human unconscious, thought by him to evolve through three stages. In the first, called the “unconscious,” both reason and will, or rationalism and irrationalism, were united as an absolute, all-embracing spiritual principle underlying all existence. With the fall of man, reason and will were separated, and will, as blind impulse, began to determine the melancholy career of the unconscious. The second stage, called “cosmic,” began with the origin of conscious life, in which man began to strive for such idealistic goals as happiness. According to Hartmann, mankind presently lives in this stage, when the forces of irrational will and rational mind compete. Both human misery and civilization will continue to advance until misery and decay reach the maximum. Only then will the third stage be possible, a Hegelian triumph by which the will is checked and reason prevails. For individual human beings, the present requires that temptations to commit suicide and all other forms of selfishness be overcome by rational thinking. Mankind must devote itself to gradual social evolution, rather than strive after an illusory and impossible happiness in the immediate future. Despite his ultimate optimism, Hartmann has been considered a pessimist whose views contributed to such extreme 20th-century philosophies as nihilism.
