Sir Kenelm Digby,  (born July 11, 1603, Gayhurst, Buckinghamshire, England—died June 11, 1665, London), English courtier, philosopher, diplomat, and scientist of the reign of Charles I.
Digby was the son of Sir Everard Digby, who was executed in 1606 for his part in the Gunpowder Plot (a conspiracy of a few Roman Catholics to destroy James I and the members of Parliament), and was brought up by his mother as a Roman Catholic. He left the University of Oxford in 1620 without taking a degree and was induced to go abroad by his mother, who opposed his love for Venetia, daughter of Sir Edward Stanley; she had been a childhood playmate and had become a woman of renowned beauty and intellectual attainment. In 1623 in Madrid, Digby was appointed to the household of Prince Charles, who had just arrived there. Returning to England the same year, he was knighted by James I and appointed gentleman of the privy chamber to Charles. In 1625 he married Venetia Stanley.
In an attempt to win favour at court by some large action, Digby embarked as a privateer in December 1627 to attack for booty French ships that were anchored in the Venetian harbour of Scanderoon (now Iskenderun, Turkey). He returned to England in February 1628, in triumph, though the government felt called upon to disavow his actions because of threats of reprisals against English merchants. Lady Digby died in 1633, perhaps as a sad consequence of his amateur pharmacology, and he retired to Gresham College, where he occupied himself with chemical experiments for two years.
After 1635 Digby associated himself with the entourage of Henrietta Maria, Charles I’s Catholic queen, and supported Charles’s expedition against the Presbyterian Scots in 1639–40; for this, Digby was summoned by Parliament as a Catholic recusant and appeared before the bar of the House of Commons in 1641. He then went to France, where in a duel he killed a French lord for insulting Charles I. Returning to England, he was imprisoned by the Commons (1642–43). On his release he went to Paris, where he published his chief philosophical works, Of the Nature of Bodies and Of the Nature of Mans Soule (both 1644).
Digby again returned to England, and Henrietta Maria appointed him her chancellor; he was sent on two abortive missions to Pope Innocent X in Rome for aid in the Royalist cause in the English Civil Wars. Digby promised the conversion of King Charles and his chief aides. After banishment from England by a suspicious Parliament in 1649, he was allowed to return in 1654 and tried to obtain full toleration for Catholics from Oliver Cromwell. At the restoration of the monarchy, on May 8, 1660, he was confirmed as Henrietta’s chancellor and was on the council of the Royal Society when its charter was granted in 1663. In January 1664 he was banished from court on grounds that he had interfered on behalf of a nobleman who had fallen into royal disfavour. Digby spent the remainder of his life in literary and scientific pursuits.
