Keshab Chunder Sen, also spelled Keshub Chandra Sen,  (born November 19, 1838, Calcutta [now Kolkata], India—died January 8, 1884, Calcutta), Hindu philosopher and social reformer who attempted to incorporate Christian theology within the framework of Hindu thought.
Although not of the Brahman class (varna), Sen’s family was prominent in Calcutta (Kolkata), and he was well educated. At age 19 he joined the Brahmo Samaj (Sanskrit: “Society of Brahma” or “Society of God”), founded in 1828 by the Hindu religious and social reformer Ram Mohun Ray. The Brahmo Samaj was intended to revitalize Hindu religion through the use of ancient Hindu sources and the authority of the Vedas. Sen was convinced, however, that Christian doctrine could bring new life to a stratified Hindu society, which he perceived as ossified.
By the use of dynamic and practical Christian missionary methods, Sen effected many social reforms in India. He organized relief campaigns for the poor, promoted literacy by founding schools for children and adults, and issued a number of inexpensive publications to bring reading matter within the reach of all. He condemned child marriage and was instrumental in having the marriage rites of his society recognized by law in 1872. He also advocated widow remarriage and intercaste marriage.
Whereas his contemporaries Debendranath Tagore and Ramakrishna remained thoroughly Hindu in outlook, Sen very nearly converted completely to Christianity. The deterrent proved to be his belief that Jesus Christ, however admirable and worthy of emulation, was not unique. An open break with Tagore followed, and Sen formed a new society in 1866 called the Bharatvarshiya Brahmo Samaj (“Brahmo Samaj of India”). The original society was renamed the Adi Samaj (“Original Society”) and was quickly purged of Christian teaching.
In 1870 Sen lectured widely in England and was granted an audience with Queen Victoria. He was impressed with Christianity as a force in English life. Back in India, however, he allowed his 14-year-old daughter to marry the son of the maharaja of Cooch Behar, thus publicly repudiating his avowed opposition to child marriage. As a result, some of his followers broke away, and he organized a new society—Naba Bidhan, or Nava Vidhana (“New Dispensation”)—continuing to preach a mixture of Hindu philosophy and Christian theology. He revived many ancient Vedic practices and sent 12 disciples to preach under a flag bearing a crescent, a cross, and a trident, the respective symbols of Islam, Christianity, and Shaivism (the branch of Hinduism that worships Shiva as the ultimate reality).
