Leszek Kolakowski,  (born Oct. 23, 1927, Radom, Pol.—died July 17, 2009, Oxford, Eng.), Polish philosopher and historian of philosophy who became one of Marxism’s greatest intellectual critics.
Kolakowski was educated privately and in the underground school system during the German occupation of Poland in World War II. In 1950 he received an M.A. in philosophy from the University of Łódź, and in 1953 he received a doctorate in philosophy from the University of Warsaw, where he taught and served as chair of the department of the history of philosophy until 1968. Kolakowski began his scholarly career as an orthodox Marxist. He was a member of the communist youth organization and joined the Polish United Workers’ Party (PUWP; the communist party) in 1945. When he was sent to Moscow for a course for promising intellectuals, however, he began to become disenchanted with the Soviet Marxist system.
Upon his return to Poland, he became part of the movement for democratization that led to the Polish workers’ uprising of 1956. His revisionist critique of Joseph Stalin, What Is Socialism? (1957), was officially banned in Poland but was widely circulated nonetheless. His 1959 essay “The Priest and the Jester,” in which Kolakowski explored the roles of dogmatism and skepticism in intellectual history, brought him to national prominence in Poland. In the 1950s and ’60s he published a series of books on the history of Western philosophy and a study of religious consciousness and institutional religion, at the same time attempting to define a humanistic Marxism; the latter effort resulted in Towards a Marxist Humanism (1967).
A speech given by Kolakowski on the 10th anniversary of the 1956 uprising led to his expulsion from the PUWP in 1966. In 1968 he was dismissed from his professorship and soon afterward left Poland. He was elected in 1970 to a senior research fellowship at All Souls College in the University of Oxford, where he remained until his retirement in 1995. He also taught at many prestigious American and Canadian schools, including McGill University, Yale University, and the University of Chicago.
Kolakowski eventually abandoned Marxism, which he described as “the greatest fantasy of our century.” In his most influential work, the three-volume Main Currents of Marxism: Its Rise, Growth, and Dissolution (1976), he described the principal currents of Marxist thought and chronicled the origins, rise, and decline of Marxist communism. As an adviser and supporter of the Solidarity trade union, which challenged the communist regime in Poland, Kolakowski played a practical as well as theoretical part in the collapse of the Soviet empire in the late 1980s.
Kolakowski also wrote much on religion and the spiritual basis of culture and was the author of three plays and three volumes of stories. He was the recipient of the German Booksellers Peace Prize in 1977, the Erasmus Prize in 1980, a MacArthur fellowship in 1983, the Jefferson Award of the National Endowment for the Humanities in 1986, and the Order of the White Eagle (Poland’s highest honour) in 1998. In 2003 the U.S. Library of Congress awarded him the first John W. Kluge Prize in the Human Sciences.
