Liang Shuming, Wade-Giles romanization Liang Shu-ming,  (born Oct. 18, 1893, Guilin, Guangxi province, China—died  June 23, 1988, Beijing), neo-Confucian philosopher and writer who attempted to demonstrate the relevance of Confucianism to China’s problems in the 20th century. A believer in the unity of thought and action, Liang became a leader in attempts at peasant organization. He also was active in the ill-fated Democratic League, a political organization that tried to steer a middle course between the Chinese communists and the Nationalist Party of Chiang Kai-shek.
Originally a Buddhist, Liang in 1917 was appointed to the faculty of Peking University as the first professor of Buddhism ever to serve on the staff of a Chinese university. In 1918, however, his father’s suicide prompted him to return to Confucianism. His influential Dongxiwenhua ji qu zhexue (1921; “The Cultures of East and West and Their Philosophies”) attempted to demonstrate to an increasingly iconoclastic and Westernized Chinese intelligentsia the modern relevance of Chinese, especially Confucian, culture. Characterizing the Western attitude as one of struggle, the Chinese attitude as one of harmonization through adjustment, and the Indian attitude as escapist, Liang theorized that after World War I, Western culture was dominant; this phase, he claimed, would soon be replaced by another era, in which the Chinese way would adapt the material successes of the West to man’s moral and ethical needs. In an even more distant era, the Indian attitude would prevail.
By the 1930s, however, Liang had come to believe that Western methods and doctrines would never be suitable to China but that once the Chinese countryside was awakened by enlightened understanding, it would become a repository of traditional Confucian values; continued struggle or revolution on the part of the Chinese people would therefore cease. To this end, Liang helped found the Shantung (Shandong) Rural Reconstruction Research Institute.
In 1937, when the Sino-Japanese War forced his institute to close, Liang became an organizing member of the Democratic League. He remained in China after the communists came to power in 1949, though he refused, despite frequent criticism, to acknowledge the validity of Marxism. In 1980 he served on the committee for the revision of the Chinese constitution, and he was also a member of the presidium of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, a body of scholars who serve in an advisory capacity.
