Lucretius, in full Titus Lucretius Carus,  (flourished 1st century bce), Latin poet and philosopher known for his single, long poem, De rerum natura (On the Nature of Things). The poem is the fullest extant statement of the physical theory of the Greek philosopher Epicurus. It also alludes to his ethical and logical doctrines.
Apart from Lucretius’s poem almost nothing is known about him. The little evidence available is quite inconclusive. Jerome, a leading Latin Church Father, in his chronicle for the year 94 bce (or possibly 96 or 93 bce), stated that Lucretius was born in that year and that years afterward a love potion drove him insane. Having written some books in lucid intervals, which Cicero afterward emended, he killed himself in his 44th year (51 or 50 bce). In his Life of Virgil, Aelius Donatus, a grammarian and teacher of rhetoric, noted that Virgil put on the toga virilis (the toga of an adult) in his 17th year, on his birthday (i.e., 54 or 53 bce), and that Lucretius died that same day. But Donatus contradicted himself by stating that the consuls that year were the same as in the year of Virgil’s birth (i.e., Crassus and Pompey, in 55 bce). This last date seems partly confirmed by a sentence in Cicero’s reply to his brother in 54 bce (Ad Quintum fratrem 2, 9, 3), which suggests that Lucretius was already dead and also that Cicero may have been involved in the publication of his poem: “The poems of Lucretius are as you write in your letter—they have many highlights of genius, yet also much artistry.” Excepting the single mention in Cicero, the only contemporary who named Lucretius was a Roman historian, Cornelius Nepos (Atticus 12, 4), in the phrase “after the death of Lucretius and Catullus.” The only contemporary whom Lucretius named was one Memmius, to whom he dedicated his poem, probably Gaius Memmius (son-in-law of Sulla, praetor of 58 bce, and patron of Catullus and Gaius Helvius Cinna), for whose friendship Lucretius “hopes.”
The title of Lucretius’s work translates that of the chief work of Epicurus, Peri physeōs (On Nature), as also of the didactic epic of Empedocles, a pluralist philosopher of nature, of whom Lucretius spoke with admiration only less than that with which he praised his master Epicurus.
Lucretius distributed his argument into six books, beginning each with a highly polished introduction. Books I and II establish the main principles of the atomic universe, refute the rival theories of the pre-Socratic cosmic philosophers Heracleitus, Empedocles, and Anaxagoras, and covertly attack the Stoics, a school of moralists rivaling that of Epicurus. Book III demonstrates the atomic structure and mortality of the soul and ends with a triumphant sermon on the theme “Death is nothing to us.” Book IV describes the mechanics of sense perception, thought, and certain bodily functions and condemns sexual passion. Book V describes the creation and working of this world and the celestial bodies and the evolution of life and human society. Book VI explains remarkable phenomena of the earth and sky—in particular, thunder and lightning. The poem ends with a description of the plague at Athens, a sombre picture of death contrasting with that of spring and birth in the invocation to Venus, with which it opens.
The argument in outline is as follows:
1. No thing is either created out of or reducible to nothing. The universe has an infinite extent of empty space (or void) and an infinite number of irreducible particles of matter (or atoms)—though their kinds are finite (see atomism). Atoms differ only in shape, size, and weight and are impenetrably hard, changeless, everlasting, the limit of physical division. They are made up of inseparable minimal parts, or units. Larger atoms have more such parts, but even the larger are minute. All atoms would have moved everlastingly downward in infinite space and never have collided to form atomic systems had they not swerved at times to a minimal degree. To these indeterminate swerves is due the creation of an infinite plurality of worlds; they also interrupt the causal chain and so make room for free will. All things are ultimately systems of moving atoms, separated by greater or smaller intervals of void, which cohere more or less according to their shapes. All systems are divisible and therefore perishable (except the gods), and all change is explainable in terms of the addition, subtraction, or rearrangement of changeless atoms.
2. The soul is made of exceedingly fine atoms and has two connected parts: the anima distributed throughout the body, which is the cause of sensation, and the animus in the breast, the central consciousness. The soul is born and grows with the body, and at death it is dissipated like “smoke.”
3. Though the gods exist, they neither made nor manipulate the world. As systems of exceedingly fine atoms, they live remotely, unconcerned with human affairs, examples to humans of the ideal life of perfect happiness (absence of mental fear, emotional turmoil, and bodily pain).
4. Humans know by sense perception and argue by reason according to certain rules. Though the senses are infallible, reason can make false inferences. Objects can be seen because they discharge from their surface representative films, which strike the eye just as smells strike the nose. Separate atoms are in principle imperceptible, having no dischargeable parts. The senses perceive the properties and accidents of bodies; reason infers the atoms and the void, the latter of which exists to explain the perceived movement of bodies.
5. Humans naturally seek pleasure and avoid pain. Their aim should be so to conduct their lives that they get, on balance, the maximum of pleasure and the minimum of pain. They will succeed in this only if they are able, through philosophy, to overcome the fear of death and of the gods.
