Madhva, also called Anandatirtha or Purnaprajna,  (born c. 1199 or 1238 ce, near Udipi, Karnataka, India—died c. 1278 or 1317, Udipi), Hindu philosopher, exponent of Dvaita (“Dualism”; belief in a basic difference in kind between God and individual souls). His followers are called Madhvas.
Madhva was born into a Brahman family. As a youth, he was discovered by his parents, after a four-day search, discoursing learnedly with the priests of Vishnu. Later, on a pilgrimage to the sacred city of Varanasi, he is reputed to have walked on water. He may have been influenced during his youth by a group of Nestorian Christians who were residing at Kalyanpur.
Madhva set out to refute the nondualistic Advaita philosophy of Shankara (died c. 750 ce), who believed the individual self (jiva) to be fundamentally identical with the universal self (atman), which in turn was identical with the Absolute (brahman), the only reality. Thus, Madhva rejected the theory of maya (“illusion” or “play”), which taught that the material world is not only illusory but also deceptive. Madhva maintained that the simple fact that things are transient and ever-changing does not mean that they are not real. He also insisted that knowledge is relative, not absolute. In Madhva’s time, most Hindus believed in heaven and hell as well as in a process of transmigration (samsara) from which it was possible to attain release (moksha). Madhva additionally believed in eternal damnation, a third alternative involving a purgatory of endless reincarnations.
Madhva outlawed devadasis—members of an order of women devoted to the temple patron god and who performed sexual favours for the king and his close circle—in all places of worship under his followers’ control. He offered figures made of dough as a substitute for blood sacrifices. His adherents customarily branded themselves on the shoulder with a multiarmed figure of Vishnu. Madhva wrote 37 works in Sanskrit, mostly commentaries on Hindu sacred writings and treatises on his own theological system and philosophy.
