Marie-François-Pierre Maine de Biran, original surname Gonthier De Biran,  (born Nov. 29, 1766, Bergerac, Fr.—died  July 20, 1824, Paris), French statesman, empiricist philosopher, and prolific writer who stressed the inner life of man, against the prevalent emphasis on external sense experience, as a prerequisite for understanding the human self. Born with the surname Gonthier de Biran, he adopted Maine after his father’s estate, Le Maine.
After defending King Louis XVI at Versailles in October 1789 as one of the king’s lifeguards at the start of the French Revolution, Maine de Biran retired to his own estate at Grateloup, near Bergerac, to study philosophy and mathematics. After the fall of Robespierre in 1794, he entered public life as an administrator in the Dordogne district. In 1813 he expressed publicly his opposition to Napoleon. After the restoration of the Bourbons in 1814, he became treasurer to the chamber of deputies in the government of King Louis XVIII.
Philosophically, Maine de Biran was known at first as one of the Idéologues, a school of philosophers who regarded all experience as being limited to the realm of sensation. In 1802 he had impressed the Institut de France with an essay upholding the views of the dominant Idéologues. A similar essay won him election to the institute in 1805. His importance, however, consists in his gradual and detailed exposition of the inadequacies of the Idéologue attitude. His diary (Journal, 3 vol., ed. H. Gouhier; 1954–57) discusses both his political and his philosophical activities and reveals the dilemmas of a philosopher who felt compelled to play a decisive role in politics. In the diary and in his other works he is preoccupied with the inner life, whose importance for experience the Idéologues had ignored. Already in the essay of 1802 he had suggested that the will, as well as sensation, was a necessary element for any analysis of the self. After 1805 he attached increased importance to the will, by which man could cause his body to move.
For his idea of human freedom, derived from this notion of willed movement, Maine de Biran has been considered by some to be the father of French Existentialist philosophy. His collected works, which fill 14 volumes (ed. Pierre Tisserand, 1920–49), include the Essai sur les fondements de la psychologie (1812; “Essay on the Fundamentals of Psychology”) and Nouveaux Essais d’anthropologie (1823–24; “New Essays in Anthropology”). In the later essays he describes the human self as developing through a purely sensitive, animal phase, the vie animale (“animal life”), to a phase of will and freedom, the vie humaine (“human life”), and culminating in experiences that transcend humanity, the vie de l’esprit (“spiritual life”).
