Marjorie Grene,  (born Dec. 13, 1910,  Milwaukee, Wis.—died March 16, 2009, Blacksburg, Va.),  American philosopher who is considered the founder of the philosophy of biology. Grene was known for her innovative theories on the nature of the scientific study of life, which she addressed in several works on Existentialism, including Dreadful Freedom: A Critique of Existentialism (1948). She also was one of the first to interpret the philosophical meaning of random events that occur in the course of evolution and to address the philosophical impacts of the inevitable increase in the understanding of evolutionary science.
Grene received a degree in zoology (1931) from Wellesley College and subsequently traveled to Germany, where she studied the theories of German existentialist philosophers Martin Heidegger and Karl Jaspers. Upon her return to the United States, she attended Radcliffe University and received a Ph.D. (1935) in philosophy. Grene accepted an assistant professorship to teach history of philosophy at the University of Chicago; however, in 1944 she left the city to follow her husband into a life of farming. Despite this dramatic change in lifestyle, Grene continued to address philosophical issues, expressing her ideas through writing. It was during this time that she published Dreadful Freedom (1948), as well as Martin Heidegger (1957), a discussion of the philosopher’s theories on Existentialism.
Grene moved with her husband to Ireland in 1952 and continued to assist in his agricultural pursuits. Several years later, however, she decided to return to teaching. She took a temporary position at the University of Manchester (1957–58), where she worked with Hungarian British philosopher and scientist Michael Polanyi. Grene’s approach to understanding existential theories relating to the meaning of science and life significantly influenced Polanyi’s book Personal Knowledge (1958).
Grene lectured in philosophy at Queens University, Belfast (1960–65), before returning to the United States to teach philosophy at the University of California, Davis (1965–78). While at Davis, Grene delivered a series of lectures and published The Understanding of Nature: Essays in the Philosophy of Biology (1974), which solidified her as the founder of the philosophy of biology. During this time, she also synthesized the details of her philosophical theories concerning evolution, taking into account the work of the era’s most influential geneticists, including German-born biologist Ernst Mayr and Ukrainian American geneticist and evolutionist Theodosius Dobzhansky.
In 1988 Grene became an adjunct professor of philosophy and science at Virginia Tech. She remained in Virginia and was active in the field of philosophy, primarily through her writings, until her death in 2009. Included among Grene’s later influential works are A Philosophical Testament (1995) and Philosophy of Biology: An Episodic History (2004; with David Depew).
Grene drew primarily on the ideas of Aristotle and other ancient philosophers, applying and adapting their concepts to modern science, particularly in the realms of molecular biology and evolution. She recognized, as did Aristotle, that to fully understand an organism’s physical characteristics, knowledge of the functions of each of the organism’s parts, including its cells and genes, was necessary.
Grene’s philosophical interests were broad, and her theories touched not only on biology but also on human knowledge. Her insights on epistemology (the philosophy of the nature of knowledge) were influential and were distilled in The Knower and the Known (1966). Grene also was noted for her determined rejection of the theories of French mathematician and philosopher René Descartes.
Grene’s unusual hiatus from her academic career to take up a life in agriculture, combined with her publication of philosophical works during this period, was frequently criticized by others in the field of philosophy. However, her brilliance, novel theories, and insightful and critical reviews of the work of other philosophers contributed in important ways to the advancement of philosophical perspectives on science, knowledge, and life. Grene received various awards, distinguished professorships, and honorary degrees throughout her career. In 2002 she became the first woman included in the Library of Living Philosophers (vol. 29, The Philosophy of Marjorie Grene), a series devoted to covering the most influential and controversial living philosophers.
