Maurice Merleau-Ponty,  (born March 14, 1908, Rochefort, Fr.—died  May 4, 1961, Paris), philosopher and man of letters, the leading exponent of Phenomenology in France.
Merleau-Ponty studied at the École Normale Supérieure in Paris and took his agrégation in philosophy in 1931. He taught in a number of lycées before World War II, during which he served as an army officer. In 1945 he was appointed professor of philosophy at the University of Lyon and in 1949 was called to the Sorbonne in Paris. In 1952 he received a chair of philosophy at the Collège de France. From 1945 to 1952 he served as unofficial co-editor (with Jean-Paul Sartre) of the journal Les Temps Modernes.
Merleau-Ponty’s most important works of technical philosophy were La Structure du comportement (1942; The Structure of Behavior, 1965) and Phénoménologie de la perception (1945; Phenomenology of Perception, 1962). Though greatly influenced by the work of Edmund Husserl, Merleau-Ponty rejected his theory of the knowledge of other persons, grounding his own theory in bodily behaviour and in perception. He held that it is necessary to consider the organism as a whole to discover what will follow from a given set of stimuli. For him, perception was the source of knowledge and had to be studied before the conventional sciences.
Turning his attention to social and political questions, in 1947 Merleau-Ponty published a group of Marxist essays, Humanisme et terreur (“Humanism and Terror”), the most sophisticated defense of Soviet communism in the late 1940s. He argued for suspended judgment of Soviet terrorism and attacked what he regarded as Western hypocrisy. The Korean War disillusioned Merleau-Ponty and he broke with Sartre, who defended the North Koreans.
In 1955 Merleau-Ponty published more Marxist essays, Les Aventures de la dialectique (“The Adventures of the Dialectic”). This collection, however, indicated a change of position: Marxism no longer appears as the final word on history, but rather as a heuristic methodology. Later he returned to more strictly philosophical concerns.
