Michael Oakeshott, in full Michael Joseph Oakeshott,  (born December 11, 1901, Chelsfield, Kent, England—died December 18, 1990, Acton, Dorset), British political theorist, philosopher, and educator whose work belongs to the philosophical tradition of objective idealism. He is regarded as an important and singular conservative thinker. In political theory Oakeshott is best known for his critique of modern rationalism.
Oakeshott attended St George’s School in Harpenden, a progressive coeducational institution, and graduated from Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1923. He was elected fellow at Cambridge (1925–40, 1945–49) in that same college and at Nuttfield College, Oxford (1949–51). In 1951 he was appointed chair of the political science department of the London School of Economics (1951–68). During World War II he served in an intelligence regiment of the British military called Phantom.
Human experience, according to Oakeshott,  is mediated by a certain number of human practices, such as politics or poetry. For Oakeshott, reality and its experiencing cannot be separated in the way that empiricists, for instance, separate sensation from its object. This, however, does not mean that our subjective experience encompasses or even creates all of reality. Oakeshott’s philosophy is a form of objective idealism, which argues, against materialism, that our experience of reality is mediated by thought while also rejecting the notion that reality is solely subjective and thus relative (subjective idealism).
Oakeshott criticizes rationalism for reducing human practices such as politics to pragmatic enterprises that can be analyzed, conveyed, and organized according to a rational model. From the rationalist’s perspective, for instance, politics consists of designing institutions according to abstract principles, without any regard for culture and tradition. By rejecting all authority besides reason, Oakeshotts argues, rationalism loses sight of the practical knowledge that is embedded in these human practices. His first important work, Experience and Its Modes (1933), distinguishes between three main modes of understanding—the practical, the scientific, and the historical—and explores in more depth the different dimensions of the latter. On Human Conduct (1975), which many regard as his masterpiece, comprises three complex essays on human conduct, civil association, and the modern European state. Oakeshott’s most famous work, however, is Rationalism in Politics (1962), an essay that criticizes the modern tendency to elevate formal theory above practical knowledge. Oakeshott is also known for his original reading of the 17th-century English philosopher Thomas Hobbes. In his introduction (1946) to Hobbes’s Leviathan, Oakeshott reclaims Hobbes as a moral philosopher, against his common interpretation as a supporter of absolutist government and a forefather of positivism.
