Michael Psellus,  (born 1018, Constantinople—died c. 1078), Byzantine philosopher, theologian, and statesman whose advocacy of Platonic philosophy as ideally integrable with Christian doctrine initiated a renewal of Byzantine classical learning that later influenced the Italian Renaissance.
Psellus served in the Byzantine state secretariat under the emperors Michael V (1041–42) and Constantine IX (1042–54). The latter in 1045 chose him to head the philosophy faculty in the newly founded imperial university.
In 1054, after the ecclesiastical upheaval following the definitive separation of the Greek and Roman churches, Psellus withdrew from academic work into monastic seclusion, adding Michael to his baptismal name. Recalled by the empress Theodora (1055–56) to serve as her prime minister, he continued in the office during the reign of his former student, the emperor Michael VII Ducas (1071–78). Having urged the Emperor to reject any overtures towards reunion with Rome, Psellus was forced into final exile when the Byzantine Macedonian dynasty’s internal struggle between aristocratic and military families resulted in Michael’s deposition and the accession of the emperor Nicephorus III Botaneiates (1078–81).
Criticized by some historians for his overweening ambition and political duplicity, Psellus made lasting contributions to Byzantine culture, including the reform of the university curriculum to emphasize the Greek classics, especially the Homeric literature that, with Platonist thought, he interpreted as precursory to Christian revelation. Manifesting encyclopaedic knowledge, Psellus composed treatises and poetry, all characterized by forceful and sometimes virulent expression, on themes in theology, philosophy, grammar, law, medicine, mathematics, and the natural sciences. Foremost among his writings are a tract, “Commentary on Plato’s Teachings on the Origin of the Soul,” and the Chronographia, which recounts the events from the accession of the emperor Basil II in 976 to that of Nicephorus III. Notable also among Psellus’ literary remains are his correspondence, consisting of more than 500 letters, and his funeral eulogy for Michael Cerularius, patriarch of Constantinople and principal force behind the Schism of 1054.
Psellus’ most enduring legacy, however, was his reversal of emphasis from Aristotelian thought (as promoted by the 9th-century patriarch Photius) to the Platonic tradition. With this change, Byzantine thought returned to the idealism of early Greek Christianity as exemplified by the 4th-century Cappadocian school of Gregory of Nazianzus and Gregory of Nyssa.
