Nikolay Aleksandrovich Berdyayev,  Berdyayev also spelled Berdiaev,  (born March 6, 1874, Kiev, Ukraine, Russian Empire—died  March 23, 1948, Clamart, France), religious thinker, philosopher, and Marxist who became a critic of Russian implementation of Karl Marx’s views and a leading representative of Christian existentialism, a school of philosophy that stresses examination of the human condition within a Christian framework.
During his student days at Kiev University (from 1894), Berdyayev engaged in Marxist activities that led in 1899 to a sentence of three years’ exile in Vologda, in northern Russia. After his release he traveled through Germany, returning in 1904 to Russia. After another visit abroad in 1907 he moved to Moscow, where he joined the Russian Orthodox Church. He was somewhat of a nonconformist, and he attacked the church’s Holy Synod in an article and was tried for it in 1914. Escaping sentence after his case was dropped at the outbreak of the Russian Revolution (1917), he was in favour with the new regime and was appointed professor of philosophy at Moscow University in 1920.
Two years later Berdyayev was expelled from the Soviet Union when it became clear that he would not embrace orthodox Marxism. Other exiles joined him in founding the Academy of Philosophy and Religion in Berlin in 1922. In 1924 he transferred the academy to Paris and founded there a journal, Put (1925–40; “The Way”), in which he criticized Russian communism. He became known as the foremost Russian émigré in France.
In further developing his existentialist philosophy, Berdyayev was inclined to prefer unsystematic and mystical modes of expression over logic and rationality. He asserted that truth was not the product of a rational quest but the result of “a light which breaks through from the transcendent world of the spirit.” He believed that man’s greatness was his share in this world of the spirit and in the divine capacity to create. A human act of creation enables man to arrive at truth by penetrating the confusion of the surrounding environment.
Highly sensitive to the moods of his time, Berdyayev believed that the “contradictions of modern history” portended a new era of “divine-human creation” through which man could revitalize the world. Implicit in that belief were remnants of his early Marxist faith that man could improve his lot. Though Berdyayev condemned “the crimes and violence of the Soviet order,” he claimed to see signs of the “divine-human creation” in the progress made in Russia after the revolution.
Among his significant works are Dukh i realnost (1927; Freedom and the Spirit), O naznacheni cheloveka (1931; The Destiny of Man), Essai de métaphysique eschatologique (1946; The Beginning and the End), Samopoznaniye: Opyt filosofskoy avtobiografi (1949; Dream and Reality: An Essay in Autobiography), and Istoki i smysl russkogo kommunizma (1955; The Origin of Russian Communism).
