Numenius of Apamea,  (flourished late 2nd century), Greek philosopher chiefly responsible for the transition from Platonist idealism to a Neoplatonic synthesis of Hellenistic, Persian, and Jewish intellectual systems, with particular attention to the concept of ultimate being, or deity, and its relation to the material world.
Beyond his origins in Apamea (near modern Ḥimṣ, Syria), nothing is known of Numenius’ life. His name may have been a Greek translation of a Semitic original. He showed extensive knowledge of Judaism, and he may have been acquainted with Christianity. Apparently he intended to seek the origin of Platonic ideas in the teachings of the ancient East: the spirit transmigration of Hinduism; the absolute, monotheistic deity and the trinity of divine functions in Judaism; and the esoteric dualism of Gnostic and Hermetic cults. Observing an influence of the older Semitic religions upon Greek thought, he called Plato “an Atticizing Moses.” His search for primitive forms of theology was later to interest the Renaissance humanists.
Central to Numenius’ thought is the dualism of an eternal divinity contrasting with eternal matter (“monad” opposed to “dyad”). As supreme deity in absolutely changeless perfection, God can have no contact with inferior being—hence the need for a second god, the Demiurge, of a dual nature, the “soul of the world” related to both God and matter and completing the Trinitarian hierarchy. Accentuating this dualism, Numenius identified matter with evil, relating it also to the evil world soul. Man, moreover, not only comprises the dualism of a body antithetical to his soul but also possesses a twofold soul, rational and irrational. Life is thus a process of escape from this dualism by the deliverance of the spirit from its material confinement.
Numenius’ thought has been alleged to have influenced the 3rd-century development of Neoplatonism by Plotinus, the foremost representative of that school. The surviving fragments from Numenius’ treatises Peri tēs tōn Akadēmaikōn pros Platōna diastaseōs (“On the Differences Between Plato and the Academicians”), Peri tōn para Platōni aporrhētōn (“On Plato’s Secret Doctrines”), Peri tagathou (“On the Good”), and Peri aphtharsias psychēs (“On the Indestructibility of the Soul”) have been collected by F. Thedinga (1875). 
