Paul W. Taylor, in full Paul Warren Taylor,  (born November 19, 1923, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, U.S.—died October 14, 2015, Hamilton, New Jersey), American philosopher best known for his book Respect for Nature: A Theory of Environmental Ethics (1986), which promulgated the biocentric viewpoint in environmental ethics and was a foundational work of environmental philosophy.
Taylor served in the United States Marine Corps from 1943 to 1946. After he was discharged, he obtained an undergraduate degree (1947) and a doctorate (1950) in philosophy from Princeton University. He also taught at Princeton University from 1949 to 1950. He spent the remainder of his career (1950–90) as a faculty member in the Department of Philosophy at Brooklyn College of the City University of New York. In 1990 he became an emeritus professor in the department.
In Respect for Nature, Taylor supported a biocentric viewpoint in environmental ethics. Biocentrism in general prioritizes individuals in nature, including humans, but does not assign humans higher priority. Respect for Nature came at a time when environmental philosophy was a new subdiscipline heavily scrutinized by mainstream philosophers, and the rigour Taylor used to outline his theory of biocentrism built credibility for the field.
A key strength of Taylor’s theory was its use of commonly understood norms in human ethics to build a foundation for environmental ethics. He argued that humans are members of Earth’s community of life, that Earth’s ecosystems are a complex web of interconnected elements, that each individual organism, like each individual human, is a teleological (purposeful) centre of autonomous choice, and thus that each organism is an end in itself. In addition, just as German philosopher Immanuel Kant posited that every person possesses inherent worth, Taylor posited that each individual organism is inherently valuable and worthy of equal moral consideration.
Taylor saw as groundless the claim that humans, by their very nature, are superior to other beings simply because they are rational forms of life. However, he acknowledged that humans have a moral responsibility (due to their unique decision-making faculties) to act in the best interest of other forms of life. He argued that biocentrism obligates humans to follow rules regarding nonmaleficence (the duty to not cause harm to any entity in the natural environment imbued with intrinsic worth), noninterference (the duty to refrain from placing restrictions on the freedom of individuals as well as to refrain from interfering with the functions of ecosystems and biotic communities), fidelity (the duty to remain faithful to the trust between humans and wild animals [because wild animals can be deceived and thus exploited by humans]), and restitutive justice (the duty to restore the moral and ethical balance between humans and animals that has been wronged by human activities).
His two other books, Normative Discourse (1961) and Principles of Ethics: An Introduction (1975), cover more traditional philosophy.
