Pierre Leroux,  (born April 17, 1797, near Paris—died  April 11, 1871, Paris), French pantheistic philosopher, economist, pacifist, government official, and champion of socialism through various reviews and newspapers that he helped found.
In 1824, with Paul-François Dubois, Leroux established Le Globe, and seven years later he made it the organ of the Saint-Simonian Socialists; but he broke with them in 1832 after one of them, Barthélemy-Prosper Enfantin, advocated free love. Founding the Revue Encyclopédique, Leroux established, with Jean Reynaud, the Encyclopédie nouvelle, of which only eight volumes appeared (1838–41). In 1840 he published the treatise De l’humanité, his major philosophical work.
Preoccupied with numbers after the fashion of Pythagoras, Leroux stressed the importance of triads, or groups of three. Man, he asserted, comprised sensation, sentiment, and intellect. Social harmony results from the cooperation of these three aspects, which are also discernible in God in the form of power, love, and intelligence. Criticizing the wage system, the institution of the family, private property, and economic systems in which “the millionaires and the capitalists are the nobles of our time,” he declared that in progressing toward a true democracy “we gravitate toward God.”
Leroux did not coin the term socialism, but he was first to analyze the concept in his article for the Revue Encyclopédique, “De l’Individualisme et du Socialisme” (1834). In Sept discours sur la situation actuelle de la Société et de l’esprit humain (1841; “Seven Discourses on the Present Situation of Society and the Human Spirit”), he wrote that the role of society “is to give to all its members, to each according to his needs, his capacity and his works, the enjoyment of the product of the common labour, whether such labour be an idea, a work of art or material prosperity.” With George Sand, Leroux founded the journal Revue Indépendante (1841), and in 1843 he founded the Revue Sociale.
After the Revolution of 1848 in Paris, Leroux was elected mayor of Boussac, where he had formed a printing association, and became a member of the National Assembly at Paris. Elected to the Legislative Assembly there the following year, he voted with the extreme Socialist wing. The coup d’état under Louis-Napoleon in 1851 dissolved the Legislative Assembly, and Leroux was forced to leave France. He lived abroad until 1869, when he returned to Paris under the general amnesty.
