Pierre Charron,  (born 1541, Paris, France—died November 16, 1603, Paris), French Roman Catholic theologian and major contributor to the new thought of the 17th century. He is remembered for his controversial form of skepticism and his separation of ethics from religion as an independent philosophical discipline.
After studies in law Charron turned to theology and became a renowned preacher to Margaret of France, the queen of Navarre. Despite his success as a theological adviser in several dioceses and as canon at Bordeaux, in 1589 he sought to retire to a cloister but was refused because of his age. The same year, he met the French essayist Michel de Montaigne, whose close friend and disciple he became.
From Montaigne, Charron acquired his skeptical tendency, coupled with traditional Roman Catholicism, noted in his two major works, Les Trois Vérités (1593; “The Three Truths”) and De la sagesse (1601; On Wisdom). In the first of these, which was intended as a Counter-Reformation tract against the reformed theology of John Calvin, Charron claimed that the nature and existence of God are unknowable because of God’s infinitude and man’s weakness. Faith, not reason, he claimed, is necessary for acceptance of Christianity, and only the authority of the traditional Roman Catholic church could make up for the human weaknesses inherent in the reformer’s attempts to know God.
In De la sagesse Charron examined further the possibility of knowledge outside of revealed truths, concluding again that the wise man doubts completely because his mental capacities are unreliable. Such skepticism has two benefits, according to Charron: it frees men from prejudices, and it frees men to receive revealed truths. Consequently, the skeptic cannot be a heretic; having no opinions, he cannot have incorrect ones. In his moral theory Charron presented the skeptic as a man who, if he has not received divine commands, lives according to nature. By this affirmation of the “noble savage” who draws his moral guidelines from the natural world, Charron became one of the first modern ethical theorists to establish a basis for morality outside religion. De la sagesse was especially popular and influential in France and England throughout the 17th century but was immediately attacked as irreligious. Contemporary Roman Catholics were divided in their reaction; the Jesuit François Garasse called the book a breviary for freethinkers and its author a secret atheist, whereas the bishop of Boulogne, Claude Dormy, and other prominent churchmen defended Charron. He, like Montaigne, has been the subject of continuing debate over his intentions. Difficulty also remains in determining Charron’s actual views, for, although his Discours chrestiens (1600; “Christian Discourses”), a collection of 16 discourses on various aspects of Christian life, and his own religious life indicate that his Christianity was sincere, portions of De la sagesse suggest that it was not.
