R.G. Collingwood, in full Robin George Collingwood,  (born February 22, 1889, Cartmel Fell, Lancashire, England—died January 9, 1943, Coniston, Lancashire), English historian and philosopher whose work provided a major 20th-century attempt to reconcile philosophy and history.
Deeply influenced by his father, a painter and archaeologist who was a friend and biographer of John Ruskin, Collingwood was educated at home until he was 13. Throughout his life he painted and composed music. After five years at Rugby, he entered Oxford in 1908, was elected tutor in philosophy in 1912, and remained there until his retirement in 1941. Between 1911 and around 1934, Collingwood concentrated on archaeological studies that made him the leading authority on Roman Britain in his day. The best known of these works are The Archaeology of Roman Britain (1930) and Roman Britain and the English Settlements in the Oxford History of England (1936). The same period saw the development of Collingwood’s philosophical thought.
An early book entitled Religion and Philosophy (1916), a critique of empirical psychology and an analysis of religion as a form of knowledge, was followed by a major work, Speculum Mentis (1924), which proposed a philosophy of culture stressing the unity of the mind. Structured around five forms of experience—art, religion, science, history, and philosophy—the work sought a synthesis of levels of knowledge.
During later years, Collingwood enriched his conception of philosophy and history and increasingly proposed a notion of philosophical inquiry that is dependent on the study of history. In two works, Essay on Philosophical Method (1933) and An Essay on Metaphysics (1940), he proposed the historical nature of civilization’s presuppositions and urged that metaphysical study evaluate these presuppositions as historically defined conceptions rather than as eternal verities. His last book, The Idea of History (1946), proposed history as a discipline in which one relives the past in one’s own mind. Only by immersing oneself in the mental actions behind events, by rethinking the past within the context of one’s own experience, can the historian discover the significant patterns and dynamics of cultures and civilizations. Collingwood has been criticized for an overly intellectualist analysis of the motivating forces in history, but his attempt to integrate history and philosophy is recognized as a significant scholarly contribution. He published An Autobiography in 1939.
