Ramana Maharshi, original name Venkataraman Aiyer,  (born Dec. 30, 1879, Madurai, Madras states, India—died April 14, 1950, Tiruvannamalai), Hindu philosopher and yogi called “Great Master,” “Bhagavan” (the Lord), and “the Sage of Arunachala,” whose position on monism (the identity of the individual soul and the creator of souls) and maya (illusion) parallels that of Shankara (c. 700–750). His original contribution to yogic philosophy is the technique of vichara (self-“pondering” inquiry).
Born to a middle-class southern Indian Brahman family, Venkataraman read mystical and devotional literature, particularly the lives of South Indian Shaivite saints and the life of Kabir, the medieval mystical poet. He was captivated by legends of the local pilgrimage place, Mt. Arunachala, from which the god Shiva was supposed to have arisen in a spiral of fire at the creation of the world.
At the age of 17 Venkataraman had a spiritual experience from which he derived his vichara technique: he suddenly felt a great fear of death, and, lying very still, imagined his body becoming a stiff, cold corpse. Following a traditional “not this, not that” (neti-neti) practice, he began self-inquiry, asking, “Who am I?” and answering, “Not the body, because it is decaying; not the mind, because the brain will decay with the body; not the personality, nor the emotions, for these also will vanish with death.” His intense desire to know the answer brought him into a state of consciousness beyond the mind, a state of bliss that Hindu philosophy calls samadhi. He immediately renounced his possessions, shaved his head, and fled from his village to Mt. Arunachala to become a hermit and one of India’s youngest gurus.
The publication of Paul Brunton’s My Search in Secret India drew Western attention to the thought of Ramana Maharshi (the title used by Venkataraman’s disciples) and attracted a number of notable students. Ramana Maharshi believed that death and evil were maya, or illusion, which could be dissipated by the practice of vichara, by which the true self and the unity of all things would be discovered. For liberation from rebirth it is sufficient, he believed, to practice only vichara and bhakti (devotion) either to Shiva Arunachala or to Ramana Maharshi.
