Ramananda, also called Ramanand or Ramadatta,  (born c. 1400—died c. 1470), North Indian Brahman (priest), held by his followers (Ramanandis) to be fifth in succession in the lineage of the philosopher-mystic Ramanuja.
According to his hagiography (saint’s life), Ramananda left home as a youth and became a sannyasi (ascetic) before settling in Varanasi (Benares) to study Vedic texts, Ramanuja’s philosophy, and yogic techniques. Having completed his studies, Ramananda began teaching. He adopted the practice of eating with his students, regardless of their caste, but the opposition of his upper-caste companions so angered Ramananda that he left the lineage to found his own sect, the Ramanandis.
Ramananda’s teachings were similar to those of Ramanuja except that he dropped the interdiction on intercaste dining and the strict rule that all teaching and texts used had to be in the Sanskrit language. At his centres in Agra and Varanasi, Ramananda taught in Hindi, the vernacular, because Sanskrit was known only to the upper castes. His original 12 disciples are said to have included at least one woman, members of the lowest castes (including the leatherworker Ravidas), and a Muslim (the mystic Kabīr). The almost complete absence of any reference to Ramananda in poetry attributed to them, however, has caused some scholars to question the historical veracity of this connection.
The connection between the historical Ramananda and the important monastic community (Ramanandis) that claims him as its founder has also been called into question, both by academic scholars and by a group of “radical Ramanandis” in the early 20th century who disputed the Brahman tie with Ramanuja. The history of the present Ramanandi sampradaya (school of religious teaching) apparently does not reach back before the 17th century, but this does nothing to diminish the fact that it is the largest Vaishnava (devotees of the god Vishnu) monastic order in North India today, and perhaps the largest monastic order of any sectarian affiliation throughout the Indian subcontinent.
