Wilfrid Sellars, in full Wilfrid Stalker Sellars,  (born May 20, 1912, Ann Arbor, Mich., U.S.—died July 2, 1989, Pittsburgh, Pa.), American philosopher best known for his critique of traditional philosophical conceptions of mind and knowledge and for his uncompromising effort to explain how human reason and thought can be reconciled with the vision of nature found in science. Although he was one of the most original and influential American philosophers of the second half of the 20th century, he remains largely unknown outside academic circles.
Sellars’s father, Roy Sellars, was a distinguished Canadian philosopher. After studying at the University of Michigan and the University of Buffalo, the younger Sellars was awarded a Rhodes scholarship to the University of Oxford, where he earned bachelor’s (1936) and master’s (1940) degrees in philosophy, politics, and economics. He was appointed assistant professor of philosophy at the University of Iowa in 1938. After serving as an intelligence officer in the U.S. Navy (1943–46), he was appointed assistant professor of philosophy at the University of Minnesota. He was professor of philosophy at Yale University from 1959 to 1963 and University Professor of Philosophy and Research Professor of Philosophy at the University of Pittsburgh from 1963 until his death.
Sellars came to prominence in 1956 with the publication of his essay “Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind,” a critique of a conception of mind and knowledge inherited from René Descartes (1596–1650). Sellars there attacked what he called the “myth of the given,” the Cartesian idea that one can have immediate and indubitable perceptual knowledge of one’s own sense experiences. Sellars’s ideas anticipated and contributed to the development of theories of mind, knowledge, and science that played significant roles in later debates on these topics.
Sellars was an articulate exponent of the modernist enterprise of reconciling the comprehensive picture of reality emerging from the theoretical activities of natural science with the traditional conception of human beings as morally accountable agents and subjective centres of experience. In “Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man” (1960), he characterized this project as bringing together into one “synoptic view” two competing images of “man-in-the-world”: the “scientific” image derived from the fruits of theory construction and the “manifest” image, the “framework in terms of which man encountered himself.”
Sellars subscribed to a form of philosophical naturalism according to which science is the final arbiter of what exists. Entities exist if and only if they would be invoked in a complete scientific explanation of the world. In “Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind,” he wrote, “In the dimension of describing and explaining the world, science is the measure of all things, of what is that it is, and of what is not that it is not.” His synoptic project, however, required him to develop ways of accommodating dimensions of human experience that seem initially to resist incorporation into the “scientific image.” Science describes how humans do think and act, for example, but not how they ought to think and act, and this latter element therefore requires explanation if it is to be reconciled with Sellars’s naturalism. His fundamental response to these challenges was to develop a sophisticated theory of conceptual roles, concretely instantiated in human conduct and transmitted by modes of social interaction, including language. He used this theory in turn to defend a form of linguistic nominalism, the denial of the real existence of universals or irreducibly mentalistic entities as the referents or meanings of linguistic expressions. Sellars analyzed discourse ostensibly about abstract or mentalistic entities as discourse about linguistic role players framed in a “transposed mode of speech.”
Sellars’s account of knowledge and experience drew upon his deep reading of the history of philosophy, particularly the works of Immanuel Kant (1724–1804). In contrast to at least some other advocates of naturalism, Sellars rejected the idea that normative concepts such as knowledge can or should be analyzed in terms of nonnormative concepts. On Sellars’s view, characterizing people as knowers does not require attributing to them a special inner psychological state but merely involves noting their ability to engage in various public behaviours, such as giving reasons for what they claim to know. Like Kant, he understood perceptual experience as synthesizing the contributions of a noncognitive faculty of sensation and a conceptual faculty of thought.
Sellars is often credited with originating the theory of functionalism in the philosophy of mind, according to which mental states are individuated by the inferential roles they play in thought. Because functional states are independent of their physical realization, it is a consequence of Sellars’s view that they can in principle be realized in digital computers as well as in biological organisms. But Sellars also argued that the classification of sensory mental states rests on analogies that ultimately pertain to similarities and differences of intrinsic content within those states. Sensations can therefore be synoptically integrated into the scientific image, he concluded, only after they and the microphysical details of the scientific image have been reconceived in terms of a uniform ontology whose fundamental entities are “absolute processes.”
Sellars also introduced the functionalist idea of explaining semantic meaning in terms of the inferential and ultimately behavioral roles played by particular linguistic expressions, a view later known as conceptual-role semantics. Public speech episodes—i.e., particular linguistic utterances or acts of inscription—instantiate semantic-conceptual roles by virtue of being regulated by rules governing linguistic responses to nonconceptual stimuli (“language entries”), behavioral responses to conceptual states (“language exits”), and transitions from one linguistic commitment to another (“intralinguistic moves”). Roles or functions are themselves individuated in terms of the structure of positive and negative uniformities generated in the natural order by such entries, exits, and moves.
Finally, Sellars proposed that what makes an entity a person is its membership in a community whose most general common intentions fundamentally define the structure of norms and values in terms of which the cognitive and moral conduct of those members comes to be mutually recognized and appraised. He consequently concluded that only by enriching the scientific image with a functionally interpreted language of intentions can one complete “the task of showing that categories pertaining to man as a person who finds himself confronted by standards…can be reconciled with the idea that man is what science says he is.”
Sellars’s major published works, in addition to the essays mentioned above, include Science, Perception, and Reality (1963), Philosophical Perspectives (1967), Science and Metaphysics: Variations on Kantian Themes (1968), Naturalism and Ontology (1979), and “Foundations for a Metaphysics of Pure Process” (1981).
