Yang Zhu, Wade-Giles romanization Yang Chu,  (born 440, China—died 360? bce, China), Chinese philosopher traditionally associated with extreme egoism but better understood as an advocate of naturalism. He may also have been the first Chinese philospher to discuss human nature (xing; literally “natural tendencies”).
When asked whether he would surrender merely one hair from his body in order to save humanity, Yang Zhu replied that “mankind is surely not to be helped by a single hair.” The Confucian philosopher Mencius (Mengzi; c. 371–289 bce), who promoted a conception of society and government based on family ties, condemned Yang’s doctrines of keeping one’s nature intact and protecting one’s body as an example of radical individualism that subverted the natural order of human relationships. Confucian tradition, the state orthodoxy from the Han dynasty (206 bce–220 ce) through the Qing dynasty (1644–1911/12), sustained Mencius’s critique.
Yang Zhu’s naturalism is evident in his belief in giving life “its free course” while “neither checking nor obstructing it.” Yang felt that human beings should live pleasurably, which for him implied a life in which both selfish inaction and selfless intervention in human affairs would be contrary extremes; instead, one should lead a natural life by cultivating and following one’s innate natural tendencies. Yang’s purported refusal to save the world by sacrificing one hair did not promote the principle of “everyone for himself,” as Mencius believed. Rather, Yang asserted that intentional social actions, regardless of motivation, disrupt and divert the natural course of one’s life and result in more harm than good.
Little is known about him beyond the information provided in several sources that mention his teachings, most notably the seventh chapter of the Daoist work Liezi, which is attributed to a philosopher of that name (flourished 4th century bce) but dates in its current form to about the 4th century ce. His thought was also an apparent influence on some of the later chapters of the philosophical and literary classic the Zhuangzi, which is attributed to a Daoist sage of that name (flourished 4th century bce).
