Zhou Dunyi, Wade-Giles romanization Chou Dun-i, also called Zhou Lianxi,  (born 1017, Yingdao [now in Daoxian, Hunan province], China—died  1073, Lushan, Jianxi province), Chinese philosopher considered the most important precursor of Neo-Confucianism, the ethical and metaphysical system that became the officially sponsored mode of thought in China for almost 1,000 years. Ideas he derived from Neo-Daoism led him to a reformulation of Confucianism.
Zhou was born into a highly influential official family and served in high governmental capacities throughout most of his life. He successively held the posts of magistrate, prefectural staff supervisor, professor of the directorate of education, and assistant prefect before resigning from office only a year before he died. He pursued his philosophical speculations while performing official duties.
In his reformulation of Confucianism, Zhou drew from Daoist doctrines and elaborated on the Yijing (“Book of Changes”). One of his two major works was the short treatise Taijitushuo (“Explanation of the Diagram of the Great Ultimate”), in which he developed a metaphysics based on the idea that “the many are [ultimately] one, and the one is actually differentiated into the many.” Zhou combined Daoist schema of the universe with the Yijing’s concept of an evolutionary process of creation: originating from the Great Ultimate (which is simultaneously the Non-Ultimate) are yin (tranquillity) and yang (movement). The interactions of yin and yang then give rise to the Five Elements (fire, earth, water, metal, and wood), and the integration and union of all of the preceding entities give rise to the male and female elements, which in turn are the cause of the production and evolution of all things. According to Zhou, human beings receive all the aforementioned qualities and forces in their “highest excellence,” and when man reacts to the external phenomena thus created, the distinction between good and evil emerges in his thought and conduct.
In the longer treatise entitled Tongshu (“Explanatory Text”), Zhou’s restatement and reinterpretation of Confucian doctrines laid the basis for the ethics of later Neo-Confucianism. According to Zhou, the sage, or superior man, reacts to external phenomena according to the principles of propriety, humanity, righteousness, wisdom, faithfulness, and tranquillity. Zhou viewed sincerity as the foundation of moral nature, the source of the ability to distinguish good from evil, and thus also of the ability to perfect oneself.
Zhou’s grounding of Confucian ethics in an impressive metaphysical scheme had a reviving and purifying influence on Neo-Confucianism. Zhou laid the foundation for the more systematic exposition of Neo-Confucianism provided by his later disciples, especially Zhu Xi (1130–1200). Because of his efforts the Yijing was revered as a great Confucian classic by Zhu and other Neo-Confucianists of the late Song dynasty.
