Zisi, Wade-Giles romanization Tzu Ssu, also called Kong Ji,  (born 483—died  402 bce), Chinese philosopher and grandson of Confucius (551–479 bce). Varying traditional accounts state that Zisi, who studied under Confucius’s pupil Zengzi, taught either Mencius (Mengzi)—the “second sage” of Confucianism—or Mencius’s teacher. Texts dating to about the 2nd and the 4th centuries bce, discovered at archaeological sites in Mawangdui (1973) and Guodian (1993), respectively, suggest evidence for a “school of Zisi.”
According to tradition, Zisi composed the Zhongyong, which was incorporated as a chapter of the Liji (“Record of Rites”) during the Han dynasty (206 bce–220 ce). The great Song dynasty (960–1279) neo-Confucian philosopher Zhu Xi (1130–1200) later included the Zhongyong among the Four Books, the texts foundational to the orthodox Confucian Way. The Zhongyong, which draws its title from words that individually denote “equilibrium” (zhong) and the “common” or “practical” (yong), illumines the proper way (dao) for exemplary persons (junzi) to act in the world.
Zisi is also credited with developing the theory of wuxing, the five modes (xing) of moral action through which exemplary persons comport themselves. The Wuxingpian (“Five Modes of Proper Conduct”), a previously lost document found during the Mawangdui and Guodian excavations and attributed by many scholars to Zisi’s school, presents these modes as benevolence (ren), righteousness (yi), ritual propriety (li), wisdom (zhi), and sagacity (sheng). Mencius adapted the first four as the “four sprouts” (siduan) of virtue in the human heart-and-mind. Wuxing theory gained popularity and influence after the alchemist Zou Yan (340–260? bce), perhaps independently of Zisi’s school, developed the theory as the Five Phases of cosmic generation and transformation: wood (mu), fire (huo), earth (tu), metal (jin), and water (shui). The neo-Confucian philosopher Zhou Dunyi (1017–73) reconnected this cosmological scheme to a moral vision when he associated the Five Phases with five virtues: the first four of the virtues recognized by Zisi and Mencius, together with fidelity (xin).
