net,   an open fabric of thread, cord, or wire, the intersections of which are looped or knotted so as to form a mesh. Nets are primarily used for fishing.
The early stages in the manufacture and use of nets are difficult to trace because materials were perishable and tools simple, but there is strong evidence that nets were employed by the hunter-gatherers of southern Europe from Upper Paleolithic times. Primitive netting was fabricated with thread or cord made from a wide range of vegetable fibres (bark, bast, leaves, roots, and stems) and animal tissues (hide, sinew, hair, intestine, and baleen). Modern nets, generally machine-made, are composed either of vegetable fibres (such as cotton, hemp, flax, manila, and sisal) or of man-made fibres (such as nylon, polyester, polypropylene, and polyethylene). The man-made fibres are inherently rotproof, whereas vegetable fibres must be treated against rot with substances such as tar.
The primary types of net used for fishing are drift nets, surrounding (encircling, or encompassing) nets, and trap nets. Drift nets—which include gill and trammel nets used at the surface and bottom-set nets used on the seabed—capture fish by entangling them. Gill and trammel nets are used principally to catch herring and salmon and are the most common drift nets. In commercial fishing, a long fleet of drift nets, often several miles in length, is suspended vertically with a line of corks or other floats at the top and a line of lead weights at the bottom. Adjustable floats maintain the net at the desired depth, and lighted marker buoys are placed at intervals. These nets are dropped from a ship at sunset because they can be seen by the fish if dropped during daylight. After the boat anchors, the net drifts all night. As a fish attempts to swim through a gill net, its head penetrates the mesh, and a section of twine slips under its gill cover, entangling it. The trammel net, on the other hand, is composed of two outer panels of large-mesh netting enclosing an inner panel of finer netting. It entangles the fish in pockets formed by the passing of the inner net through the mesh of the outer net.
Surrounding nets are fine, heavy nets that capture fish by encircling them. Seine nets, trawls, dredges, and long lines are all varieties of surrounding nets. Of these, the most widely used are the seine and the trawl. Beach, or drag, seines can be hauled onto a beach with their contents; others, called purse seines, are operated from boats in deep water far from the shore. A steel cable that runs through rings at the bottom of the purse seine is pulled up to close the net. Seine nets (also known as ring, or round, nets) are used to catch sardines, herring, pilchards, salmon, and tuna. The other principal form of surrounding net is the trawl, a bag-shaped net that is dragged by a specialized vessel (trawler) along the bottom of the sea or in midwater. Trawls are used to catch cod, haddock, plaice, and sole, which are trapped in the net when it is pulled to the surface.
Trap nets are stationary nets that are staked to the shore or in estuaries. They form a labyrinth-like chamber into which fish can easily enter, and from which they cannot easily escape. Salmon, trout, and eels are the principal catch.
Although nets are primarily used in commercial fishing, they also are used in land capture of animals (birds, butterflies, and much larger animals), and they have many uses in industry, sports, and horticulture.
