Abigail Hopper Gibbons, née Abigail Hopper,  (born December 7, 1801, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, U.S.—died January 16, 1893, New York, New York),  American social reformer, remembered especially for her activism in the cause of prison reform.
Abigail Hopper was born into a pious Quaker family with a deep tradition of good works, which was reflected throughout her life in her devotion to social causes. She attended Friends’ schools and in 1821 established her own school for Quaker children. In 1830 she moved to New York City and became a teacher in a Quaker school. In February 1833 she married James S. Gibbons, a Quaker merchant of substantial means; they lived in Philadelphia until 1835 and thereafter in New York City. They were active abolitionists and leading members of the Manhattan Anti-Slavery Society, and their home became a refuge for runaway slaves. In 1842 the Friends Meeting in New York disowned Abigail Gibbons’s father and husband for their abolitionist activities, whereupon she resigned from the antislavery society.
Other causes attracted her support, including temperance, abolition of capital punishment, relief of the poor, and, especially, prison reform. Gibbons became a leading figure in the female department of the Prison Association of New York, founded in 1845 by her father and others, and in 1846 she was elected to a committee of women in charge of a halfway house (later the Isaac T. Hopper Home, named for her father) for discharged women prisoners. She continued to be active in the female department long after its reorganization as the independent Women’s Prison Association and Home in 1853. In 1859 she became president of the German Industrial School. She was also a frequent visitor to the New York City children’s asylum on Randall’s Island. For nearly four years during the American Civil War, she worked as a volunteer nurse in army camps and hospitals around Washington, D.C., and during that time she was noted for her outspoken criticism of army medical management and practice.
After the war Gibbons resumed her connections with the Women’s Prison Association, of which she became president, and with the Hopper Home, and over the next several years she often lobbied the state legislature for financial support. She founded the Labor and Aid Society to help veterans find work and to provide relief to war widows and orphans. In 1873 she helped found the New York Diet Kitchen Association, which, upon a physician’s prescription, provided food to the ailing poor. She also helped establish the Protestant Asylum for Infants and was president of the New York Committee for the Prevention of State Regulation of Vice, established in opposition to proposals to license prostitution. She was in large part responsible for the legislation that created a women’s reformatory in New York City in 1892.
