Alfred Milner, Viscount Milner, in full Alfred Milner, Viscount Milner of Saint James’s and Cape Town, also called (1901–02) Baron Milner, or (1895–1901) Sir Alfred Milner,  (born March 23, 1854, Giessen, Hesse-Darmstadt [Germany]—died May 13, 1925, Sturry Court, near Canterbury, Kent, Eng.), able but inflexible British administrator whose pursuit of British suzerainty while he was high commissioner in South Africa and governor of the Cape Colony helped to bring about the South African War (1899–1902).
Milner was of German and English ancestry. A brilliant student, he won numerous scholarships at Oxford and became a fellow of New College (1872). In 1881 he began to practice law but turned to journalism, working on the Pall Mall Gazette. Defeated as a Liberal candidate for Parliament (1885), he became the private secretary of the chancellor of the Exchequer, George Goschen. As an administrator, he served with distinction in Egypt (1889–92) and as chairman of the Board of Inland Revenue (1892–97), for which he was knighted in 1895. In 1892 he wrote England and Egypt.
An ardent imperialist, Milner in 1897 became high commissioner in South Africa and governor of the Cape Colony. With Britain and the Transvaal close to conflict, his was the most critical post in the empire. The Transvaal’s president, Paul Kruger, had become deeply mistrustful after the abortive Jameson Raid (Dec. 29, 1895) into Boer territory. Thus, when Kruger was reelected in February 1898, Milner concluded that “there is no way out of the political troubles of South Africa except for reform in the Transvaal, or war.” Milner’s idea of reform was to secure justice for the Uitlanders (British residents in the Transvaal) by demanding full citizenship rights for them after five years’ residence. During the futile negotiations at the Bloemfontein Conference (May–June 1899), Kruger was prepared to bargain, but Milner was not. The Transvaal government made further concessions, but by this time Milner had determined that British supremacy in Southern Africa should be asserted by force; hence, he remained intransigent. After delivering an ultimatum, the two Boer republics, the Orange Free State and the Transvaal, declared war on Britain on Oct. 11, 1899.
When Britain annexed the Orange Free State and the Transvaal in 1901 during the war, Milner left his post as governor of the Cape and took over as administrator of those two Boer territories. Retaining the office of high commissioner, he and the military commander, Lord Kitchener, negotiated the Peace of Vereeniging (May 31, 1902) that ended both the war and the independence of the two Boer republics. For his services in Southern Africa, Milner was made a baron (1901) and a viscount (1902).
Milner and a group of young administrators known as “Milner’s Kindergarten” were largely in charge of the postwar settlement, and his administration undertook the task of resettling the Boers on their farms. Meanwhile, by encouraging economic growth, particularly in the gold-mining industry, Milner hoped to attract British immigrants to create a permanent majority, and he introduced a vigorous education program with all the instruction in English.
Milner’s schemes proved a failure. Though the Boers were successfully resettled, they reacted strongly against his insistence upon the use of English in the schools. During the long postwar depression, many British residents left the land, and few immigrants arrived. Milner persuaded the colonial secretary to permit the importation of Chinese labour for the short-handed gold-mining industry; public opinion in Britain was outraged, and the Conservatives were defeated in the British election of January 1906. The new Liberal government, moreover, rejected his plans for a constitution that would give the Transvaal a representative government rather than responsible self-rule.
Milner had already resigned his Southern African posts and returned to England (1905), where he intended to retire from public life, and he began work on The Nation and the Empire (1913). He became an active member of the House of Lords, however, and was a member of David Lloyd George’s World War I Cabinet from 1916 to 1921. In March 1918 he played a decisive part in setting up a unified Allied command under Marshal Foch of France. Appointed colonial secretary at the end of the war, Milner attended the peace conference. When the Cabinet rejected his proposal that Egypt be given a modified form of independence, Milner resigned in 1921. In 1923 he published Questions of the Hour. Milner’s viscountcy became extinct upon his death without an heir. The Milner Papers (1931–33) were edited by C. Headlam.
