Battle of Plattsburgh,  also called the Battle of Lake Champlain, (6–11 September 1814), battle during the War of 1812 that resulted in an important American victory on Lake Champlain that saved New York from possible British invasion via the Hudson River valley. In sum, a British army of some 14,000 troops under Sir George Prevost reached Plattsburgh in a joint land and sea operation. The American defenders included 1,500 regulars and about 2,500 militia commanded by Gen. Alexander Macomb, supported by a 14-ship American naval squadron under Commodore Thomas Macdonough. The outcome of the battle was determined on water when the British fleet was decisively defeated on 11 September. Deprived of naval support, the invading army was forced to retreat. The victory at Plattsburgh influenced the terms of the December peace drawn at the Treaty of Ghent, which ended the War of 1812.
With fresh reinforcements from Britain, Lieutenant General George Prevost, governor general of Canada, initiated his plan to seize the American base at Plattsburg, New York, and destroy the American fleet on Lake Champlain. Prevost’s objective was uncontested control of the lake.
To accomplish this, Prevost planned a joint land and lake attack. He advanced a British force of 10,350 along Lake Champlain’s south shore and on 6 September occupied Plattsburg, west of the Saranac River. Across the river were American defensive positions guarding the bridges. Offshore on the lake was anchored the American flotilla, commanded by Captain Thomas Macdonough: USS Saratoga (twenty-six guns), Eagle, Ticonderoga, and Preble, plus ten gunboats. Prevost’s assault was to be coordinated with an attack on Macdonough by Captain George Downie’s naval squadron: HMS Confidence (thirty-seven guns), Linnet, Chubb, and Finch, plus twelve gunboats.
Downie arrived on 11 September. He ordered his four ships abreast and sailed directly at the American line, firing his long-range guns. Macdonough’s guns were shorter range but heavier carronades. The wind died, disrupting Downie’s formation. When the starboard batteries of Saratoga and Eagle were damaged, Macdonough used anchors to swing the ships so that their port guns could fire broadsides. Downie was crushed and killed by a cannon, and the Confidence, badly hurt, soon surrendered. Ticonderoga and Preble forced Finch to beach, but Preble was heavily damaged. Chubb and Linnet did little and both struck their colors after being hit by several broadsides. Prevost watched the naval disaster and revoked his already on-going attack. The next day he withdrew his army back to Canada.
Losses: U.S., some 100 dead, 120 wounded; British, some 380 killed or wounded, more than 300 captured or deserted.
