Battle of Cowpens,  (January 17, 1781), in the American Revolution, brilliant American victory over a British force on the northern border of South Carolina that slowed Lord Cornwallis’s campaign to invade North Carolina. British casualties were estimated at about 600, whereas the Americans lost only 72.
From his headquarters at Charlotte, North Carolina, the new American commander in the South, Gen. Nathanael Greene, had divided his army and sent a force of 1,000 men under Gen. Daniel Morgan to the southwest to intercept Cornwallis’s advance. The two forces converged at Cowpens, an area so named because it was a well-known enclosed pasturing field for cows. There Morgan confronted about 1,150 troops under Col. Banastre Tarleton, who had intended to seize the strategic crossroads at Ninety Six, South Carolina. Morgan employed three progressively stronger defensive lines: a front line of skirmishers deployed behind trees, followed by Southern militia troops, and, finally, the regular Continental Army troops supported by Col. William Washington’s cavalry reserve, positioned out of sight of Tarleton’s forces.
Morgan’s strategy was particularly ingenious in its use of militia forces. Tension existed between militias and Continental troops throughout the Revolutionary War, because militia units tended to be less reliable in the face of British attacks than their Continental counterparts. Continental soldiers typically had longer service, regular training, and significantly more combat experience. By contrast, militias mustered for short durations, and their members performed best when campaigning close to home. Recognizing the militia troops’ limited tolerance for battle, Morgan directed them to fire two volleys and then withdraw behind the Continental lines. By providing a planned withdrawal, Morgan ensured that the militia would not break and flee. Morgan’s employment of Washington’s cavalry also surprised Tarleton’s mounted troops and disrupted the British charge against the Continentals. As the Continentals held the centre, the re-formed militia troops descended on the British left while Washington’s cavalry hit the British right flank. Morgan’s successful double envelopment routed the British, and the militia soldiers’ actions at Cowpens are generally credited with having ensured a rare American victory.
Not discouraged by what he described as a “very unexpected and severe blow,” Cornwallis pushed on into North Carolina. Morgan and his troops retreated deeper into North Carolina to rejoin Greene’s army.
