Battle of the Crater,  (30 July 1864), Union defeat in American Civil War  (1861–65), part of the Siege of Petersburg, Virginia. In the final year of the war, Union forces besieged the town of Petersburg, to the south of the Confederate capital of Richmond. But a well-conceived attempt to end the stalemate of trench warfare and break through Confederate defenses with gunpowder resulted in a tragic fiasco.
After his failure at the Battle of Cold Harbor (May 31–June 12), Union General Ulysses S. Grant sent his Army of the Potomac over the James River to attack Richmond from the south. He failed, however, to capture the important railhead at Petersburg. Confederate General Robert E. Lee rushed to strengthen its fortifications, forcing Grant to dig in for a siege. Having learned his lesson at Cold Harbor, Grant was in no mood to attempt a frontal assault on Confederate earthworks. He made it known that he was seeking alternatives.
Lieutenant Colonel Henry Pleasants, a mining engineer, came up with the idea of digging a mineshaft under Confederate lines and filling it with explosives. Not only would the explosion kill the defenders but it would also breach their front line. Pleasants and his miners dug a sloping tunnel 500 feet (150 m) long that ended in a large chamber. This was filled with 320 kegs of gunpowder that were then detonated at 4:44 AM on 30 July.
The explosion killed 352 Confederates and opened up a vast crater, 130 feet long, 60 feet wide, and 30 feet deep.  Noted a journalist who witnessed the blast, "Clods of earth weighing at least a ton, and cannon, and human forms, and gun-carriages, and small arms were all distinctly seen shooting upward in that fountain of horror."  The way was now clear for Union troops to pour into Petersburg, but the first soldiers to enter the crater decided it was a good place to dig a rifle pit, and stayed put. Within an hour Confederate troops had rallied their strength and begun to fire rifles and artillery down into the crater, killing hundreds of the trapped men. Union reinforcements also came under intense fire until all withdrew. The successful detonation had created a death trap.
Losses: Confederate, 361 dead, 727 wounded, 403 missing or captured of 6,100; Union, 504 dead, 1,881 wounded, 1,413 missing or captured of 8,500.
