Battle of Monocacy,  (July 9, 1864), American Civil War engagement fought on the banks of the Monocacy River near Frederick, Maryland, in which Confederate troops under Lieutenant General Jubal A. Early routed Union forces under Major General Lewis Wallace. Although the Union forces were defeated, the delay caused by the battle gave General Ulysses S. Grant time to send reinforcements for the defense of Washington, D.C. Of 6,050 Federal troops in the engagement, some 1,300 were killed, wounded, or missing in action. Of 14,000 Confederates involved, there were about 700 casualties.
Early left Richmond on June 13 under orders from General Robert E. Lee to drive Union forces out of the Shenandoah Valley and, in Early’s words, to “threaten” Washington. Early took his II Corps west to Lynchburg, Virginia, where he routed Union troops under Major General David Hunter. Early then moved north through the Shenandoah Valley. Picking up cavalry troops along the way, the Confederate force crossed the Potomac River into Maryland on July 5.
As Early’s men moved closer to Maryland, Wallace, who was the commander of the Middle Atlantic Department in Baltimore, received reports that an enemy force was heading toward Washington, which was lightly defended. On July 3 Wallace sent a brigade of troops to Monocacy Junction in Maryland, some 4 miles (6 km) south of Frederick. Wallace joined them in the early morning hours of July 6. The rest of his troops arrived that day. Nearly all were “hundred days” men who had recently joined the Union army to perform rear-echelon duties that were intended to free experienced troops to fight in the South.
Wallace arrayed the men on the Monocacy River’s eastern bank. Grant, encamped outside Richmond, Virginia, waited until July 6 to send troops to help Wallace. That day, at about 5 am, some 5,000 men under the command of Brigadier General James Brewerton Ricketts—two brigades of the Union army’s VI Corps’s Third Division—left their encampment outside Petersburg, Virginia, and boarded transport ships to Baltimore. They reached Baltimore in the late afternoon on July 7, boarded trains heading west, and arrived at Monocacy Junction on the morning of July 8.
The Battle of Monocacy began at around 6 am on Saturday, July 9. The initial fighting took place at the Baltimore Pike near a stone bridge that spanned the Monocacy River. The skirmishing there—on the northernmost edge of the Union line, which was some 3 miles (5 km) long—went on for about two hours. Wallace had six pieces of artillery. Early had nine batteries, at least 36 big guns, including 20 Napoleon (12-pound) howitzers. Skirmishing and artillery barrages continued intermittently all morning and into the afternoon.
During the height of the battle, Confederate Brigadier General “Tiger” John McCausland led his four Virginia cavalry regiments with as many as 1,000 men across the Monocacy. McCausland then ordered his men to dismount. He did not know that Ricketts had deployed a skirmish line behind a post-and-rail fence. Ricketts had his men hold their fire until the Confederates were within rifle range. The Confederates took many casualties in the deadly ambush, but they rallied and chased the Union men back.
The Battle of Monocacy ended around 4 pm when Confederate Major General John Brown Gordon’s men, aided immeasurably by artillery, flanked the last of Ricketts’s line of Union troops on the Georgetown Pike. When Wallace saw that Gordon’s troops had pushed Ricketts back, he ordered a retreat. Wallace believed that, by holding up Early for nearly an entire day, he had reached his goal of giving Grant time to move experienced troops up from Petersburg to defend Washington, D.C.
After Wallace and his surviving troops escaped, Early crossed the river and set up his headquarters at Monocacy Junction. “The Confederate victory,” Gordon wrote in his memoir, “was won at a fearful cost…but it was complete, and the way to Washington was opened for General Early’s march.”
Early rested his troops for one day at Monocacy and then led them on a march to Washington. They arrived at the outskirts of the city on July 11. Two days of intermittent skirmishing followed at Fort Stevens in the upper northwest portion of the city. Early broke off the fighting on July 13, 1864, and returned to Virginia.
