Battle of Manila Bay,  (May 1, 1898), defeat of the Spanish Pacific fleet by the U.S. Navy, resulting in the fall of the Philippines and contributing to the final U.S. victory in the Spanish-American War. The resounding American victory made Commodore George Dewey a national hero and helped establish the reputation of the United States as a major naval power.
On February 25, 1898, just 10 days after the destruction of the USS Maine in the harbour of Havana and well before a formal commencement of hostilities, the U.S. Asiatic Squadron under Commodore George Dewey was placed on alert and ordered to Hong Kong. After the United States declared war (April 25), Dewey was ordered to “capture or destroy the Spanish fleet” then in Philippine waters. The U.S. Navy was well trained and well supplied, largely through the energetic efforts of the young assistant secretary of the Navy, Theodore Roosevelt, who had selected Dewey for the command of the Asiatic Squadron. Dewey’s fleet consisted of four protected cruisers—USS Olympia (his flagship), USS Boston, USS Raleigh, and USS Baltimore—the gunboats USS Concord and USS Petrel, the armed revenue cutter USS Hugh McCulloch, and a pair of locally purchased British supply steamers. Dewey gathered his force at Mirs Bay (Dapeng Wan), northeast of Hong Kong, on April 27 and arrived off Luzon, in the Philippines, three days later.
Spanish Adm. Patricio Montojo had anchored his fleet to the east of Cavite in a general east-west line, keeping his broadside to the north. His force consisted of his flagship, the cruiser Reina Cristina; Castilla, an old wooden steamer which had to be towed; the protected cruisers Isla de Cuba and Isla de Luzon; and the gunboats Don Juan de Austria, Don Antonio de Ulloa, and Marques del Duero. Montojo was also supported by a shore battery of six guns at or near Cavite.
On the evening of April 30, Dewey passed into the Boca Grande, a wide channel into Manila Bay that was less used than the Boca Chica, the main shipping corridor that ran north of Corregidor Island. This allowed him to avoid the Spanish batteries on Corregidor that oversaw Boca Chica. Dewey addressed concerns about mines in the channel by leading the advance in the USS Olympia, and at midnight he passed El Fraile, a small fortified island, from which two shots were fired at him. He was also shelled by the batteries at Cavite.
When Dewey sighted the Spanish fleet to the south, he ordered his supply ships and the USS Hugh McCulloch out into the bay and advanced in column with the USS Olympia, USS Baltimore, USS Raleigh, USS Petrel, USS Concord, and USS Boston at 400-yard (366-metre) intervals. About 5:40 am, when he was within 5,500 yards (roughly 5,000 metres) of the Spanish force, Dewey issued a command to Capt. Charles Gridley of the USS Olympia: “You may fire when you are ready, Gridley.”
The American ships made repeated east-to-west passes along the Spanish line, unloading their port batteries and gradually decreasing their distance to 2,000 yards (1,829 metres). At 7:00 am the Spanish flagship attempted to come out and engage at short range, but it was driven back by the American fire. The Spanish squadron was now in very bad condition, but the seriousness of its plight was not fully known to the American commander. At 7:35 am Dewey withdrew, gave his men breakfast, and had a consultation of commanding officers. Before he re-engaged at 11:16 am the Reina Cristina and Castilla had broken into flames. Thus, the remainder of the action consisted of silencing the shore batteries at Cavite and completing the destruction and demoralization of the smaller Spanish ships, a task that passed to the USS Petrel. Dewey took possession of Cavite, paroled its garrison, and awaited the arrival of a land force to capture Manila.
On May 4 Dewey dispatched a telegram that was received in Washington on May 7: “I control bay completely, and can take city at any time, but I have not sufficient men to hold.” The cruiser USS Charleston and the steamer USS Peking, with ammunition, supplies, and troops, were to be dispatched to Manila at once. Maj. Gen. Wesley Merritt, who was given command of the ground operation, initially requested a force of about 14,000 men but later increased this to 20,000. On May 25 Brig. Gen. T.M. Anderson and the 2,491 U.S. troops under his command sailed in three transports from San Francisco and joined a convoy with the USS Charleston at Honolulu.
While the Americans were massing their forces, Filipino resistance leader Emilio Aguinaldo announced the renewal of his struggle against Spain. Aguinaldo had been living in self-imposed exile as part of an agreement with Spanish authorities, but he reached out to the Americans and offered his assistance in their military campaign. Conveyed from Hong Kong by an American vessel, Aguinaldo landed at Cavite on May 19, rallied his supporters, and promptly proceeded to capture several towns south of Manila. He declared the independence of the Philippines on June 12 and was proclaimed president of the Philippine Republic. Aguinaldo’s actions were not sanctioned by the Americans, but there was little they could do to slow his progress. At the head of a sizable insurgent army, Aguinaldo instituted a close siege of Manila.
On June 20 the USS Charleston convoy paused to shell and take possession of the island of Guam before continuing on its journey and arriving in Manila Bay on June 30. A second detachment, 3,586 troops under Brig. Gen. F.V. Greene, arrived on July 17, and Merritt, who had been appointed governor-general, reached Manila Bay on July 25. Five more transports, carrying 4,847 men, arrived on July 31, bringing the total American troop strength at Manila to nearly 11,000, with 5,000 more on the way. Merritt immediately moved his forces from Cavite and entrenched within 1,000 yards (914 metres) of the Spanish position at Manila. On the night of July 31, the Spanish subjected the American lines to intense rifle and artillery fire, killing 10 and wounding 43.
For the next few nights firing was frequent from the Spanish lines. On August 7 a joint note from Dewey and Merritt was sent to Spanish Gov. Fermín Jáudenes, giving him 48 hours to evacuate noncombatants from Manila. Jáudenes replied that he was surrounded by Aguinaldo’s army and that there was no place of refuge for the sick and for the women and children. A second joint note demanding surrender was declined by the Spanish commander, who offered to refer it to Madrid. This was refused, and preparations were made for an attack.
There were 13,000 Spanish troops within the city fortifications, but, with Dewey’s fleet controlling the bay and with the beleaguering force of Americans and insurgents ashore, resistance was hopeless. When the combined ground and naval assault was made on August 13, there was no great resistance, and a white flag was hoisted at 11:00 am, roughly an hour and a half after the fleet opened fire. A formal capitulation was signed the following day.
The American victory at the Battle of Manila Bay was complete. All the Spanish ships were sunk or destroyed, and the damage done to Dewey’s Asiatic Squadron was negligible. Moreover, the annihilation of the Spanish fleet signaled the end of Spanish rule in the Philippines. Into this vacuum rushed the United States, a nascent colonial power, and the Filipino independence movement, which exerted effective control over the countryside. Conflict between the two was inevitable, and the Philippine-American War would rage until 1902.
In the initial naval engagement, the Spanish lost 167 killed and 214 wounded, out of a total of 1,875. The Americans had 7 slightly wounded out of 1,748 men in action. The total loss of the Americans during the whole Manila campaign was 20 killed and 105 wounded.
