Battle of the Wilderness,  (May 5–7, 1864), in the American Civil War, the first battle of Union General Ulysses S. Grant’s "Overland Campaign," a relentless drive to defeat once and for all Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee’s Army of Northern Virginia and capture the South’s capital at Richmond, Virginia. Although a bloody and inconclusive encounter resulting in a high body count, the battle put the Confederates on the defensive and set the stage for the aggressive war of attrition that followed, ultimately spelling the South’s defeat.
The battle took place in an area of almost impenetrable scrub and rough terrain known as the Wilderness of Spotsylvania, a few miles to the west of where the Battle of Chancellorsville had been fought a year earlier. The Union Army of the Potomac, under the command of General George Meade but taking orders from Grant, crossed the Rapidan River on 4 May and converged at the Wilderness Tavern on the main turnpike.
Meade had no wish to fight in the wooded Wilderness, unlike his Confederate opponent, General Lee, who, massively outnumbered and outgunned, preferred to fight in among trees as these would prevent Grant from using his artillery effectively and provide cover for his smaller force. The unfavorable terrain reduced the two-day battle to a series of bloody small-scale skirmishes, each scene obscured by smoke from gunpowder and the fires lit by exploding shells in the dry woods. Both sides endured heavy casualties, and Confederate General James Longstreet was hit by friendly fire only four miles (6.5 km) from where General "Stonewall" Jackson had been similarly hit the previous year. Horrifically, a brush fire broke out between the two armies on the night of 6 May and killed many of the soldiers still lying wounded on the battlefield. On 7 May, further skirmishes took place before Grant saw the futility of further hostilities in that area and moved on to do battle at Spotsylvania Court House, nearer Richmond. Although inconclusive, the battle benefited the Union side because Lee’s casualties were high in proportion to the size of his army.
Losses: Union, 2,246 dead, 12,037 wounded of 101,895; Confederate, 1,495 dead, 7,928 wounded of 61,025.
