Battle of Columbus,  also known as the Burning of Columbus or the Columbus Raid, (8–9 March 1916).  In need of supplies during the Mexican Revolution, Pancho Villa led his men in a raid across the border into the United States, at Columbus, New Mexico. The raid quickly escalated into a full-scale battle when they encountered the U.S. cavalry. After sustaining huge losses, Villa was forced to retreat to Mexico.
By late 1915, Pancho Villa had lost much of the widespread support he had enjoyed at the start of the Mexican Revolution. Having lost a series of battles, Villa and the remaining 500 soldiers of his Army of the North were desperate for food, horses, and weapons.
In March 1916, Villa planned a raid on the military garrison in the U.S. town of Columbus, New Mexico. The small town lay only a couple of miles across the border. Villa sent spies to gather information, and they returned to report that the garrison consisted of only fifty men. On the night of 8 March, Villa led the Army of the North into Columbus and attacked the garrison in the early hours of 9 March. Villa’s men also began looting and setting fire to houses in the town. However, rather than the fifty U.S. soldiers that Villa had expected, there were actually 350 soldiers, including the 13th U.S. Cavalry, stationed at the garrison.
The raid quickly became a fierce battle when U.S. troops, led by Lieutenant Ralph Lucas, fought back from the garrison with machine guns. A second detachment of U.S. soldiers, commanded by Lieutenant James Castleman, launched a counterattack, which forced Villa and his men to retreat. They were pursued by U.S. cavalrymen back across the border into Mexico. The raid was a disaster for the Mexicans, with Villa’s forces suffering huge casualties. In response to the attack, U.S. forces later invaded Mexico at Carrizal, in an attempt to capture Villa.
Losses: Villa’s Army of the North, 190 casualties of 500;  U.S., 7 dead, 5 wounded of 350, plus 8 civilians dead,  2 civilians wounded.
