Battle of Spotsylvania Court House,  (8–21 May 1864), Union failure to smash or outflank Confederate forces defending Richmond, Virginia, during the American Civil War (1861–65).  A lull might have been expected after the Battle of the Wilderness (5–7 May), with both Union and Confederate armies exhausted and disorganized. But General Ulysses S. Grant pressed on relentlessly with his offensive. A day later he met General Robert E. Lee’s army again, 10 miles (16 km) to the southeast at Spotsylvania Court House.
On the night of 7 May, hours after fighting ended at the Wilderness, Grant began moving his army forward to resume its advance. He aimed to take the crossroads at Spotsylvania, cutting between Lee’s army and Richmond. Lee anticipated this move and reacted swiftly. After cavalry charges on 8 May, Lee had his troops the dig a line of field fortifications some 4 miles (6.5 km) long north of Spotsylvania. Its only weakness was an exposed salient known as the Mule Shoe.
After initial probing skirmishes, Union forces attacked the Mule Shoe on 10 May. An assault by resolute troops charging at a run penetrated the Confederate lines, but the Union soldiers were driven back by counterattacks at the end of the day. As Grant shifted his forces in preparation for another assault, Lee misunderstood the Union activity and pulled back his artillery to meet a potential flanking maneuver. As a result, Grant’s attack on 12 May was initially a complete success, breaking through the Confederate lines before Lee rushed in troops to plug the gap. The battle raged into the night, the intense firepower of both sides flattening the landscape as soldiers engaged in hand-to-hand fighting at a position that became infamous as "Bloody Angle."
In the early hours of 13 May, Lee’s men completed a fallback trench and retreated to it, ceding the salient to Grant’s troops. A Union attack on this new line on 18 May was met with heavy artillery fire and made no impact.  Maneuvering continued until 21 May, when the stage was set for the nine-month Siege of Petersburg.
Losses: Union, 18,000 casualties of 100,000 soldiers; Confederate, 12,000 casualties of 62,000.
