Battle of Copenhagen,  (April 2, 1801), British naval victory over Denmark in the Napoleonic Wars. There were several reasons for the animosity between the countries.  The armed-neutrality treaty of 1794 between Denmark and Sweden, to which Russia and Prussia adhered in 1800, was considered a hostile act by England.  Conversely, while at war with France during the Napoleonic Wars, Britain’s naval operations against French trade also hurt neutral nations’ shipping. Such hostility brought Britain into conflict with Denmark in 1801, resulting in a successful British attack on Copenhagen and, shortly after, the demise of an anti-British alliance.
In early 1801, Russia, Prussia, Sweden, and Denmark formed a coalition to protect their own shipping and cut Britain’s supplies from the Baltic of timber and other products vital to the navy. The British sent a fleet to break the coalition. Admiral Hyde Parker, a suitably senior but rather unenterprising officer, was in charge; Adm. Horatio Nelson was his second in command.
The fleet reached Denmark on 21 March. After fruitless negotiations, Nelson, on board HMS Elephant, led twelve ships of the line on an attack on the Danish ships and land batteries near Copenhagen on 2 April. The plan was bold because the British were moving into shallow waters without proper charts; three British ships ran aground in the early stages. Parker thought Nelson’s force was taking unacceptable losses and ordered him to retreat. Nelson, who was blind in one eye from an old wound, made a joke about not being able to see the signal flags and fought on, thereby ignoring Parker’s orders. By late afternoon, the Danish were taking a battering, and the British were in a strong position. They reopened negotiations—with eventual success—and were aided by the news that Czar Paul of Russia had been assassinated; his successor Alexander was known to be more pro-British.
The Battle of Copenhagen is often listed as one of Nelson’s great victories; it was scarcely that—the Danes were far from beaten—but it did help end an important threat to British power.
Losses: Danish, 12 ships captured or destroyed, 1,700 dead or wounded men, 2,000 men captured; British, several ships grounded but later refloated, 1,000 dead or wounded.
