Carl von Clausewitz, in full Carl Philipp Gottlieb von Clausewitz,  (born June 1, 1780, Burg, near Magdeburg, Prussia [Germany]—died Nov. 16, 1831, Breslau, Silesia [now Wrocław, Pol.]), Prussian general and military thinker, whose work Vom Kriege (1832; On War) has become one of the most respected classics on military strategy.
Clausewitz enlisted in the Prussian army in 1792, and in 1793–95 he took part (and was commissioned) in the campaigns of the First Coalition against Revolutionary France. In 1801 he gained admission into the Institute for Young Officers in Berlin, an event that proved to be a turning point in his life.
During his three years at the institute, Clausewitz became the closest protégé of Gerhard Johann David von Scharnhorst, the institute’s head. The broad curriculum, coupled with Clausewitz’s extensive reading, expanded his horizons dramatically. His basic ideas regarding war and its theory were shaped at that time. After finishing first in his class, Clausewitz was on the road leading to the centre of the political and military events during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars, the reform of the Prussian army that followed Prussia’s defeat, and the restoration of European monarchies following the defeat of Napoleon.
In 1804 Clausewitz was appointed adjutant to Prince August Ferdinand of Prussia. In this capacity, he took part in the Battle of Jena-Auerstädt (1806). In the wake of Prussia’s catastrophic defeat by Napoleon, he and the prince fell into French captivity. With the Prussian army demolished and the prince captured, Prussia was forced to give up half of its territory in the concluding peace treaty. After their release at the end of 1807, Clausewitz joined the group of young and middle-rank officers around Scharnhorst, who struggled to reform the Prussian army. The reformers believed that Prussia’s only hope of survival in the age of mass enlistment, as introduced by Revolutionary France, was in adopting similar institutions. However, such a modernization of society, state, and army was widely resisted among the aristocratic elite, which feared an erosion of its status. During these years, Clausewitz married Countess Marie von Bruhl, with whom he formed a very close but childless union. Clausewitz was ill at ease in society and more in his element among a small circle of fellow military reformers.
In the war ministry that was formed, headed by Scharnhorst, Clausewitz served as his mentor’s assistant and was then simultaneously appointed a major in the general staff, instructor at the new Officers’ Academy, and military tutor to the Prussian crown prince. Like his friends in the reform circle, he looked for any opportunity to wage a national war of liberation against France, and he was repeatedly frustrated by the king’s hesitation to act against the much superior French power. In 1812, when Prussia was forced to join Napoleon’s invasion of Russia, Clausewitz, like some of his comrades, resigned his commission and joined the Russian service. He served in various staff posts, and during the catastrophic French retreat he was instrumental in generating the chain of events that ultimately drove Prussia to change sides. Clausewitz took part in the final campaigns that brought down Napoleon in 1813–15. During the Waterloo campaign, he served as chief of staff to one of the four Prussian army corps.
With the coming of peace and the setting in of the reaction to the terms of the treaty in Prussia, which clouded his career, Clausewitz increasingly concentrated on his intellectual interests. He had been thinking and writing on war and its theory since his days in the Institute for Young Officers. His tenure as head of the Military Academy at Berlin (1818–30) left him plenty of time to work on his major study On War. Appointed chief of staff to the Prussian army that prepared for intervention against the Polish revolt of 1831, Clausewitz died of cholera that year. His unfinished work, together with his historical studies, was posthumously published by his widow.
Clausewitz’s ideas were shaped by the coming together of two revolutions that dominated his life and times. Intellectually, he expressed in the military field the sweeping Romantic reaction against the ideas of the Enlightenment, a reaction that had been brewing in Germany since the late 18th century and that had turned into a tidal wave by the beginning of the 19th century in response to French Revolutionary ideas and imperialism. In the spirit of their time, the military thinkers of the Enlightenment had believed that war ought to come under the domination of reason. A comprehensive theory based on rules and principles ought to be formulated and, wherever possible, given a mathematical form. Against this Clausewitz argued, in line with Romantic critics, that human affairs and war in particular were very different from natural phenomena and the sciences. He ruled out any rigid system of rules and principles for the conduct of war, celebrating instead the free operation of genius, changing historical conditions, moral forces, and the elements of uncertainty and chance. These elements, especially the enemy’s counteractions, give war a nonlinear logic. Every simple action encounters “friction”—in Clausewitz’s borrowed metaphor from mechanics—which slows it down and may frustrate it.
At the same time, Clausewitz believed that a general theory of war was attainable and that it should express war’s immutable essence, nature, or concept and guide all military action. Here is the second revolution that dominated his life. His generation witnessed the collapse of the limited warfare of ancien régimes in the face of the all-out effort and strategy of destruction, or total war, unleashed by the French Revolution and Napoleon. While very conscious of the changing social and political conditions that had brought about this transformation of warfare, Clausewitz, like his contemporaries, held that the new, sweeping way of war making, culminating in the decisive battle and the overthrow of the enemy country, reflected the true nature of war and the correct method of its conduct. He had expressed this view in his writings through 1827, when the first six books of On War (out of an eventual eight) had been completed.
However, in 1827 Clausewitz began to have serious doubts about whether total war was really the sole legitimate type of war. He came to the conclusion that there were in fact two types of war, total (or absolute) and limited, and that it was, above all, political aims and requirements that imposed themselves on war and dictated its intensity—hence his famous dictum, “War is a continuation of state policy with the admixture of other means.” In the light of these new ideas, Clausewitz added the last two books of On War and started to revise the first six. He died while working on Book One, however. Thus, the manuscript remained as an incomplete draft—Books Two to Six expressed his old ideas regarding the supremacy of the decisive battle and total war, whereas the beginning and end of On War proclaimed the subservience of war to politics and consequently the legitimacy of limited war. It was in this form that Clausewitz’s widow published the manuscript after his death.
This curious development of Clausewitz’s work has had a profound effect on the reception of his ideas. Since later readers have been largely unaware of the reasons for the glaring inconsistency in On War, while being impressed by its sophistication, they have tended to concentrate on those ideas that most accorded with the spirit of their own times. For decades after Clausewitz’s death, On War remained a respected but little-known work. However, Prussia’s victories in the German Wars of Unification—orchestrated by a self-declared disciple of Clausewitz, Chief of Staff Helmuth von Moltke—made Clausewitz the most celebrated strategic authority by the late 19th century. It was Clausewitz’s emphasis on morale, concentration of force, the decisive battle, and the complete overthrow of the enemy that were highlighted in the intellectual climate of that time. However, once disillusionment with total war had set in after the two world wars of the 20th century, and with the advent of nuclear weapons, interpretations completely reversed themselves. Strategic thinkers of the nuclear age now picked up the ideas found in the later stage of Clausewitz’s work regarding limited war and the careful political direction of war. A “Clausewitz renaissance” in academia and the armed forces throughout the West ensued. In the communist camp as well—following Vladimir Lenin’s perusal of Clausewitz’s work during World War I—commentators praised Clausewitz’s understanding of the political context of war, while maintaining that his grasp of the social context did not go far enough and while also criticizing his nationalism.
