Charles William Ferdinand of Brunswick, German Karl Wilhelm Ferdinand,  (born Oct. 9, 1735, Wolfenbüttel, Lower Saxony [Germany]—died Nov. 10, 1806, Ottensen, near Hamburg), duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg-Wolfenbüttel, Prussian field marshal, and an enlightened ruler. Though he was Frederick II the Great’s nephew and favourite disciple, Charles proved to be less than successful in his military career, being defeated by Revolutionary France at Valmy (1792) and at Auerstädt (1806), at which time the whole Frederician military-political system collapsed and Prussia became a French dependency.
The son of Charles I of Brunswick-Lüneburg and Philippina Charlotte, a sister of Frederick II of Prussia, Charles was educated in the classical, rationalist tradition. Distinguishing himself in the Seven Years’ War, which involved the struggle for supremacy in Germany between Austria and Prussia, he became Frederick the Great’s favourite. After inheriting the small, debt-ridden duchy in 1780, Charles set out to reform his territories. He reorganized the tax structure, set his finances in order, and reformed the educational system. Most of these efforts were thwarted, however, by the determined resistance of the clergy and nobility.
Made a Prussian field marshal in 1787, Charles defeated the Dutch democratic Patriots in a campaign that returned the stadtholder William V of Orange to power. His reputation as a field commander established, Charles in 1792 reluctantly accepted command of the Prussian army against Revolutionary France. His cultural tastes being decidedly French, Charles was not unsympathetic to the Revolution and had in fact been approached by France to reorganize that country’s army. Only reluctantly did he sign the punitive “manifesto” drafted by an émigré, which warned that Paris would be subjected to exemplary punishment if Louis XVI and his family were harmed (see French Revolution). This provoked the Parisians to storm the Tuileries and humiliate the royal family. It also swelled the ranks of the French army, which halted Charles’s advance at Valmy, 100 miles (160 km) east of Paris. The next year he defeated the French several times in Germany, but he retired after incessant quarrels with King Frederick William III. Recalled to the Prussian high command in 1806, he was decisively defeated at the Battle of Auerstädt, which sealed the triumph of Napoleonic France over Prussia. Charles himself was mortally wounded and died shortly afterward.
