Civil war,  a violent conflict between a state and one or more organized non-state actors in the state’s territory. Civil wars are thus distinguished from interstate conflicts (in which states fight other states), violent conflicts or riots not involving states (sometimes labeled intercommunal conflicts), and state repression against individuals who cannot be considered an organized or cohesive group, including genocides, and similar violence by non-state actors, such as terrorism or violent crime.
The definition of civil war clearly encompasses many different forms of conflict. Some analysts distinguish between civil wars in which insurgents seek territorial secession or autonomy and conflicts in which insurgents aim for control of the central government. Conflicts over government control may involve insurgents originating from within the centre or state apparatus, as in military coups, or challengers from outside the political establishment. Other analysts distinguish between ethnic civil wars, in which the insurgents and individuals in control of the central government have separate ethnic identities, and revolutionary conflicts, in which insurgents aim for major social transformation. Colonial conflicts are sometimes singled out as a type distinct from civil wars on a state’s core territory. Notwithstanding those distinctions, a given civil war will often combine several elements. For example, insurgencies may be both ethnic and ideologically based, and the insurgents’ aims can shift over time from secession for a limited territory to controlling the entire state.
Armed challenges to state authority are as old as states themselves. Despite numerous historical accounts of civil wars, however, there is little empirical data on civil conflicts prior to 1945. Although there have been relatively few interstate wars since then, civil wars have been common. Whereas interstate conflicts tend to be short, civil wars often persist for a long time, are less likely to be settled by formal agreements, and are much more likely to recur. Many experts regarded the outbreak of new civil conflicts immediately following the Cold War as evidence that the world would be more turbulent and violent after a long period of stability based on the strategy of nuclear deterrence adopted by the United States and the Soviet Union. Yet the number of new civil wars actually declined in relative terms after the initial peak after the Cold War. The specific causes that may underlie that decline remain disputed, and the number of ongoing civil wars remains high in absolute terms.
Civil wars are generally less severe than interstate wars, as measured in direct battle deaths. However, civil wars have been more frequent and lengthier, and the great majority of the recorded deaths in battle since the Cold War stem from civil wars. Furthermore, war can have a substantial indirect impact on human welfare beyond the direct loss of life. Studies have indicated that countries experiencing civil war suffer a pronounced decline in gross domestic product and never recover their earlier economic-growth trajectory. Civil wars also disrupt trade and investment and leave large social legacies in unemployed former combatants and displaced individuals. The negative consequences of civil war are not limited to the countries that experience them: neighbouring countries also suffer negative economic impacts and may be more prone to violence themselves.
Most civil wars take place within relatively poorer societies. Early contributions to the study of violence within societies tended to focus on economic deprivation and grievances as key motives. The American political scientist Ted Gurr, for example, highlighted inequality and how groups may resort to rebellion if they are dissatisfied with their current economic status relative to their aspirations. The literature on nationalist conflicts emphasized how both relatively poorer and wealthier groups are likely to rebel against the centre if they believe that they can do better under independence. Civil wars in Latin American countries were often interpreted within a framework focusing on economic grievances arising from either unequal land distribution or high income inequality. However, the empirical evidence linking individual income inequality and civil conflict is mixed.
Subsequent political-economic studies of civil war tended to dismiss the role of grievances. Some researchers argued that grievances are ubiquitous and that it is more important to focus on variation in the opportunities for violence. Thus the British economists Paul Collier and Anke Hoeffler argued that low overall income makes it easier to mobilize insurgencies, since potential recruits have less to lose in foregone income from normal economic activities. The American political scientists James Fearon and David Laitin claimed that civil war is primarily a problem of weak states and that weakness is largely determined by economic development. Researchers in this tradition also linked mobilization to the role of individual incentives. Opportunities for insurgencies are greater when participants can prosper from war—for example, through looting or by gaining control of valuable natural resources. Empirical studies also supported the supposed link between the existence of valuable natural resources and a higher risk of civil war. Civil wars in Africa are often taken to support those perspectives.
