Committee of Public Safety, French Comité De Salut Public,  political body of the French Revolution that gained virtual dictatorial control over France during the Reign of Terror (September 1793 to July 1794).
The Committee of Public Safety was set up on April 6, 1793, during one of the crises of the Revolution, when France was beset by foreign and civil war. The new committee was to provide for the defense of the nation against its enemies, foreign and domestic, and to oversee the already existing organs of executive government. The members of the committee, at first numbering 9 and later increased to 12, were elected by the National Convention (representative assembly) for a period of one month and were eligible for reelection.
From April to July 10, 1793, the Committee of Public Safety was dominated by Georges Danton and his followers, who pursued a policy of moderation and reconciliation but who failed to deal adequately with the precarious military situation. These men were replaced in July by men more determined and more radical in the defense of the Revolution, among them Maximilien Robespierre.
From September 1793 to July 1794, the Committee of Public Safety was composed of the same men (with the exception of Marie-Jean Hérault de Séchelles, who was guillotined in April 1794), and it controlled France, dominating the National Convention and relying on the support of the Jacobins (radical democrats). Under its direction, harsh measures were taken against the alleged enemies of the Revolution, the economy was placed on a wartime basis, and mass conscription was undertaken. While decisions were taken in common, the members of the committee specialized in different areas: Robespierre, Georges Couthon, and Louis de Saint-Just (called the Triumvirate) specialized in general political matters, Lazare Carnot in military affairs, and Robert Lindet in supplies.
Dissension within the committee contributed to the downfall of Robespierre in July 1794, after which the Committee of Public Safety waned in importance; its powers were strictly limited to the areas of diplomacy and war.
