Dos de Mayo Uprising,  also called the Battle of Madrid, (2 May 1808), an engagement of the Peninsular War.  The French commanders in Spain were highly experienced and successful soldiers, but they completely misjudged the inflammatory nature of Spanish political, religious, and social life. What they considered as a simple punishment for dissent and opposition to French control in Madrid was transformed into a rallying cry of insurrection throughout Spain.
Napoleon’s pact with Russia at Tilsit (July 7, 1807) left the French emperor free to turn his attention toward Britain and toward Sweden and Portugal, the two powers that remained allied or friendly to Britain. His goal was to complete the Continental System designed to wage economic war against Britain. To impose this system, Napoleon crossed Spain and invaded Portugal in October—November 1807, occupying parts of Spain in the process. He also began meddling in Spanish royal politics, which led to the removal of the Spanish monarch, who was replaced by Napoleon’s elder brother, Joseph. Not surprisingly, these actions caused deep consternation among the Spanish people, which came to a head when Marshal Joachim Murat prepared to remove the children of the royal family to France. Although Madrid had been occupied by the French since 23 March 1808, the French were unprepared for the strength of feeling among its citizens, which erupted into violence on 2 May.
A crowd assembled around the royal palace in an attempt to physically stop the removal of the children. On hearing this, Murat dispatched a grenadier battalion of the Imperial Guard and a battery of artillery to clear a way for the royal departure; when the French guns opened up on the Spanish, the protest was transformed into outright rebellion. French cavalry then charged through the streets quelling the protest with their sabers.
The following day, the French instigated measures to repress the revolt; those caught carrying firearms (and many who were not) were shot. Although Murat and his fellow commanders thought that such exemplary punishments would stop the protests, they could not have been more wrong. The events of Dos de Mayo acted as the fuse that lit a nationwide uprising against French rule.
Losses: French, unknown (perhaps some 150 killed or wounded); Spanish, up to 500 killed (including more than 100 executed on 3 May).
