Edward Bancroft,  (born January 9, 1744, Westfield, Massachusetts [U.S.]—died September 8, 1821, Margate, Kent, England), secretary to the American commissioners in France during the American Revolution who spied for the British.
Although he had no formal education, Bancroft assumed the title and style of “Doctor.” In 1769 he established his credentials as a scientist with the publication of his “Essay on the Natural History of Guiana.” About 1770 he went to England, where he became friendly with Benjamin Franklin during one of Franklin’s early missions to London. Bancroft became an adherent of the American cause and returned to the colonies. As a result of his friendship with Franklin he accompanied Franklin and the two other American commissioners to France in 1776. In France Bancroft was contacted by Paul Wentworth, an American-born loyalist who headed a ring of loyalist spies for the British. By December of that year Bancroft had begun receiving a salary from the British. Between 1777 and 1783 he reported every movement of Franklin and the other Americans to the British, writing his reports in invisible ink and relaying them by means of a dead drop. Bancroft’s information included the details of treaties and the movement of ships and troops from France to America. To avoid suspicion Bancroft made several trips to Britain ostensibly to spy on the British; they provided him with harmless or false information and once pretended to arrest him.
In 1783 Bancroft moved to England, primarily to preserve his British citizenship and the pension due him for his secret service. He continued to correspond with Franklin, who never suspected him. He invented several processes for dyeing textiles and in 1794 wrote a work called “Experimental Researches concerning the Philosophy of Permanent Colors.” He gained international fame as a chemist and was made a fellow of the Royal Society. Not until nearly 70 years after his death did his role as a British spy become public knowledge.
