Elizabeth L. Van Lew,  (born Oct. 17, 1818, Richmond, Va., U.S.—died Sept. 25, 1900, Richmond), American Civil War agent who, through clever planning and by feigning mental affliction, managed to gather important intelligence for the Union.
Van Lew was the daughter of a prosperous family of Northern antecedents. She was educated in Philadelphia and grew up to hold strong antislavery views. During the 1850s, under her influence, the family’s domestic servants were freed. At the outbreak of the Civil War she remained firmly and publicly loyal to the United States. She made many visits to Union prisoners in Richmond, Virginia’s Libby Prison, bringing in food, clothing, and other items and often carrying away military information that she was able to transmit to federal authorities. On occasion she hid escaped prisoners in her house.
In March 1864, following General Hugh J. Kilpatrick’s unsuccessful attempt to open Libby Prison during a cavalry raid on Richmond (a raid apparently planned in response to information gathered by Van Lew that the prisoners were soon to be moved farther south), she and her agents daringly spirited out of the city the body of Colonel Ulric Dahlgren. Dahlgren, Kilpatrick’s second-in-command and the son of Admiral John A.B. Dahlgren, had been killed in the raid, and his remains had suffered indignities at the hands of an outraged Richmond citizenry.
During the yearlong siege of Richmond and Petersburg in 1864–65, Van Lew performed invaluable services in intelligence gathering. Her assumed manner of mental aberration, which gained her the indulgent nickname of “Crazy Bet” around Richmond, enabled her to carry on unsuspected. Her contacts reached even into Jefferson Davis’s home, where she had placed one of her former servants.
After the fall of Richmond in April 1865 Van Lew was personally thanked and given protection by General Ulysses S. Grant. Under President Grant she held the post of postmistress of Richmond from 1869 to 1877. She worked subsequently as a clerk in the Post Office Department in Washington, D.C., until the late 1880s. Van Lew then returned in poverty to Richmond, where she was still a social outcast because of her wartime activities. In later years she protested her taxes because she was denied the vote. She lived in the family mansion in Richmond until her death.
