Franz Graf Conrad von Hötzendorf,  (born November 11, 1852, Penzing, Austria—died August 25, 1925, Mergentheim, Germany), a controversial military strategist and one of the most-influential conservative propagandists of Austria-Hungary, who planned the Habsburg monarchy’s campaigns during World War I.
Advancing rapidly in the Austro-Hungarian army, Conrad became chief of staff in 1906 on the recommendation of the heir to the throne, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, whose military views he shared. A staunch conservative, Conrad distrusted the expansionist tendencies of Serbia and Austria’s ally Italy, advocating preventive wars against both. His vociferously aggressive stance toward Italy in 1911 caused his temporary dismissal, but he returned to head the General Staff in 1912. He devised two plans for an eventual war in the East. If Russia remained neutral, he would throw preponderant forces against Serbia; but, if Russia became involved, Austria would concentrate its strength on that front.
Upon Russia’s entry into World War I, most Austrian troops faced that enemy. As a result, Conrad’s invasion of Serbia failed; that country was not finally subdued until the end of 1915, and then only with German aid. His offensives on the Russian front also were repulsed, in part because of his late redeployment of Austria’s strategic reserve to the East, but more because of Conrad’s insistence on attacking a numerically superior enemy. Only German intervention saved Austria from disaster. The Austro-German offensive of 1915, planned by Conrad, succeeded, but by this time the Austrian army had become increasingly subordinated to the German General Staff and had virtually lost its independence. His Italian offensive of 1916 also came close to success, but troop withdrawals to the threatened Russian front again cost him victory. When the new emperor, Charles I, took over command in 1916, he dismissed the strong-willed Conrad, who commanded an army group on the Italian front until the summer of 1918.
Retiring after the war, Conrad wrote his memoirs, Mein Anfang 1878–82 (1925; “My Beginnings 1878–82”) and Aus meiner Dienstzeit 1906–18, 5 vol. (1921–25; “My Service 1906–18”). A gifted but unlucky soldier, Conrad failed mainly because he advocated ruthless military solutions, ignoring human factors and the political realities of Austria-Hungary.
