Frederick William II,  (born September 25, 1744, Berlin, Prussia [now in Germany]—died November 16, 1797, Berlin), king of Prussia from August 17, 1786, under whom, despite his lack of exceptional military and political gifts, Prussia achieved considerable expansion.
The son of Frederick the Great’s brother Augustus William, he became heir presumptive on his father’s death in 1758. He was intellectually receptive and devoted to the arts, but when he succeeded Frederick the Great as king, he was unable to perpetuate his uncle’s system of personal government; the direction of the Prussian state fell to a few favourites. Nevertheless, Prussia grew: it acquired Ansbach and Bayreuth when the margrave Charles Alexander renounced his territories (1791), and it gained Danzig (Gdańsk), Thorn (Toruń), and a large part of central Poland (including Warsaw) in the Second (1793) and Third (1795) Partitions of that country.
In foreign affairs Frederick William cooperated with the Holy Roman emperor Leopold II and entered into an Austro-Prussian alliance (February 7, 1792), chiefly because of a common opposition to the French Revolution. In the War of the First Coalition, Frederick William’s preoccupation with getting his share of Poland led him to conduct the war halfheartedly, and in 1795 he withdrew from the coalition by concluding the separate Treaty of Basel. In domestic affairs the king gained easy popularity by abolishing the state monopoly on coffee and tobacco, although the loss of revenue had to be made good by increasing the excise duty on beer, flour, and sugar. Frederick William’s most notorious domestic measure was the Religionsedikt (“Religious Edict”) of 1788, largely the work of his favourite, Johann Christoph von Wöllner. It gave legal recognition to the principle of toleration while restricting the freedom of religious instruction and binding the clergy to a narrow Protestantism. Although it was zealously enforced (Immanuel Kant was reprimanded and several important journals moved abroad to avoid censorship), the act proved ineffective. A notable law code (Allgemeines Preussisches Landrecht) including various liberal statutes, however, was promulgated (1794).
Under Frederick William cultural activities flourished, mostly in Berlin. Painting, architecture, and the theatre were encouraged, and especially music: Mozart and Beethoven visited the King and dedicated chamber music to him, and Frederick William himself played the cello.
He contracted two dynastic marriages, the first of which was dissolved. During the lifetime of both his royal consorts he also contracted two morganatic marriages. His son by the second of these wives, Sophia Juliana, Gräfin Dönhoff, was the future statesman Friedrich Wilhelm, Graf von Brandenburg.
