Frederick North, Lord North, also called (from 1790) 2nd Earl Of Guilford, Baron Guilford,  (born April 13, 1732, London, Eng.—died  Aug. 5, 1792, London), prime minister from 1770 to 1782, whose vacillating leadership contributed to the loss of Great Britain’s American colonies in the American Revolution (1775–83).
The son of a Tory nobleman, the 1st earl of Guilford, North was educated at Eton and Trinity College, Oxford. Elected member of Parliament for Banbury at the age of 22, he represented the town (of which his father was high steward) for nearly 40 years. The Duke of Newcastle, when prime minister, made him a lord of the treasury in 1759, and North held this office under the succeeding prime ministers, the Earl of Bute and George Grenville, until 1765. On the fall of the Marquess of Rockingham’s first ministry in 1766, North was sworn a member of the Privy Council and made paymaster general by the next prime minister, the Duke of Grafton. On the death of Charles Townshend in September 1767 North became chancellor of the exchequer.
North succeeded Grafton as prime minister in February 1770 and continued in office for 12 of the most eventful years in English history. George III had at last clinched the defeat of the Whiggish Newcastle-Rockingham connection and found in North a congenial Tory and chief minister. The path of the minister in Parliament was a hard one; he was popular and an able debater, but at times he had to defend measures which he had not designed and of which he had not approved, and this too in the House of Commons in which the oratorical ability of Edmund Burke and Charles James Fox was ranged against him.
During peacetime North’s financial administration was sound, but he lacked the initiative to introduce radical fiscal reforms. The most important events of his ministry were those concerned with the American Revolution. He cannot be accused of causing it, but one of the first acts of his ministry was the retention of the tea duty, and his ministry responded to the Boston Tea Party with the Coercive Acts of 1774. Underestimating the colonists’ powers of resistance, he attempted to combine severity and conciliation. He faced war halfheartedly and was easily depressed by reverses; after 1777 it was only George III’s repeated entreaties not to abandon his sovereign to the mercy of the Rockingham Whigs that induced North to defend a war that at times he felt to be hopeless and impolitic. In March 1782 he insisted on resigning, after the news of Cornwallis’ surrender at Yorktown made defeat in the House of Commons imminent.
North had been rewarded for his assistance to the king by honours for himself and sinecures for his relatives, but in April 1783 he formed a famous coalition with the prominent Whig Fox (much to George III’s disgust) and became secretary of state with Fox under the nominal premiership of the Duke of Portland. The coalition went out of office on Fox’s India bill in December 1783. For about three years North continued to act with Fox in opposition, but failing eyesight then caused his retirement from politics. He succeeded to the earldom of Guilford on his father’s death in 1790.
