Friedrich Gentz, also called Friedrich Von Gentz,  (born May 2, 1764, Breslau, Silesia, Prussia [now Wrocław, Pol.]—died  June 9, 1832, Vienna, Austria), German political journalist, famous for his writings against the principles of the French Revolution and Napoleon and as a confidential adviser of Metternich. Though a commoner, he sometimes affected the von of nobility, having received a Swedish knighthood in 1804.
Gentz’s father was a Prussian civil servant; his mother came from the French Huguenot colony of Berlin, with which young Gentz liked to associate. Up to an advanced age, he wrote his diaries in French, displaying in that language the same limpid elegance that distinguished his German. He studied under the German philosopher Immanuel Kant in Königsberg (now Kaliningrad, Russia) but was essentially self-taught, acquiring historical, juridical, and economic knowledge from books, chiefly English works. In 1785 Gentz entered the Prussian civil service in Berlin and in 1793 became a secretary in the War Office.
With the outbreak of the French Revolution, Gentz began his career as a political writer. As a pupil of Immanuel Kant, he had at first hailed the Revolution as the “awakening of mankind.” But he soon began to criticize the Revolution and ended by combatting it. In 1793 he published a German translation of Edmund Burke’s Reflections on the Revolution in France; thereafter, Burke, the great English conservative, remained for Gentz the master whose ideas most closely reflected his own and whose style he admired and imitated. In two periodicals he acquired or founded anew, Neue deutsche Monatsschrift and Historisches Journal, as well as in brochures published at irregular intervals from 1800 on, Gentz continued to analyze the great drama that unfolded in France. Gentz’s writings of 1795–1802 are still uncannily topical. His attitude, which would now be called that of a conservative liberal, made him advocate the preservation of civic liberties against autocratic egalitarianism, the defense of the rule of law throughout Europe against illegitimate imperialism, and the maintenance of the equilibrium of powers against the encroachments of the one universal state, which, in his view, all French governments after 1793 were bound to strive for. In particular, Gentz pointed out the differences between the American and the French revolutions, seeing in the former a defense of historical rights against British usurpation, in the latter an antihistorical, aggressive, ideology-laden undertaking. These political investigations were complemented by economic research, as in the great essay Über die britische Finanzverwaltung (“On British Financial Administration”).
As a politician, Gentz strove for a coalition of “Free Europe” against French despotism. But, since Prussia observed a policy of strict neutrality during the period 1795–1806, Gentz’s position in Berlin became increasingly untenable. In 1803 he accordingly moved to Vienna, the centre, as he hoped, of the Continent’s resistance to Napoleon. The net result of his advocacy, however, was a series of disappointments: the War of the Third Coalition (1805–07) ended with the allied defeat at the Battle of Austerlitz and a rapprochement between Russia and France, and the Fourth Coalition ended with a Franco-Austrian alliance cemented by Napoleon’s marriage to a Habsburg archduchess. Gentz found himself in a state of melancholy isolation; by 1810 his advocacy of European freedom had begun to weaken.
Gentz’s friendship with the new Austrian foreign minister, Prince von Metternich, helped him gain access to the Vienna state chancery, this time with the regular title of Hofrat (privy councillor). Metternich, whom he admired as a skeptical, worldly-wise man of affairs and a pragmatic politician, became his mentor; Gentz, in turn, became the all-powerful minister’s propagandist and confidential adviser.
The War of Liberation that began with Napoleon’s catastrophe in Russia and ended with his overthrow evoked little enthusiasm in Gentz’s tired spirit. He reached the peak of success at a time when his energies had already begun to flag. Gentz was allowed to officiate as secretary general of the great congresses of the immediate post-Napoleonic era—those held at Vienna, Aachen (Aix-la-Chapelle), Troppau, Laibach, and Verona. It was a position that entailed many advantages by way of orders and decorations, influence, and money. As he had earlier formulated the Austrian and Prussian war manifestos against Napoleon, so he now wrote up, with the same untiring skill, the protocols of these European congresses. These activities were of a rigidly conservative and purely defensive nature. The idea of “European freedom” was replaced by the old order of the Continent, an idealized 18th century, which Gentz defended against the 19th.
The last chapter in Gentz’s life was a personal one: his liaison, at the age of 66, with young Fanny Elssler, a ballerina. It was his final triumph and his first complete happiness, and, when it paled, he soon died. His possessions had to be auctioned off in order to satisfy the creditors. Metternich paid for the funeral.
