Fukuzawa Yukichi,  (born January 10, 1835, Buzen, Japan—died February 3, 1901, Tokyo), Japanese author, educator, and publisher who was probably the most-influential man outside government service in the Japan of the Meiji Restoration (1868), following the overthrow of the Tokugawa shogunate. He led the struggle to introduce Western ideas in order to increase, as he repeatedly wrote, Japanese “strength and independence.”
Fukuzawa grew up in northern Kyushu, the younger son of an impoverished lower samurai. Since he had little chance for advancement there, in 1854 he traveled to Nagasaki (then one of the few areas in Japan with connections to the West) to study Western military techniques. He left a year later for Ōsaka to learn Dutch, since that was the language then needed to access rangaku (“Dutch learning”)—the term the Japanese used to describe Western knowledge and science in the years when the Dutch were the only Westerners with access to Japan, before the country was opened to the West in the mid-19th century. In 1858 he moved to Edo (now Tokyo) to start a Dutch-language school, which in 1868 took the name Keiō Gijuku. That school developed into Keiō University, the first great university independent of government domination and one that was to produce many business leaders.
Fukuzawa went abroad with the first Japanese missions to the West—the United States in 1860 and Europe in 1862—after which he wrote Seiyō jijō (“Conditions in the West”). The book became popular overnight because of its simple and clear descriptions of the political, economic, and cultural institutions of the Occident. Continuing his efforts to introduce Western ways into Japan, he developed a lucid writing style and began the first attempts at public speaking and debating in Japan. In the xenophobic years at the end of the Edo (Tokugawa) period, before the Meiji Restoration, Fukuzawa’s championing of Western ways provoked many attempts on his life. After the restoration, when the Japanese government began to actively seek foreign knowledge, Fukuzawa was often invited to enter government, but he refused, insisting on the need to develop an independent intelligentsia.
In 1882 Fukuzawa founded the Jiji shimpō (“Current Events”), which was for years one of Japan’s most-influential newspapers and a training ground for many liberal politicians and journalists. He also wrote more than 100 books explaining and advocating parliamentary government, popular education, language reform, women’s rights, and a host of other causes. Writing in his The Autobiography of Fukuzawa Yukichi (Eng. trans. 1934; numerous subsequent editions and reprintings) shortly before his death in 1901, Fukuzawa declared that the abolition of all feudal privileges by the Meiji government and Japan’s victory over China in the Sino-Japanese War of 1894–95 (which gave Japan the status of a world power) had fulfilled his life completely. His only regret was that many of his friends had not lived to see those great accomplishments.
