Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher, Fürst (prince) von Wahlstatt, byname Marschall Vorwärts (“Marshal Forward”),  (born December 16, 1742, Rostock, Mecklenburg [Germany]—died September 12, 1819, Krieblowitz, near Kanth, Silesia, Prussia [now Katy Wrocławskie, Poland]), Prussian field marshal, a commander during the Napoleonic Wars, who was important in the Allied victory at Waterloo.
Blücher enlisted in the Swedish cavalry in 1756 and served until he was captured in 1760 by the Prussians, for whom he thereafter fought. He distinguished himself against the French in 1793–94 and commanded the Prussian rear guard at the Battle of Jena (1806). Around this time he met Gerhard Johann David von Scharnhorst, who served as one of his principal staff officers until Scharnhorst’s death in June 1813. After the Peace of Tilsit (1807) Blücher was employed for a time in the War Department and then went into retirement.
In 1813, when war between France and Prussia broke out again, Blücher, then 71 years old, returned to active service. He took part in the battles of Lützen and Bautzen in May 1813, and three months later at Wahlstatt (Legnickie Pole), on the Katzbach (Kaczawa) River, he decisively defeated the French under Marshal Jacques-Alexandre Macdonald, capturing 18,000 prisoners and more than 100 guns. For his part in the Battle of Leipzig (October 1813) he was made a field marshal. After hard fighting he entered Paris with other victorious Allied commanders in May 1814. He then received his title of Prince of Wahlstatt and retired to his estates.
After Napoleon’s return in 1815, Blücher again assumed command of the Prussian troops in Belgium, with August von Gneisenau as his invaluable chief of staff. Blücher immediately set about coordinating his force with that of the British and Allied forces under the Duke of Wellington. At Ligny (June 16, 1815) he was defeated by Napoleon; but, in order to ensure cooperation with Wellington later, he withdrew his army toward Wavre, although by so doing he endangered his own communications. His troops took no part in the early stages of the Battle of Waterloo (June 18, 1815); but, urged on by Gneisenau, they made an exhausting countermarch and appeared on the French right flank at a critical stage of the battle. This action, together with a general advance by the British, completed Napoleon’s defeat. Blücher’s cavalry continued the pursuit of the French toward Paris throughout the night.
Blücher was described by a contemporary as a rough, ill-educated man, but he was endowed with common sense and fiery energy. He knew little of the higher art and science of war, and he required a good chief of staff to guide him. On the battlefield, however, his determination and personal courage and example proved invaluable.
