Georges Couthon,  (born Dec. 22, 1755, Orcet, Fr.—died  July 28, 1794, Paris), close associate of Robespierre and Louis de Saint-Just on the Committee of Public Safety that ruled Revolutionary France during the period of the Jacobin dictatorship and Reign of Terror (1793–94).
Couthon became a poor people’s advocate at Clermont-Ferrand in 1788. In 1791 he went to Paris as a deputy to the Revolution’s Legislative Assembly and in 1792 was elected to the National Convention, where he joined the majority in voting for the death of King Louis XVI (January 1793). By this time a disease—probably meningitis—had paralyzed Couthon’s legs. Although he was confined to a wheelchair, he went on missions to the provinces in November-December 1792 and in March 1793. He bitterly denounced the moderate Girondin deputies before the Convention, and he introduced the motion that led to the arrest of the leading Girondins on June 2. The Jacobins, in alliance with the Parisian lower classes, then took control of the Revolution.
Meanwhile, Couthon and four other men had been added to the Committee of Public Safety on May 30, 1793. They drafted a new constitution, which was submitted to the Convention on June 10, and Couthon remained on the committee when it was reorganized a month later. On August 21 he was sent to direct the military operations against the counterrevolutionary stronghold of Lyon. Lyon surrendered on October 9, but Couthon had himself relieved of his command so that he would not have to carry out the Convention’s order to destroy the city. Nevertheless, in speeches before the Convention he called for the extermination of enemies of the republic. In March-April 1794 he helped Robespierre and Saint-Just bring about the downfall of factions led by the radical democrat Jacques Hébert and the moderate Georges Danton. Couthon then secured passage of the Law of 22 Prairial (June 10, 1794), which speeded up the work of the Revolutionary Tribunal and unleashed the Reign of Terror. The Robespierrist leaders, however, were facing growing resistance, and on 9 Thermidor (July 27, 1794) Couthon, Robespierre, and Saint-Just were arrested by a group of their opponents. They were guillotined, along with 19 other Robespierrists, the next day.
