George H. Thomas,  (born July 31, 1816, Southampton county, Va., U.S.—died  March 28, 1870, San Francisco), Union general in the American Civil War (1861–65), known as “the Rock of Chickamauga” after his unyielding defense in combat near that stream in northwestern Georgia in September 1863.
A graduate of the U.S. Military Academy, West Point, N.Y., in 1840, Thomas served in the Mexican War (1846–48) and as an instructor at West Point. Despite his Southern birth he remained loyal to the Union when the Civil War broke out. In command of an independent force in eastern Kentucky, he attacked the Confederates on Jan. 19, 1862, at Mill Springs and gained the first important Union victory in the west. He served under General Don Carlos Buell and was offered but refused the chief command. Under General William S. Rosecrans, he was engaged at Stones River (Murfreesboro), Tenn., and was in charge of the most important part of the maneuvering from Decherd to Chattanooga, Tenn. On Sept. 19–20, 1863, after two days of conflict along Chickamauga Creek in Georgia 12 miles (19 km) south of Chattanooga, General Thomas adroitly organized Union defenses and withstood violent attack on the left wing until reserve units allowed an orderly withdrawal of Union troops. For this action he was promoted to brigadier general and succeeded Rosecrans in command of the Army of the Cumberland shortly before the great victory at Chattanooga (November), in which he and his army played a conspicuous role.
In the autumn of 1864, Union General William Tecumseh Sherman called on Thomas to deal with the threat to Union communications by the Confederate forces of General John B. Hood. Thomas had achieved his objective by Christmas, checking the enemy army at Franklin, Tenn. (November 30), and finally at Nashville, Tenn. (December 15–16). At that historic battle, Thomas inflicted on Hood the worst defeat sustained in the open field on either side during the war. Thomas was made a major general and received the thanks of Congress.
After the war Thomas commanded the military departments in Kentucky and Tennessee until 1869, when he was placed in charge of the Division of the Pacific with headquarters at San Francisco.
