Henri Grégoire,  (born December 4, 1750, Vého, Lorraine, France—died May 20, 1831, Paris), French prelate who was a defender of the Constitutional church, the nationalized Roman Catholic church established in France during the Revolution, and of the rights of Jews and blacks.
Born into a poor peasant family, Grégoire entered the priesthood and became curé of Emberménil. His Essay on the Regeneration of the Jews (1788) made him a celebrity, and in 1789 he was elected to the Estates-General as a deputy for the clergy. After the Third Estate (the unprivileged order) converted the Estates-General into the Revolutionary National Assembly (June 17, 1789), Grégoire worked for the union of the clergy with the Third Estate, for the granting of citizenship to Jews, and for the abolition of slavery. He objected to some features of the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, which set forth a plan for nationalizing the church, but, after it was enacted in July 1790, he took the oath of allegiance to the government and later became the Constitutional bishop of Loir-et-Cher (the diocese of Blois).
As deputy of the third Revolutionary Assembly, the National Convention, Grégoire in September 1792 proposed the abolition of the monarchy and in November demanded that Louis XVI be brought to trial. During the dechristianizing campaign of late 1793 and early 1794, Grégoire continued to wear clerical dress and to profess his faith openly; as a member of the Committee of Public Instruction, he tried to save monastery libraries and religious works of art. After the collapse of the radical democratic Jacobin regime in July 1794, Grégoire was instrumental in securing the restoration of freedom of worship and guided the reorganization of the Constitutional church.
Grégoire opposed the coup d’état of 18 Brumaire, year VIII (November 9, 1799), by which Napoleon Bonaparte seized power. His election to the Senate in 1801 was regarded as a protest against Napoleon’s consular regime and against the Concordat of 1801, which was a reconciliation with Rome that marked the end of the Constitutional church. Grégoire voted against the proclamation of the empire in 1804. He served as advisor to the Jewish deputies to the Sanhedrin convened by Napoleon in 1807. He supported the independent republic of Haïti created in 1804, and his abolitionist work De la littérature des Nègres (1808; “The Literature of Black Writers”) argued that blacks were capable of the same intellectual attainments as whites.
After the Second Restoration of the monarchy in 1815, Grégoire stood firmly by his views on the Civil Constitution. In 1819 he was elected a deputy but was not allowed to take his seat, resulting in a cause célèbre.
