Lewis Wallace, byname Lew Wallace,  (born April 10, 1827, Brookville, Indiana, U.S.—died February 15, 1905, Crawfordsville, Indiana), American soldier, lawyer, diplomat, and author who is principally remembered for his historical novel Ben-Hur.
The son of David Wallace, an Indiana governor and one-term U.S. congressman, Lew Wallace left school at 16 and became a copyist in the county clerk’s office, reading in his leisure time. After working briefly as a reporter for the Indianapolis Daily Journal, he began to study law in his father’s office. In 1846 Wallace recruited a company for the First Regiment of Indiana Volunteers, with whom he served in the Mexican-American War. His war experience consisted mostly of garrison duty.
Wallace came home from Mexico in 1847, went back to studying the law in Indianapolis, briefly edited a small newspaper, was admitted to the bar in 1849, and began practicing law. In 1850 he won a two-year term as the 1st congressional district’s prosecuting attorney in Covington, Indiana. In 1856 Wallace formed 65 young men from Crawfordsville into a local military company called the Montgomery Guards. He shaped them into a Zouave unit, specializing in close-order drills and wearing red kepis, blue shirts, gray Greek-style tunics, and baggy gray breeches.
In April 1861 Indiana Gov. Oliver H.P.T. Morton appointed Wallace state adjutant general in charge of the effort to raise six Indiana regiments for the Union army in the American Civil War. Wallace quickly induced more than a dozen regiments’ worth of men to sign up. On April 23, 1861, he resigned as adjutant general, and on April 26 he received a commission as a colonel in the 11th (Zouave) Regiment of Indiana Volunteers.
Wallace joined the Union Army of the Tennessee under  Ulysses S. Grant and fought under Grant in the victorious February 1862 battles in Tennessee at Forts Henry, Heiman, and Donelson. On March 21 Wallace was promoted to major general. At age 34 he thereby became one of the youngest Union officers to hold that rank. Wallace was relieved of his command following the  Battle of Shiloh (April 6–7, 1862), in southwestern Tennessee. Wallace went home to Crawfordsville, but by August he was leading Union troops in Ohio. From November 1862 through May 1863 he presided over a military commission that investigated, and eventually blamed, Union Maj. Gen. Don Carlos Buell for his lack of leadership in a series of defeats in Kentucky in the summer and fall of 1862.
On March 12, 1864, Wallace became commander of the VIII Army Corps and of the Middle Department, based in Baltimore. The command included all of Delaware and Maryland from Baltimore west to the Monocacy River. At the Battle of Monocacy (July 9, 1864), he was defeated by the Confederate general Jubal A. Early, whose troops far outnumbered Wallace’s. However, by holding Early’s forces up for a day, Wallace prevented the Confederates from capturing the Federal capital, Washington, D.C., which they attacked on July 11 and 12. He went on to serve as president of the court of inquiry that  condemned the Confederate captain Henry Wirz, commander of the notorious Confederate prisoner-of-war camp at Andersonville, Georgia. He was a member of the court that tried the persons charged with assassinating Pres. Abraham Lincoln. In 1865 Wallace resigned from the army and returned to law practice. He held two diplomatic positions by presidential appointment. He was governor of New Mexico Territory (1878–81) and then U.S. minister to Turkey (1881–85).
Though Wallace also wrote poetry and a play, his literary reputation rests upon three historical novels: The Fair God (1873), a story of the Spanish conquest of Mexico; The Prince of India (1893), dealing with the Wandering Jew and the Byzantine Empire; and above all Ben-Hur (1880), a romantic tale set in the Roman Empire during the coming of Christ. Its main character, a young Jewish patrician named Judah Ben-Hur, loses his family and freedom because of the injustice of a Roman officer but eventually triumphs through his own abilities and the intervention of Jesus. Ben-Hur was an enormous popular success; it was made into a play and a motion picture (1925) and then remade on a spectacular scale in two other motion-picture versions (1959 and 2016). Lew Wallace: An Autobiography, his last book, was published posthumously in 1906.
