Louis-Alexandre Berthier, prince de Wagram,  (born Nov. 20, 1753, Versailles, Fr.—died  June 1, 1815, Bamberg, Bavaria), French soldier and the first of Napoleon’s marshals. Though Berthier was not a distinguished commander, Napoleon esteemed him highly as chief of staff of the Grande Armée from 1805. Responsible for the operation of Napoleon’s armies, he was called by the Emperor “the man who has served me longest and has never failed me.”
The son of an ennobled court works surveyor, Berthier gained military experience in the American Revolution, serving with Lafayette, and then in the French Revolution as survey and staff officer and finally as chief of staff (1791–92). Sent to fight the royalists in western France in March 1793, he was recalled, as a noble, after four months’ dangerous service and driven underground by the Revolutionary Terror. He reappeared as general of division and chief of staff in the Army of the Alps and of Italy. Commanding in Italy, he occupied Rome in February 1798 but later joined Napoleon in Egypt.
As chief of staff of the Grande Armée, Berthier directed a staff of six generals and eight colonels. His duties included dispatching direct orders from Napoleon to his marshals. In spite of his professed impersonality in carrying out Napoleon’s orders, a certain amount of friction developed between Berthier and the marshals as the power of the chief of staff grew. Napoleon recognized his loyalty by making him sovereign prince of Neuchâtel in 1806 and gave him the French title of prince de Wagram in 1809.
Berthier remained with Napoleon in Russia to the end of the retreat in 1812 and, after the Emperor’s departure, struggled devotedly to preserve order in the army. After Napoleon’s abdication Berthier submitted to Louis XVIII and, as captain of his guards, escorted him out of France when Napoleon returned from Elba for the Hundred Days. He then retired to Bavaria, where he soon died from a fall. There were stories of suicide or murder, but the accident was probably due to illness.
