Louis-Philippe-Joseph, duc d’Orléans, also called (1752–85) duc de Chartres, byname Philippe Égalité,  (born April 13, 1747, Saint-Cloud, France—died November 6, 1793, Paris), Bourbon prince who became a supporter of popular democracy during the Revolution of 1789.
The cousin of King Louis XVI (ruled 1774–92) and the son of Louis-Philippe (later duc d’Orléans), he became duc de Chartres in 1752 and succeeded to his father’s title in 1785. Orléans’s hostility to Louis XVI’s queen, Marie-Antoinette, caused him to live away from the royal court of Versailles.
During the conflicts that arose between Louis XVI and the nobles over financial policies in 1787, Orléans was temporarily exiled to his estates for challenging the king’s authority before the Parlement of Paris (one of the high courts of justice). He was elected a representative for the nobles to the States General, which convened on May 5, 1789. Orléans supported the unprivileged Third Estate (bourgeoisie) against the two privileged orders (nobles and clergy). On June 25 he and a small group of nobles joined the Third Estate, which had already (June 17) proclaimed itself a National Assembly. His Paris residence, the Palais-Royal, became a centre of popular agitation, and he was viewed as a hero by the crowd that stormed the Bastille on July 14.
On returning from a mission to England in July 1790, Orléans took a seat in the National Assembly. He was admitted to the politically radical Jacobin Club in 1791. After the fall of the monarchy in August 1792, he renounced his title of nobility and accepted the name Philippe Égalité from the Paris Commune, one of the popular Revolutionary bodies. Elected to the National Convention (the third successive Revolutionary legislature), which convened in September 1792, Égalité supported the radical democratic policies of the Montagnards against their more moderate Girondin opponents. Nevertheless, during the trial of Louis XVI by the Convention, the Girondins attempted to confuse the issues by accusing the Montagnards of conspiring to put Égalité on the throne. Égalité voted for the execution of Louis, but he fell under suspicion when his son Louis-Philippe, duc de Chartres, defected to the Austrians with the French commander Charles-François du Périer Dumouriez on April 5, 1793. Accused of being an accomplice of Dumouriez, Égalité was arrested on April 6 and was sent to the guillotine in November. The duc de Chartres reigned as King Louis-Philippe from 1830 to 1848.
