Matsudaira Yoshinaga, also called Matsudaira Keiei,  (born Oct. 10, 1828, Edo [now Tokyo], Japan—died  June 2, 1890, Tokyo), one of the primary Japanese political figures in the events preceding the Meiji Restoration—i.e., the 1868 overthrow of the feudal Tokugawa shogunate and the establishment of a centralized regime under the Japanese emperor.
Matsudaira was born into a collateral branch of the Tokugawa clan, the family that controlled the office of shogun, or hereditary military dictator of Japan. In 1838 he succeeded his father as daimyo (feudal lord) of the Fukui fief in central Japan, where he established a Western-style arms factory, encouraged education, and developed medical facilities.
As one of the more important daimyos of the country, he was called upon by the shogun to act in an advisory capacity when the government was confronted with the crisis resulting from U.S. Commodore Matthew C. Perry’s demand (1853) that Japan open its doors to trade and intercourse with the outside world. Matsudaira at first took a firm stand for continued seclusion, but by the time of the Harris Treaty in 1858 he had reconsidered and reversed his position.
In 1858 Matsudaira was placed under house arrest by the powerful state councillor Ii Naosuke because of Matsudaira’s and others’ attempts to determine the succession of the shogunate. After Ii was assassinated in 1860, Matsudaira was pardoned and released, and in 1862 he became an important shogunal adviser under a new administrative structure. Influenced by his famous adviser Yokoi Shōnan, Matsudaira attempted to appease the other daimyos, abolishing the sankin kōtai, or alternate attendance system, by which the Tokugawa house had controlled Japan’s most powerful lords. Under that costly system, the daimyos were required to live in the capital city in alternate years, leaving their wives and children as hostages while they returned to their fiefs.
A strong believer in national solidarity, Matsudaira also attempted to give the emperor more power in the government. In 1864 he even joined a council of great lords appointed to advise the court and thus bring the Imperial house and the shogunate together. But when this group broke up, Matsudaira went back to serving the Tokugawa family, waiting for the inevitable conflict between the two factions. Since Matsudaira was known to be an Imperial supporter, he later served for a while in high positions in the Meiji government.
