Mercy Otis Warren, née Mercy Otis,  (born September 14 [September 25, New Style], 1728, Barnstable, Massachusetts [U.S.]—died October 19, 1814, Plymouth, Massachusetts, U.S.), American poet, dramatist, and historian whose proximity to political leaders and critical national events gives particular value to her writing on the American Revolutionary period. She is considered by some to be the first American woman to write primarily for the public rather than for herself.
Mercy Otis was born to a prosperous Cape Cod family. One of her brothers was the political activist and firebrand James Otis, who was early involved in events leading to the American Revolution. She received no formal schooling but managed to absorb something of an education from her uncle, the Rev. Jonathan Russell, who tutored her brothers and allowed her to study by their side in all subjects except Latin and Greek. In 1754 she married James Warren, a merchant and farmer who went on to serve in the Massachusetts legislature (1766–78), and bore five children. Because of her husband’s political associations, Warren was personally acquainted with most of the leaders of the Revolution and was continually at or near the centre of events for more than two decades, from the Stamp Act crisis of 1765 to the establishment of the federal republic in 1789.
After her brother James was brutally beaten by colonial revenue officers in 1769, Warren was increasingly drawn to political activism and hosted protest meetings at her home that resulted in the organization of the Committees of Correspondence. Combining her unique vantage point and fervent beliefs with a talent for writing, she then became both a poet and a historian of the Revolutionary era, beginning with a trio of scathingly polemical plays in verse that were published serially in a Boston newspaper. The Adulateur (1772) foretold the War of Revolution through the actions of Rapatio, a haughty, imperious official obviously modeled on Massachusetts’s royal governor, Thomas Hutchinson. The Defeat, also featuring Rapatio, followed a year later, and in 1775 Warren published The Group, a satire conjecturing what would happen if the British king abrogated the Massachusetts charter of rights. The anonymously published prose dramas The Blockheads (1776) and The Motley Assembly (1779), no less acerbic, are also attributed to her.
As the young United States, and Massachusetts in particular, began to move in a Federalist direction following the war, Warren remained steadfastly Republican. In 1788 she published Observations on the New Constitution, detailing her opposition to the document on account of its emphasis on a strong central government. Warren maintained social and political correspondences with her friends John and Abigail Adams. She wrote the latter about her belief that the relegation of women to minor concerns reflected not their inferior intellect but the inferior opportunities offered them to develop their capacities. She also corresponded with George Washington and Thomas Jefferson. In 1790 she published Poems, Dramatic and Miscellaneous, a collection of her works that contained two new plays, The Sack of Rome and The Ladies of Castille. In 1805 Warren completed a three-volume history titled A History of the Rise, Progress, and Termination of the American Revolution. The work deliberately avoided dull accounts of “military havoc” in favour of knowledgeable comments on the important personages of the day, which remain especially useful. Its marginalizing and sharply critical treatment of John Adams led to a heated correspondence and a breach in Warren’s friendship with the Adamses that lasted until 1812.
