Mexican Revolution,  (1910–20), a long and bloody struggle among several factions in constantly shifting alliances which resulted ultimately in the end of the 30-year dictatorship in Mexico and the establishment of a constitutional republic.
The revolution began against a background of widespread dissatisfaction with the elitist and oligarchical policies of Porfirio Díaz that favoured wealthy landowners and industrialists. When Díaz in 1908 said that he welcomed the democratization of Mexican political life and appeared ambivalent about running for his seventh reelection as president in 1910, Francisco Madero, an idealistic liberal from an upper-class family, emerged as the leader of the Antireeleccionistas and announced his candidacy. Díaz had him arrested and declared himself the winner after a mock election in June, but Madero, released from prison, published his Plan de San Luis Potosí from San Antonio, Texas, calling for a revolt on November 20.
The revolt was a failure, but it kindled revolutionary hope in many quarters. In the north,Pascual Orozco and Pancho Villa mobilized their ragged armies and began raiding government garrisons. In the south, Emiliano Zapata waged a bloody campaign against the local caciques (rural political bosses). In the spring of 1911 the revolutionary forces took Ciudad Juárez, forced Díaz to resign, and declared Madero president.
Madero’s regime faltered from the start. He proved to be a somewhat ineffectual chief executive and disappointed most of his followers by failing to recognize the need for economic changes. Nevertheless, he was a sincere believer in constitutional government, and labour and peasant groups were now free to demand reforms. Notably, Zapata turned against Madero, angered at his failure to effect the immediate restoration of land to dispossessed Native Americans. Orozco, initially a supporter of Madero, was dissatisfied with the slow pace of reform under the new government and led a revolutionary movement in the north.
In the meantime, U.S. Ambassador Henry Lane Wilson became an outspoken enemy of the Madero administration, and the U.S. government then turned against the new president, fearing that he was too conciliatory to the rebel groups and concerned about the threat that civil war in Mexico was posing to American business interests there. Tensions reached a peak when yet another faction of rebel forces, led by Félix Díaz (the former dictator’s nephew), clashed with federal troops in Mexico City under the command of Victoriano Huerta. On February 18, 1913, after the ninth day of that melee (known as La Decena Trágica, or “The Ten Tragic Days”), Huerta and Díaz met in Ambassador Wilson’s office and signed the so-called “Pact of the Embassy,” in which they agreed to conspire against Madero and to install Huerta as president. Huerta assumed the presidency the following day, after arresting Madero and his vice president, José María Pino Suárez, both of whom were shot a few days later, presumably on Huerta’s orders, while being transferred from one prison to another.
Opposition to Huerta’s drunken, inefficient, and despotic rule grew in the north, where movements to restore constitutional government with an elected president were launched in three states. Venustiano Carranza, whose Plan de Guadalupe called for Huerta’s resignation, led the effort  in Coahuila. Pancho Villa and Álvaro Obregón guided the rebellious opposition in Chihuahua and Sonora, respectively. An uneasy alliance was formed between the three groups. Meanwhile, in the mountains of the south, Zapata headed a rebellion aimed at land reform. The constitutionalist forces won the support of Woodrow Wilson, the new U.S. president, who refused to recognize Huerta, tried to induce him to agree to a free election, and in February 1914 permitted the constitutionalists to buy munitions in the United States while embargoing shipments for Huerta. When U.S. marines landing at Tampico were temporarily arrested by Mexican officials and Huerta refused to make adequate apologies, Wilson intervened more directly. In April, in order to prevent Huerta from receiving an arms shipment from Germany, U.S. naval forces seized Veracruz.
In the spring and summer of 1914, the loosely allied rebel forces converged on Mexico City. After a series of constitutionalist victories, Huerta went into exile in July 1914. Carranza declared himself president on August 20, over Villa’s objections. A state of anarchy and bloodshed ensued until Villa, Obregón, and Zapata held a convention at which it was agreed that the rivalry between Villa and Carranza made order impossible, and they elected Eulalio Gutiérrez interim president.
Villa retained the support of Zapata and backed Gutiérrez. Obregón, however, re-allied himself with Carranza and routed Villa in a bloody battle in April 1915 at Celaya. Thereafter, both Zapata and Villa lost ground, and Villa, blaming his defeat on Wilson’s support of Carranza, launched a vendetta against Americans in Mexico and in U.S. border towns. He executed about 17 U.S. citizens at Santa Isabel in January 1916, and his raid on Columbus, New Mexico, two months later, which claimed the lives of some 17 Americans, prompted Wilson to order Gen. John J. Pershing into the Mexican hills in futile pursuit.
Carranza, president again, presided over the writing of the constitution of 1917, which conferred dictatorial powers on the president but gave the government the right to confiscate land from wealthy landowners, guaranteed workers’ rights, and limited the rights of the Roman Catholic Church. Carranza remained in power by eliminating those who opposed him (Zapata was assassinated in 1919), but in 1920 opposition reached a climax when he tried to break up a railroad strike in Sonora. Deserted by virtually all his supporters, including Obregón, he was killed attempting to flee the capital on May 21. Adolfo de la Huerta became interim president until Obregón was elected in November.
Many historians regard 1920 as the end of the revolution, but sporadic violence and clashes between federal troops and various rebel forces continued until the reformist president, Lázaro Cárdenas, took office in 1934 and institutionalized the reforms that were fought for during the revolution and were legitimized in the constitution of 1917.
