Mihály, Count Károlyi, in full Mihaly, Count Károlyi von Nagykárolyi,  (born March 4, 1875, Fót, Hung., Austria-Hungary [now in Hungary]—died March 20, 1955, Vence, France), Hungarian statesman who before World War I desired a reorientation of Austro-Hungarian foreign policy toward friendship with states other than Germany. He also advocated concessions to Hungary’s non-Magyar subjects. After the war, as president of the Hungarian Democratic Republic in 1919, Károlyi was nevertheless unable to hold the lands of the former kingdom together and was soon forced into exile.
Károlyi was a member of one of the wealthiest and most famous families of the Hungarian aristocracy. Entering the Hungarian parliament as a conservative in 1910, he soon drifted to the left. His policies—the breakup of large estates, universal suffrage, equality of nationalities, and a maximum of freedom in the joint institutions of Austria-Hungary—were radical positions in conservative prewar Hungary; he had little actual power and almost no following. When, however, the military situation turned against the Central Powers toward the end of World War I, Károlyi emerged as an influential figure, and on Oct. 25, 1918, he formed a national council composed of his followers, bourgeois radicals, and social democrats. King Charles IV (Emperor Charles I of Austria) appointed him Hungarian prime minister on October 31 and recognized Hungary as a separate state with a separate army. Károlyi hoped to gain a favourable peace settlement from the Allies but was disappointed. Czechoslovakia, Romania, and Yugoslavia seized extensive stretches of Hungary, and when the Allies demanded yet further territorial concessions, he resigned (March 20, 1919) the presidency that he had held since January 11. He was replaced by Béla Kun and the Hungarian Soviet Republic. After fleeing abroad in July 1919, Károlyi became a left-wing socialist, returning to Hungary in 1946. While ambassador to Paris (1947–49), he resigned after the arrest of László Rajk and protested, from Paris, against Rajk’s death sentence.
