Pancho Villa, byname of Francisco Villa, original name Doroteo Arango,  (born June 5, 1878, Hacienda de Río Grande, San Juan del Río, Durango, Mexico—died July 20, 1923, Parral, Chihuahua), Mexican revolutionary and guerrilla leader who fought against the regimes of both Porfirio Díaz and Victoriano Huerta and after 1914 engaged in civil war and banditry.
Villa was the son of a field labourer and was orphaned at an early age. In revenge for an assault on his sister, he killed one of the owners of the estate on which he worked and was afterward forced to flee to the mountains, where he spent his adolescence as a fugitive.
In 1910 Villa joined Francisco Madero’s uprising against the dictator of Mexico, Porfirio Díaz. During the rebellion, Villa, who lacked a formal education but had learned to read and write, displayed his talents as soldier and organizer. Combined with his intimate knowledge of the land and the people of northern Mexico, those gifts enabled him to place at Madero’s disposal a division of trained soldiers under his command. After the success of the revolution, Villa remained in the irregular army.
In 1912, during the rebellion of Pascual Orozco, Villa aroused the suspicion of Gen. Victoriano Huerta, who condemned him to death, but Madero ordered a stay of execution and sent Villa to prison instead. Villa escaped from prison in November and fled to the United States. After Madero’s assassination in 1913, Villa returned to Mexico and formed a military band of several thousand men that became known as the famous División del Norte (Division of the North). Combining his force with that of Venustiano Carranza, Villa revolted against the increasingly repressive and inefficient dictatorship of Huerta, once again revealing his military talents by winning several victories. In December 1913 Villa became governor of the state of Chihuahua. With Carranza, he won a decisive victory over Huerta in June 1914. Together Villa and Carranza entered Mexico City as the victorious leaders of a revolution.
Distrust and rivalry between the two men, however, soon led to a break between them, and Villa was forced to flee Mexico City with the revolutionary leader Emiliano Zapata in December 1914. Badly defeated by Carranza in a series of battles, he and Zapata fled to the mountains of the north. In order to demonstrate that Carranza did not control northern Mexico, Villa executed some 17 U.S. citizens at Santa Isabel, Chihuahua, in January 1916 and two months later attacked Columbus, New Mexico, killing about 17 Americans. U.S. Pres. Woodrow Wilson then sent an expedition under Gen. John J. Pershing to that area. Because of Villa’s popularity and intimate acquaintance with the terrain of northern Mexico, however, and because of the Mexican government’s dislike of Pershing’s presence on Mexican soil, it proved impossible to capture Villa.
Villa continued his guerrilla activities as long as Carranza remained in power. After the overthrow of Carranza’s government in 1920, Villa was granted a pardon and a ranch near Parral (now Hidalgo del Parral), Chihuahua, in return for agreeing to retire from politics. Three years later he was assassinated amid a barrage of gunfire while traveling home in his car from a visit to Parral.
