Philip Mazzei,  (born December 25, 1730, Poggio a Caiano, Tuscany [Italy]—died March 19, 1816, Pisa, Italy), Italian physician, merchant, and author, ardent supporter of the American Revolution, and correspondent of Thomas Jefferson.
Mazzei studied medicine in Florence and practiced in Turkey before moving in 1755 to London, where he became a wine merchant. In 1773 Mazzei set sail for the American colonies, intending to launch the development of olive and grape growing in Virginia. He established an experimental farm next to Jefferson’s Monticello. Mazzei soon became enveloped in the independence movement, and he strongly favoured Virginia’s strides toward religious and political freedom. In 1779 he accepted a commission from Patrick Henry, the Virginia governor, to seek a loan from the grand duke of Tuscany. After being captured by the British and imprisoned for three months, Mazzei arrived in Europe—only to find his every effort blocked by Benjamin Franklin, who believed that the national government alone could contract foreign debts.
Mazzei remained in Europe until late 1783, collecting political and military information for Jefferson. He returned to the United States briefly in quest of a foreign service post, but when that effort failed he went back to Europe. In 1788 his four volumes on America, Recherches historiques et politiques sur les États-Unis de l’Amérique septentrionale (“Historical and Political Studies of the Northern United States of America”), were published in Paris.
In 1789 Mazzei became an adviser to Stanisław II August Poniatowski, last king of an independent Poland, and in 1802 he began to receive a pension from Russia. He continued for many years to correspond with Jefferson and other Virginians. One of Jefferson’s letters to him—criticizing the Federalists and, by implication, George Washington—created a storm of controversy when it fell into the hands of political opponents and American newspapers reprinted it.
Three years before his death, Mazzei completed an account in Italian of his remarkable life and travels; it was published in two volumes in 1845–46.
