Rudolf von Bennigsen, in full Karl Wilhelm Rudolf von Bennigsen,  (born July 10, 1824, Lüneburg, Hanover [Germany]—died August 7, 1902, Bennigsen, Hanover), Hanoverian politician who combined liberalism with support for Prussian hegemony in a united Germany.
After studying law at the University of Göttingen, Bennigsen, the son of a Hanoverian major general, entered the civil service of Hanover but had to resign in 1856 in order to accept his election to the lower chamber of that kingdom. A vigorous defender of freedom of religion, he became leader of the liberal opposition and, in 1859, president of the Nationalverein (German National Union), which he founded with Johannes von Miquel. The organization’s aims were a united Germany led by Prussia, an all-German parliament, and the exclusion of Austria. After the Nationalverein was dissolved in 1867, he was instrumental in founding the National Liberal Party, which was the dominant group in the Reichstag for most of the 1870s.
Bennigsen had unsuccessfully attempted to prevent Hanover from entering the Seven Weeks’ War (1866) on the side of Austria and, after the defeat of the Austrian alliance, wanted his sovereign’s territories to remain a separate state. Upon the transformation of Hanover into a province of Prussia, however, he entered the Prussian chamber of deputies and the diet of the North German Confederation, turning down the offer of Chancellor Otto von Bismarck to head the provisional government of the new province. From 1871 to 1897, with the exception of a four-year retirement (1883–87), he was a member of the all-German Reichstag and served as its president from 1873 to 1879. In 1877 Bismarck’s attempt to bring him into the cabinet collapsed because of the opposition of Emperor William I and Bennigsen’s insistence on the appointment of two other party colleagues to ministerial posts. Relations with the German chancellor cooled when the National Liberals rejected Bismarck’s protectionist policies in 1879, an action that also destroyed the power of the party. The same year a right-wing protectionist group split away, the next year a radical group.
In 1888 William II (Kaiser [emperor] Wilhelm II) appointed Bennigsen president of the province of Hanover. Bennigsen retired from public life in 1897.
