 When British exploration of the Arctic was at its peak during the first half of the 19th century, disasters were not uncommon. Many lives were lost in search of the Northwest Passage, a sea route through the North American Arctic. However, few doomed missions captured the popular imagination as much as the one captained by Sir John Franklin. Franklin’s ships, the HMS Erebus and the HMS Terror, were technical marvels when they sailed from England in 1845, yet they were lost virtually without a trace. Franklin’s fate would remain unknown until 1859, when explorer Francis Leopold McClintock uncovered the graves of some of Franklin’s men as well as a written record of the expedition’s disastrous end.
This biography of Franklin was published in 1856 in the eighth edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica, at a time when the Franklin expedition was still the subject of an active and ongoing recovery effort. It was penned by Sir John Richardson, who had accompanied Franklin on his first two overland explorations of the Canadian Arctic and who had personally led a rescue mission in search of Franklin in 1848–49. A fascinating example of Britannica’s efforts to cover contemporary events, this biography is also an unabashed tribute to Franklin.
FRANKLIN, Sir John, Rear-Admiral of the Blue, was a native of Spilsby, in Lincolnshire. Sprung from a line of freeholders, or “Franklins,” his father inherited a small family estate, which was so deeply mortgaged by his immediate predecessor that it was found necessary to sell it; but by his success in commercial pursuits he was enabled to maintain and educate a family of twelve children, of whom one only died in infancy. The fortunes of his four sons were remarkable, unaided as they were by patronage or great connections. Thomas, the eldest, following the pursuits of his father, acquired the local reputation of an acute and highly honourable man of business, whose intellect gave him much influence with his neighbours, and in a time of threatened invasion, he was mainly instrumental in raising a body of yeomanry cavalry, in which he did the duty of adjutant, and was afterwards chosen to be lieutenant-colonel of a regiment of volunteer infantry. The second son, Sir Willingham, educated at Westminster, was elected to a scholarship of Christ’s Church, Oxford, and after gaining an Oriel fellowship, was called to the bar, and died a judge at Madras. James, the third son, having, as cadet, exhibited great proficiency in Hindostanee and Persian, was presented by the India Company with a handsome sword, L.50 in money, and a cornetcy in the First Bengal Native Cavalry, in which he rose to the rank of major. He was noted while in India for his scientific knowledge, which procured him a lucrative civil appointment, but his advancement was interrupted by ill-health, and after executing extensive surveys of the country, he was under the necessity of returning to England, where he died. His collections in natural history were highly appreciated by zoologists.
John, the youngest son, and the subject of this memoir, was destined for the church by his father, who, with this view, had purchased an advowson for him. He received the first rudiments of education at St. Ives, and afterwards went to Louth Grammar School where he remained two years; but having employed a holiday in walking twelve miles with a companion to look at the sea, which up to that time he knew only by description, his imagination was so impressed with the grandeur of the scene that former predilections for a sea life were confirmed, and he determined from thenceforth to be a sailor. In the hope of dispelling what he considered to be a boyish fancy, his father sent him on a trial voyage to Lisbon in a merchantman, but finding on his return that his wishes were unchanged, procured him, in the year 1800, an entry on the quarterdeck of the Polyphemus, 74, Captain Lawford; and this ship having led the line in the battle of Copenhagen in 1801, young Franklin had the honour of serving in Nelson’s hardest fought action. Having left school at the early age of thirteen, his classical attainments were necessarily small, and at that period there was no opportunity on board a ship of war of remedying the defect. Two months, however, after the action of Copenhagen, he joined the Investigator, discovery-ship, commanded by his relative Captain Flinders, and under the training of that able scientific officer, while employed in exploring and mapping the coasts of Australia, he acquired a correctness of astronomical observation and a skill in surveying which proved of eminent utility in his future career. In the prosecution of this service he gained for life the friendship of the celebrated Robert Brown, naturalist to the expedition. In 1803, the Investigator having been condemned at Port Jackson as unfit for the prosecution of the voyage, Captain Flinders determined to return to England to solicit another ship for the completion of the survey, and Franklin embarked with him on board the Porpoise armed store-ship, Lieutenant-Commander Fowler. In the voyage homewards this ship, and the Cato which accompanied her, were wrecked in the night of the 18th of August, on a coral reef, distant from Sandy Cape, on the main coast of Australia, 63 leagues, and the crews, consisting of 94 persons, remained for 50 days on a narrow sand-bank, not more than 150 fathoms long, and rising only four feet above the water, until Captain Flinders, having made a voyage to Port Jackson, of 250 leagues, in an open boat, along a savage coast, returned to their relief with a ship and two schooners.1 After this misfortune, Captain Flinders, as is well known, went to the Isle of France, where he was unjustly and ungenerously detained a prisoner by General de Caen, the governor. Meanwhile Franklin proceeded with Lieutenant Fowler to Canton, where he obtained a passage to England in the Earl Camden, East Indiaman, commanded by Sir Nathaniel Dance, commodore of the China fleet of 16 sail. On the 15th of February 1804, Captain Dance had the distinguished honour of repulsing a strong French squadron, led by the redoubted Admiral Linois. Lieutenant Fowler assisted the commodore with his professional advice in this action, and Franklin performed the important duty of signal midshipman. On reaching England, Franklin joined the Bellerophon, 74, and in that ship he was again entrusted with the signals, a duty which he executed with his accustomed coolness and intrepidity in the great battle of Trafalgar, while those stationed around him on the poop fell fast, and were all, with only four or five exceptions, either killed or wounded. In the Bedford, his next ship, he attained the rank of lieutenant, and remaining in her for six years, latterly as first lieutenant, served in the blockade of Flushing, on the coast of Portugal, and in other parts of the world, but chiefly on the Brazil station, whither the Bedford had gone as one of the convoy which conducted the royal family of Portugal to Rio de Janeiro in 1808. In the ill-managed and disastrous attack on New Orleans, he commanded the Bedford’s boats in an engagement with the enemy’s gun-boats, one of which he boarded and captured, receiving a slight wound in the hand-to-hand fight.
On peace being established, Franklin turned his attention once more to the scientific branch of his profession, as affording scope for his talents, and having made his wishes known to Sir Joseph Banks, who was generally consulted by government on such matters, he set himself sedulously to refresh his knowledge of surveying. In 1818, the discovery of a north-west passage became again, after a long interval, a national object, principally through the suggestions and writings of Sir John Barrow, secretary of the Admiralty, and Lieutenant Franklin was appointed to the Trent, as second to Captain Buchan of the Dorothea, hired vessels equipped for penetrating to the north of Spitzbergen, and, if possible, crossing the Polar Sea by that route. During a heavy storm, both ships were forced to seek for safety by boring into the closely packed ice, in which extremely hazardous operation the Dorothea was so much damaged that her reaching England became doubtful, but the Trent having sustained less injury, Franklin requested to be allowed to prosecute the voyage alone, or under Captain Buchan, who had the power of embarking in the Trent if he chose. The latter, however, declined to leave his officers and men at a time when the ship was almost in a sinking condition, and directed Franklin to convoy him to England. Though success did not attend this voyage, it brought Franklin into personal intercourse with the leading scientific men of London, and they were not slow in ascertaining his peculiar fitness for the command of such an enterprise. His calmness in danger, promptness and fertility of resource, and excellent seamanship, as proved under the trying situation which cut short the late voyage, were borne ample testimony to by the official reports of his commanding officer; but to these characteristics of a British seaman, he added other qualities less common, more especially an ardent desire to promote science for its own sake, and not merely for the distinction which eminence in it confers, together with a love of truth that led him to do full justice to the merits of his subordinate officers, without wishing to claim their discoveries as a captain’s right. Added to this, he had a cheerful buoyancy of mind, which, sustained by religious principle of a depth known only to his most intimate friends, was not depressed in the most gloomy times. It was, therefore, with full confidence in his ability and exertions that he was, in 1819, placed in command of an expedition appointed to travel through Rupert’s Land to the shores of the Arctic Sea; while Lieutenant Parry, who had in like manner risen from second officer under Sir John Ross to a chief command, was despatched with two vessels to Lancaster Sound, a mission attended with a success that spread his fame throughout the world. At this period, the northern coast of America was known at two isolated points only, viz., the mouth of the Copperrnine River, discovered by Hearne, but placed erroneously by him four degrees of latitude too much to the north; and the mouth of the Mackenzie, more correctly laid down by the very able traveller by whose name the river is now known. On the side of Behring’s Straits, Cook had penetrated only to Icy Cape, and on the eastern coasts Captain (Sir John) Ross, in 1818, had ascertained the correctness of Baffin’s survey, which had been questioned, and had looked into Lancaster Sound and reported it to be closed by an impassable mountain barrier. To stimulate enterprise by rewarding discoverers, the legislature established a scale of premiums graduated by the degrees of longitude to which ships should penetrate, but no provision was made for a pecuniary recompense to any one who should trace out the north-west passage in hosts or canoes.
Lieutenant Franklin, accompanied by a surgeon, two midshipmen, and a few Orkneymen, embarked for Hudson’s Bay, in June 1819, on board of one of the company’s ships, which ran ashore on Cape Resolution during a fog on the voyage out, and was saved from foundering by Franklin’s nautical skill. On reaching the anchorage off York Factory, a large hole was found in the ship’s bottom, but so far closed by a fragment of rock as considerably to diminish the influx of water. Franklin’s instructions left the route he was to pursue much to his own judgment; in fact, so little was then known in England of the country through which he was to travel, even by the best informed members of the government, that no detailed directions could be given, and he was to be guided by the information he might be able to collect at York Factory from the Hudson’s Bay Company’s servants there assembled. No time could be more unpropitious for a journey through that land. For some years an internecine warfare had been carried on between the North-West Company, operating from Canada, claiming a right to the fur trade from priority of discovery, and holding commissions as justices of peace from the colonial government, and the Hudson’s Bay Company, which, in virtue of a charter from King Charles the Second, attempted to maintain an exclusive authority over all the vast territory drained by the rivers that fall into the bay. Arrests by clashing warrants of the contending justices were frequent, might became right when the members of the two companies met, personal violence, seizure of property, and even assassination were too common, and in a recent fight at Red River 22 colonists of the Hudson’s Bay Company had lost their lives. Numbers also had perished of famine in the interior owing to the contests that were carried on. When the expedition landed at York Factory, they found some of the leading North-West partners prisoners there, and learnt that both companies were arming to the extent of their means for a decisive contest next summer. Such being the state of the country, a party coming out in a Hudson’s Bay ship was looked upon with suspicion by the members of the rival company, and it was mainly through Franklin’s prudent conduct and conciliating manners that it was permitted to proceed; but sufficient aid to ensure its safety was not afforded by either of the contending bodies. Wintering the first year on the Saskatchewan, the expedition was fed by the Hudson’s Bay Company; the second winter was spent on the “barren grounds,” the party subsisting on game and fish procured by their own exertions, or purchased from their native neighbours; and in the following summer the expedition descended the Coppermine River, and surveyed a considerable extent of the sea-coast to the eastward, still depending for food on the casual supplies of the chase, and often faring very scantily, or fasting altogether. The disasters attending the return over the barren grounds, on the premature approach of winter, have been told by Franklin himself in a narrative which excited universal interest and commiseration. The loss of Mr Hood, a young officer of very great promise, and who at the time of his death had been promoted to the rank of lieutenant, was especially deplored. The survivors of this expedition travelled from their outset at York Factory down to their return to it again, by land and water, 5550 miles. While engaged on this service, Franklin was promoted to be a Commander, and after his return to England in 1822, he obtained the post rank of Captain, and was elected to be a fellow of the Royal Society. In the succeeding year he married Eleanor,2 the youngest daughter of William Porden, Esq., an eminent architect, by whom he had a daughter and only child, now the wife of the Rev. John Philip Gell.
In a second expedition, which left home in 1825, he descended the Mackenzie under more favourable auspices, peace having been established throughout the fur-countries under the exclusive government of the Hudson’s Bay Company, which had taken the north-west traders into partnership, and was then in a position to afford him effectual assistance, and speed him on his way in comfort. This time the coast line was traced through 37 degrees of longitude from the mouth of the Coppermine River, where his former survey commenced, to nearly the 150th meridian, and approaching within 160 miles of the most easterly point attained by Captain Beechey, who was co-operating with him from Behring’s Straits. His exertions were fully appreciated at home and abroad. He was knighted in 1829, received the honorary degree of Doctor of Civil Law from the University of Oxford, was adjudged the gold medal of the Geographical Society of Paris, and was elected in 1846 Correspondent of the Institute of France in the Academy of Sciences. Though the late surveys executed by himself and by a detachment under command of Sir John Richardson comprised one, and within a few miles of two, of the spaces for which a parliamentary reward was offered, the Board of Longitude declined making the award, but a bill was soon afterwards laid before parliament by the secretary of the Admiralty abrogating the reward altogether, on the ground of the discoveries contemplated having been thus effected.3 In 1828 he married his second wife, Jane, second daughter of John Griffin, Esq.
Sir John’s next official employment was on the Mediterranean station, in command of the Rainbow, and his ship soon became proverbial in the squadron for the happiness and comfort of her officers and crew.4 As an acknowledgment of the essential service he had rendered off Patras in the “war of liberation,” he received the Cross of the Redeemer of Greece from King Otho, and after his return to England he was created Knight Commander of the Guelphic order of Hanover.
In 1836 Lord Glenelg offered Sir John the lieutenant-governorship of Antigua, and afterwards of Van Diemen’s Land, or Tasmania, which latter he accepted, with the condition that he might be allowed to resign it, if, on a war breaking out, he were tendered the command of a ship. He preferred rising in his own profession to the emoluments of the civil service. In as far as a man of independent political principles, of strict honour and integrity, conspicuous for the benevolence of his character, without private interests to serve, and of a capacity which had been shown in several important commands, was likely to benefit the colony he was sent to govern, the choice was a judicious one, and did honour to Lord Glenelg’s discernment. Dr Arnold, no mean judge of character, rejoicing in the promise the appointment gave of a new era in the annals of colonial management, expressed the delight with which, had circumstances permitted, he would have laboured with such a governor in founding a system of general education and religious instruction in that distant land. Sir John’s government, which lasted till the end of 1843, was marked by several events of much interest. One of his most popular measures was the opening of the doors of the legislative council to the public, a practice soon afterwards followed by the older colony of New South Wales. He also originated a college, endowing it largely from his private funds with money and lands, in the hope that it would eventually prove the means of affording to all parties secular and religious instruction of the highest kind. At Sir John’s request Dr Arnold selected a favourite pupil, the Rev. John Philip Gell,5 to take the direction of this institution; but much opposition to the fundamental plan of the college was made by various religious bodies, and after Sir John left the colony the exclusive management of it was vested in the Church of England, with free admission to the members of other persuasions. In his time also the colony of Victoria was founded by settlers from Tasmania; and towards its close, transportation to New South Wales having been abolished, the convicts from every part of the British empire were sent to Tasmania. Up to the period of his quitting the government this concentration had occasioned no material inconvenience, neither was there at that time any organized opposition to it. On an increase to the lieutenant-governor’s salary being voted by the colonial legislature, Sir John declined to derive any advantage from it personally, while he secured the augmentation to his successor. In 1838 he founded a scientific society at Hobarton (now called the “Royal Society”). Its papers were printed at his expense, and its meetings were held in Government House. He had also the gratification of erecting in South Australia, with the aid of the governor of that colony, a handsome granite obelisk, dedicated and inscribed to the memory of his former commanding officer, Captain Flinders, to whose discoveries we owe our earliest knowledge of that part of the continent of Australia. It stands on a lofty hill, and serves as a landmark to sailors. A magnetic observatory, founded in 1840, at Hobarton, in connection with the head establishment under Colonel Sabine at Woolwich, was an object of constant personal interest to Sir John; and Tasmania being the appointed refitting station of several expeditions of discovery in the Antarctic regions, he enjoyed frequent opportunities of exercising the hospitality he delighted in, and of showing his ardour in promoting the interests of science whenever it lay in his power to do so. The lamented Dumont d’Urville commanded the French expedition, and Sir James Clark Ross the English one, consisting of the Erebus and Terror. The surveying vessels employed in those seas during that period came also in succession to Hobarton—namely, the Beagle, Captain Wickham; the Pelorus, Captain Harding; the Rattlesnake, Captain Owen Stanley; the Beagle (2d voyage), Captain Stokes; and the Fly, Captain Blackwood; all of whom, with the officers under them, received from the lieutenant-governor a brother sailor’s welcome. Thus pleasantly occupied, the years allotted to a colonial governorship drew towards a close, and Sir John contemplated with no common satisfaction the advancing strides of’ the colony in material prosperity; but he was not destined to be spared one of those deep mortifications to which every one is exposed, however upright he may be in his conduct abroad, who is dependent for support and approval on a chief at home that changes with every party revolution. When Sir John was sent to Tasmania, England had not yet recognised as an established fact that the inhabitants of a colony are better judges of their own interests, and more able to manage their own affairs, than a bureaucracy in Downing Street, with a constantly shifting head, ill informed of the factious oligarchies that infest colonies, and of the ties that connect them with subordinate officials at home. Previous to leaving England Sir John was advised, and indeed instructed, to consult the colonial-secretary of Tasmania in all matters of public concern, as being a man of long experience, thoroughly acquainted with the affairs of the colony; and he found, on taking charge of his government, that this was a correct character of the officer next to himself in authority. Mr Montagu was a man eminently skilful in the management of official matters, but he was also the acknowledged head of a party in the colony bound together by family ties, and possessing great local influence from the important and lucrative situations held by its members, and the extensive operations of a bank of which they had the chief control. Party struggles ran high in the legislative council, and the lieutenant-governor’s position was one of great delicacy, while the difficulty of his situation was vastly augmented through the practice of the officials in Downing Street of encouraging private communications on public measures from subordinate officers of the colony, and weighing them with the despatches of the lieutenant-governor. For some years, by Sir John’s prudent conduct, the harmony of the colonial executive was not interrupted; but at a later period the colonial secretary, having visited England, returned to Tasmania with greater pretensions, and commenced a course of independent action, ever hostile to his chief, subversive of the harmonious co-operation heretofore existing, and thus injurious to the interests of the colony, so that Sir John was under the necessity of suspending this officer from his functions until the pleasure of Lord Stanley, then secretary of state for the colonies, was known. Mr Montagu immediately proceeded to England to state his own case, and he did it with such effect that Lord Stanley, while admitting that the colonial secretary had acquired a local influence which rendered “his restoration to his office highly inexpedient,”6 penned a despatch which is not unjustly characterized as a consummate piece of special pleading for Mr Montagu, whom it absolves, while it comments on the lieutenant-governor’s proceedings in a style exceedingly offensive to a high-minded officer who had acted, as he conceived, with the strictest regard to the public interests. The extraordinary measure was also resorted to of instantly furnishing Mr Montagu, then in attendance at Downing Street, with a copy of this despatch, so that he was enabled to transmit it to Hobarton, where it was exposed in the Bank to public inspection. At the same time there was circulated privately amongst the officers of the colonial government and others a journal of his transactions with the lieutenant-governor, and of his private communications with members of Franklin’s family, which he had kept for years while on terms of close social intercourse with them. This volume having answered in England the purpose for which it was intended, was now exhibited in the colony as containing an account of the subjects on which he stated he had held conversations with Lord Stanley. All this took place before the lieutenant-governor received official intimation of Lord Stanley’s decision. The recovery of a document which had lain secluded in an office in the colony enabled Sir John afterwards more fully to substantiate one of the most important charges he had made, nevertheless Lord Stanley refused to modify the terms he had employed, or to make any concession calculated to soothe the wounded feeling of an honourable and zealous officer. The arrival of a new lieutenant-governor, the late Sir John Eardley Wilmot, bringing with him the first notice of his own appointment, and consequently finding Sir John still in the colony, served to show more strongly than could otherwise have been done, the hold the latter had gained on the affections of the colonists, and the verdict pronounced on Lord Stanley’s despatch by the people, to whom all the merits of the case were most fully known. Sir John, after three months’ longer residence at Hobarton as a private individual waiting for a passage to England, during which time he received addresses emanating from every district of the colony, was attended to the place of embarkation by the most numerous assemblage of all classes of people which had ever been seen on those shores, the recently consecrated Bishop of Tasmania7 walking at their head, along with the new colonial secretary, the late Mr Bicheno, who for some months had acted in the greatest harmony with Sir John. A local paper, after describing the scene in much detail, adds—“Thus departed from
among us as true and upright a governor as ever the destinies of a British colony were entrusted to.” Years afterwards, when the enthusiasm of party feelings could have no share in their proceedings, the colonists showed their remembrance of his virtues in a more substantial manner, as will be mentioned below. Sir John, on receiving the secretary of state’s despatch, had tendered his resignation, but his successor was appointed before his letter could reach England, though, as we have just said, his recall-despatch did not come to Tasmania till some days after Sir Eardley’s arrival.
Owing to the fortunate rendezvous at Hobarton of the scientific expeditions and surveying ships above named, as well as of many of her Majesty’s vessels engaged in the ordinary service of those seas, the intrigues of the family faction and their supporters in the colony being matters of common discussion, became known to numbers of Sir John’s brother officers, and a true estimate of the treatment he had received from the colonial minister was formed by the profession to which he belonged. He found, therefore, on reaching England, that the confidence of the Admiralty in his integrity and ability was undiminished, and this was speedily shown by his appointment in 1845 to the command of an expedition, consisting of the Erebus and Terror, fitted out for the further discovery of the north-west passage. With an experienced second in command, Captain Crozier, trained under Parry and James Ross from 1821 in the navigation of icy seas, a select body of officers chosen for their talent and energy, and excellent crews, in ships as strong as art could make them, and well furnished, Franklin sailed from England for the last time on the 26th of May 1845. He was last seen by a whaler on the 26th of July in Baffin’s Bay, at which time the expedition was proceeding prosperously. Letters written by him a few days previous to that date were couched in language of cheerful anticipation of success, while those received from his officers expressed their admiration of the seamanlike qualities of their commander, and the happiness they had in serving under him. In autumn 1847 public anxiety began to be manifested for the safety of the discoverers, of whom nothing more had been heard; and searching expedition after expedition despatched in quest of them in 1848 and the succeeding years down to 1854, regardless of cost or hazard, redound to the lasting credit of England. In this pious undertaking Sir John’s heroic wife took the lead. Her exertions were unwearied, she exhausted her private funds in sending out auxiliary vessels to quarters not comprised in the public search, and by her pathetic appeals she roused the sympathy of the whole civilized world. France sent her Bellot; the United States of America replied to her calls by manning two searching expeditions, the expenses of which were borne by Mr Grinnel, a wealthy private citizen of great humanity and liberality; and the inhabitants of Tasmania subscribed L.1700, which they transmitted to Lady Franklin as their contribution towards the expense of the search. In August 1850 traces of the missing ships were discovered, and it was ascertained that their first winter had been spent behind Beechey Island, where they had remained at least as late as April 1846. Yet in spite of every exertion by the searching parties, no further tidings were obtained until the spring of 1854, when Dr Rae, then conducting an exploring party of the Hudson’s Bay Company, learnt from the Eskimos that in 1850 white men, to the number of about forty, had been seen dragging a boat over the ice near the north shore of King William’s Island, and that later in the same season, but before the breaking up of the ice, the bodies of the whole party were found by the natives on a point lying at a short distance to the north-west of Back’s Great Fish River, where they had perished from the united effects of cold and famine. These unfortunate men were identified as the remnant of the crews of the Erebus and Terror by numerous articles which the Eskimos had picked up at the place where they perished, many of which Dr Rae purchased from that people and brought to England. Point Ogle is supposed by this gentleman to be the spot where the bodies lie; and this summer (1855) Mr Anderson of the Hudson’s Bay Company started from Great Slave Lake to examine the locality, pay the last tribute of respect to the dead, and collect any written papers that might remain there or books and journals said to be in the hands of the Eskimos. By considering the direction in which the party that perished were travelling when seen by the natives, and the small district that remains unexplored, we must come to the conclusion that the ships were finally beset between the 70th and 72d parallels of latitude, and near the 100th meridian. Two entrances from the north may exist to this part of the sea, one along the west coast of North Somerset and Boothia, which is an almost certain one; and the other, which is more conjectural, may occupy the short unexplored space between Captain Sherard Osborn’s and Lieutenant Wynniatt’s extreme points. To approach this last strait, if it actually exists, Cape Walker would be left on the eastern side of the passing ships. It is a singular and most melancholy fact, that the very limited district of the Arctic Sea thus indicated, and which was specially adverted to in the original plan of search, is almost the only spot that has defied the exertions of the skilful and persevering officers who have attempted to explore it. Sir James Ross failed in reaching it; it intervenes between the extremes of the long and laborious journeys made by Captain Sherard Osborn and Lieutenant Wynniatt. Dr Rae’s two attempts to enter it were frustrated by the state of the ice and other circumstances, and Captain Collinson was also stopped short on its southern side by the want of fuel. Lady Franklin had sent out the Prince Albert for the express purpose of searching this quarter, but Mr Kennedy unfortunately, instead of adhering to the letter of his instructions, trusted to a distant view of the passage from the north, which seemed to him to be closed, and turning to the west, made his memorable winter journey through a space which, though he was ignorant of the fact at the time, had been previously examined.
With the utmost economy in its use, fuel would soon become precious on board the Erebus and Terror: and it is probable that after three years one of the ships would be broken up to furnish this essential article. Provisions could not last longer without placing the crews on short allowance, and to do so in that climate subjected them to sure and destructive attacks of scurvy. Fish and venison, it is true, might be procured in quantities sufficient to modify these conclusions, but not to a great extent; and, beyond all question, the numbers of the intrepid sailors who left England in such health and spirits in 1845 had waned sadly by the close of the season for operations in 1849. The forty men seen by the natives early in 1850 were doubtless the only survivors at that date. Franklin, had he lived till then, would have been sixty-four years old, but no one of that age was in the number seen by the natives. Had he been then in existence, he would have taken another route on the abandonment of his ship, as no one knew better than he the fatal result of an attempt to cross that wide expanse of barren ground lying between the mouth of the Great Fish River and the far-distant Hudson’s Bay post on the south side of Great Slave Lake. Who can conjecture the reason that turned the steps of the weary wanderers in that direction? Perhaps the desire of solving the long-sought problem of a north-west passage even then animated their emaciated frames, and it is certain that they did solve it, though none of them lived to claim the grateful applause of their countrymen. Later in point of time, and in a higher latitude, Sir Robert M‘Clure also filled up a narrow gap between previous discoveries, and so traced out the north-west passage by travelling over ice that has in the five several years in which it has been attempted proved to be a barrier to ships. If ever in the pursuit of whales, or for conveyance of minerals, commercial enterprise endeavours to force a north-west passage by steam, the southern route, whose last link was forged by Franklin’s party with their lives, will undoubtingly be chosen. And it is to be deeply regretted that the parliamentary committee in recommending the grant of public money to Sir Robert M‘Clure, which his courage and enterprise so well deserved, should have omitted to mention the prior discovery made by the crews of the Erebus and Terror.8
This sketch of Sir John Franklin’s character and public services has been written by one who served long under his command, who during upwards of twenty-five years of close intimacy had his entire confidence, and in times of great difficulty and distress, when all conventional disguise was out of the question, beheld his calmness and unaffected piety. If it has in some passages assumed the appearance of eulogy, it has done so not for the purpose of unduly exalting its subject, but from a firm conviction of the truth of the statements. On the other hand, the writer has abstained, in the only sentences in which it was necessary to speak of opponents, from saying a single word more of their conduct or motives than strict justice to Franklin’s memory demanded, Franklin himself was singularly devoid of any vindictive feeling. While he defended his own honour, he would have delighted in showing any kindness in his power to his bitterest foe; and in emulation of that spirit the preceding pages have been penned.
1 The Bridgewater, another merchantman, was also in company with the Porpoise at the time of the wreck, and narrowly escaped sharing the same fate. The master of her, however, having on the following day seen the shipwrecked vessels from a distance, proceeded on his voyage to Bombay, where, on his arrival, he reported their loss. He did not live to explain his motives to those whom he thus deserted, for the Bridgewater never was heard of again after she left Bombay.^
2 She died in 1825.^
3 Messrs Dease and Simpson of the Hudson’s Bay Company, at a later period (1836–1839) completed the survey of 160 miles of coast line, lying between the extreme points of Beechey and Franklin, and navigated the sea eastwards beyond the mouth of Back’s Great Fish River, proving the existence of a continuous water-course from Behring’s Straits through 73° of longitude, as far eastward as the ninety-fourth meridian.^
4 The sailors, with their usual fondness for epithets, named the ship the “Celestial Rainbow” and “Franklin’s Paradise.”^
5 In later years he became Sir John’s son-in-law, as mentioned above.^
6 Lord Stanley’s despatch, 13th September 1842. Mr Montagu was promoted to be colonial secretary at the Cape of Good Hope.^
7 The erection of Tasmania into a see was promoted by Sir John’s exertions and representations.^
8 Spars and pieces of rail recognized as having belonged to the Erebus or Terror were picked up by Captain Collinson near his wintering place in Cambridge Bay, and are sufficient evidence of currents setting in that direction, though a passage encumbered doubtless with drift ice.
The very extensive search for this ill-fated expedition has issued in a more complete exploration of those ice-encumbered seas than would otherwise have been instituted; but an account of the operations connected therewith will be given hereafter under the head of “Polar Regions,” by one [British naval officer Sherard Osborn] thoroughly acquainted with the whole subject—one who, in the prosecution of daring and successful private enterprise, preceded the modern “arctic voyages” instituted by government, discovered much of the Greenland coast, and gained a higher latitude than any former navigator.^
