Takasugi Shinsaku,  (born Sept. 27, 1839, Hagi, Nagato province, Japan—died May 17, 1867, Shimonoseki), noted Japanese imperial loyalist whose restructuring of the military forces of the feudal fief of Chōshū enabled that domain to defeat the armies of the Tokugawa shogun, the hereditary military dictator of Japan. That victory led to the Meiji Restoration (1868), the overthrow of shogunal government and the restoration of power to the emperor.
Like most other imperial loyalists, Takasugi originally was strongly antiforeign, but he finally concluded that the expulsion of all Westerners from Japan was impossible, and he became an advocate of Western military techniques. His about-face almost resulted in his assassination, but he was vindicated in 1863, when attempts to expel foreigners from the Shimonoseki Strait resulted in the Shimonoseki Incident (1864)—the demolition of all Chōshū forts along the strait by warships from Britain, France, the Netherlands, and the United States. The loyalist faction in Chōshū then chose Takasugi to help construct a new Western-style army.
Takasugi’s reforms completely transformed Japanese fighting techniques. Although commoners were theoretically forbidden to carry weapons, he formed a series of peasant militia units led by young extremist samurai and trained in Western-style military discipline. The most famous of these units, the Kiheitai (“Irregular Troop Unit”), remained under Takasugi’s personal control.
Alarmed at the growing radical tendencies in Chōshū, the shogun in 1864 sent a punitive expedition to the fief. The Chōshū forces were defeated and a conservative government installed. As soon as the shogun’s army left, however, Takasugi’s irregular units attacked and defeated the conservative government’s forces and reinstalled a radical group in power. In August 1865 the shogun sent another expedition, this one with orders to level the fief. By this time, however, Takasugi had brought his militia units, equipped with Western arms, under strict central control; the shogun’s army was routed, and the balance of power in Japan was drastically altered. In January 1868, samurai from Chōshū and Satsuma fief overthrew the shogun and declared a new central government under the Meiji emperor.
One of the first acts of the new imperial government was to develop an army along the lines already begun by Takasugi, whose untimely death occurred before he could assume an important role in the new administration.
