The Last of the Mohicans,  in full The Last of the Mohicans: A Narrative of 1757, the second and most popular novel of the Leatherstocking Tales by James Fenimore Cooper, first published in two volumes in 1826. In terms of narrative order, it is also the second novel in the series, taking place in 1757 during the French and Indian War.
SUMMARY: Its principal character is Natty Bumppo, also called Hawkeye, now in middle life and at the height of his powers. The story tells of brutal battles with the Iroquois and their French allies, cruel captures, narrow escapes, and revenge. The beauty of the unspoiled wilderness and sorrow at its disappearance, symbolized in Hawkeye’s Mohican friends, the last of their tribe, are important themes of the novel.
DETAIL: The pivotal set piece of The Last of the Mohicans is the massacre at Fort William Henry during the French and Indian War. This is the “factual” event around which Cooper, the first internationally renowned American novelist, builds a compelling tale of wilderness adventure. Drawing heavily on the American genre of the Native American captivity narrative, he creates a template for much American popular fiction, particularly the western. Frontiersman Natty Bomppo had already been introduced as an old man in The Pioneers (1823); here he appears in middle age, as Hawkeye, a scout working for the British, with two Delaware Native American companions, Chingachgook and his son, Uncas. Having crossed paths with Cora and Alice Munro, the daughters of a British colonel, Bomppo and friends spend the rest of the novel rescuing them from captivity, escorting them to safety, or pursuing them through the wilderness. Cooper’s racial politics are conservative; though the novel raises the possibility of interracial romance between Uncas and the genteel Cora (who has a black mother), the prospect is quashed. Cooper laments the destruction of the wilderness, and of the Native Americans who inhabit it, but all are shown to succumb inevitably to progress, typical of the ideology of nineteenth-century America.
