Tokugawa Nariaki,   (born April 4, 1800, Edo, Japan—died  Sept. 29, 1860, Mito, Hitachi Province), Japanese advocate of reform measures designed to place more power in the hands of the emperor and the great lords and to keep foreigners out of Japan. He played a prominent role in the Meiji Restoration (1868), which overthrew the Tokugawa family, whose members for more than 250 years had ruled Japan through the office of shogun.
A member of the Tokugawa family himself, Nariaki in 1829 succeeded his brother as head of Mito han (fief), one of the most powerful of the many feudal fiefs into which Japan was then divided. Although controlled by the Tokugawa house, Mito had become the centre of a movement claiming that the true Japanese way was the way of the emperor, whose power the shogun had usurped. An articulate adherent of the movement, Nariaki urged the central government to grant more power to the feudal lords, to encourage national consolidation, and to adopt Western military and industrial techniques to strengthen national defenses. Western techniques, however, were to be applied without allowing Westerners to enter the country, for Nariaki believed that increased trade and contact with the West violated sacred Japanese tradition.
Because of Nariaki’s prestige, the reform program he instituted in his own domain became a model for the rest of the country. He reorganized the fief’s finances and administration, carried out extensive public works, began an iron and shipbuilding industry, and introduced Western military techniques. When he began to cast his own cannon in direct violation of the Shogun’s internal security provisions, however, he was forced to abdicate as head of Mito han in favour of his son Keiki. He continued to exercise influence in Mito, however, and in 1848 he was allowed to resume his post.
Five years later Commodore Matthew C. Perry of the U.S. Navy was sent to Japan in command of a fleet of gunships to force the country to end its two centuries of isolation. In an attempt to consolidate national opinion, the government called on Nariaki for advice; he demanded that no concessions be made. When a treaty was signed with Perry the following year, Nariaki became the head of an influential group demanding reform of the shogunate.
Although Nariaki’s son Keiki was considered the most eligible candidate to succeed the Shogun (Tokugawa Iesada) when he died in 1858, another contender was chosen, and the government then concluded the treaty that established trade between the United States and Japan. Nariaki attacked this treaty, concluded without the Emperor’s consent, as a betrayal of Japanese tradition. This attack was viewed as insubordination by the Shogun, and Nariaki and his party were ordered into retirement. The disintegration of Tokugawa power after Nariaki’s death eventually brought a more reform-minded group to power within the shogunate. Keiki, named shogun in 1866 as Tokugawa Yoshinobu, presided over the subsequent demise of the shogunate.
