William Cavendish, 1st Duke of Devonshire,  (born January 25, 1640—died August 18, 1707, London, England), a leader of the parliamentary movement that sought to exclude the Roman Catholic James, duke of York (afterward James II), from succession to the British throne and that later invited the invasion of William of Orange.
Cavendish was the eldest son of the 3rd earl of Devonshire (and succeeded to the title in 1684). On his return from a youthful grand tour of Europe, in 1661, he took a seat in Parliament and soon became conspicuous as one of the most determined opponents of the general policy of the court of Charles II. In 1679 he was made a privy councillor by Charles II, but he soon withdrew from the board with his friend Lord William Russell (afterward 1st duke of Bedford) when he found that the Roman Catholic interest uniformly prevailed. Devonshire carried up to the House of Lords the articles of impeachment against Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, for his arbitrary proceedings in the Court of King’s Bench; and, when Charles II declared his resolution not to sign the bill for excluding the duke of York from the succession, Devonshire moved in the House of Commons that a bill might be brought in for the association of all his majesty’s Protestant subjects. He also openly denounced the king’s counselors.
Devonshire appeared in defense of Lord Russell at the latter’s trial and, after Russell’s condemnation, offered to exchange clothes with him in the prison, remain in his place, and so allow him to effect his escape.
Devonshire opposed the government under James II and, for quarreling at court, was fined and briefly imprisoned. The Glorious Revolution (1688–89) again brought him into prominence. He was one of the seven who signed the original paper inviting William of Orange to England and was made lord high steward of the new court.
Devonshire was created marquis of Hartington and duke of Devonshire in 1694 by William and Mary, on the same day on which the head of the house of Russell was created duke of Bedford. His last public service was assisting to conclude the union of England and Scotland (1707).
