William III, byname William of Orange, also called William Henry, prince of Orange, Dutch Willem Hendrik, prins van Oranje,  (born November 14 [November 4, Old Style], 1650, The Hague, Netherlands—died March 19 [March 8], 1702, London, England), stadholder of the United Provinces of the Netherlands as William III (1672–1702) and king of England, Scotland, and Ireland (1689–1702), reigning jointly with Queen Mary II (until her death in 1694). He directed the European opposition to Louis XIV of France and, in Great Britain, secured the triumph of Protestantism and of Parliament.
The son of William II, prince of Orange, and of Mary, the daughter of Charles I of England, William was born at The Hague in November 1650, eight days after his father’s death. As stadholder of five of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, William II had recently incurred the enmity of a powerful minority of a republican oligarchy that dominated the province of Holland and the city of Amsterdam. After his death this party determined to exclude the house of Orange from power, and the Act of Seclusion (1654) debarred the prince of Orange and his descendants from holding office in the state.
William III’s education, nevertheless, was, from the first, the training of a ruler. Contemporaries agree that he was a boy of great vivacity and charm, but frequent quarrels between his mother and his paternal grandmother disturbed his childhood and may have helped to breed the habit of reserve that was intensified by the difficulties of his later life. In 1660, after his uncle Charles II’s restoration to the English throne, the Act of Seclusion was rescinded. Shortly afterward his mother died, leaving him to the guardianship of his grandmother and of his uncle Frederick William, elector of Brandenburg.
Early in 1666 he was made a ward of the States General, the representative assembly of the United Provinces. Under Johan de Witt, the grand pensionary of Holland, he acquired a specialized knowledge of public business. His exceptional promise and the popular devotion he had inherited made it impossible to deny him all advancement, but the Perpetual Edict (1667) decreed that the offices of stadholder and captain general, formerly held simultaneously by the princes of Orange, should never again be held by the same person.
In 1671 it became clear that Louis XIV of France and Charles II of England were planning a joint attack on the United Provinces, and demands for William’s appointment as captain general became insistent. He was appointed in February 1672, though at first with very limited authority. In March and April Charles and Louis declared war, and in June French troops crossed the Rhine River and overran three provinces in as many weeks. The Dutch navy was able to hold the English in check, but the army had been neglected and was ill-trained and ill-equipped. As a last expedient the polders, or low-lying areas, were flooded, and William, with his few unseasoned troops, was left to defend the “water line.”
Panic broke out in the country, and there were angry demands for the prince’s elevation to the stadholderate. The few dissenters were overruled, and on July 8 (New Style) he was proclaimed stadholder by the States General, later ratified by the provincial estates of the occupied provinces. One of his first acts, done with the States’ approval, was to refuse the ruinous peace terms offered by the two kings. Civil disorders, however, were not over. On August 20 Johan de Witt and his brother, who were unjustly suspected of treachery, were murdered by an infuriated mob at The Hague. William was in no way implicated in the crime and was enraged when he heard of it, but, because of the number of the murderers and perhaps because of the general revolutionary situation, he failed to bring them to justice.
In a few weeks the country settled down and for a year held out almost alone. In the autumn of 1672 William had enlisted the aid of the Holy Roman emperor Leopold I and the elector of Brandenburg, and in 1673 Spain joined the alliance, but their help was not immediately effective. William, meanwhile, was steadily rebuilding his army and in September 1673 recaptured the key fortress of Naarden. He then moved swiftly into the territory of Cologne, joined his forces to those of the emperor, and on November 12 captured Bonn. The French, threatened with encirclement, hurriedly evacuated the United Provinces. Charles II and Louis’s minor allies were forced to make peace early in 1674. Louis’s Dutch adventure had failed and had turned half of Europe against him, but he still held many places in Germany and the Spanish Netherlands, so the war continued and spread into remoter parts of the continent. William’s chief concern for the next four years was the command of the Dutch armies in Flanders, though Dutch domestic affairs and repeated attempts to find an acceptable peace formula took much of his time. Peace was finally made by a series of treaties in 1678 and 1679.
