Anglo-Indian,  in India, a citizen of mixed Indian and, through the paternal line, European ancestry. From roughly the 18th to the early 20th century, the term referred specifically to British people working in India.
The meaning of the term Anglo-Indian has to some degree been in a state of flux throughout its history. It was not until the Indian census of 1911 that the term was used as a category denoting persons of mixed ethnicity. In the Government of India Act of 1935, an Anglo-Indian was formally identified as “a person whose father or any of whose other male progenitors in the male line is or was of European descent but who is a native of India.” The key points of that definition were retained when Anglo-Indians were listed as an official minority group in India’s constitution in 1950. With the diaspora of the community since that time, however, it has become ever more difficult to identify Anglo-Indians, much less to estimate the size of their population.
The Anglo-Indian community in India is mostly urban and Christian and traces its origin to the earliest contact between Europe and India, ultimately to 1498, when Portuguese navigator Vasco da Gama landed at Calicut (now Kozhikode) on the Malabar Coast of southwestern India. During the subsequent settlement and administration of the surrounding area by the Portuguese, Governor Alfonso de Albuquerque, who conquered the city of Goa in 1510, encouraged his countrymen to marry Indian women to help establish Portuguese authority. The offspring of those marriages were known as Luso-Indians. As the Portuguese gradually abandoned their Indian possessions or otherwise lost dominance in the region, Luso-Indians merged with the local Indian population. For the most part, the descendants of these Luso-Indians are known today as Goans, and they are concentrated in the state of Goa, in Mumbai, and along India’s western coast. Especially in the larger cities, such as Mumbai, Madras (now Chennai), and Calcutta (now Kolkata), the Goans and other Luso-Indians retained much of their European cultural heritage and amalgamated with the local community of mixed British and Indian descent—those for whom the Anglo-Indian ethnic category would ultimately be named.
The British gained control of the greater portion of the Indian subcontinent starting in the 17th century and retained significant power well into the 20th. Many men were brought from England to assist in the administration of India. The offspring of these men and local Indian women were generally known as Eurasian, or half-caste, until they were subsumed under the broader Anglo-Indian rubric in the early 20th century.
When India achieved independence in 1947, the Anglo-Indian population was about 300,000. After independence, however, the social status of Anglo-Indians declined sharply, and, as a result, many families migrated abroad, especially to the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Canada, Australia, and the United States. Because the group is geographically, socially, and politically fragmented, estimates of the size of the Anglo-Indian community vary—as widely as from 30,000 to 150,000—in India in the 21st century.
