Sakha, also called Yakut,  one of the major peoples of eastern Siberia, numbering some 380,000 in the late 20th century. In the 17th century they inhabited a limited area on the middle Lena River, but in modern times they expanded throughout Sakha republic (Yakutia) in far northeastern Russia. They speak a Turkic language. The Sakha are thought to be an admixture of migrants from the Lake Baikal region with the aborigines of the Lena—probably mostly Evenk (Evenki), who have contributed much to their culture. Other evidence, however, points to a southern ancestry related to the Turkic-speaking tribes of the steppe and the Altai Mountains.
The early history of the Sakha is little known, though epic tales date from the 10th century. In the 17th century they had peacefully assimilated with other northern peoples and consisted of 80 independent tribes, subdivided into clans. The nuclear family was the primary Sakha social unit. The position of women in family and public life was generally inferior. Supernatural power was attributed to blacksmiths, since their art was considered a divine gift. The old Sakha religion had many supernatural spirits, good and evil. Black shamans dealt with evil spirits and could be benevolent or harmful; white shamans were concerned with spiritual intercession for human beings. Two major religious festivals were celebrated with ritual use of koumiss (fermented mare’s milk), one in spring for good spirits and one in fall accompanied by blood sacrifices of livestock for evil spirits.
The majority of the Sakha were formerly seminomadic, with winter settlements of earth-covered log huts and summer camps of conical birch-bark tents sited near pasturage and sources of hay for winter fodder. Through the process of assimilation many of the southern Sakha turned to farming, while the more northerly ones adopted reindeer breeding from the Evenk. Much noted for their ironwork, the Sakha also made pottery, a unique occupation among the historical Siberian tribes.
Despite the Arctic climate, the Sakha have clung to an economy based on the raising of cattle, reindeer, and horses, though their livestock must be sheltered and fed a large part of the year. Dairy products occupy a prominent place in their diet, with meat reserved for special occasions. Fishing in rivers and lakes is the second most important economic activity. Many traditional arts, such as ivory and wood carving and jewelry making, are still practiced, though such relatively modern arts as filmmaking are also popular. Playing of the khomus, or mouth harp, once an accompaniment to shamanic ritual, has also experienced a resurgence.
