Sherpa, also called Sharwa,  group of some 150,000 mountain-dwelling people of Nepal; Sikkim state, India; and Tibet (China); they are related to the Bhutia. Small groups of Sherpas also live in parts of North America, Australia, and Europe. Sherpas are of Tibetan culture and descent and speak a language called Sherpa, which is closely related to the form of Tibetan spoken in Tibet. Sherpa is predominately a spoken language, although it is occasionally written in the Tibetan or Devanagari script. The greatest number of Sherpas live in Nepal and speak Nepali in addition to their own language. Those educated in Tibet or in Tibetan Buddhist monasteries may speak Tibetan. Most of those whose livelihood depends on mountaineering also speak one or several of the languages of climbers and tourists.
The Sherpas of Nepal live in the Solu-Khumbu district, in the environs of the Himalayas. This area consists of two regions connected by the Sun Kosi River (a major tributary of the Kosi River): the Khumbu region, at an elevation of 12,000 to 14,000 feet (about 3,700 to 4,300 metres), with still higher pasturelands; and the Solu region, at an elevation of 8,000 to 10,000 feet (about 2,400 to 3,100 metres). The Khumbu region stretches from the Chinese (Tibetan) border in the east to the banks of the Bhotekosi River in the west.
The name Sherpa (sometimes given as Sharwa, which better reflects how the people pronounce their name) means “easterner,” making reference to their origins in Khams, eastern Tibet. They began to migrate in the 15th century, making a living for many centuries as traders (salt, wool, and rice), herders (yaks and cows), and farmers (potatoes, barley, and buckwheat). Most Sherpas belong to the ancient Nyingma, or Red Hat, sect of Tibetan Buddhism, but their practice is a mixture of Buddhism and animism. Sherpa culture is based on a clan system (ru). True Sherpa heritage is determined through patrilineage, and all Sherpas belong to 1 of 18 clans and bear a clan name.
The term Sherpa in its most recent sense refers to a variety of ethnic groups in the region who have exhibited excellent mountaineering and trekking skills. These “Sherpas,” a great number of whom are indeed ethnic Sherpas, have been essential to the ascents of various mountains of the Himalayas. Until the 20th century and despite their apparent propensity for mountain climbing, Sherpas had not attempted to scale the region’s mountains, which they viewed as the homes of the gods. Although they have since accepted mountaineering as a way of life, Sherpas retain their respect for the mountains and have attempted to prevent foreign climbers from engaging in profaning and polluting activities, such as killing animals and burning garbage, which they fear will anger the gods.
Notable Sherpa climbers include Ang Tharkay, author of Mémoires d’un Sherpa (1954), and Ang Tsering (Tshering). The famous Tenzing Norgay, who reached the summit of Mount Everest in 1953 with Sir Edmund Hillary of New Zealand, was born in Tibet and hence was not an ethnic Sherpa. A female Sherpa, Pasang Lhamu Sherpa, reached the summit in 1993.
