Tasaday,   small group of people living in the highland rain forest of Mindanao, in the Philippines. Before their existence was first reported by anthropological investigators in 1971, the Tasaday, numbering about 25 individuals, apparently had been living a virtually isolated, primitive (incorrectly labeled “Stone Age”) existence until they were discovered by nearby settled tribes in 1966. Visiting anthropologists found cave-dwelling food-gatherers whose subsistence was based on the wild yam; other foods included tadpoles, frogs, small fish, crabs, grubs, palm fruit, and wild bananas. The Tasaday were dressed only in loincloths and skirts made of orchid leaves, used only crude stone tools (axes and scrapers) and wooden implements (fire drills and digging sticks), and had no weapons for hunting or war. 
The discovery of the Tasaday was hailed as one of the most intriguing anthropological finds of the century and received broad international media coverage. But questions about the authenticity of the Tasaday were raised in 1986, when they were revisited and found to be wearing Western clothing, using tools such as knives, mirrors, and other modern goods. It was asserted that their ethnic and cultural identity were really a hoax perpetrated by officials of the regime of former Philippine president Ferdinand Marcos in order to garner publicity and, eventually, to somehow profit from the management of Tasaday forestlands. According to these later reports, the Tasaday were actually members of the nearby, more culturally advanced Manubo-Blit or Tboli tribes who had acted the part of more primitive peoples at the prompting of Marcos’ assistant on national minorities. Nevertheless, linguistic evidence obtained during the earlier anthropological study, however incomplete, seemed to indicate that the Tasaday were indeed isolated, though the Philippine government may have encouraged the people to feign a more primitive life-style than that which they actually lived.
In 1988, on the advice of a Congressional investigative committee, President Corazon Aquino pronounced the Tasaday an authentic minority group, but many scholars remained skeptical, and hope of any conclusive evidence on either side of the controversy was beginning to fade.
