Allen Iverson, in full Allen Ezail Iverson, byname the Answer,  (born June 7, 1975, Hampton, Virginia, U.S.), American basketball player known for both explosive play on the court and controversy away from the game. He became the first great athlete to be strongly identified with the hip-hop movement.
Athletic success and controversy came to Iverson at an early age. At Bethel High School, he led the school’s gridiron football and basketball teams to state championships his junior year. At age 17 he was jailed after being accused of starting a racially charged brawl in a bowling alley, but his conviction was later overturned because of lack of evidence. He was offered a scholarship to Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., where in two years he averaged 23 points per game and won two Big East Conference Defensive Player of the Year awards before making the decision to leave school to play professionally. Iverson was chosen first overall in the 1996 National Basketball Association (NBA) draft by the Philadelphia 76ers.
Although he was one of the smallest players in the league, standing 6 feet (1.8 metres) tall and weighing 165 pounds (75 kg), Iverson immediately made a big splash, leading his team with a scoring average of 23.5 points per game and winning Rookie of the Year honours. His quickness and his signature crossover dribble often left even the best defenders helpless. Off the court his baggy clothing, flashy jewelry, and braided hair were not part of the image the NBA wanted to promote. During his early years in the league, he clashed frequently with coaches and team officials, was portrayed by the media as a selfish, disruptive player, and had several run-ins with the law. Yet he developed a huge following of young fans who identified with his rebellious image.
Despite the controversies that followed him, Iverson proved his talent on the court, taking the league scoring title in 1998–99 and winning the scoring title, the steals title, and Most Valuable Player honours in 2000–01 while guiding the 76ers to the NBA finals. In the middle of the 2006–07 season he was traded to the Denver Nuggets, where he was teamed with young superstar Carmelo Anthony. Iverson was an extremely proficient scorer, and in 2007 he became the sixth fastest player in NBA history to score 20,000 career points. Denver, however, failed to advance beyond the first round of the play-offs, and Iverson expressed a desire to play for a contender. Three games into the 2008–09 season, he was traded to the Detroit Pistons, but the Pistons finished the season with a losing record and were swept in the first round of the play-offs, leading Iverson and the team to part ways.
Iverson signed with the Memphis Grizzlies in September 2009, but, unhappy with his role on the team, he left the Grizzlies after playing only three games, and his contract was terminated soon thereafter. Iverson then announced his retirement from professional basketball, but he instead returned for a second stint with the 76ers, after signing with the team in December 2009. The return of the still-popular Iverson led to an upswing in home attendance for the 76ers that proved to be short-lived. He left the team in February 2010 to spend time with his ailing daughter, and the next month the 76ers announced that he would not return for the remainder of the 2009–10 season. In October 2010 Iverson signed a two-year contract with Besiktas, a Turkish professional team. He left Besiktas halfway through his first season in Turkey and was without a team until he officially retired in October 2013. Iverson was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 2016.
