Babe Didrikson Zaharias, byname of Mildred Ella Zaharias, née Mildred Ella Didrikson,  (born June 26, 1911, Port Arthur, Texas, U.S.—died September 27, 1956, Galveston, Texas), American sportswoman who was one of the greatest athletes of the 20th century, achieving particular success in basketball and track and field, though she is perhaps best known for her achievements in golf.
Although Didrikson claimed to have been born in 1914, various sources indicate the correct year was 1911. From a young age, her goal was to be “the greatest athlete to ever live.” A standout baseball player, she asserted that, as a teenager, she acquired the nickname “Babe” in reference to Babe Ruth. She later dropped out of high school to pursue a career in sports. From 1930 through 1932, Didrikson was a member of the women’s All-America basketball team. During the same period she also won eight events and tied in a ninth in national championship competition in track and field. In the 1932 Women’s Amateur Athletic Association (AAU), competing as a team by herself, Didrikson won six individual events and the team title, outscoring the 20-women runner-up team from the Illinois Athletic Club 30 points to 22. She became known for her competitiveness and brash confidence.
At the 1932 Olympic Games in Los Angeles Didrikson won the 80-metre hurdles and the javelin throw but was deprived of a third gold medal in the high jump because she had used the unorthodox Western roll to achieve the highest jump; she was awarded the silver medal instead. Her Olympic success brought her national attention, not all of which was complimentary. At the time, women were not encouraged to compete in sports, and Didrikson faced much sexism as well as claims that she might actually be a man. One sportswriter noted, “It would be much better if she and her ilk stayed at home, got themselves prettied up and waited for the phone to ring.”  Such comments failed to deter Didrikson, as she also excelled in softball, swimming, figure skating, billiards, and even football.
Didrikson began playing golf casually in 1932, but from 1934 she played that game exclusively. In 1938 she became the first woman to compete in a men’s golf event, though she did not make the cut. Also that year she married George Zaharias, a professional wrestler. Restored to amateur status after some years as a professional, she won the U.S. Women’s Amateur tournament in 1946. The next year she won 17 straight golf championships, including the British Ladies Amateur, of which she was the first American holder. Didrikson Zaharias subsequently became a professional again, and in 1948 she won the U.S. Women’s Open, a feat she repeated two years later.
In 1950 Didrikson Zaharias helped found the Ladies Professional Golf Association, and she became the LPGA’s star competitor. Not only did she attract interest in the women’s game, she revolutionized the sport and was known for her powerful drives. At one point she quipped, “You’ve got to loosen your girdle and really let the ball have it.” Diagnosed with colon cancer, she underwent surgery in 1953. The following year, in one of sport’s greatest comebacks, she  captured her third U.S. Open. Although she wore a colostomy bag, Didrikson Zaharias dominated the event, winning by 12 strokes. She won four other tournaments in 1954, and the following year she claimed two more victories, which were the last of her career.
Didrikson Zaharias’s autobiography, This Life I’ve Led, appeared in 1955. She was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2021.
