Bob Knight, in full Robert Montgomery Knight, also called Bobby Knight and the General,  (born October 25, 1940, Massillon, Ohio, U.S.), American collegiate basketball coach whose 902 career National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) coaching victories are among the most in men’s basketball history.
Knight played basketball and football in high school, and he was a reserve on the Ohio State University national championship basketball team in 1960. After spending two years as an assistant coach at the United States Military Academy (Army), he was promoted to head coach in 1965 and became the youngest varsity basketball coach in NCAA history. Knight was an immediate success at Army because of his coaching philosophy, which stressed discipline, unselfish play, and relentless man-to-man defense. He took the head coaching job at traditional power Indiana University in 1971, and he led the Hoosiers to an appearance in the NCAA tournament’s Final Four (championship semifinals) in his second season. His 1975–76 team produced a perfect 32–0 record and won the NCAA championship. The Hoosiers also won national titles in 1981 and 1987. In 1984 Knight coached the U.S. men’s basketball team to a gold medal at the Olympic Games in Los Angeles.
Knight’s tenure at Indiana was marked by instances of extremely temperamental behaviour. He drew national attention for throwing a chair across the court during a game in 1985, and he was repeatedly fined for outbursts toward officials and NCAA representatives. In March 2000 he was accused of having choked a former player during a practice in 1997. More allegations of verbal and physical abuse came from past Indiana players and university employees in the following months, and an investigation by the school led to the implementation of a “zero tolerance” policy for Knight’s actions. An altercation with an Indiana student in September 2000 led to the coach’s dismissal, despite Knight’s protestations that he had done nothing wrong.
Knight returned to college basketball in 2001 as the head coach of Texas Tech University. On January 1, 2007, Knight won his 880th career game, breaking Dean Smith’s record for all-time NCAA Division I men’s basketball coaching victories. Knight abruptly resigned from Texas Tech in February 2008 and turned his coaching duties over to his son, Pat. His victory total was surpassed in 2011 by Duke University’s Mike Krzyzewski, a former player of Knight’s at Army. In spite of his controversial reputation, Knight was commended by many (including numerous former players and their parents) for his teaching ability and the high graduation rates of his teams. He articulated his coaching philosophy in The Power of Negative Thinking: An Unconventional Approach to Achieving Positive Results (2013).
