Charles Barkley, in full Charles Wade Barkley, bynames Sir Charles and the Round Mound of Rebound,  (born February 20, 1963, Leeds, Alabama, U.S.), American professional basketball player and television personality whose larger-than-life character made him one of the most popular figures in National Basketball Association (NBA) history. Over the course of his 16-year NBA career, he became the fourth player to amass 20,000 points, 10,000 rebounds, and 4,000 assists.
Barkley was a nondescript high school basketball player until a 6-inch (15-cm) growth spurt helped him become one of the better players in Alabama during his senior year and earn a scholarship to Auburn University. He was an all-conference selection in each of his three seasons at Auburn, and in 1984 he was chosen by the Philadelphia 76ers with the fifth overall pick of the NBA draft. Listed at 6 feet 6 inches (1.98 metres) tall but by most accounts about 2 inches (5 cm) shorter, Barkley was very undersized for a forward, but his great leaping ability and his skill at establishing position around the basket using his considerable strength quickly made him one of the elite rebounders in the game. He made the first of 11 consecutive All-Star Game appearances in 1987, but the 76ers’ success as a team was limited. With the exception of a run to the Eastern Conference finals during his rookie season (on a team led by future Hall of Famers Julius Erving and Moses Malone), Barkley and the 76ers never advanced farther than the second round of the play-offs during his eight seasons in Philadelphia. His inability to get the 76ers a championship led some to question whether he should be considered a truly elite player. Coupling this with Barkley’s outspokenness, which made him unpopular with the team’s front office, the team decided to trade him to the Phoenix Suns in 1992.
After helping the Suns post the NBA’s best record in his first season with the team, Barkley won the league’s Most Valuable Player award. In the following postseason he led the Suns to the NBA finals, a six-game loss to the Chicago Bulls. That season was the highlight of Barkley’s tenure in Phoenix, and in 1996 he was traded to the Houston Rockets. He again had an immediate positive impact on a franchise, as the Rockets reached the conference finals in the 1996–97 season. However, Barkley failed to win his long-sought championship in Houston, and he retired in 2000.
Barkley was a member of two U.S. men’s basketball teams that won Olympic gold medals (1992, 1996). He was named one of the 50 greatest players in NBA history in 1996, and he was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 2006.
Barkley’s postretirement fame arguably surpassed that of his playing days. Always a popular pitchman, he continued to appear in commercials for a wide variety of products after he last stepped off a court. But he was best-known as a commentator on an award-winning NBA studio show on the Turner Network Television cable channel and as a frequent talk show guest. Beginning with his years as a player, Barkley was never shy about expressing his opinions—often with a large dose of humour—which helped him create a persona that transcended the basketball world.
