Dirk Nowitzki,  (born June 19, 1978, Würzburg, West Germany), German professional basketball player who is regarded as one of the greatest foreign-born players in National Basketball Association (NBA) history.
Nowitzki took up basketball relatively late in life, at age 13. His immense natural talent (his mother was a member of the West German national basketball team) helped him quickly acclimate to the sport, and by age 16 he was playing with DJK Würzburg, a second-division German professional team. He first came to the attention of NBA scouts in 1998, when he scored 33 points to lead a team of international players age 19 and under to an upset victory over a collection of American high school stars in an exhibition game in San Antonio, Texas. As a result of the exhibition, he garnered dozens of scholarship offers to play collegiately in the United States, but Nowitzki instead declared his eligibility for the NBA draft. He was selected by the Milwaukee Bucks with the ninth overall selection of the 1998 NBA draft but was immediately traded to the Dallas Mavericks.
Nowitzki struggled while adjusting to the NBA’s level of play during his rookie season, but he doubled his scoring average in his second season and was chosen for the All-Star Game in his fourth. Standing 7 feet (2.13 metres) tall, Nowitzki proved a unique matchup for opposing defenders, as he was much taller than most small forwards (his natural position) but also possessed a keen shooting ability unusual for someone his size. Over the years his fadeaway jump shot proved to be one of the most effective signature scoring maneuvers in NBA history, and Nowitzki became a perennial All-Star.
As Nowitzki developed into one of the biggest stars in the game, he also was the key to the period of greatest team success in Mavericks history. The franchise had not qualified for the playoffs for eight straight seasons when Nowitzki joined the Mavericks in 1998, but in 2000–01 he helped Dallas win 53 games and advance to the postseason. That was the first of 11 consecutive 50-win seasons for the Mavericks, one of the longest such stretches in league history. In 2005–06 he led Dallas to the team’s first berth in the NBA finals (a six-game loss to the Miami Heat), and in 2006–07 he averaged 24.6 points per game while guiding the team to the best record in the league, for which he earned the 2007 NBA Most Valuable Player (MVP) award. During the first round of the 2007 playoffs, however, the Mavericks became the first top seed to be upset in a best-of-seven opening-round series, and the team’s subsequent postseason disappointments—combined with its play in the 2006 finals, in which the team squandered a 2–0 series lead—led some to question Nowitzki’s ability to win clutch games. This reputation was undone in 2010–11 during a remarkable postseason run in which Nowitzki sparked a number of fourth-quarter comebacks and propelled the Mavericks to an NBA finals rematch against the Heat. There he averaged 26 points per game (10.3 in the fourth quarter) to lead the Mavericks to their first NBA title and earn finals MVP honours.
He continued his strong play in the five years after the Mavericks championship, but the aging team fell off its long-torrid winning pace and routinely posted its worst records since Nowitzki’s early seasons with the franchise, failing to advance past the first round of the playoffs in that time. In November 2014 Nowitzki scored his 26,947th career NBA point to surpass Hakeem Olajuwon as the highest-scoring foreign-born player in NBA history. While his on-court performance generally declined over the following seasons, in March 2017 Nowitzki became just the seventh player in league history to score 30,000 career points. The Mavericks’ play continued to decline during the second half of the decade. In 2017–18 the team posted a 24–58 record, and Nowitzki scored just 12 points per game, his lowest scoring average since his rookie season. His role with Dallas was minimized in 2018–19, resulting in Nowitzki averaging just 15 minutes of playing time and 7 points per game, and he retired at the end of the season. His finished his NBA career with 31,560 points scored, which was the sixth highest total in league history at the time.
He is the subject of the documentary Nowitzki: der perfekte Wurf (2014; Nowitzki: The Perfect Shot), which traces the development of his career, notably focusing on his relationship with coach Holger Geschwindner, who helped him to develop his signature jump shot.
