Dolph Schayes, byname of Adolph Schayes,  (born May 19, 1928, New York, New York, U.S.—died December 10, 2015, Syracuse, New York), American professional basketball player who was one of the game’s best-known players in the 1950s and who became the first in the history of the National Basketball Association (NBA) to score 15,000 points in a career. An exception to the sports maxim that “nice guys finish last,” the sharp-shooting tough-rebounding Schayes is remembered for a wide smile and enthusiasm for basketball that made him one of the most-popular players in the professional ranks during a 16-year career that spanned the era of two-hand set shots and high-flying jump shots.
In 1948 the Syracuse Nationals (usually shortened to the “Nats”) of the National Basketball League (NBL) won a bidding war for Schayes, a native New Yorker who had starred at New York University and whose services were also sought by the New York Knicks, then a part of the Basketball Association of America (BAA). The two leagues merged a year later, and, with a raft of standout performers, including Schayes, under the same tent, the new National Basketball Association began its slow climb toward parity with major league baseball and professional football.
Although he was easygoing, Schayes was anything but a gentle giant; learning to deal out punishment as well as take it, he became a fierce rebounder. He never stopped trying to improve. The Nats won just one NBA championship, in 1954–55, but Schayes was a tower of consistent performance. The memory of Schayes unleashing his accurate two-handed set shot was indelible for his early fans. However, he came on the scene at a time of great change in playing techniques—when the very survival of professional basketball seemed to hang in the balance—and skillfully adapted his play to suit the evolving game. During the 1954–55 season Nats owner Danny Biasone persuaded the NBA to install the 24-second shot clock (see basketball), which is popularly credited with saving the professional game. Schayes made an easy transition to the new wide-open style that resulted. Indeed, Schayes led the Nats in scoring most seasons that he played for Syracuse, where his fame lingered long after the franchise moved to Philadelphia in 1963 to become the 76ers. His career totals include 19,249 points and an average of 18.2 points per game. He was also a 12-time All-Star (1951–62).
After retiring as a player, Schayes coached briefly for the 76ers (1963–66) and the Buffalo Braves (1970–71). He was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 1973 and was named one of the NBA’s 50 greatest players of all time in 1996. His son Danny also had a long NBA career (1981–99), with a variety of teams, after having played collegiately at Syracuse University.
