Dwyane Wade, in full Dwyane Tyrone Wade, Jr., byname D-Wade,  (born January 17, 1982, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.), American professional basketball player who was one of the best players of his era and who won three National Basketball Association (NBA) championships (2006, 2012, and 2013) as a member of the Miami Heat.
Coming out of high school, Wade was lightly recruited by colleges and accepted a scholarship to Marquette University. He had a breakout season as a junior when he averaged 21.5 points per game and led Marquette to an unexpected berth in the Final Four of the National Collegiate Athletic Association men’s basketball tournament. Wade was named a consensus All-American and decided to forgo his senior season so as to declare for the 2003 NBA draft, in which the Heat selected him as the fifth overall pick.
Wade made an immediate positive impact on the Heat, earning first-team NBA All-Rookie honours after scoring 16.2 points per game in 2003–04. The following season he increased his scoring average to 24.1 points per game and led the Heat in assists to earn his first career All-Star selection while leading Miami (alongside newly acquired centre Shaquille O’Neal) to the best record in the NBA’s Eastern Conference. Although the Heat fell to the Detroit Pistons in the conference finals that season, the team bested that postseason result in 2005–06, beating the Pistons to win the first conference title in team history. In the NBA finals Wade had one of the greatest individual playoff performances in league history. After the Heat was trailing the Dallas Mavericks two games to none in the best-of-seven series, Wade proceeded to average 39.3 points per game over the next four contests (all Miami victories) to lead the way to the NBA championship and earn the finals’ Most Valuable Player award.
Following his breakthrough finals exploits, Wade continued to improve—notably leading the NBA in scoring average in 2008–09 with 30.2 points per game—but Miami failed to match its earlier postseason success over the four seasons after the team’s championship. During the 2010 off-season Wade recruited free-agent superstars LeBron James and Chris Bosh to sign with the Heat. Although James supplanted him as the focal point of Miami’s offense, Wade continued his All-Star-level play, and the Heat advanced to the NBA finals during the star trio’s first season together. The Heat lost that series to the Mavericks, but it returned to the finals in 2011–12 and defeated the Oklahoma City Thunder to capture another NBA title. Although the Heat made a third consecutive trip to the finals in 2012–13, Wade’s playoff production was lacklustre. Aging and injured, he averaged a career-low 15.9 points per game during the postseason. However, his standout performance down the stretch of a seven-game NBA finals series against the San Antonio Spurs helped Miami clinch its third NBA title. Wade and the Heat advanced to a fourth consecutive appearance in the NBA finals in 2013–14, but Miami lost its championship rematch with the Spurs. James left Miami in the following off-season, and the team fell from the NBA’s upper echelon. Meanwhile, Wade resumed his role as the team’s focal point, leading the Heat with 21.5 points per game. The Heat rebounded in 2015–16, earning the third seed in the Eastern Conference playoffs after winning 48 games and advancing to the second round of the postseason. During the following off-season, Wade—who had previously signed a number of below-market deals with the Heat in attempts to help the team add more surrounding talent—grew frustrated with what he perceived to be a lack of appreciation from Miami’s management via its low contract offer, and he surprisingly signed with his hometown Chicago Bulls.
He averaged 18.3 points per game in his first season with the Bulls—the lowest scoring average since his rookie year—and saw the end of his 12-year streak of being selected for the All-Star Game. The Bulls qualified for the final spot in the Eastern Conference playoffs and were eliminated in six postseason games. Wade and the Bulls agreed to a contract buyout in the following off-season, and he then signed a one-year deal to play alongside James as a member of the Cleveland Cavaliers. Wade failed to find a useful role with the Cavaliers, and a struggling Cleveland team traded him back to Miami in February 2018. He played his final season and a half with a middling Heat team before retiring at the end of the 2018–19 season.
In addition to his NBA accomplishments, Wade was a member of the 2004 bronze-medal-winning U.S. men’s Olympic basketball team and the 2008 Olympic gold-medal-winning team.
