Milwaukee Bucks,  American professional basketball team based in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, that plays in the Eastern Conference of the National Basketball Association (NBA). The Bucks have won three conference championships (1971, 1974, and 2021) and two NBA titles (1971 and 2021).
The Bucks were founded in 1968 and had a last-place divisional finish in their inaugural season. Despite winning 11 more games than their fellow expansion team the Phoenix Suns, the Bucks won a coin toss to earn the first pick in the 1969 NBA draft, which they used to select collegiate superstar Lew Alcindor (known as Kareem Abdul-Jabbar from 1971). With Alcindor, Milwaukee improved its win total by 29 games in 1969–70 to finish the season with the second best record in the NBA (56–26), behind the New York Knicks, who then eliminated the Bucks in the Eastern Division finals. In the following off-season the Bucks traded for future Hall of Fame point guard Oscar Robertson, who helped lead Milwaukee to a league-best 66–16 mark in 1970–71. The Bucks then easily defeated the San Francisco Warriors, Los Angeles Lakers, and Baltimore Bullets in the postseason to win the NBA title in just their third season, a record for the four major North American professional team sports.
Milwaukee qualified for the playoffs in each of the following three seasons, including a berth in the 1974 NBA finals, where the Bucks lost a seven-game series to the Boston Celtics. Robertson retired after the 1973–74 season, and Abdul-Jabbar went to the Lakers the following year in a six-player trade engineered by Wayne Embry, who had become the first black general manager in professional sports when he took that position with the Bucks in 1972. A reconfigured Bucks team with Don Nelson as its head coach (1976–87) and featuring forward Marques Johnson, guard Sidney Moncrief, and guard-forward Junior Bridgeman began in 1979–80 a streak of 12 straight playoff appearances for the franchise. The team advanced to two consecutive conference finals in 1982–83 and 1983–84 but was beaten by the Philadelphia 76ers and the Celtics, respectively. Moncrief and forward Terry Cummings were the Bucks’ star players in 1985–86, when Milwaukee made its third Eastern Conference finals appearance in four years only to again be denied an NBA finals berth at the hands of the Celtics.
The Bucks advanced no farther than the second round of the playoffs in the following five seasons, and in the 1991–92 season the team entered into a seven-year postseason drought. A bright spot for the franchise came in 1994, when the Bucks won the NBA draft lottery and selected forward Glenn Robinson. Robinson and sharpshooting guard Ray Allen led the Bucks back to the postseason in 1998–99. Milwaukee was defeated by the Indiana Pacers in the first round of the playoffs that season and in the following one. In 2000–01 the Bucks advanced to another Eastern Conference finals appearance, though the team lost to the 76ers in seven games.
All-Star guard Michael Redd guided the Bucks to three more playoff berths in the following 10 years, but further success eluded the team: Milwaukee posted only three total winning seasons in the first decade of the new millennium. Although the Bucks stumbled into a playoff appearance in 2012–13 despite having a losing record, the team reached new depths the following season when it posted the worst record in the NBA and won a franchise-low 15 games. Under new head coach Jason Kidd, the team staged a rather remarkable comeback in 2014–15 as a young Bucks team surpassed expectations by adding 26 wins to its previous season total and returning to the playoffs. However, Milwaukee quickly returned to the lower echelons of the NBA the following season. The rapid development of versatile wing Giannis Antetokounmpo into stardom during the 2016–17 season propelled the Bucks back to the playoffs that season. Although Milwaukee improved with Antetokounmpo, the team’s management grew frustrated with Kidd’s coaching style, and Kidd was fired during the 2017–18 season, a campaign that ended with a Bucks first-round playoff loss for the second consecutive year.
Milwaukee hired Mike Budenholzer, a defensive-minded coach, during the off-season, and he quickly transformed the Bucks into one of the best-coached teams in the NBA, leading them to the best record in the league in 2018–19. During the playoffs the team advanced to the conference finals for the first time in 18 years but was upset in that round by the Toronto Raptors. The Bucks again posted the best record in the league in 2019–20 but again met with postseason disappointment, losing to the Miami Heat in a disastrous five-game second-round series. Milwaukee’s consecutive playoff failures led to increased calls to fire Budenholzer in the off-season, but Milwaukee stayed the course and brought in point guard Jrue Holiday to add steady on-court leadership and another strong defensive presence to the team. The Bucks remained one of the best teams in the NBA in 2020–21, but they fell to the third seed in the Eastern Conference playoffs. Milwaukee exorcised its postseason demons behind clutch play from Holiday, All-Star guard Khris Middleton, and Antetokounmpo, who helped the team overcome multiple series deficits to advance to the NBA finals. There, despite falling behind the Phoenix Suns 2–0, Antetokounmpo put on one of the greatest performances in finals history, averaging 35.2 points, 13.2 rebounds, and 5.0 assists per game for the series, and he led the Bucks to four straight victories (which included his scoring a remarkable 50 points in the deciding sixth game) to capture the franchise’s second league championship.
