Nancy Lieberman, in full Nancy Elizabeth Lieberman,  (born July 1, 1958, Brooklyn, New York, U.S.), American basketball player and coach. A pioneer in women’s basketball, Lieberman recorded several unprecedented accomplishments in a playing career that spanned three decades.
Growing up, Lieberman had the toughness, court savvy, and natural ability to compete in the male-dominated New York City basketball scene. She entered Old Dominion University in 1976 and led the school to consecutive Association for Intercollegiate Athletics for Women (AIAW) championships in 1978–79 and 1979–80. An intelligent and extraordinarily quick point guard, she was known for her precision passing and tenacious defense as well as her accurate shooting touch, which enabled her to average 18.1 points per game over her four-year career. She was named national player of the year twice and ended her collegiate career as Old Dominion’s all-time leader in assists and steals.
At the international level she helped lead the United States to a gold medal in the 1975 Pan American Games. She was also a member of the silver medal-winning 1976 U.S. Olympic team; she made the 1980 team as well, but the squad did not compete because of an American boycott of the Games.
In the early 1980s, professional basketball in the United States offered few, if any, opportunities for women. Nevertheless, after the close of her career at Old Dominion, Lieberman aspired to stay involved in the game she loved. In 1980 she was the number-one draft pick of the Dallas Diamonds of the Women’s Basketball League (WBL), a fledgling women’s professional league. The WBL folded in 1982, leaving its players without a professional league once again. In 1984 Lieberman was the first draft pick of a newly created professional circuit, the Women’s American Basketball Association (WABA). Because fan interest in a women’s professional league still was not strong enough to generate financial success, however, the WABA was also short-lived.
Reluctant to leave the United States for Europe, where she had several offers to play professionally, Lieberman continued to look for new opportunities at home. She became the first woman to try out for a National Basketball Association (NBA) team and the first to play in a men’s professional league, in 1986 with the Springfield Fame in the United States Basketball League (USBL). In 1988 Lieberman was chosen by the Washington Generals to play against the Harlem Globetrotters, making her the first woman to participate in a Globetrotters world tour. Approaching the age of 40 but still a talented player, she joined the Phoenix Mercury of the newly formed NBA-sponsored Women’s National Basketball Association (WNBA) for the 1997 season. In 2008 she joined the WNBA’s Detroit Shock, which had a depleted roster at the time, for one game.
Lieberman was the Shock’s head coach and general manager from 1998 to 2000. She then served as a television analyst for women’s basketball before becoming the head coach of the Dallas Mavericks’ NBA Developmental League team in 2009. In 2015–17 Lieberman was on the coaching staff of the Sacramento Kings, thereby becoming the second female assistant coach in NBA history. Lieberman was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 1996.
