Phoenix Suns,  American professional basketball team based in Phoenix. Established in 1968, the Suns play in the National Basketball Association (NBA) and have won three Western Conference titles (1976, 1993, and 2021).
The Suns’ first seasons were moderately successful, and the team showcased the talents of “the Original Sun” Dick Van Arsdale and future Hall of Famer Connie Hawkins. In 1976, a 42–40 Phoenix team featuring longtime franchise favourites Alvan Adams and Paul Westphal went on a surprising postseason run in which the “Sunderalla” Suns pulled off upsets in the first two rounds to reach the NBA finals, where they faced the Boston Celtics in a dramatic six-game series. The finals were highlighted by a triple-overtime shootout in game five, but the Suns were overpowered and fell in the sixth game. In 1977 the Suns drafted Walter Davis, who would go on to set the franchise scoring record during his 11 years with the team.
The Suns traded for point guard Kevin Johnson in the middle of the 1987–88 season and signed free agent forward Tom Chambers in the off-season. The two would form the core of a reinvigorated team that advanced to the conference finals in both 1989 and 1990, the first 2 of 13 consecutive playoff berths for the franchise. In 1992 Phoenix traded for perennial All Star Charles Barkley in an effort to secure a title. Although Barkley played well enough to earn the NBA’s Most Valuable Player (MVP) award his first year in Phoenix, the team fell to the Chicago Bulls in the 1993 NBA finals. Phoenix failed to advance to the finals again during the remainder of Barkley’s time with the team, and the Suns entered into a rebuilding mode at the turn of the 21st century.
The team drafted high school phenomenon Amar’e Stoudemire in 2002 and reacquired point guard Steve Nash (who was originally drafted by the Suns) in 2004. Nash’s up-tempo playing style perfectly complemented the skill sets of Stoudemire and forward Shawn Marion, and the Suns transformed into an exciting high-scoring team. The team’s offensive firepower was not enough to propel it past the conference finals, however, and the Suns traded for powerful centre Shaquille O’Neal during the 2007–08 season in an effort to develop a championship-calibre defense. The presence of O’Neal was not enough to propel the Suns past the first round of the playoffs, and he was traded away in 2009. A young Suns team rebuilt around Nash and Stoudemire made an impressive run in 2009–10 before losing in the Western Conference finals to the Los Angeles Lakers. Stoudemire signed a free-agent contract with the New York Knicks the following off-season, and the Suns entered a period of nonwinning campaigns. The Suns surprisingly rebounded from their dire stretch in 2013–14 by adding 23 wins to the previous season’s total to finish with a 48–34 record, landing just outside playoff qualification in a historically strong Western Conference field. However, the turnaround was short-lived, and, after a slight downturn the following year, the Suns finished the 2015–16 season with the fourth worst record in the NBA (23–59), the first of three consecutive 20-win seasons that established Phoenix as one of the worst teams in the NBA.
Behind sharpshooter Devin Booker, the Suns nearly made the playoffs following the 2019–20 NBA season. That improvement paled in comparison with that of the following season when a young Phoenix team—having traded for superstar point guard Chris Paul in November 2020—jelled under the guidance of head coach Monty Williams and posted the second best record in the league in 2020–21. The Suns then stormed through the Western Conference playoffs to earn the franchise’s third appearance in the NBA finals. There the team took a 2–0 series lead over the Milwaukee Bucks only to lose four consecutive games and narrowly miss out on its first NBA title.
