Rick Barry, byname of Richard Francis Dennis Barry III,  (born March 28, 1944, Elizabeth, New Jersey, U.S.), American professional basketball player who was one of the most prolific scorers and accurate free throw shooters in the sport’s history. In his 14 seasons playing in both the National Basketball Association (NBA) and the American Basketball Association (ABA), he was a first-team all-league selection nine times.
As a senior at the University of Miami, Barry led the National Collegiate Athletic Association in scoring with 37.4 points per game and was named an All-American. He was selected by the San Francisco Warriors with the second overall pick in the 1965 NBA draft. In his rookie year, Barry was named an All-Star and first-team All-NBA, honours he repeated the following season as he led the league in scoring and helped the Warriors reach the NBA finals, which they lost to the Philadelphia 76ers.
Unhappy with his pay and the Warriors’ coaching, Barry joined the Oakland Oaks of the upstart ABA. Not only did Barry become a minority owner of the team, but his father-in-law and former college coach, Bruce Hale, was hired as the Oaks’ head coach. Barry was forced to sit out the 1967–68 season, however, because of the resulting legal dispute between the two leagues. He led the Oaks to an ABA title in 1968–69, but soured on the team when it announced that it was relocating to Washington, D.C., and he re-signed with the Warriors in an attempt to remain in the Bay Area. However, a court order forced Barry to return to the ABA, and, after an abbreviated season in Washington, he was dealt to the New York Nets. After two productive seasons with the Nets, he was obligated to honour the contract he had signed with the Warriors three years earlier and Barry returned to the NBA.
Barry’s second stint with the Warriors lasted six seasons, by far his longest tenure with any professional team. He led the Warriors to the 1975 NBA title and was named the finals Most Valuable Player after averaging 29.5 points per game in his team’s four-game sweep of the Washington Bullets.
Barry signed with the Houston Rockets in 1978, but his level of play dramatically fell off, and he retired in 1980 after two disappointing seasons in Houston, the only seasons in which he did not receive All-Star honours during his 14-year career. He retired as the all-time leader in free-throw percentage for both the ABA and the NBA (the latter record has since been broken), and he was famous for his distinctive, old-fashioned underhand method for shooting free throws. After his playing days ended, Barry worked as a commentator on NBA television broadcasts. Four of his sons also played professional basketball, including Brent, who was a member of two championship-winning San Antonio Spurs teams, making the Barrys the second father-son duo to capture NBA titles (preceded by Matt Guokas, Sr., and Matt Guokas, Jr., and followed by Bill Walton and Luke Walton). Barry was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 1987 and was named one of the 50 greatest players in NBA history in 1996.
