San Antonio Spurs,  American professional basketball team established in 1967 that is based in San Antonio, Texas. The Spurs won five National Basketball Association (NBA) championships (1999, 2003, 2005, 2007, and 2014) during one of the most dominant stretches in NBA history.
The team started out as the Dallas Chaparrals in the American Basketball Association (ABA). The Chaparrals were moderately successful, but the team was sold to a group of San Antonio businessmen in 1973, relocated, and renamed the Spurs. George (“the Iceman”) Gervin—a future Hall of Famer who joined the franchise midway through the 1973–74 season—was the star of the early San Antonio teams, a high-scoring shooting guard who would help establish the Spurs as a consistent contender throughout the 1970s and 1980s. The Spurs joined the NBA when the league agreed to absorb the four most successful ABA franchises in 1976 after the younger league began to struggle financially. Defying predictions of mediocrity, the team immediately posted winning records and stood up to the NBA’s best teams. Capturing five division titles in their first seven seasons of NBA play, the Spurs continually made the playoffs but could not surmount the championship hurdle.
After Gervin was traded from the team in 1985, the Spurs experienced a four-year string of losing seasons. The slump ended with the addition of superstar centre David Robinson in 1989. Robinson’s presence was the catalyst for a 35-win improvement in the 1989–90 season for the Spurs, and the team qualified for the postseason in each of his first seven years in San Antonio, but he could not carry the team past the conference finals on his own. Fortune shone on the Spurs in 1997 when, after an injury-plagued 20–62 season, the Spurs won the NBA draft lottery, which allowed them to choose forward Tim Duncan with the first overall selection of that year’s draft. Duncan teamed with a healthy Robinson to lead the Spurs to a 36-win improvement in the 1997–98 season, and the duo, nicknamed the “Twin Towers,” followed that remarkable year by guiding the team to the 1999 NBA championship. In 2003, which was Robinson’s last season with the team, they won another title and thus allowed him to end an illustrious career on top.
The Spurs remained dominant after Robinson’s retirement, combining veterans and promising young talent with the defensive philosophy of coach Gregg Popovich. Duncan was joined by rising stars Manu Ginobili and Tony Parker (who both played complementary roles in the Spurs’ 2003 title) during championship runs in 2005 and 2007. In 2010–11 the Spurs tied an all-time NBA mark by recording their 12th consecutive season with at least 50 victories, but they were met with disappointment in the following postseason as they became just the second top-seeded NBA team to be upset by an eighth-seeded (lowest-seeded) team in an opening seven-game playoff series when they were eliminated by the Memphis Grizzlies. The Spurs established a new NBA record by reaching 50 wins over the next two campaigns, each of which saw the team advance to the conference finals, with San Antonio defeating the Grizzlies in that round to reach the NBA finals in 2012–13, where the Spurs lost a thrilling seven-game series to the Miami Heat. The team won a league-high 62 games the following season and, in the ensuing playoffs, won its way into a rematch with the Heat in the NBA finals. There the Spurs put on one of the most effective and prolific scoring displays in finals history, setting numerous finals shooting records en route to winning the franchise’s fifth title, in a five-game series.
Led by emerging star forward Kawhi Leonard, the Spurs continued to be among the NBA’s elite teams in the years following their fifth championship. In 2015–16 San Antonio won a franchise-record 67 games, which was tied for the fifth highest win total in league history at the time, but the team failed to get past the second round of the playoffs, where it was upset by the Oklahoma City Thunder. The Spurs won 61 games in 2016–17, the second highest total in the league that season, and advanced to the Western Conference finals. There San Antonio ran out to a surprising 23-point second-half lead over the heavily favoured Golden State Warriors in game one when Leonard sustained a postseason-ending ankle injury. Without their best player, the Spurs proceeded to lose that game as well as the next three for one of the more disappointing postseason outcomes in franchise history. Leonard struggled to recover from his injury and was limited to just nine games during the 2017–18 season, which saw the Spurs fail to win at least 50 games (or post the equivalent winning percentage during the lockout-shortened 1998–99 season) for the first time since the team drafted Tim Duncan—a remarkable 20-year run of elite play. That campaign ended with a first-round loss to the Warriors in the playoffs. Leonard was traded away in the off-season, but a rebuilt Spurs team still advanced to the 2019 postseason, which resulted in another first-round loss.
