Senda Berenson, original name Senda Valvrojenski,  (born March 19, 1868, Butrimonys, Russian Empire [near present-day Vilnius, Lithuania]—died February 16, 1954, Santa Barbara, California, U.S.), American educator and sportswoman who created and successfully promoted a form of women’s basketball played in schools for nearly three-quarters of a century.
The Valvrojenski family immigrated to the United States in 1875, adopting the name Berenson and settling in Boston. Senda’s brother Bernard, not quite three years her senior, would become a noted art collector and an authority on Italian art. Senda was a frail child whose health often interfered with her education. In 1890 she entered the Boston Normal School of Gymnastics and soon found her physical condition much improved. After two years at the school she joined the staff of Smith College as a teacher of physical training. Her teaching emphasized the Swedish gymnastics she had learned at the Boston school and, from 1895, fencing. In 1897 she studied advanced fencing at the Royal Central Institute of Gymnastics in Stockholm. In 1901 she initiated the introduction of field hockey at Smith.
Berenson’s major contribution to women’s physical education, however, was her devising of women’s basketball, a modified version of the men’s game that she introduced at Smith in the fall of 1892 after reading of James Naismith’s invention of the game in nearby Springfield, Massachusetts. Her version of basketball deemphasized the contest for possession and full court movement in favour of passing and position. Players were allowed to dribble only three times and to hold the ball for no more than three seconds. The game spread quickly among girls’ schools. (Clara Baer of Newcomb College, New Orleans, Louisiana, also contributed greatly to the development of the game, notably the three-zone “line basketball” idea.) From 1899 to 1917 Berenson edited the version of the rules accepted as official, and from 1905 to 1917 she was chairman of the Basketball Committee for Women. Her version of basketball remained standard for 70 years.
Berenson left Smith upon her marriage in 1911 to Herbert V. Abbott, a professor of English. She was director of physical education at a private girls’ school until 1921. In 1985 she was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame.
