Utah Jazz,  American professional basketball team based in Salt Lake City, Utah, that plays in the Western Conference of the National Basketball Association (NBA). The Jazz have won two conference championships (1997 and 1998).
Originally based in New Orleans, whose storied music history gave the Jazz its name, the team played its first game in 1974. Early Jazz teams were noteworthy for the presence of high-scoring guard Pete Maravich, who was an all-star three times in his five years in New Orleans but who never led the Jazz to a winning record or a divisional finish higher than fourth place. In 1979 the franchise’s financial difficulties led to a relocation to Salt Lake City, where it incongruously retained the name Jazz.
Shortly before beginning its first season in Utah, the team traded for Adrian Dantley, who became the key figure in the Jazz’s ascent to the upper echelon of the Western Conference. In the 1983–84 season, Dantley led the Jazz to a 45–37 record and a division title. While the Jazz lost in the conference semifinals to the Phoenix Suns, the team’s first play-off appearance marked the beginning of a streak of 20 consecutive postseason berths for the franchise. In 1984 Utah drafted point guard John Stockton, and the following year it drafted forward Karl Malone. With the trade of Adrian Dantley to the Detroit Pistons in the 1986 off-season, Stockton and Malone took over as the faces of the franchise. Known for their deft use of the pick-and-roll maneuver, Stockton and Malone—who, at the time of their retirements, were respectively the NBA’s all-time leader in assists and the league’s second highest career scorer—formed arguably the most prolific guard-forward duo in basketball history and led the Jazz to its greatest achievements to date.
Early in the 1988–89 season, Jerry Sloan became the Jazz’s head coach, replacing Frank Layden, who moved to the team’s front office. In his third full season with Utah, Sloan guided the Jazz to a berth in the Western Conference finals, where the team was defeated by the Portland Trail Blazers. Utah advanced to the conference finals twice more (1993–94, 1995–96) in the following four seasons but lost to the Houston Rockets and the Seattle Supersonics, respectively. The Jazz finally broke through to the NBA finals in 1997 but, like most of the other teams of that era, had to go through Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls to capture the championship, and the Jazz were beaten by the Bulls in six games. The two teams met again in the 1998 NBA finals, where the Jazz were seconds away from forcing a deciding game seven on its home court when Jordan made a game-winning shot in the closing moments of game six to again deny Stockton and Malone an NBA title. The pair led the Jazz to play-off appearances in each season from 1998–99 to 2002–03, but the team never advanced past the conference semifinals, and both players left the Jazz in 2003.
The Jazz drafted point guard Deron Williams in 2005, and after a three-year absence the team returned to the play-offs in Williams’s second season. Utah beat the Houston Rockets and the Golden State Warriors in the postseason to advance to the conference finals, where the Jazz lost to the eventual champion, the San Antonio Spurs, in five games. The Jazz continued to be one of the strongest teams in the Western Conference in subsequent seasons but did not advance past the second round of the play-offs between 2006–07 and 2009–10.
In 2011 the Jazz underwent sudden and surprising personnel change when Sloan abruptly resigned on February 10, after tiring of his numerous conflicts with team management and Williams. Less than two weeks later, Williams was traded, and the Jazz began a rebuilding process around a core of young players. Behind the play of forward Gordon Hayward and centre Rudy Gobert, the Jazz won a division title in 2016–17 but were swept in the second round of the play-offs by the Golden State Warriors. Hayward left in free agency during the following off-season, but the Jazz received unexpectedly strong play from rookie guard Donovan Mitchell, who helped Utah return to the postseason where the team again lost in the second round.
