Fatima Meer,  (born August 12, 1928, Durban, South Africa—died March 13, 2010, Durban), South African antiapartheid and human rights activist, educator, and author. From the mid-20th century she was one of the most prominent women political leaders in South Africa.
Meer was the second of nine children in a liberal Islamic family. Her father, Moosa Meer, was the editor of Indian Views, an anticolonialist newspaper that also opposed South Africa’s white-minority government. While a student at Durban Indian Girls’ High School, she organized the Student Passive Resistance Committee to support the Indian community’s Passive Resistance Campaign (1946–48) against new legislation restricting the land rights of Indians in South Africa. She later attended the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg and the University of Natal, where she received bachelor’s and master’s degrees in sociology. She married her first cousin, Ismail Meer, a lawyer and activist, in 1950.
For her role as an organizer and speaker in the 1952 Defiance Campaign, a multiracial civil-disobedience protest against apartheid laws, she became the first woman in South Africa to be banned, a punishment that confined her to Durban and prohibited her attendance at public gatherings and the publication of her writings for three years. Despite her banning, she was a founding member of the Federation of South African Women (FEDSAW) in 1954. Two years later she was appointed a lecturer in sociology at University of Natal, where she remained until 1988. She was the first nonwhite to teach at a white South African university.
During the Treason Trial (1956–58) of leaders of the Congress Alliance (a coalition of antiapartheid groups led by the African National Congress [ANC]), Meer organized efforts to aid the imprisoned activists (who included her husband) and their families. Following the Sharpeville massacre of 1960, in which police fired on a crowd of blacks in the Sharpeville township, killing or wounding some 250, she led weekly vigils outside the prison in Durban where many arrested activists, again including her husband, were being held. In the early 1970s she allied herself with the Black Consciousness Movement, emphasizing black dignity and self-worth, led by Steve Biko. She founded the Institute of Black Research, an educational and publishing organization, at the University of Natal in 1972.
In 1975 she cofounded (with Winnie Mandela) the Black Women’s Federation, an umbrella group of women’s organizations. She was soon banned for a second time, for five years. In 1976, in the wake of the Soweto student uprising (in which police killed more than 600 people, many of them children), she was detained without trial for six months for attempting to organize a mass rally with Biko. Shortly after her release, she and her husband survived an assassination attempt when their house was attacked with gasoline bombs. From 1979 she founded a number of schools and vocational training centres for impoverished black children and adults, including two that were closed by the government after she was arrested for violating her third banning order (for five years), imposed in 1981.
After the establishment of democracy in South Africa in 1994, Meer refused a seat in the parliament, preferring to work with civil-society organizations to aid the poor and promote interracial understanding. She was a founding member of Jubilee South Africa, part of the Jubilee 2000 movement, which called for the cancellation of the debts of developing countries.
Meer was the recipient of numerous honours and awards from governments, human rights organizations, and academic institutions. She published more than 40 books, including Higher than Hope (1988), the first authorized biography of Nelson Mandela.
