William Powell, in full William Ralph Powell,  (born December 6, 1949, Roslyn, New York, U.S.—died July 11, 2016, near Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada), American writer who wrote the incendiary manual The Anarchist Cookbook (1971), a how-to guide for anyone bent on mayhem or revolution.
Powell, whose father was a press agent for the United Nations, spent his early childhood in Britain. His family returned to live in the suburbs of New York City in 1959. When he was 17 years old, Powell left home and got an apartment in the East Village neighbourhood of New York City, where he worked as a clerk in a bookstore. He was angered when he received notification that he was to be drafted to serve in the Vietnam War, and in 1968 he began compiling information for The Anarchist Cookbook. He used countercultural publications, military manuals, and other materials gathered from collections of the New York Public Library to put together a book with chapters devoted to the making of recreational drugs, to electronics and sabotage, to improvised weapons for use in close combat, and, most famously, to recipes for explosives. The information was accompanied by drawings and narrated in an authoritative tone. In the foreword, he cautioned, “Read this book, but keep in mind that the topics written about here are illegal.… Also, more importantly, almost all the recipes are dangerous…. This book is not for children or morons.”
The Anarchist Cookbook was published by Lyle Stuart and created an immediate sensation. It was generally greeted with horror and was brought to the attention of the FBI. Critics described it as reckless. However, it never went out of print. In later years, perpetrators of numerous bombing incidents and mass shootings were found to have had access to and interest in The Anarchist Cookbook. Powell was later among those who called for the book to be withdrawn, but its publisher, which owned the copyright, refused.
After writing The Anarchist Cookbook, Powell earned (1974) a bachelor’s degree from Windham College and a master’s degree (1979) from Manhattanville College. He went on to a career in international teaching, focusing especially on students with learning disabilities and other special needs, and he wrote or co-wrote several books on education. In addition, he and his wife, Ochan Kusuma-Powell, founded the professional development organization Education Across Frontiers. Powell and The Anarchist Cookbook were the subject of a 2016 documentary film by Charlie Siskel, American Anarchist.
