Aguascalientes,  estado (state), central Mexico. One of Mexico’s smallest states, it is bounded to the west, north, and east by the state of Zacatecas and to the south and southeast by the state of Jalisco. The city of Aguascalientes is the state capital.
The Chichimec were the original inhabitants of the region. The Spanish conquered Aguascalientes in the 16th century and expanded silver mining in the area. Under the Spanish and after independence, neighbouring territories fought over Aguascalientes, and for a time it was part of Zacatecas. It became a state in 1835. During the Mexican Revolution it was the scene of bitter fighting and was occupied by various factions.
The state’s relief is dominated by spurs of the Sierra Madre Occidental and the Cordillera Neo-Volcánica rising above the Mesa Central. High elevations, between some 3,300 and 9,800 feet (1,000 and 3,000 metres), contribute to a mild climate with light rainfall. The state’s Calvillo and Aguascalientes rivers form part of the Rio Grande de Santiago system. Numerous hot springs are the basis for the state’s name (from the Spanish, meaning “hot waters”) and the playful label for its residents, hidrocálidos—from hidro (a prefix meaning “water”) and cálido (“warm”).
Mining makes up a small part of the economy, as does wine making. Agriculture relies on irrigation; crops raised include chilies, corn (maize), potatoes, garlic, onions, beans, guavas, peaches, and alfalfa. The service sector, including government, trade, and tourism, dominates the economy. Tourism centres on the hot springs and the San Marcos Fair, held each spring in Aguascalientes city. Manufacturing also contributes significantly to the economy; notable products are clothing (largely exported to the United States), electronics, automobiles and automobile parts, metal goods, and dairy and beef products. Aguascalientes has an airport and good rail and highway connections with all parts of Mexico.
The executive branch of state government is led by a governor, who is elected to a single six-year term. Members of the unicameral legislature, the State Congress, are elected to three-year terms. Aguascalientes is divided into local governmental units called municipios (municipalities), each of which is headquartered in a prominent city, town, or village. The Aguascalientes municipio is the site of the state’s leading cultural institutions, including the Autonomous University of Aguascalientes (founded 1973). Area 2,112 square miles (5,471 square km). Pop. (2010) 1,184,996.
