Al-Daqahliyyah,  muḥāfaẓah (governorate), northeastern Nile River delta, Lower Egypt, bordering on the Mediterranean Sea. Its triangular area, with the “point” to the south, is traversed by the Damietta branch of the Nile. Its name, an Arabicized form of the Coptic Tkehli, comes from the small village of Daqahlah, southwest of Damietta. The capital and largest town is Al-Manṣūrah. Al-Daqahliyyah was created a political unit under the Fāṭimid caliphs (late 11th century ad), and it has, with brief exceptions, survived as such to the present, though with many changes in its boundaries. Toward the south, Al-Daqahliyyah takes in part of the very fertile middle delta land, but in the northeast it borders the saline Al-Manzilah Lake, from which about 140,000 acres (57,000 hectares) have been reclaimed for agricultural use. There are additional land reclamation projects under way. The flat countryside has many irrigation ditches and canals, the most important of which is Al-Ṣaghīr Canal.
While northern Al-Daqahliyyah is a prime rice-growing centre of Egypt, in the southern and central regions of the governorate cotton is more prevalent. Other crops include corn (maize), wheat, and berseem (clover). Principal industries are based on agricultural production; they include cotton ginning, flour and rice milling, and oil pressing. Al-Manṣūrah has diversified manufactures. There are textile mills at Mīt Ghamr. Commercial fishing along the coasts has declined since the opening of the Aswān High Dam, but fishing on the salt lake remains economically important. In 1974 a major natural gas field at Abū Madi in the northern part of the governorate started production. It provides energy for industries in the area, including a fertilizer plant at Ṭalkhā. Principal towns are Al-Manṣūrah, Al-Matariyyah, Al-Manzilah, Mīt Ghamr, and Al-Sinbillāwayn. An institute affiliated with Al-Azhar University at Cairo is located in Al-Manṣūrah, and southwest of the city is Samannūd, site of the ancient city of Sebennytus. Part of Al-Daqahliyyah was detached in 1955 to form Damietta governorate. Area 1,340 square miles (3,471 square km). Pop. (2006) 4,985,187.
