Al-Fayyūm, Fayyūm also spelled Faiyum or Fayum,  muḥāfaẓah (governorate) of Upper Egypt, located in a great depression of the Western Desert southwest of Cairo. Extending about 50 miles (80 km) east–west and about 35 miles (56 km) north–south, the whole Fayyūm—including Wadi Al-Ruwayān, a smaller, arid depression—is below sea level (maximum depth 150 feet [45 metres]). The governorate also includes a triangular tract of desert to the west, bounded by Al-Jīzah to the north and Banī Suwayf to the south. The name is derived from Phiom (Coptic for “the sea”), probably inspired by the ancient Lake Moeris that formed there during the Pleistocene Epoch (about 2,600,000 to 11,700 years ago) when the Nile, about 60 feet (18 metres) higher than today, breached the gravelly ridge that separates Al-Fayyūm from the Nile valley proper.
On the southeastern side of the depression is Al-Fayyūm, the capital of the governorate formerly Madīnat al-Fayyūm (“City of the Fayyūm”). The present Lake Qārūn in the depression is sustained by a partial diversion of the Nile into the Yūsuf (Ibrāhīmiyyah) Canal, which follows the ancient channel of the Nile into the Fayyūm, branching out to provide irrigation water. The brackish lake, occupying 85 square miles (220 square km), has been successfully stocked with saltwater fish, enabling a commercial fishing industry to develop.
The naturally protected, well-defined geographic entity of Al-Fayyūm was favoured by prehistoric hunters, who were probably attracted there by abundant game and equable climate. It was an important province in the 12th dynasty (1938–1756 bce), when the capital of Egypt was situated nearby. There is documentary evidence (3rd century bce) of Jewish settlement there. Ptolemy II (285–246 bce) reduced the level of the lake to its present level, reclaiming much agricultural land. Greek settlers were brought to the area, creating prosperous Hellenistic communities. The ruins of these have yielded thousands of Greek, Demotic, and Coptic papyri. When occupied by the Arabs (c. 640 ce), it was apparently still a prosperous agricultural region, chiefly producing rice and flax. Vulnerable to Berber desert raiders, it later declined, although it continued for centuries to be a centre of Coptic Christianity.
With the linking of Al-Fayyūm to the Nile valley by railroad (1874), the governorate’s isolation was reduced and the way opened for development of the rich soils deposited by the Nile. Most of the area of Al-Fayyūm is now settled and cultivated. Cereals, rice, beans, grapes, olives, figs, dates, honey, cotton, and sugarcane are produced. Pigeons are raised for domestic commercial use. In the early 1970s about 9,900 acres (4,000 hectares) of desert were reclaimed for agricultural use. Attar of roses collected there is used in the perfume industry. Other industrial activities include manufacture of woolen and linen cloth, leather tanning, and tobacco processing. Construction of a chemical plant using solar evaporation to extract sodium chloride, sulfide, chlorate, and magnesium oxide started in 1980 near Lake Qārūn. Coal and iron ore deposits have been found in the governorate.
The region has many ancient sites, including Shedet (later Crocodilopolis), chief centre for worship of the crocodile-god Sebek, near which Al-Fayyūm town now lies. In the time of the Ptolemies, Setje was named Arsinoe after the wife of Ptolemy II Philadelphus. Since pharaonic times Al-Fayyūm’s irrigation waters, its lifeline, have been controlled by sluices at Al-Lāhūn across the Yūsuf Canal. Other modern centres in the great oasis include Sinnūris, Iṭsā, and Ibshawāy. The governorate is linked by a highway across the desert to Al-Jīzah (Giza) and by local roads to Banī Suwayf. A branch railway off the Cairo–Aswān line serves the governorate, and narrow-gauge railways radiate from the capital into the countryside. Area 705 square miles (1,827 square km). Pop. (2006) 2,511,027.
