Alagoas,  estado (state) of northeastern Brazil. It is the second smallest of Brazil’s states and is an agricultural region in the early stages of industrialization. Situated on the northern bank of the São Francisco River, it is bounded on the north and west by the state of Pernambuco, on the east by the Atlantic Ocean, on the south by Sergipe, and on the west by Bahia. Its coastline is about 138 miles (220 km) long. The name of the state derives from its large number of lakes (lagôas). The capital is Maceió.
Pôrto Calvo in the north and Penedo, located on the northern bank of the São Francisco River, were founded during the early years of the Portuguese occupation of Brazil, in the 16th century. In the early part of the 17th century the Dutch obtained a foothold but were soon expelled. At about the same time, quilombos—fortified settlements of fugitive slaves, with a distinct culture that had many African characteristics—were established in the forests. Alagoas was a district of Pernambuco until 1817, when it became a captaincy (fief). Following the proclamation of Brazilian independence in 1822, it became a province of the empire, and in 1889 it became a state of the republic.
The climate of Alagoas is hot and humid along the coast and hot and dry in the interior. The terrain slopes downward from a semi-barren plateau to a narrow coastal plain. The principal rivers of the state are the São Francisco and the Mundaú, Paraíba, and Coruripe. Lagoa Mundaú, or Lagoa do Norte (Lake of the North), and Lagoa Manguaba, or Lagoa do Sul (Lake of the South), are the largest of the state’s many lakes. Geologically, Alagoas consists mostly of the southern part of the Serra da Borborema (Borborema Mountain Range). The Serra Lisa (Lisa Mountain) is the state’s highest point. There are four zones of vegetation: the coastal plain; the Mata, or tropical rainforest; the Agreste, a shrubby savanna parkland; and the Caatinga, an arid region covered with underbrush and cacti. The animal life of the state is rich and varied.
The Alagoans are a mixture of peoples of European, African, and Indian origin. Those of European and African ancestry predominate in the coastal region of Alagoas, and caboclos—people of mixed European and Indian descent—in the interior. The language of the state is Portuguese. Roman Catholicism is the principal religion.
Abundant electric power is available from the  Xingó and Paulo Afonso hydroelectric projects on the São Francisco River in Alagoas and the neighbouring state of Bahia. The water supply, however, remains inadequate. The São Francisco River is being canalized, both for navigation and to supply the hinterland with water for domestic use. Sanitary conditions are poor. Although there are hospitals and other medical establishments in the state, all suffer from shortages of staff and funds.  Such conditions have contributed to a life expectancy for the state’s residents that is significantly lower than the national average, and Alagoas has one of the highest infant mortality rates in the country. The region’s great poverty has also resulted in Alagoas having one of the highest emigration rates in Brazil.
While Alagoas is still primarily an agricultural state, industrialization is making progress. The main agricultural products are sugarcane, palm, coconuts, cassava (manioc), corn (maize), cotton, and tobacco. Cattle raising is increasing in the Bacia Leitera, a dairying region in the west central part of the state. Sugar refining is the state’s most important industry; other industries include textile manufacturing, dairy processing, iron smelting, and the processing of corn, rice, fertilizers, and hides. Since the late 20th century, tourism has played a growing role in the state’s economy, as its excellent beaches attract numerous visitors.
Deposits of amianthus, a fine, silky asbestos, are mined. Oil production and exploration are centred in the southern portion of the state, near the more significant offshore fields.
In addition to its status as state capital, Maceió is the state’s chief commercial city and has an active industrial district. A modest foreign and coastwise trade is carried on through its port, Jaraguá. Maceió is also the centre of a fast growing tourist industry, sparked by a variety of scenic beaches. Other major towns include Arapiraca and Palmeira dos Índios. Inland water transport is available on the São Francisco River and on several lakes. Flights from Palmares Airport link Maceió to other Brazilian state capitals.
Alagoas is home to a number of educational institutions. In addition to the University of Alagoas there is a state school of medical sciences and a private school of social service. Many facilities provide technical instruction. Among the state’s cultural institutions are the Historical and Geographic Institute, the Academy of Letters, and a medical society. Area 10,721 square miles (27,768 square km). Pop. (2010) 3,120,494.
