Åland Islands, Swedish Åland Skärgård, Finnish Ahvenanmaa,  archipelago constituting Åland (Ahvenanmaa) autonomous  territory, southwestern Finland. The islands lie at the entrance to the Gulf of Bothnia, 25 miles (40 km) east of  the Swedish coast, at the eastern edge of the Åland Sea. The archipelago has a land area of 599 square miles (1,551 square km) and consists of about 35 inhabited islands, 6,500 uninhabited islands, and many rocky reefs. The bedrock is primarily granite and covered with a soil that, though mainly clay, is rich in certain areas.
Åland, the largest island in the group, accounts for more than 70 percent of the total land area and is known locally as Fasta Åland (“Main Island”).  It consists of rugged granite to the north and rich agricultural soil to the southeast. Eckerö and Lemland are the next largest islands.  Åland is home to about 90 percent of the archipelago’s population and is the site of Mariehamn, the administrative capital,  chief seaport, and only town. Also located on Åland is Orrdals Hill, the highest point of the archipelago, rising to a height of 423 feet (129 metres). From the 19th century  until World War II, Mariehamn served as the centre of a sailing fleet engaged in grain trade with Australia. Few of these ships still operate, though the colourful history of the fleet is reflected in an excellent maritime museum. Fishing, which originally brought settlement to coastal areas unsuited to agriculture, is a declining source of income.
The archipelago has the highest crop yields in Finland per unit area because of the mild climate and fertile soil. Small, highly mechanized farms produce  wheat, oats, barley, rye, cucumbers, sugar beets, potatoes, and onions.  The climate also favours apple, plum, and pear orchards. Ayrshire cattle dominate the dairy farms, and sheep are also raised.  Tourism, shipping, and commerce and banking  account for much of the nonagricultural employment. The islands are linked to Sweden and the Finnish mainland by car and passenger ferries,  steamship service, and air service from Mariehamn airport. The islands’ tourist industry has expanded greatly in recent decades, with most visitors arriving by ferry from neighbouring Finland or Sweden. The islands’ inhabitants speak Swedish, which is the sole official language and  the language of instruction in schools.
The archipelago shows evidence of Bronze and Iron Age settlement as well as distinctive Viking graveyards and numerous medieval granite churches. The islands were Christianized during the 12th century by Swedish missionaries. In 1714 they were seized by the Russian tsar Peter I the Great after his naval victory over Sweden. When the grand duchy of Finland was ceded to Russia in 1809, the islands were included with the provision that they would not be fortified. Russia began fortification in the 1830s, however, with the building of the Bomarsund garrison. The fortress was destroyed in 1854 during the Crimean War by Anglo-French troops. The Åland Convention between Britain, France, and Russia (1856) stipulated that the islands would never be fortified again, though the islands remained under Russian rule. Because of their long history of economic and cultural association with Sweden, the Ålanders claimed the right of self-determination and sought to become part of Sweden when Finland declared its independence in 1917. Finland granted the islands autonomy in 1920 but refused to acknowledge their secession. The League of Nations became mediator of the Åland question, granting the islands a unique autonomy while directing that they remain part of Finland.
Åland autonomous territory has a single-chamber parliament called the Lagtinget whose members are elected to four-year terms. Most administrative powers are vested in an Executive Council, whose ministers are appointed by the Lagtinget.  The people also elect one representative to the Finnish parliament. There is a board that exercises certain administrative powers retained by the national government and that is headed by a governor appointed by the Finnish president upon agreement with the speaker of the Lagtinget. Pop. (2005 est.) 26,766.
