Alberta,  most westerly of Canada’s three Prairie Provinces, occupying the continental interior of the western part of the country. To the north the 60th parallel (latitude 60° N) forms its boundary with the Northwest Territories, to the east the 110th meridian (longitude 110° W) forms the boundary with its prairie neighbour, Saskatchewan, to the south the 49th parallel forms the international boundary with the U.S. state of Montana, and to the west the boundary with British Columbia is formed by the 120th meridian and the crest of the Rocky Mountains. The province is about 750 miles (1,200 km) in extent from north to south and about 400 miles (640 km) across at the greatest width. Alberta was established as a district of the North-West Territories in 1882 and was enlarged to its present boundaries on becoming a province in 1905. The provincial government has its seat in Edmonton.
Following the earliest explorations by fur traders, the settlement of Alberta’s prairie and parkland zones (which stretch from the boreal forest transition zone south to the border with the United States) led to the development of agriculture. Subsequent exploitation of rich oil, gas, coal, and timber resources led to further population growth, with an increase in urbanization and industrialization. The province remains sparsely populated, however, and relative isolation from the more populous eastern regions of the country has inhibited the development of industries needing mass markets. With natural routes to the north, Alberta has become a major jumping-off point for the development of Canada’s Arctic and subarctic regions. The scenery of the mountain parks in the west is internationally renowned. Area 255,541 square miles (661,848 square km). Pop. (2016) 4,067,175; (2019 est.) 4,371,316.
Mount Columbia (12,294 feet [3,747 metres]) in the Rocky Mountains is Alberta’s highest point, and numerous other peaks exceed 11,000 feet (3,350 metres). A narrow foothill zone flanks the mountains to the east. Beyond that, the interior plains fall from over 3,000 feet (900 metres) in the southwest to below 1,000 feet (300 metres) in the northeast, where ancient Precambrian rocks outcrop in the Canadian Shield. Outliers of higher ground include the Cypress and Swan hills and the Caribou Mountains.
The Columbia Icefield is the source of two of Alberta’s major rivers, the Athabasca and the North Saskatchewan. The first flows northeast to Lake Athabasca, where it becomes the Slave River. It is then joined by the Peace River and drains north toward the Arctic Ocean. Alberta’s lowest point (573 feet [175 metres]) occurs in the Slave River valley. Apart from a small area drained by the Milk River into the Missouri, the southern portion of the province is dominated by the Saskatchewan River system. The Oldman and Bow rivers combine to form the South Saskatchewan, which is joined by the Red Deer River before flowing east with the North Saskatchewan toward Hudson Bay. Most of Alberta’s rivers flow in deeply incised valleys, along which the eroded, barren landscapes known as badlands may develop. Those of the Red Deer are famous for their rich deposits of dinosaur remains. The province has about 6,500 square miles (16,800 square km) of fresh water.
Chernozems—rich brown and black soils with a deep humus layer—underlie the prairies and parklands. The less fertile gray-wooded soils known as luvisols underlie the extensive mixed and coniferous forests of the foothills and the north.
