Aragon, Spanish Aragón,  comunidad autónoma (autonomous community) and historical region of northeastern Spain. It encompasses the provincias (provinces) of Huesca, Zaragoza, and Teruel. Aragon is bounded by France to the north and by the autonomous communities of Catalonia to the east, Valencia to the southeast, Castile–La Mancha to the southwest, and Castile-León, La Rioja, and Navarra to the west. Aragon was established as an autonomous community by the statute of autonomy of Aug. 10, 1982. The capital is Zaragoza. Area 18,411 square miles (47,697 square km). Pop. (2007 est.) 1,296,655.
Mountains dominate the relief north and south of the east-west-trending Ebro River basin, which bisects Aragon into northern and southern portions. Administratively, Zaragoza province occupies the Ebro basin and is flanked by Huesca province to the north and Teruel province to the south. The Pyrenees rise to more than 9,840 feet (3,000 metres) and extend southward from France into Huesca. Their foothills, the pre-Pyrenees, decline in elevation southward to the Ebro basin. The Ebro River drains most of Aragon with the exception of its southernmost portion, which is linked to the Tagus River basin and the Mediterranean Sea. The Sierra de Gúdar occupies almost all of Teruel province as well as the southwestern corner of Zaragoza.
Annual precipitation is low throughout most of Aragon, averaging about 14 inches (350 mm). Most precipitation occurs in the autumn and spring. A Mediterranean climate prevails except in the Pyrenees.
The population tends to be concentrated in the irrigated zones of the Ebro River basin and is much sparser in the adjoining mountains. In Huesca and Teruel the population has declined since the early 20th century, when grape phylloxera destroyed numerous vineyards there. Meanwhile, the population of the province and city of Zaragoza has grown at the expense of Huesca and Teruel. One-half of Aragon’s population lives in Zaragoza city.
Most of the land is cultivated by dry farming, producing crops of wheat, barley, olives, and grapes. The irrigated land, however, is far more productive and accounts for the better part of Aragon’s agricultural output. The principal crops of the irrigated zones are corn (maize), fodder, and fruit.
The government sponsored various projects to expand the land under irrigation, beginning with the Imperial Canal alongside the Ebro River, which was completed in 1783. By 1904 the Canal of Aragon and Catalonia had brought wide stretches of land in the province of Huesca under irrigation, and the Plan Bardenas and the Plan Monegros, both initiated after 1945, brought many additional acres under irrigation. The Bardenas Canal channels the Arba and Aragon rivers and centres around the town of Ejea de los Caballeros, while the Monegros Canal draws on rivers south of Huesca town. Livestock farming, especially pig and sheep raising, is important in Huesca.
Aragon’s manufacturing sector is heavily concentrated in greater Zaragoza. The introduction of sugar beets in the late 19th century hastened the industrialization of the city; seven sugar refineries were established there between 1900 and 1905. Metalworking is now Zaragoza’s leading industry, however. Electric appliances, machinery, railway equipment, and automobiles are the leading manufactures. Textiles, footwear, and clothing are also produced.
Aragon’s primary source of energy is hydroelectricity, generated by the damming of the Ebro River and its northern affluents in Huesca. Historically, Teruel province was a lignite and iron-ore mining region; today its dominant economic activity is the production of thermoelectric power. A railroad reached Zaragoza in 1864, and highways now connect that city with Spain’s major industrial centres.
The modern autonomous community of Aragon is roughly coextensive with the historical kingdom of Aragon. This principality had its origins in 1035, when Sancho III (the Great) of Navarre left to his third son, Ramiro I, the small Pyrenean county of Aragon and established it as an independent kingdom. To this mountain domain Ramiro added the counties of Sobrarbe and Ribagorza to the east. By 1104 Aragon’s kings had doubled its size by conquests southward toward the Ebro River. Zaragoza, a major city controlled by the Almoravids, fell to Alfonso I of Aragon (1104–34) in 1118, and it soon became the capital of the kingdom of Aragon. The reconquest of present-day Aragon from the Muslims had been completed by the late 12th century. In 1179 Aragon reached an agreement with the neighbouring Christian kingdom of Castile under which those parts of Spain remaining in Muslim hands were divided into two zones—one for each kingdom to reconquer.
In 1137 the ruler of Catalonia, Ramon Berenguer IV, count of Barcelona, married the heiress of the kingdom of Aragon. The union of Aragon and Catalonia principally benefited the Catalans, who dominated the state until 1412. The union enabled the Catalans to devote themselves to commerce and maritime expansion, knowing that the financial and military responsibility of defending them from Castile would fall largely on the inhabitants of the Aragonese hinterland.
The Aragonese kings meanwhile continued to expand their domains, reconquering the rich kingdom of Valencia from the Muslims in 1238. Having thus completed the occupation of the Muslim territories allotted to it by the treaty of 1179, Aragon began expanding into the Mediterranean area, a move made possible by the sea power of the Catalans. In 1282, after the incident of the Sicilian Vespers, Peter III of Aragon (1276–85) was received by the Sicilians as their king, and thenceforth Sicily was ruled either directly by the kings of Aragon or by their relatives. Sardinia was incorporated into the Aragonese empire in 1320, and in 1442 Alfonso V of Aragon (1416–58) successfully concluded his long struggle to conquer the Kingdom of Naples. Navarre, which had been ruled by Aragon from 1076 to 1134, came under its rule again in 1425.
By the 15th century the nobles of Aragon proper had come to favour union with Castile to counterbalance the power of the mercantile Catalans. Their chance came in 1412 when, after the extinction of the house of Barcelona in 1410, they procured the election of a Castilian prince, Ferdinand of Antequera, to the vacant Aragonese throne over strong Catalan opposition. One of Ferdinand’s successors, John II of Aragon (1458–79), countered residual Catalan resistance by arranging for his heir, Ferdinand, to marry Isabella, the heiress of Henry IV of Castile. In 1479, upon John II’s death, the kingdoms of Aragon and Castile were united to form the nucleus of modern Spain. The Aragonese lands, however, retained autonomous parliamentary and administrative institutions until the early 18th century, when their constitutional privileges were abrogated by Philip V. The old kingdom of Aragon survived as an administrative unit until 1833, when it was divided into the three existing provinces.
