Arunachal Pradesh,  state of India. It constitutes a mountainous area in the extreme northeastern part of the country and is bordered by the kingdom of Bhutan to the west, the Tibet Autonomous Region of China to the north, Myanmar (Burma) and the Indian state of Nagaland to the south and southeast, and the Indian state of Assam to the south and southwest. The capital is Itanagar.
Arunachal Pradesh, meaning “Land of the Rising Sun,” long has been a recognized region of the Indian subcontinent, receiving mention in such ancient Hindu literature as the Kalika-purana and the epic poems Mahabharata and Ramayana. Formerly known as the North East Frontier Agency (from the British colonial era), the area was part of Assam until it was made the Indian union territory of Arunachal Pradesh in 1972, and in 1987 it became an Indian state. The region, however, has been the subject of an ongoing sovereignty dispute between India and China. Area 32,333 square miles (83,743 square km). Pop. (2011) 1,382,611.
Most of Arunachal Pradesh’s terrain consists of deep valleys flanked by highland plateaus and ridges that rise to the peaks of the Great Himalayas. The state encompasses three broad physiographic regions. Farthest south is a series of foothills, similar in type to the Siwalik Range (a narrow sub-Himalayan belt stretching across much of northern India), that ascend from the Assam plains to elevations of 1,000 to 3,300 feet (300 to 1,000 metres). Those hills rise rapidly northward to the Lesser Himalayas, where some ridges and spurs reach 10,000 feet (3,000 metres). Farther north, along the Tibetan border, lie the main ranges of the Great Himalayas, where Kangto, the highest peak in the state, dominates the landscape, reaching about 23,260 feet (7,090 metres).
The major rivers of the state are the Brahmaputra and its tributaries—the Dibang [Sikang], Lohit, Subansiri, Kameng, and Tirap. The Brahmaputra (known as the Tsangpo in the Tibet Autonomous Region of China and as the Dihang [Siang] in Arunachal Pradesh) flows eastward from Mansarovar Lake in Tibet before dipping south through the Himalayas into north-central Arunachal Pradesh. The river then winds its way southward across the length of the state, cutting a narrow, steep-sided gorge into the mountainous terrain. The Brahmaputra finally emerges onto the northern edge of the Assam plains—a finger of which extends into southeastern Arunachal Pradesh—near the town of Pasighat. It is joined by the Dibang and the Lohit rivers a short distance beyond Pasighat, just south of the border between Assam and Arunachal Pradesh. West of the Brahmaputra, the Subansiri is the only tributary to cross the main Himalayan ranges. The Kameng and other rivers in the area rise on the southern flanks of the mountains. The Tirap River drains the southeastern part of the state.
Soils vary considerably with terrain. Generally, however, they are acidic and, in mountainous areas, subject to erosion. The major soil types are inceptisols, entisols, and ultisols. River valleys are characterized by rich alluvial soils that are highly suited for agriculture.
The climate of Arunachal Pradesh varies with topography and elevation. The foothill zone is subtropical and has a hot and humid climate; in the lower valleys, summer temperatures in June, July, and August typically rise into the mid-90s F (mid-30s C), while winter high temperatures in December, January, and February usually reach the mid-50s F (about 13 °C). Average temperatures decrease as elevations increase in the mountains.
Precipitation in the state generally follows the wet-dry monsoon pattern. Annual totals average about 130 inches (3,300 mm), falling mostly between April and September during the wet southwest monsoon. In the centre of the state, however, the precipitation figure approaches 160 inches (4,100 mm) or higher per year.
Arunachal Pradesh’s diverse terrain, climate, and soils are reflected in its fauna and flora. About two-thirds of the state is forested, with a wide belt of swampy rainforest lying along the foothills. Forests of tropical evergreens and subtropical pines (as well as subtropical mixed broad-leaved and pine forests) are found in lower elevations. As elevation increases, the woodlands give way to mixed and coniferous temperate forests. Subalpine and alpine vegetation, with rhododendrons predominating, appears on the higher slopes. A great variety of medicinal plants, including ginseng and yew, also grow in Arunachal Pradesh, and they are used by much of the population for the treatment and cure of various ailments.
Animal life includes tigers, clouded and snow leopards, elephants, wild buffalo, serow and goral goats, many species of deer, and primates such as hoolock gibbons, slow lorises, macaques, and capped langurs. Animals found at higher elevations include bharals (wild sheep), black bears, and red pandas. The rare musk deer and takin (Budorcas taxicolor) also are found in the state. Moreover, Arunachal Pradesh has an abundance of fish, many varieties of snakes, and hundreds of species of birds.
