Australian Capital Territory (A.C.T.), formerly Yass-Canberra,  political entity of the Commonwealth of Australia consisting of Canberra, the national and territorial capital, and surrounding land. Most of the Australian Capital Territory lies within the Southern Tablelands district of New South Wales in southeastern Australia, but there is also an area of some 28 square miles (73 square km) to the east on the Tasman Sea coast at Jervis Bay. Canberra is located in the northeastern corner of the territory, about 185 miles (300 km) southwest of Sydney, 290 miles (465 km) northeast of Melbourne, and 95 miles (150 km) from the coast. The entire territory lies between latitudes 35° and 36° S and extends some 53 miles (85 km) north to south and 33 miles (53 km) east to west.
The Australian constitution mandated establishing such a capital territory. The site was chosen in 1908, construction began in 1911, and parliament moved from the temporary capital, Melbourne, into the first Parliament House in 1927. Area 910 square miles (2,358 square km). Population (2016) 397,397; (2019 est.) 426,704.
The western boundary of the territory follows the watershed of the Brindabella Range, a northern extension of the Snowy Mountains. The territory’s southern and western parts are mountainous, reaching a maximum height of 6,279 feet (1,914 metres) at Bimberi Peak. In the northeastern section there are broad valleys between rounded hills. While much of the generally rugged topography of the Australian Capital Territory allows small-scale farming, forestry, and grazing, only about one-third of the territory is suitable for urban development.
The area is drained by the Murrumbidgee River, which flows from the Snowy Mountains northward through the territory. The boundaries of the territory were drawn in part to provide Canberra with its own water supply. One of the major tributaries of the Murrumbidgee within the region is the Cotter River, which drains the western area and provides most of Canberra’s water supply from three storage lakes. Another major tributary is the Molonglo River, which runs through the centre of the city, where it is dammed to form Lake Burley Griffin, one of the major landscape design features in the centre of Canberra. Smaller tributaries have been dammed to form ornamental lakes that serve also as basins for drainage in the urban districts of Gungahlin, Belconnen, and Tuggeranong. Increasingly, locally treated sewage and water from the lakes are being used to irrigate playing fields in the city.
The Canberra plains are covered by red-yellow soils and the western mountains by thin skeletal (or granular)  soils. Although soils over most of the territory are shallow, varying in depth from a few inches to about three feet (one metre), pockets of deep alluvial soils along the banks of the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee rivers are a source for garden topsoil in the city.
The Australian Capital Territory has a continental climate with marked seasonal and diurnal variations in temperature. Temperatures range between 14 and 108 °F (−10 and 42 °C); the daily maximum often exceeds 86 °F (30 °C) in summer (December through February). During the winter (June through August), temperatures are lower, and the higher parts of the mountains are covered with snow. Frosts occur on most winter nights, but the days are usually sunny and often warm.
The average annual precipitation is 25 inches (630 mm). Although it is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year, precipitation is somewhat less (about 1.6 inches [40 mm] per month) in the winter. Because rainfall is unreliable, with periods of drought and flooding, large storage reservoirs are needed to ensure water supply and to provide high-capacity drainage of storm water. Sudden heavy storms have resulted in loss of life. Rainfall is much greater in the mountains, averaging about 60 inches (1,525 mm) a year. Fogs are common in winter and sometimes cause airport closings.
The natural vegetation in the lower and flatter northeastern parts of the territory and the lower mountainous areas is either savanna grassland or savanna woodland, with yellow box and red gum, both eucalypts, and spear wallaby grass predominant among nearly 1,000 native and hundreds of introduced species of trees, shrubs, flowering plants, and ferns. The eucalypts have largely been cleared from most of the flatter and some of the hilly regions. Pines have been planted in some of the hilly areas. Other stretches of land are still covered by dry sclerophyll forests consisting primarily of red stringybarks and scribbly gums. Farther south and west are wet sclerophyll forests dominated by brown barrels, stringybarks, ribbon gums, and mountain gums. In the highest mountains are small areas of subalpine woodland, mainly alpine snow gums. Different species of eucalypts predominate in all native forests. The forested area includes a wide variety of shrubs as well as larger trees; little of it has a closed canopy. Nearly half of the territory is covered by indigenous forests.
The largest of the roughly 50 native mammal species common in the territory are eastern gray kangaroos, wallabies, and wombats, which are found in the forest areas and in the grasslands at the margins of the forests. Smaller marsupials include phalangers (possums), gliders, and marsupial mice. The wide range of native birds (nearly 300 species) includes currawongs, magpies, ravens, parrots, cockatoos, and lorikeets. Many of these birds, including colourful parrots, are common not only in the indigenous forests but also in Canberra, where they are attracted by the native and introduced trees and shrubs found throughout the urban area. There is much less birdlife in the pine forests. More than a dozen frog, several dozen reptile, and nearly a dozen fish species inhabit the territory. Eastern brown snakes, red-bellied black snakes, and several lizards are common, especially near watercourses, but snakes are seldom found in urban areas. Among the nonendemic animals found in the forests are wild pigs, goats, and horses and, in the grasslands, foxes, rabbits, and hares.
