Auvergne,  historical region and former administrative région of France. As a région, it encompassed the central départements of Allier, Puy-de-Dôme, Cantal, and Haute-Loire. In 2016 the Auvergne région was joined with the région of Rhône-Alpes to form the new administrative entity of Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes.
Most of Auvergne belongs to the uplands of the Massif Central. Main mountain ranges include the Forez, Vivarais, Livradois, and Dore, the last of which displays the extensive ash and lava remains of three powerful volcanoes of the Quaternary Period (within the past 2.6 million years). They reach 6,184 feet (1,885 metres) at the summit of the Puy de Sancy, in Puy-de-Dôme, which is the highest point in central France. The Vivarais Mountains top out at Mount Mézenc, 5,751 feet (1,753 metres) above Haute-Loire, while in Cantal, an area of high plateaus, volcanic peaks rise to the Plomb du Cantal, at 6,096 feet (1,858 metres). In the north the Paris Basin extends into Allier. Important rivers include the Loire, Allier, Cher, and Dordogne, the headwaters of which are at the foot of the Puy de Sancy; the Sioule River also rises in the Dore Mountains. A humid climate prevails in the west, which is open to Atlantic influences; a continental climate prevails in the east. In the mountains the winters are long and severe.
The region is sparsely populated, and rural densities are particularly low, notably in Cantal. A long period of emigration and rural depopulation led to the progressive aging of the remaining inhabitants. The lowland areas of Puy-de-Dôme became the most dynamic, reflecting the influence of the capital, Clermont-Ferrand. Population growth is strongest in the small towns on the fringes of the urban area.
Agriculture is dominated by cattle raising with greater emphasis given in the north to beef and in the south to milk production, which is frequently used for making cheese. In contrast to the upland areas, the plains of Limagne around Clermont-Ferrand and Issoire specialize in cereal production (predominantly wheat but also corn [maize]). Much of the area is afforested, but only portions have been commercially exploited.
Industrial activity is varied and includes the manufacture of tires, armaments, electronics, and pharmaceuticals as well as metallurgy and food processing. Many factories serve as subcontractors for the automobile and aeronautical industries. Clermont-Ferrand is the major industrial centre, but manufacturing is also found at Montluçon, Moulins, Vichy, Le Puy-en-Velay, and Issoire. Thiers is renowned for its cutlery.
Clermont-Ferrand is also the principal commercial and administrative centre, with a concentration of employment in the service sector. Auvergne offered many possibilities for tourism, including spa towns such as Vichy and the winter-sports resorts of Le Mont Dore and Super Besse. Historical sites include numerous medieval churches—often made of different-coloured local volcanic lavas—in Issoire, Sainte-Nectaire, Orcival, Brioude, La Chaise-Dieu, and Le Puy-en-Velay, the last of which is a place of pilgrimage. Natural attractions in the Haute-Loire département include the crater lake of Le Bouchet and the gorges of the Loire and Allier rivers.
Accessibility to the region has been improved through motorway construction, and there is a regional airport at Clermont-Ferrand.
In the time of Julius Caesar (died 44 bce), the Arverni were a powerful confederation, and their chieftain Vercingetorix was Caesar’s foremost opponent in Gaul. The Romans made Arvernia part of Aquitania Prima. It was the seat of a countship under the Carolingians. After the rule of the powerful William (Guilhem) the Pious (William I), count from 886 to 918, the viscounts of Clermont (now Clermont-Ferrand) usurped the hereditary title of counts of Auvergne.
Through the marriage of Eleanor of Aquitaine to Henry II Plantagenet, the counts became vassals of the kings of England. But Count William VII (the Young), who reigned from 1145 to 1168, lost much of his domain to his uncle William VIII (the Old), who was supported by Henry II. William VII retained only the region bounded by the Allier and the Coux rivers—the district that from the end of the 13th century was called the Dauphiné d’Auvergne. Philip II Augustus of France intervened in the family quarrel and appropriated a large part of the area (1195), which he annexed to the royal domain as Terre d’Auvergne. For his concurrence in this matter, the bishop of Clermont, Robert I (1195–1227), was granted the lordship of the town of Clermont, which subsequently became a countship (to be distinguished from the countship of Clermont-en-Beauvaisis). Such was the origin of the four great domains of Auvergne.
In 1360 John II of France made the Terre d’Auvergne a duchy for his son Jean, duc de Berry (died 1416). This duchy eventually descended to Charles, the famous constable of France, who was able to unite duchy and dauphiné when he became duc de Bourbon in 1503. But these Bourbon domains were confiscated by King Francis I after the constable’s treason and were assigned to the king’s mother, Louise of Savoy, for the rest of her life, after which they were annexed to the kingdom (1532).
The countship of Auvergne, however, having passed in 1422 to the house of La Tour, descended to Catherine de’ Medici, who, moreover, gained possession of Clermont in 1551. These domains were annexed to the crown in 1615, after the death of Catherine’s daughter Margaret of Valois. The généralité of Riom was established in 1577. The intendants had their seat at Clermont.
Local government eventually passed to the départements with their establishment in 1790, although, by the late 20th century, administrative power in Auvergne was also found at the larger région level again. In 2016 the région of Auvergne was merged with the neighbouring région of Rhône-Alpes as part of a national plan to increase bureaucratic efficiency.
