Barnet,  outer borough of London, England, on the northwestern perimeter of the metropolis. The borough lies mostly within the historic county of Middlesex, but many of its northern districts (including New Barnet and East Barnet) belong historically to Hertfordshire. The present borough was created in 1965 by the amalgamation of the former boroughs of Hendon and Finchley and the urban districts of Barnet, East Barnet, and Friern Barnet, which at one time formed separate manors and ecclesiastical parishes. It includes areas such as (roughly from north to south) Monken Hadley, Barnet, Cockfosters, New Barnet, Arkley, East Barnet, Edgware Bury, Totteridge, Oakleigh Park, Whetstone, Southgate (in part), New Edgware, Mill Hill, Edgware, North Finchley, Friern Barnet, Watling, Finchley, Church End, East Finchley, The Hyde, Hendon, Hampstead Garden Suburb, West Hendon, Golders Green, and Childs Hill.
The name Barnet, which was recorded about 1070 ce as Barneto, is derived from the Old English bærnet (“burning”). Throughout the Middle Ages its fields were cultivated in grass for hay, and its strategic location on the main road between London and St. Albans made it a centre for inns and marketplaces (notably Chipping [“Market”] Barnet). In 1471 the Battle of Barnet was fought at Hadley Green between Lancastrians and Yorkists.
The region retained its rural character long after the dissolution of the monasteries in the 1530s, when Barnet was wrested from the control of St. Albans. With the advent of railways in the mid-19th century, however, the population began to rise sharply, and estates and farms were replaced by Victorian brick villas. Development accelerated during the 1920s and ’30s with expansion of the London Underground (subway) network.
Modern Barnet is almost entirely residential, though some industry is concentrated along Edgware Road, its western boundary. In the early 21st century the western portion of the borough underwent major regeneration, especially in the area around the Colindale Underground station, as space formerly dedicated to large institutions was given over to new housing development. Notably, the Peel Centre, which had trained officers for the Metropolitan Police for decades (having originated in 1934 as the Hendon Police College and been rebuilt and reopened in 1974), ceased cadet training, shifted its focus, and consolidated its operations. Portions of the Peel Centre site had formerly been part of Hendon’s military airfield, which closed in 1957, and now house the Royal Air Force Museum. The origins of that historic airfield date to the first decade of the 20th century. The British Newspaper Library, which had operated at Colindale for more than 80 years, relocated in 2013, with its bound copies moving to a storage facility in Boston Spa, Yorkshire, but the collection remaining accessible via the British Library at St. Pancras. Elsewhere in the borough, new housing also sprouted around the expanding Brent Cross Shopping Centre, which was the first large enclosed shopping area in the United Kingdom when it opened in 1976. A vocational college is sited at Barnet, and the main campus of Middlesex University is located in Hendon. 
Few notable medieval structures remain. The Monken Hadley parish church has a tower that was built in 1494. East Barnet parish church dates from about 1100, and there are Norman traces in the Hendon parish church of St. Mary. Tudor Hall (1577), now part of Barnet College, was built for the Free Grammar School of Queen Elizabeth I (founded 1573). A mid-17th century farmhouse at Greyhound Hill, Hendon, operated as Church Farm House Museum until 2011, when it was closed as a result of budget cuts. The internationally celebrated Hampstead Garden Suburb was laid out east of Hendon by architects Raymond Unwin and Barry Parker in the early 20th century.
Margaret Thatcher, who served as prime minister of Britain from 1979 to 1990, long represented the constituency of Finchley (1959–92) in the House of Commons. Ethnic minorities account for more than one-fifth of the population of Barnet, with South Asians the most numerous. Golders Green and Finchley have large Jewish communities. Area 33 square miles (87 square km). Pop. (2001) 314,564; (2011 prelim.) 356,386.
