Basse-Normandie,  former région of France. As a région, it encompassed the northwestern départements of Orne, Calvados, and Manche. The northern and western shores of the region are washed by the English Channel. In 2016 the Basse-Normandie région was joined with the région of Haute-Normandie to form the new administrative entity of Normandy.
The uplands of the Armorican Massif extend into Manche and western Calvados and Orne. Eastern Calvados and Orne belong to the Paris Basin. The highest point in the region, indeed in all of Normandy, is in the Forest d’Écouves in Orne, where the elevation reaches 1,368 feet (417 metres). A humid climate prevails, with annual precipitation in the Cotentin peninsula of Manche approaching 35 inches (900 mm).
The region is sparsely inhabited. The process of rural depopulation, which characterized much of France in the 19th and early 20th centuries, was especially pronounced in Basse-Normandie, the population of which declined by more than 38 percent between 1851 and 1946. Subsequently, although the rural exodus continued, the population overall has grown, largely as a result of natural increase. Most of the recovery occurred in Calvados, which has benefited from the growth of Caen. In certain inland areas, such as the département of Orne, there is a large rural population.
Although few people now work in agriculture, the region retains a strongly rural character. Animal husbandry dominates, and western lands are given over to permanent pasture or the cultivation of forage crops. Auge in Calvados and Perche in Orne are major producers of beef. Dairying is also widespread. Camembert cheese is produced in Orne, and other fine cheeses are produced in Pont-l’Évêque and Livarot in Calvados. Large numbers of horses are raised in Calvados and Orne. Farms are generally small in size, and fields are frequently hedge-lined. On the eastern lowlands around Caen, where farms are larger, cereal farming is important. In addition, many farms grow apples for the manufacture of cider and a cider brandy known as calvados. Vegetables are raised along the northern coast of Manche, and oyster farming is also a coastal activity. Port-en-Bassin and Cherbourg are the most important fishing ports.
Beginning in the late 1950s, following the decline of traditional textile and metallurgical industries, the region benefited from the decentralization of Paris-based firms. This led especially to the growth of electrical and mechanical engineering and electronics industries. Other industrial activities include food and beverage processing, shipbuilding and repair, automobile and commercial vehicle manufacturing, nuclear power generation, and nuclear waste reprocessing. Industries are heavily concentrated around Caen, the region’s main business and administrative centre. Tourism is an important activity in coastal resort areas such as Deauville, Trouville, Granville, and Mont-Saint-Michel, with its picturesque Gothic abbey perched high above the sea.
Basse-Normandie is notable historically as the birthplace of William I (the Conqueror), who was born in Falaise in southern Calvados. In World War II the coast was the site of several landings by Allied troops during the Normandy Invasion (June 6, 1944), which led to the liberation of occupied France. In 2016 Basse-Normandie was merged with the neighbouring région of Haute-Normandie as part of a national plan to increase bureaucratic efficiency.
