Beaufort,  county, extreme southern South Carolina, U.S. It consists of a coastal region bordered to the southeast by the Atlantic Ocean. The New and Coosawhatchie rivers define portions of its western boundaries, and the Combahee River constitutes its eastern boundary.
The county comprises lowland plains and some 65 islands (part of the Sea Islands chain) separated from each other and from the mainland by bays, the St. Helena and Port Royal sounds, the Coosaw, Broad, and other rivers, and the Intracoastal Waterway. Some of the islands, including the sites of Hunting Island State Park and Pinckney Island National Wildlife Refuge, persist in a relatively unspoiled state. Others, especially Hilton Head Island, are known for sandy beaches and mild temperatures and attract tourists throughout the year. A bridge connecting Hilton Head to the mainland was built in 1956. Beaufort county includes the U.S. Marine Corps Recruit Depot on Parris Island and a nearby Marine air base. Many of the county’s longtime African American residents speak the Sea Islands’ unique Gullah dialect, compounded of African and English linguistic elements.
Cusabo Indians inhabited the area when Spanish explorers arrived in the early 16th century. Following short-lived Huguenot and Scottish settlements, the first permanent European settlement was established by the English at Beaufort in 1711. Beaufort was established as a county in 1785 and named for Henry Somerset, 2nd duke of Beaufort, one of the colonial proprietors of Carolina. The English held Beaufort during the U.S. War of Independence and sent gunboats to the region during the War of 1812 but failed to attack. During the American Civil War, Union sailors made Hilton Head Island their base while they blockaded nearby ports.
At the end of the 20th century, Beaufort county boasted one of the few unpolluted marine estuaries on the U.S. Atlantic coast, an important shellfishery. Though aircraft parts and aluminum products are manufactured, industry in general has not been encouraged. Local farms produce primarily vegetables and hogs, but agriculture is secondary to tourism and recreation in the economy. Hilton Head Island is the largest city, and Beaufort is the county seat. Area 587 square miles (1,520 square km). Pop. (2000) 120,937; (2010) 162,233.
