Bengkulu,  propinsi (or provinsi; province), southwestern Sumatra, Indonesia. It is bounded by the Indian Ocean to the west and by the provinces of West Sumatra (Sumatera Barat) to the north, Jambi and South Sumatra (Sumatera Selatan) to the east, and Lampung to the southeast. The province also includes the islands of Mega and Enggano in the Indian Ocean. The capital is Bengkulu city.
The region formed part of the Buddhist Srivijaya empire in the 8th century. It became part of the Hindu Majapahit empire of eastern Java in the 16th century. The first European visitors to the area were the Portuguese, followed by the Dutch in 1596. The region gradually came under Dutch possession, except for British occupation briefly in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. Bengkulu city and the surrounding area remained British until 1824, when the Dutch acquired it by treaty.
In 1946 the province was included by the Dutch in South Sumatra state, which became a province of the Republic of Indonesia in 1950. In 1964 the province of Lampung was created from roughly the southern third of South Sumatra, and in 1967 the province of Bengkulu was formed from South Sumatra’s western coastal region.
The north–south-trending Bengkulu Mountains, which are surmounted by both active and extinct volcanoes, run parallel to the coast and traverse the length of the province. Mount Seblat rises to an elevation of 7,818 feet (2,383 metres), and Mount Kaba reaches 6,358 feet (1,938 metres). The mountains are flanked by a strip of fertile coastal plain that is enriched from time to time by fresh deposits of ash and lava. Rivers and streams, including the Selagan and Seblat rivers, flow southwestward into the Indian Ocean.
In the early 21st century the indigenous Rejang  and Serawai peoples were among Bengkulu’s largest ethnic groups, together accounting for about two-fifths of the population. Roughly another fifth of the population was Javanese. Such a strong Javanese presence was in large measure the result of government-sponsored transmigration schemes undertaken throughout the 20th century. Notable smaller minorities included Malay, Minangkabau, and Sundanese peoples. Arabs and Chinese lived in the coastal areas. Islam was by far the predominant religion.
The province’s agriculture is based on shifting cultivation; rice, tea, coffee, copra, palm oil, ebony, ironwood, and rubber are the major products. Industries and crafts include food processing, textiles, wood carving, metalwork, leather, paper plaiting, and the manufacture of transport equipment. Roads run parallel to the coast and connect the settlements of Muaraaman, Curup, Bengkulu, Manna, and Bintuhan. Area 7,691 square miles (19,919 square km). Pop. (2000) 1,455,500; (2010) 1,715,518.
