Bern, French Berne,  canton, west-central Switzerland. It is the second most populous and second largest of the Swiss cantons; about 100 square miles (260 square km) are occupied by glaciers. Bordering Jura canton (until 1979 part of Bern canton) and Solothurn canton to the north, it is bounded on the west by the cantons of Neuchâtel, Fribourg, and Vaud; south by Valais; and east by Uri, Unterwalden, Lucerne, and Aargau. It is drained mainly by the Aare River and its affluents. Three physical divisions may be distinguished. The Bernese Highlands in the south includes the Alps, culminating in the Finsteraarhorn (14,022 feet [4,274 m]) and the Jungfrau (13,642 feet [4,158 m]), and the famous resorts of Interlaken, Thun, Meiringen, Grindelwald, Mürren, and Kandersteg. This region is extremely mountainous and is noted for its great scenic beauty. The Midlands (Mittelland) consists of the Aare valley below Thun, the Emme River valley, the foothills of the high Alps, and the plain around the city of Bern. In the north of the canton lies the Lake Region around Lake Biel.
The canton comprises the districts acquired by the city of Bern (q.v.), the cantonal capital, between the 14th and the 16th century. From 1803 to 1814 the canton of Bern was one of the six directorial cantons of the Swiss Confederation. The existing constitution dates from 1893, but the direct popular election of the executive council (Regierungsrat) was introduced in 1906.
In the Highlands the principal economic factors are the year-round tourist trade, agriculture, cattle breeding, cheese making (at the Emmental), and hydroelectric power generation. There is also wood carving at Brienz and pottery making near Thun. The Midlands is a fertile agricultural region and is also the most industrialized part of the canton. Machinery, metal products, and precision instruments are produced in the canton. Because the city of Bern is the national capital, Bern canton is home to a large number of employees of the federal government. A nuclear power station is located at Mühleberg. There is vine culture around Lake Biel. The population of the canton is mainly German speaking and Protestant. Area 2,300 square miles (5,959 square km). Pop. (2007 est.) 958,987.
