Brittany, French Bretagne, Breton Breiz,  région of France encompassing the northwestern départements of Ille-et-Vilaine, Morbihan, Côtes-d’Armor, and Finistère. Brittany is bounded by the régions of Basse-Normandie to the northeast and Pays de la Loire to the east. It protrudes westward into the Atlantic Ocean as a peninsula; the Bay of Biscay lies to the southwest and the English Channel to the north. The capital is Rennes. Area 10,505 square miles (27,209 square km). Pop. (1999) 2,906,197; (2014 est.) 3,276,543.
Brittany belongs to the ancient uplands of the Armorican Massif and is generally low-lying, with a mean elevation of 341 feet (104 metres). The Aulne Basin separates the heights of the Arrée Mountains (1,260 feet [384 metres]) in the north and the Noires Mountains (1,001 feet [305 metres]) in the south. Both run east-west. Belle-Île-en-Mer, Ouessant, and several other small islands are part of the région. Erosion has carved out sharp abers, or gorges, in the north, and the coastline is deeply indented. Principal rivers include the Vilaine, the Leita, and the Rance. An oceanic climate prevails.
Decline in the French share of North Atlantic fisheries and the rural depopulation seen elsewhere in France at the beginning of the 20th century led to a population decline in Brittany of more than 11 percent between 1911 and 1946. Then, following World War II, the population rose, and from the 1970s it was bolstered by the growth of industrial and service businesses. However, demographic recovery has been uneven, favouring the coastal areas, with many inland, rural areas continuing to lose population.
Brittany is an important agricultural area in France. Following several decades of change and modernization, farming is efficient and productive, dominated by the raising of pigs, poultry, and calves. Cereals and forage crops are grown, largely to meet the needs of livestock farmers. Vegetables are cultivated in certain northern coastal areas. Fishing has declined in importance, as elsewhere in northwestern Europe, owing to problems of overfishing and the consequent need to limit catches, but it still characterizes many of Brittany’s ports, notably Guilvinec, Concarneau, and Douarnenez.
Brittany is not heavily industrialized, but the growth of such industries as electronics, telecommunications, and automobile assembly has offset the decline of the traditional industries of textiles, leather goods, and ship repair. Other long-standing activities, notably food processing, have been strengthened and modernized. Rennes is the main regional focus of industry and is also the administrative and business capital.
Tourism is prominent in many coastal areas, and in Ille-et-Vilaine coastal resorts have become more important than the fishing industry to the economy. The département of Morbihan has more stone monuments than any other département in France, with several thousand megaliths in the area of Carnac and Locmariaquer west of the Morbihan Gulf. The medieval towns of Morbihan are also important tourist attractions.
Following major investment, the région has been integrated into the French motorway network and is served by a series of highways and high-speed trains (trains à grande vitesse; TGV). Rennes has a regional airport, and Brest is an important seaport and naval base.
Bretons combine enterprise and traditionalism. Many have distinguished themselves as seafarers; Jacques Cartier, for example, who explored Canada, was born in Saint-Malo. Brittany long provided the French navy with the majority of its sailors. The Roman Catholic faith is deeply rooted in Brittany; there are pilgrimages, or pardons, at Locronan, Josselin, and Ste. Anne d’Auray. Compared to elsewhere in France, the région has preserved much of its old social structure; in the country, families are large and devoted to paternal authority, and the rural nobility still exercises influence.
The Breton language is commonly spoken in parts of Morbihan, Finistère, and Côtes-d’Armor, and from the mid-19th century there has been a considerable revival of Breton literature.
