Caithness,  historic county in extreme northern Scotland, facing the Atlantic Ocean and the Pentland Firth (which separates it from the Orkney Islands) on the north and the North Sea on the east. It contains Dunnet Head, the northernmost point in Great Britain, which juts into the Atlantic east of Thurso.
The area is part of a plateau about 1,000 feet (300 metres) in elevation in the south, sloping gently north and northeast to the coast, where it is truncated in a series of cliffs up to 400 feet (120 metres) high. Above this plateau of old red sandstone and Highland schists rise several massive hills in the south, including Morven, with an elevation of 2,313 feet (705 metres), and Scaraben, which reaches 2,054 feet (626 metres). In the north the plateau descends to alluvial plains just above sea level. Fertile glacial deposits and small lochs (lakes) cover the eastern area, and peat bogs predominate in the western two-thirds. Despite its northern latitude, Caithness has a temperate climate.
Caithness is rich in prehistoric remains from Neolithic times onward. Cairns, standing stones, and hill forts abound, and there are more brochs (ancient dry stone buildings) than in any other Scottish county. The area was an early Pictish province called Cait, or Cat, which was invaded by Norsemen. Its place-names testify to Norse domination. Traces of early Christian chapels are widespread, a very early example being St. Mary’s Forse, Thurso. Medieval castles, such as Dunbeath, are found on the coasts; inland castles are usually of a later date.
For a time Caithness was firmly integrated into the Scottish kingdom by William the Lion (reigned 1165–1214), but the Norse earls of Orkney held the earldom of Caithness until 1231. It passed in the Middle Ages to several noble Scottish families, including the Sinclairs and later the Campbells of Glenorchy. The estates were subsequently sold to several Caithness families, including the Traills of Castletown, who encouraged agricultural advances during the 18th century. In the 19th century the county enjoyed a measure of prosperity from its herring industries and the export of flagstones. During the 20th century, tourism, fine glass manufacturing, and a nuclear power and research facility at Dounreay supplemented the traditional economy. Wick and Thurso are the most important towns.
