 “There is science, logic, reason; there is thought verified by experience. And then there is California.” That sense of peculiarity—that California is inherently different or strangely unique—lies at the heart of the comment above (attributed to Edward Abbey) and to Britannica’s early coverage of the region excerpted below. Though Britannica in the 18th century, from its offices in Edinburgh, thought this land called “Callifornia” might even be an island—in the West Indies no less—it proved prescient in its commentary a hundred years later. As it announced on the eve of the American Civil War, California “promises at no distant day” to be “great, wealthy, and powerful,” “one of the first [i.e., foremost] states in the Union.”
Note, in particular, two lines below: Britannica’s matter-of-fact statement that its history of California will naturally begin with the territory’s annexation by the United States, since anything earlier—say, the history of Mexico or of Native Americans—“presents little of interest to the general reader”; and second, Britannica’s highlighting of the discrimination of the “unfortunate yellow men” of California, meaning Chinese immigrants. Britannica’s comment on the latter—on the controversy that then existed over immigrants competing for native jobs—sounds surprisingly current. Plus ça change . . .
Complete entry on “Callifornia” from Britannica’s 1st Edition (1768–71):
Callifornia, a large country of the West Indies, lying between 116° and 138° W. long. [longitude] and between 23° and 46° N. lat. [latitude]. It is uncertain whether it be a peninsula or an island.
From Britannica’s 2nd Edition (1778–83):
California, the most northerly of all the Spanish dominions on the continent of America, is sometimes distinguished by the name of New Albion, and the Islas Carabiras: but the most ancient appellation is California; a word probably owing to some accident, or to some words spoken by the Indians and misunderstood by the Spaniards. For a long time California was thought to be an island; but Father Caino, a German Jesuit, discovered it to be a peninsula joining to the coast of New Mexico and the southern parts of America. . . .
In a country stretching about 800 miles in length, there must be considerable variations of soil and climate; and indeed we find, from good authority, that California produces some of the most beautiful lawns, as well as many of the most inhospitable deserts, in the universe. Upon the whole, although California is rather rough and craggy, we are assured by the Jesuit Vinegas, and other good writers, that with due culture it furnishes every necessary and conveniency of life; and that, even where the atmosphere is hottest, vapours rising from the sea, and dispersed by pleasant breezes, render it of a moderate temperature. . . .
In all California there are only two garrisons, each consisting of 30 men, and a soldier with every missionary. These troops were chosen by the legislators, though they are paid by the government. Were the court of Madrid to push their interest with half the zeal of the Jesuits, California might become one of the most valuable of their acquisitions, on account of the pearls and other valuable articles of commerce which the country contains.
From Britannica’s 7th Edition (1830–42):
California, New, a province of Mexico, or New Spain, which extends from the isthmus of Old California, or the bay of Todos Santos, to Cape Mendocino in north lat. 40.19. . . .
The aspect of the country is exceedingly picturesque and beautiful, and the inhabitants enjoy almost a perpetual spring. On every side are presented views of magnificent forests and verdant savannahs, whose numerous herds of deer, or elks of gigantic size, graze undisturbed in their sylvan retreats. . . . The population of New California is estimated at about 15,000 souls, and its surface at 2125 square leagues.
From Britannica’s 8th Edition (1852–60):
California, Upper, as ceded to the United States by the treaty of 1848, comprises the region between 32. 30. and 42. N. Lat. and 106. and 124. W. Long. . . .
The history of California, previous to its annexation to the United States, presents little of interest to the general reader. . . .
In [January 1848], a mechanic named Marshall, employed in building a saw-mill for Captain Sutter, on the south branch of a river known as the American Fork, while cutting a mill-lead, discovered scales of gold in the soil. Pieces of considerable size were taken out, and in a few days gold to the amount of $150 was gathered. The news spread rapidly through the country, and examinations were prosecuted at other points along the stream, and almost everywhere with success. The towns were forthwith deserted by their male population, and a complete cessation of the whole industrial pursuits of the country was the consequence. Commerce, agriculture, mechanical pursuits, professions—all were abandoned for the purpose of gathering the glittering treasure which lay buried in the ravines, gorges, and rivers of the Sierra Nevada. In the mean time, news of the discovered El Dorado crossed the continent; and although its marvels were regarded by many as fabulous, there were others who either abandoned their homes for the wilderness, or sent hither valuable cargoes, from the sale of which they drew enormous profits. Under the temptations of trade and discovery, an immense emigration, chiefly of males, poured into California, not only from the United States, but also from Mexico, Chili, Peru, China, the Sandwich Islands, and other parts. . . . Intelligent and industrious men thronged the towns that sprang up as if by enchantment at every advantageous point. . . .
California promises at no distant day to be one of the first states in the Union. The bold and enterprising character of her present inhabitants cannot fail of rendering it a great, wealthy, and powerful state. In the ordinary elements of wealth and power, it is not behind the older states, while it far surpasses the most favoured in her inexhaustible supplies of the precious metals.
From Britannica’s 9th Edition (1875–89):
California, the name originally given to a portion of the region of western North America bordering on the Pacific Ocean, and apparently taken from a Spanish romance (Las ⚠ de Esplandian), in which the author speaks of “the great island of California, where a great abundance of gold and precious stones is found.” This romance was published in 1510, and, becoming quite popular, the name of California probably struck the fancy of some one of the officers or companions of Cortez, and was applied by them to the newly-discovered country, perhaps on account of its association with a region fabulously rich in gold, the early Spanish discoverers in America always expecting to find an El Dorado in every new region they entered. . . .
The Chinese element in California is a peculiar and interesting feature. By the last census there were 49,310 of that race in the State. They are settled in great numbers in San Francisco, where they are house-servants, and operatives in the manufacturing establishments, which could not be successfully carried on with white labour. They also work the abandoned placers, although the amount of their gains in this operation must usually be very small, as they are only allowed to occupy spots supposed by the white men to have been quite worked out. [As Hittell cites in Resources of California,] “The white miners have a great dislike to Chinamen, who are frequently driven away from their claims, and expelled from districts by mobs. In such cases the officers of the law do not ordinarily interfere; and, no matter how much the unfortunate yellow men may be beaten or despoiled, the law does not attempt to restore them to their rights or avenge their wrongs.”
