Campeche,  estado (state), southeastern Mexico, on the western part of the Yucatán Peninsula. It is bounded to the north and east by the state of Yucatán, to the east by the state of Quintana Roo, to the south by Guatemala, to the southwest by the state of Tabasco, and to the west by the Bay of Campeche, an inlet of the Gulf of Mexico. Campeche city is the state capital and a major port.
Named for the ancient Mayan province of Kimpech, Campeche includes numerous ruined Mayan cities, such as Calakmul, Uxul, and Xicalango. The capital’s fortified colonial-era centre and the ruins of Calakmul were designated UNESCO World Heritage sites in 1999 and 2002, respectively.
The state’s relief consists of a low limestone plain broken only by rivers in the humid south and by the Puuc hills in the arid north, where deep grottoes hold the main water supply for crops and livestock raising. Stands of tropical semi-deciduous forest lie east and south of Campeche city; treetops can reach heights of 65 to 100 feet (20 to 30 metres), notably at Calakmul Biosphere Reserve. Most of the rivers in the south, including the Golondrinas-Candelaria system, drain into Términos Lagoon on the Gulf of Mexico. At the lagoon’s entrance is Ciudad del Carmen, the chief port and petroleum depot of the area.
Manufacturing provides one-third of the state’s income, and services (including tourism, trade, and government jobs) account for more than one-fourth. Major manufactures include refined petroleum, extracted from offshore wells; forest products, made mostly from local hardwoods; and processed foods. Shrimp trawling and other commercial fishing are also important. The state is linked to central Mexico by railroad, highway, and air. Although the great majority of its population is urbanized, Campeche is sparsely settled and one of the least-populous Mexican states.
Campeche seceded in 1857 from the state of Yucatán after a civil war. It became a state in 1862 and originally included the region that is now Quintana Roo. The executive branch of state government is led by a governor, who is elected to a single term of six years. Members of the unicameral legislature, the State Congress, are elected to three-year terms. Campeche is divided into local governmental units called municipios (municipalities), each of which is headquartered in a prominent city, town, or village. The capital city is home to most of the state’s cultural institutions, including the Museum of Mayan Archaeology and the Autonomous University of Campeche (1756; refounded 1965). The Autonomous University of Carmen (1967) is in Ciudad del Carmen. Area 19,619 square miles (50,812 square km). Pop. (2010) 822,441.
