Cantabria, formerly Santander,  comunidad autónoma (autonomous community) and historic region of Spain, coextensive with the northern Spanish provincia (province) of Cantabria. Cantabria is bounded by the Bay of Biscay to the north and by the autonomous communities of Basque Country to the east, Castile-León to the south, La Rioja to the southeast, and Asturias to the west. The autonomous community was established by the statute of autonomy of Dec. 30, 1981. The capital is Santander. Area 2,028 square miles (5,253 square km). Pop. (2007 est.) 572,824.
The rolling coastal hills rise gradually into the Cantabrian Mountains. Almost one-half of the land lies above 2,000 feet (600 metres), and only one-fourth is lower than 650 feet (200 metres). Karstic tablelands mark the southeastern border of Cantabria, which is linked to the Meseta Central and is drained by the Ebro River. An oceanic climate prevails. Annual precipitation is high, exceeding 40 inches (1,000 mm); precipitation tapers off toward the Ebro basin.
The population is heavily concentrated along the coastal areas. More than one-third of the population lives in the city of Santander, which has grown at the expense of the older centres of Castro-Urdiales, Laredo, Santoña, and San Vicente de la Barquera. The rural population tends to be widely scattered, living in isolated farmsteads or small hamlets.
Employment is fairly evenly distributed among the agricultural, industrial, and service sectors, but agriculture accounts for only a small percentage of Cantabria’s gross domestic product. Cattle husbandry is the dominant agricultural activity.
Mining is a major industry and centres on the deposits of lead, zinc, and pyrites around Reocín. Cantabria produces a large portion of Spain’s zinc and is also a chief producer of pyrites. Iron and graphite are also mined. Torrelavega has become Cantabria’s leading industrial centre, producing chemicals and synthetic fibres. Reinosa and Santander are major metallurgical centres.
Santander is the financial and commercial centre of all but the easternmost zones of the provinces, which are oriented toward Bilbao. Reinosa is the commercial centre of southern Cantabria as well as of adjoining settlements in the province of Palencia. Laredo and Castro-Urdiales have become important centres of tourism.
The traditional attire worn by men includes the boina, or beret, typical of the Basques. The traditional farmsteads resemble the Basque caserío and are built of stone, but roofs have four sides and balconies are more open. Nomenclature of places is primarily Romance, indicating that Arab influence in the region was slight. Nomenclature incorporates various Celtic words, however, among them aban, or for river, which appears as Abanillas, La Abadilla, and Abaño. The Cantabri, an Iberian tribe with a strong Celtic element, dominated the region until 19 bc. The name Cantabria is derived from the Celtic, denoting people of the mountain.
