Castile–La Mancha, Spanish Castilla–La Mancha,  comunidad autónoma (autonomous community) and historic region of Spain, encompassing the provincias (provinces) of Toledo, Ciudad Real, Cuenca, Guadalajara, and Albacete. Castile–La Mancha is bounded by the autonomous communities of Madrid to the north, Aragon to the northeast, Valencia to the east, Murcia to the southeast, Andalusia to the south, Extremadura to the west, and Castile-León to the northwest. The autonomous community of Castile–La Mancha was established by the statute of autonomy of August 10, 1982, from the historic region of New Castile. The capital is Toledo. Area 30,660 square miles (79,409 square km). Pop. (2007 est.) 1,977,304.
The watershed of the low-lying Toledo Mountains bisects the region, with tablelands of La Alcarria to the north being drained by the Tagus and the plains of La Mancha to the south being drained by the Guadiana River. La Alcarria merges with the Sistema Central to the north and the Iberian Cordillera to the east; the plains of La Mancha extend southeastward into the province of Albacete, terminating in the Baetic Cordillera. The Sierra Morena rises in the south. A Mediterranean climate, modified by continental influences, prevails; temperatures increase east to west and north to south. Annual precipitation is relatively low, exceeding 20 inches (500 mm) only in the province of Cuenca, and is concentrated in the autumn and spring.
Emigration to Madrid, the national capital, just to the north, has depleted the population of Castile–La Mancha. This effect has been much more severe in the mountainous zones of the provinces of Cuenca and Guadalajara than in the provincial capitals, where the population has doubled since 1900. Emigration has been especially high among young men, which has resulted in a sharp increase in the median age and a drop in the birth rate. Although emigration to the countries of the European Union has generally been low, large numbers of migrants work in France. The population tends to be dispersed in the Iberian Cordillera and concentrated in the plains of La Mancha, where large agricultural towns predominate. The population density increases in lower La Mancha, where the water table is close to the surface and supports diversified agriculture. Farmland in La Mancha tends to be partitioned into latifundios, or large estates, while minifundios, or small landholdings, predominate north of the Tagus.
Agriculture dominates the economy. Most of the land under cultivation is dry-farmed, producing barley, grapes, and olives. The region also produces lentils, onions, peppers, sunflowers, saffron, and sumac. Mechanization of agriculture has been impeded by the fragmentation of holdings in the mountains and lags behind the national average. Animal husbandry accounts for approximately one-third of the region’s agricultural output; the preferred animals are sheep, pigs, and goats. Forests cover one-third of the land but have yet to be fully exploited.
The industrial sector is underdeveloped outside the province of Ciudad Real, where a large petroleum refinery has established Puertollano as a major petrochemical centre. The mines of Almadén produce mercury. Mining is of relatively little importance outside Ciudad Real, though there are important deposits of iron in Guadalajara province, and kaolin is mined in Cuenca. Manufacturing is small-scale and centres on the processing of primary materials. The region produces about one-half of Spain’s wine and mills a large portion of the country’s flour. Some of Madrid province’s industrial centres have spread eastward and southward into Guadalajara and Toledo provinces.
The provincial capitals are the leading commercial centres of the region. The provinces of Toledo and Guadalajara also have strong commercial ties to Madrid, while Talavera de la Reina in Toledo province is the commercial centre of dozens of communities. Energy resources are poor, the general dryness of the region precluding the development of hydroelectricity. There are nuclear reactors in Zorita de los Canes and Trillo.
The National Museum of Abstract Art was established in the city of Cuenca in 1966. The polychromatic ceramics produced in the province of Toledo have been widely marketed since the 14th century; colours are clearly delineated, and designs show Mudéjar, Gothic, and Renaissance influences. The ceramics of Talavera de la Reina were especially popular during the Renaissance but were in decline by the second quarter of the 18th century. The town of Atienza in the province of Guadalajara features a Caballada every Pentecost, in which townsmen ride to the hermitage of Nuestra Señora de la Estrella outside Atienza and reenact the rescue of Alfonso VII by townsmen in 1163.
