Ceredigion, historical name Cardiganshire,  county in Wales, extending from the western coast on Cardigan Bay to inland hills and valleys and the upland of Plynlimon, with an elevation of 2,468 feet (752 metres). Ceredigion is coterminous with the historic county of Cardiganshire. Aberaeron is the county’s administrative centre.
As in other regions of western Britain, the earliest evidence of prehistoric human occupation in Ceredigion is on the high ground, which has several tumuli and cairns in the north and south of the county. To the east there is evidence of a Roman trackway, known as Sarn Helen. During the post-Roman centuries there were numerous raids, especially by Irish and Scandinavians upon the open coast. During this period Ceredig, son of Cunedda Wledig of northern Wales, is said to have gained control of the whole basin of the Teifi. Ceredigion takes its name from this legendary figure.
Norman penetration of hilly Ceredigion was slow. During the 12th and 13th centuries there was a long series of skirmishes between the Normans, who sought to keep open the valley lines of communication, and the Welsh herdsmen from the hills. The town of Cardigan, in southern Ceredigion, has a bridge of Norman origin (rebuilt in 1640) and castles dating to 1093 and 1160. Cardigan also is the historic county town (seat).
The port of Aberystwyth dates to 1277, when Edmund Crouchback, brother of Edward I of England, began building Aberystwyth Castle. The Welsh burned the still unfinished castle in 1282, but the English resumed construction and in 1289 completed the castle, whose ruins still stand in Aberystwyth. By the Statutes of Rhuddlan (1284) Edward constituted Ceredigion out of the former principality of Wales as a shire on the English model. However, its state remained so unsettled that in the early 15th century Owain Glyn Dŵr, the rebel and self-proclaimed prince of Wales, actually held a court in Aberystwyth Castle. During the reign of Henry VIII the boundaries of the county were enlarged.
In the English Civil Wars the castles of Cardigan and Aberystwyth were held for Charles I and reduced to ruins by the Cromwellian forces. In the 18th century the county became the centre of the Welsh Methodist movement—culminating in the founding of the Presbyterian Church of Wales—which seems to have had its greatest influence among the shepherds and cattle herders of the moorland.
In the 17th and 18th centuries the coastal towns and villages enjoyed a brisk coastal trade, chiefly with Bristol. Because of difficult landward communications, almost all imported material came by sea. The Industrial Revolution affected Ceredigion adversely. It ultimately destroyed local small-scale industries, and newly built railways outcompeted coastal seafaring. Many of the region’s inhabitants migrated to the growing industrial towns of England and South Wales. Fishing, always important, continued on a small scale, while many places became summer resorts for travelers from the English Midlands and South Wales.
In recent years Ceredigion has become one of the fastest-growing counties in Wales. The educational and commercial centre of Aberystwyth, however, has absorbed more of the growth than have the rural areas. Agriculture remains the principal economic activity outside Aberystwyth, and dairy farming is especially important. Sheep are also raised in the area. The cliffs, headlands, and sandy bays of the coast attract some tourism. Aberystwyth is the site of the first college of the University of Wales (1872); the Welsh Agricultural College; the College of Librarianship, Wales; and the National Library of Wales. Area 689 square miles (1,785 square km). Pop. (2001) 74,941; (2011) 75,922.
