Chhattisgarh,  state of east-central India. It is bounded by the Indian states of Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand to the north and northeast, Odisha (Orissa) to the east, Telangana (formerly part of Andhra Pradesh) to the south, and Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh to the west. Its capital is Raipur. Area 52,199 square miles (135,194 square km). Pop. (2011) 25,540,196.
Chhattisgarh is located in the Chhattisgarh Plain, which forms the upper Mahanadi River basin. The basin proper lies at an elevation that ranges from about 800 to 950 feet (250 to 300 metres) above sea level. It is a structural plain with topographic variations resulting from extensive denudation (wearing away of the earth by such processes as weathering and erosion). Knolls, undulating interfluves (areas between adjacent watercourses), and valleys flanked by belts of clayey soils are characteristic of the region. About 100 miles (160 km) wide, the Chhattisgarh Plain is bounded by the Chota Nagpur plateau to the north, the Maikala Range to the west, the hills of Raigarh to the northeast, the Raipur upland to the southeast, and the Bastar plateau to the south. These highlands comprise mostly erosional plateau forms reaching an elevation of more than 2,300 feet (700 metres) in the Maikala Range and the Dandakaranya hills.
Earthquakes are relatively infrequent in Chhattisgarh, though seismic activity of mild intensity has been recorded in northern Chhattisgarh and along the border with Telangana in the south. A few tremors also have been felt in the east and around Raigarh.
Chhattisgarh contains the source of one of the most important rivers of the South Asian peninsula—the Mahanadi. This river originates in a village near Raipur. It flows westward for about 125 miles (200 km) and meets the Shivnath River about 8 miles (13 km) from Bilaspur. Thereafter it flows toward the east and enters Odisha, ultimately emptying into the Bay of Bengal. Among the other rivers that drain Chhattisgarh are the Indravati, Arpa, and Pairi.
Various types of soils are found throughout the state. Two types predominate: the black, clayey soils and the red-to-yellow soils. The latter are less fertile and contain substantial amounts of sand.
The climate in Chhattisgarh is governed by a monsoon weather pattern. The distinct seasons are summer (March to May), winter (November to February), and the intervening rainy months of the southwest monsoon (June to September). The summer is hot, dry, and windy, with high temperatures typically reaching at least 85 °F (about 30 °C) in all parts of the state; in some areas temperatures regularly rise above 100 °F (upper 30s C). Winters are usually pleasant and dry, with high temperatures in the upper 70s F (mid-20s C). In December and January there is considerable rainfall over the northern part of the state, although the state as a whole receives most of its precipitation during the southwest monsoon. Rainfall usually ranges from 47 to 60 inches (1,200 to 1,500 mm) annually.
The eastern and southeastern borderlands of Chhattisgarh are characterized by moist deciduous plantlife, but toward the interior of the state this flora is replaced by dry deciduous vegetation, often degenerating locally into scrub. The most valuable hardwoods are teak and sal (Shorea robusta). A type of tree called salai yields a resin used for incense and medicine, while leaves from tendu trees are used for rolling bidi (Indian cigarettes). Bamboo is abundant and is harvested for many purposes.
The forests are home to a broad array of animals, including tigers, striped hyenas, and blackbucks. Other species include the chital (spotted deer), gaur (a type of wild buffalo), sambar deer, sloth bear, wild boar, and four-horned antelope, among others. The woodlands are also inhabited by many species of birds. Chhattisgarh has a number of national parks and many wildlife sanctuaries. The Indravati National Park contains a wildlife sanctuary for tigers.
Chhattisgarh supports a population of diverse ethnic, social, religious, and linguistic backgrounds. More than one-third of the state’s residents officially belong to the Scheduled Castes (groups formerly called “untouchables” within the Indian caste system) or to the Scheduled Tribes (indigenous minority peoples who are not embraced by the caste hierarchy). Of the Scheduled Tribes, the Gond peoples are most prominent.
The vast majority of Chhattisgarh’s people practice Hinduism, but there are sizable minorities of Muslims, Jains, Christians, and Buddhists. There also is a small community of Sikhs. Chhattisgarhi is the most widely spoken language, followed by Hindi; both are official languages of the state. Many of the Gond speak Gondi. Marathi, Urdu, Oriya, Gujarati, and Punjabi are spoken by significant numbers.
Some three-fourths of Chhattisgarh’s population is rural. The distribution of this population is uneven, however, with the far southern portion of the state having significantly fewer residents than its northern counterpart. The urban population of Chhattisgarh is concentrated mainly in the vicinity of Raipur and Bilaspur in the state’s midsection and near Raigarh in the east. However, massive public-sector investment in mining has helped to spur growth around Durg and Bhilai Nagar to the west of Raipur, Korba in the north-central region, and Ambikapur in the northern part of the state. Raipur, Durg–Bhilai Nagar, and Bilaspur have become major urban agglomerations, each with a relatively well-developed industrial base.
In the late 20th century the rate of population increase in Chhattisgarh was somewhat below the national average, but in the early 21st century the rate of increase had risen above the national average. Men have continued to outnumber women but only slightly. Because Chhattisgarh is predominantly agricultural, the state experiences seasonal fluctuations in population. When farming activities come to a virtual halt between January and June, there is mass migration of agricultural workers to Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, and anywhere else where there are opportunities for daily wage labour.
