Chuvashiya, also spelled Chuvashia,  republic in western Russia that is inhabited mainly by the Chuvash people. Its capital is Cheboksary.
Chuvashiya occupies the right (southwest) bank of the middle Volga River and is drained by tributaries of that river—the Sura in the west, the Great (Bolshoy) Tsivil and Little (Maly) Tsivil in the centre, and the Kubnya in the east. Most of the area consists of the so-called Chuvash Plateau—low, rolling hills, much cut up by ravines—which forms the extreme northern end of the Volga Upland and drops gradually to the terraces and floodplain of the Volga. In the west, along the Sura River, are alluvial sands of ancient origin.
The boundary between the forest and forest-steppe natural zones crosses the republic. The Sura sands are densely forested with pine, while in the north are areas of mixed and deciduous forests. Much of Chuvashiya’s original forest cover has been removed by overcutting, and about half of the land area is cultivated. In the east and southeast are patches of black-earth soils, almost all of which are tilled. Along the Volga and Sura rivers are floodplain meadows. The climate is moderately continental, with warm summers and long, cold winters. Rainfall is low, 16–20 inches (400–500 mm) a year.
The Chuvash, a Turkic people, were settled agriculturists when their domain was annexed by the Russians in the 16th century. The republic was first formed as an autonomous oblast (region) in 1920, becoming an autonomous republic in April 1925; from 1929 to 1936 it formed part of Gorky kray (territory). The urban population of Chuvashiya numbers about three-fifths of the total. The major cities and urban settlements include Cheboksary, Alatyr, Kanash, Shumerlya, and Novocheboksarsk.
The republic is predominantly agricultural: grains, hemp, potatoes, vegetables, flax, sugar beets, and makhorka (“coarse”) tobacco are grown. Fruit growing is important along the Volga. Cattle, pigs, and sheep are raised, and the numbers of livestock per 100 acres (40 hectares) of agricultural land are far above the average for the central regions of European Russia. Dairy produce and meat are supplied to the Moscow area and to Nizhny Novgorod.
Industry, little of which existed before the October Revolution in 1917, developed considerably after World War II. Cheboksary, which is also a river port, produces electrical equipment, machine parts, iron castings, textiles, alcohol, and leather goods. It also has a Chuvash regional museum. Alatyr, a grain-growing centre, has locomotive and automobile works as well as an electromechanical plant. Shumerlya, developed during the 1930s, produces furniture, veneers, flooring, and tannin from local oaks. Mariinsky Posad, with shipbuilding, and Kozlovka are the chief timber centres along the Volga River, producing prefabricated houses, railroad ties, and matchwood. Food processing and textile and leather manufacture are widespread. A chemical industry has developed at Vurnary, based on wood chemicals and supplies of phosphorites from Buinsk. Shale oil from Buinsk and Ibresi and peat from the Volga floodplain are the only local fuels, but a large hydroelectric plant was constructed at Novocheboksarsk in the 1980s. Several oil and natural gas pipelines span the republic from southeast to northwest, linking to Nizhny Novgorod and beyond.
Besides the Volga, the main Trans-Siberian Railroad (from Moscow) traverses the area, with a branch from Kanash to Cheboksary. Motor roads link Cheboksary to the Russian cities of Nizhny Novgorod, Kazan, and Ulyanovsk (formerly Simbirsk). Area 7,100 square miles (18,300 square km). Pop. (2008 est.) 1,282,567.
