Clackmannanshire, also called Clackmannan,  council area and historic county, east-central Scotland, bounded on the southwest by the River Forth. The River Devon, flowing east-west before turning to join the Forth, separates the carse (estuarine plain) from the moors of the Ochil Hills in the north. The present council area of Clackmannanshire is nearly coterminous with the historic county of the same name, but it also incorporates a small area in the east that lies within the historic county of Perthshire and a small area in the west that belongs to the historic county of Stirlingshire. Clackmannanshire is the smallest historic county in Scotland.
The early inhabitants belonged to the great Celtic tribe known to the Romans as Damnonii; they may have been the ancestors of the Picts who lived there afterward. Later the historic county was part of the district of Mannan, disputed land in central Scotland. Near the end of the 7th century St. Serf, who had come to the Fife peninsula to convert the Picts, visited Tullibody, Tullicoultry, and Alva; a well at Alva and a bridge over the Devon commemorate his name. The victory of Kenneth MacAlpin, king of the Scots, over the Picts in 844 is said to have taken place near Tullibody; a stone near Baingle Brae marks the battlefield. It is said that in 1559 the bridge over the Devon at Tullibody was broken down to impede the passage of French troops in the service of Mary of Lorraine (or Guise), but the French removed the roof of the church and repaired the bridge. During the English Civil Wars of the 1640s, combatants from both sides conducted raids in the county. During the Industrial Revolution of the late 18th and 19th centuries, the availability of locally produced wool and coal from the Devon valley promoted woolen textile manufacture and coal mining, which became one of the historic county’s main sources of wealth, but these traditional industries declined dramatically during the late 20th century, and the county experienced a rise in unemployment.
Although manufacturing sectors such as metal fabrication continue to operate in Clackmannanshire, newer service sector activities have grown in relative importance. The county also has a diversity of agricultural enterprises, ranging from the sheep farms of the Ochil Hills to the lowland farms in the south, built on reclaimed land and rich alluvial soil. However, agriculture suffers from land subsidence caused by coal mining. Alloa, the administrative centre of the council area, is also a commercial centre. Area council area, 61 square miles (157 square km). Pop. (2001) council area, 48,077; (2011) 51,442.
