Cocos Islands, officially Territory of Cocos (Keeling) Islands, also called Keeling Islands,  external territory of Australia in the eastern Indian Ocean. The islands lie 2,290 miles (3,685 km) west of Darwin, Northern Territory, on the northern Australian coast, and about 560 miles (900 km) southwest of Christmas Island (another external territory of Australia). The isolated territory is made up of two coral atolls, the southern comprising 26 islets and the northern containing only North Keeling Island. The territory’s administrative headquarters are on West Island in the southern atoll. Total land area 5 square miles (14 square km). Population (2016) 544.
North Keeling Island is located about 15 miles (24 km) north of the main lagoon (South Lagoon), which is surrounded by the numerous islets of the South Keeling Islands. The principal islands of the South Keelings include West Island (the largest in the territory, with a length of 6 miles [10 km]), South, Home, Direction, and Horsburgh. The land is low, with the highest point in the territory rising to only about 20 feet (6 metres) above sea level. The climate is warm and humid; temperatures range from 77 to 84 °F (25 to 29 °C), and annual rainfall averages 78 inches (1,970 mm). Destructive cyclones may strike the area early in the year, and earthquakes occur periodically. The vegetation consists chiefly of coconut palms, which were formerly cultivated for copra on plantations; on North Keeling and Horsburgh islands, coarse grass serves as a ground cover. There are no indigenous mammals, but seabirds abound, as do land crabs. As the location of several rare ecosystems—including an intact coral atoll environment—and a notable seabird breeding ground, North Keeling Island and its surrounding waters were designated a protected area, Pulu Keeling National Park, in 1995.
The inhabitants are predominantly the descendants of the original plantation workers, mostly of Malay origin, who were brought to the islands by John Clunies-Ross, a Scotsman, in 1827–31. Some four-fifths of the population—Cocos Islanders, or Cocos Malays, as they are often called, together with the descendants of the Clunies-Ross family—live on Home Island. Most of the Cocos Malays speak a dialect of Malay and are Muslim. Numerous Cocos Islanders moved to the Australian mainland in the mid-1950s because of overcrowded conditions on the islands; they settled mainly in the state of Western Australia.
The remainder of the Cocos Island population resides on West Island and consists mostly of mainland-recruited employees of the territory administration, together with their families; most are there on short-term postings. The majority of the people are engaged in maintaining the coconut plantations on Home and other islands in the group. A small number of others are permanent residents working in small businesses.
The production and export of copra is the territory’s economic mainstay. The Cocos Islands Co-operative Society Ltd., established in 1979, undertakes building maintenance and construction and provides stevedoring, interisland transport, lighter on- and off-loading, and other services. Although fishing is good and the islanders have gardens, much of the food must be imported, as must fuels and consumer goods. High unemployment rates are a continuing problem.
An airstrip, built on West Island in 1945, was used until 1967 as a stopping place on flights between Perth, Austl., and Johannesburg, S.Af. Several regular passenger flights connect the islands with Perth and with Christmas Island. Meteorological reports from the Cocos are important in forecasting weather for a large area of the Indian Ocean.
An administrator appointed by the Australian governor-general is the senior governmental official in the Cocos. The islands became an Australian territory under the Cocos (Keeling) Islands Act 1955. In 1979 the residents of Home Island established the Cocos Islands Council to administer local affairs. In 1984 the Cocos Islanders voted in favour of political integration with Australia. The Territories Law Reform Act of 1992 amended the Cocos (Keeling) Islands Act, expanding local authority and applying the legal structure of Western Australia to the territory. The act provides for a Shire Council, which replaced the Cocos Islands Council and administers most local government services; many other services are provided through agencies of the Western Australia state government. Cocos Islanders vote in federal elections as part of the electoral district of Lingiari, in the Northern Territory.
The islands were uninhabited at the time of their first European sighting, in 1609 by the English mariner William Keeling, who was working for the East India Company. They were settled (1826) by an English adventurer named Alexander Hare, who brought his Malay harem and slaves. In 1827 John Clunies-Ross settled there with his family, improved the natural coconut groves, and brought in additional numbers of Malays to assist in harvesting the coconuts for copra. The English naturalist Charles Darwin made observations of the coral reefs there in 1836.
Declared a British possession in 1857, the Cocos were placed under the governor of Ceylon (present-day Sri Lanka) in 1878. The islands were attached to the Straits Settlements in 1886 and were granted in perpetuity to the Clunies-Ross family. In 1903 the Cocos were attached to the British crown colony of Singapore. During World War I the German cruiser Emden was overwhelmed (1914) by the Australian cruiser Sydney and beached itself on the reefs off North Keeling. The islands passed from British Singapore to Australia in 1955. In September 1978 the owner, John Clunies-Ross, sold most of his property and relinquished his authority over the islands to Australia, which introduced Australian currency and took steps toward establishing Cocos Malay self-government. In a 1984 referendum on the future political status of the islands, the residents voted for full integration with Australia. The islands’ leaders signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Australian government in 1991, which described measures designed to bring the Cocos’ standard of living in line with that of mainland Australia. The Clunies-Ross family sold its remaining Home Island property to Australia in 1993.
