Copperbelt, formerly Western,  province, central Zambia, east-central Africa. It is bounded by North-Western (to the west) and Central (south) provinces and by the Democratic Republic of the Congo (to the north and east). Ndola, in the east, is the capital of the province.
The region lies on the eastern Central African Plateau, with gently undulating terrain mostly between 3,000 and 5,000 feet (900 and 1,500 metres) in elevation and occasionally broken by isolated hills. The Kafue River, tributary to the Zambezi River, traverses the province in a generally southward direction, and swamps occur along the river and its numerous tributaries. Broad areas of the plateau are covered with an open mixture of shrubs, trees, and tall grasses.
Discoveries at Gwisho brought to light remains of the Wilton culture (Late Stone Age culture in southern Africa) dating from 3000 bce. Early, Middle, and Late Stone Age and Early Iron Age sites are in the province, as well as a number of rock paintings (c. 500–1750 ce). Chiefdoms dominated by the Lamba, Lima, and Lala peoples rose in the early 17th century, and, after raiding the area, the Chikunda later settled there. The 1890s treaties with the British South Africa Company brought the territory into what became in 1924 the colony of Northern Rhodesia, ruled by a legislative council with a white majority. In the northern mining towns popular African discontent found effective expression against colonial rule, especially after the federation (1953) of Northern and Southern Rhodesia and under the leadership of Kenneth Kaunda. Upon independence (1964) the area became a province of the new state of Zambia.
The province is industrially advanced and urbanized, and its modern peoples are the Bemba, Lamba, and Swahili. Subsistence agriculture produces corn (maize), tobacco, peanuts (groundnuts), potatoes, and fodder crops. Commercial farming goes on near urban centres and includes beef cattle and pigs. The Copperbelt industrial area lies on the watershed of the Congo and Zambezi rivers near the Congo border and contains mineral deposits. Copper is mined at Ndola and also at Chambishi, Kalulushi, Chililabombwe, Mufulira, Chingola, Kitwe, and Luanshya, all of which are connected by road, railway, and air. Other minerals mined include cobalt and uranium. Industries produce beverages, metal products, batteries, chemicals, wire and cable, cement, and textiles. Area 12,096 square miles (31,328 square km). Pop. (2000) 1,581,221; (2010) 1,972,314.
