Cork, Irish Corcaigh,  county in the province of Munster, southwestern Ireland. The largest county in Ireland, Cork is bounded by the Atlantic Ocean (south) and by Counties Waterford and Tipperary (east), Limerick (north), and Kerry (west). The county seat, Cork city, in the south-central part of the county, is administratively independent.
Cork has long east-west ridges forming uplands and hills. Less than one-third of its area is rough pasture, and farmlands climb as high as 800 feet (245 metres) and line the valleys of such east-flowing rivers as the Blackwater, the Bride, the Lee, and the Bandon. In east and central Cork are broad valleys and lowlands, which give way in the west to narrower valleys with coastal lowlands backed by high mountains. Around Bantry and Dunmanus bays are long, scenic promontories such as Beare Peninsula. At the head of Bantry Bay is Glengariff, where subtropical vegetation survives because of the mild winters.
The city of Cork is the largest urban area in the county, and it and its suburbs constitute the second largest conurbation in the country. Other large towns are Cobh, Youghal, Mallow, and Fermoy. Administration is by a county manager and county council, though Cork city has its own manager. Both the Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church have three diocesan units: Cork, Cloyne, and Ross.
Many farms in the east and centre of the county are 70 acres (28 hectares) or larger and grow cereals and root crops. The main cash resource, however, is livestock, either for meat or milk. In the extreme southwest the farms are far smaller, but around Skibbereen and along the south coast are good agricultural lands. There is salmon fishing in the rivers, and Kinsale has become an important sea angling centre. Tweed is made in rural factories near Cork. There is a large oil refinery at Whitegate, on Cork Harbour. Tourism is important, with notable attractions including the coast and the famous castle in Blarney. The county has railway lines from Cork through Mallow to Dublin and Limerick; at Mallow, lines run east to Waterford and west to Killarney and Tralee. There is a regional technical college.
The city of Cork, founded by the Norse, remained an independent entity for centuries, and outside the city and its immediate environs the Irish followed their traditional way of life. The kingdom of Desmond, a division of the kingdom of Munster, was controlled by the MacCarthys until the Anglo-Norman invasion in the 12th century, when most of it fell to the Fitzgeralds, who became earls of Desmond.
Large estates in Cork were allocated to English “undertakers,” including Sir Walter Raleigh, under the attempted plantation of Munster in 1586, but the scheme was halted by warfare in 1598. Spanish forces attempting to assist the cause of Hugh O’Neill of Ulster were defeated at the Battle of Kinsale in 1601–02. Some of the ruined estates of the old Munster plantation were bought up by Richard Boyle, who became earl of Cork. Cork was the scene of much political disturbance during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Area 2,880 square miles (7,460 square km), excluding Cork city. Pop. (2002) 324,767, excluding Cork city; (2011) 399,802, excluding Cork city.
