Dadra and Nagar Haveli,  district, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu union territory, west-central India, located in the western part of the country and situated between the states of Gujarat to the north and Maharashtra to the south. It lies some 15 miles (24 km) from the Arabian Sea and about 80 miles (130 km) north of Mumbai (Bombay). The territory consists of two sections—Dadra and Nagar Haveli—which together embrace roughly 70 villages. Its administrative headquarters is located in Silvassa. Area 190 square miles (491 square km). Pop. (2011) 342,853.
Forests cover some two-fifths of Dadra and Nagar Haveli. The terrain is undulating and hilly, reaching elevations of 1,000 feet (300 metres) in the northeast and east near the Western Ghats. Lowland areas are limited to the central plains, which are crossed by the Daman Ganga River and its tributaries. The only navigable river in Dadra and Nagar Haveli, the Daman Ganga rises in Maharashtra and flows northwestward through the territory toward Daman, a port once famous for its docks.
The climate is typical of the region. Summers are hot, with the mean temperatures in May typically rising into the low 90s F (mid-30s C). Annual rainfall averages about 120 inches (3,050 mm), most of it falling between June and September.
About four-fifths of the population consists of various indigenous peoples (officially recognized as Scheduled Tribes), the most numerous of which are the Varli, Dhodia, and Konkan. An array of languages and dialects are spoken by these communities, sometimes in addition to Gujarati and Marathi, which also are spoken in the region. The population is predominantly Hindu, with small Christian and Muslim minorities.
Farming is the chief occupation and is largely practiced by the indigenous people, most of whom live in rural areas. Much cultivation is done on terraced land. Rice and ragi (also called finger millet) are the major food crops. Wheat and sugarcane are also grown. A dam and reservoir on the Daman Ganga River in neighbouring Gujarat has extended irrigation in the territory significantly. Timber production is mainly centred on the valuable native teak.
There is very little large-scale industry; industrial estates have been established in Mashat, Khadoli, and elsewhere for producing such items as electronics, chemicals, and fabrics. Industrial growth has resulted in an influx of labour rather than directly benefiting the local population.
An elected district panchayat oversees day-to-day affairs. Its duties, however, are subject to the administrator of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu union territory.
The history of Dadra and Nagar Haveli before India’s medieval period (roughly 11th–16th century ce) remains obscure. In 1262 ce a Rajput invader defeated the local Koli chieftains of the area and became the ruler of Ramnagar, a small state that included Nagar Haveli in its territory. The region remained under Rajput rule until the mid-18th century, when the Marathas acquired Nagar Haveli.
Dadra and Nagar Haveli came under the rule of Portugal in the late 18th century. The Marathas ceded Nagar Haveli to the Portuguese in 1783 as compensation for a Portuguese vessel that their navy had destroyed. Two years later Portugal acquired Dadra, which became a kind of fief. After India achieved independence in 1947, nationalists in Goa—the oldest Portuguese possession in India—sought to break away from Portugal; their first successes were the seizure of Dadra on the night of July 21, 1954, and their capture of Nagar Haveli two weeks later. A pro-Indian administration was formed in these enclaves, and on June 1, 1961, Dadra and Nagar Haveli requested accession to the Indian union. Although the Indian government had already acknowledged the incorporation of the two areas after their liberation from the Portuguese, their status as a single union territory was made official on August 11, 1961. In 2020 it was joined with Daman and Diu union territory to make the two a single union territory.
