Daman and Diu,  former union territory of India, which comprised two widely separated districts on the country’s western coast. Daman is an enclave on the state of Gujarat’s southern coast, situated 100 miles (160 km) north of Mumbai (Bombay). Diu encompasses an island off the southern coast of Gujarat’s Kathiawar Peninsula, 40 miles (64 km) southeast of Veraval, as well as a small area on the mainland. The town of Daman, in the Daman district, was the capital of the territory. In January 2020 the two districts joined Dadra and Nagar Haveli to become Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu union territory. Area 43 square miles (112 square km). Pop. (2011) 242,911.
Daman lies on an alluvial coastal plain, although outcrops of basalt create low plateaus and promontories in the area. The Daman Ganga River flows through the territory, with Daman town situated where the river enters the Arabian Sea. Mean daily maximum temperatures range from the mid-80s F (near 30 °C) in January to the low 90s F (about 34 °C) in May. Annual rainfall, received mainly between June and September, averages about 80 inches (2,000 mm). The greater part of Diu is covered by sand, silt, and marsh; the island portion of the district is separated from the Kathiawar Peninsula by a narrow, swampy creek. Temperatures in Diu are similar to those in Daman, though rainfall is significantly less, averaging less than 25 inches (600 mm) annually.
The people of Daman and Diu are predominantly Hindu, with small Muslim and Christian minorities. Gujarati is the main language in both districts. Less than one-tenth of the territory’s population consists of Scheduled Tribes (indigenous minority peoples who are not embraced by India’s caste hierarchy). Of these communities the Dubla, Dhodia, and Varli are the largest groups.
Agriculture and fishing dominate the economies of Daman and Diu. Rice, ragi (also called finger millet), pulses (legumes), and beans are among the main crops of Daman. In Diu, crops such as bajra (pearl millet) and wheat flourish in the arid climate; a smaller portion of land is cultivated in Diu than in Daman, however. Much of the industrial growth of the territory has been promoted through the efforts of the government of the neighbouring state of Goa. The largest towns of the territory—Diu and Daman—are commercial centres.
Daman district and Diu district are governed locally by district pancayats, whose members are directly elected. Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu union territory is headed by an administrator, who is appointed by the central Indian government.
The name Daman is probably derived from the Daman Ganga River, while Diu is from the Sanskrit word dvipa, meaning “island.” From Mauryan times (4th–2nd century bce), both were subject to various local and regional powers ruling in western India. In the 13th century Daman formed part of the Ramnagar state, which then became a tributary of the Gujarat sultans. Similarly, numerous dynasties in Kathiawar (Saurashtra) ruled Diu until it fell to the sultan of Gujarat in the early 15th century.
The Portuguese acquired Daman and Diu as part of their grand design to control the trade of the Indian Ocean. In 1535, under a treaty with Sultan Bahādur Shah of Gujarat, the Portuguese built a fort at Diu, an important port on the flourishing commercial and pilgrimage routes between India and the Middle East. By the mid-1550s all Gujarati ships entering and leaving the Gulf of Khambhat (Cambay) ports were required to call at Diu to pay Portuguese duties. In Diu the Portuguese constructed a Jesuit college, which was converted into the majestic Cathedral of Sé Matriz about the turn of the 17th century; the cathedral remains a landmark today.
Renowned for its docks and shipbuilding yards, Daman (known in Portuguese as Damão) was conquered by the Portuguese in 1559. Both Daman and Diu were subject to the governor-general of Goa as part of the Portuguese overseas province Estado da Índia (State of India). They remained under Portuguese rule for more than four centuries, though the decline of the Portuguese empire in Asia greatly diminished their strategic significance. Daman and Diu survived as outposts of Portuguese overseas territory until 1961, when they became part of India along with Goa. When Goa attained statehood in 1987, Daman and Diu became a separate union territory, and in 2020 that union territory was combined with Dadra and Nagar Haveli union territory.
