Dublin, Irish Baile Átha Cliath,  geographic county in the province of Leinster, eastern Ireland. In 1994 it was replaced administratively by three counties—Fingal to the north, South Dublin to the southwest, and Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown to the southeast—as well as by the city of Dublin itself, which was given the administrative level of both a city and a county. The limits of the former geographic county of Dublin are nearly coextensive with the Greater Dublin metropolitan area.
The area of the geographic county is bounded by Counties Kildare (west), Meath (west and north), and Wicklow (south) and by the Irish Sea (east). The central and northern parts of the region are low-lying, whereas low mountains occupy the southern reaches of it; the mountains are chiefly covered with heath and bog. The northern coast from Balbriggan to Howth has sandy shores but assumes a bolder aspect in the promontory of Howth. The chief river is the Liffey, which rises in the Wicklow Mountains a few miles southwest of Dublin city and flows through the city and into Dublin Bay.
As Dublin city is the region’s primary seaport, fishing is an important industry; important catches include salmon, cod, plaice, and oysters. Telecommunications and computer software production helped diversify the economy in the late 20th century. Industry outside Dublin city is quite limited and is concentrated around Bulriggan, Dublin city, Dún Laoghaire, and Skerries. Agriculture, particularly oats and potatoes, and livestock formerly dominated the economy but have declined significantly. Several important railways converge on Dublin city.
The geographic county was probably formed in the late 12th century; it comprised the chief portion of country within the English Pale (the English enclave in Ireland), though the limits of the county itself underwent many changes before reaching their final configuration. Among early remains are raths (prehistoric hill forts), dolmens, and round towers. Malahide Castle was founded in the 12th century. Because of its proximity to the capital city, the region was the scene of sporadic fighting in the troubled years between 1914 and 1922, and gunrunning by nationalists took place at Howth in June 1914.
