Dudley,  metropolitan borough, metropolitan county of West Midlands, west-central England, at the western edge of the metropolitan county. The historic town of Dudley (the administrative centre) and surrounding areas at the centre of the borough are part of the historic county of Worcestershire, as are southern neighbourhoods such as Stourbridge and Halesowen. Northern and western sections of the borough—such as Amblecote, Kingswinford, and Sedgeley—lie in the historic county of Staffordshire.
The borough is bisected by the Sedgley-Northfield ridge. To the south and west lies the fertile countryside around the River Severn; on the River Stour, a tributary of the Severn in the south of the borough, are the towns of Stourbridge and Halesowen. North and east of the ridge is the industrial Black Country plateau, dominated by Dudley Castle Hill, the site of Saxon and Norman fortifications and, since 1935, of a zoological garden.
Coal and ironstone were mined in the locality beginning in the Middle Ages, although the coal was not used for iron smelting until the 18th century. The tremendous expansion of industry after 1700 was stimulated by the building of canals, which transformed the communications of the area, as well as by the rich mineral resources. By the first half of the 19th century there were numerous blast furnaces, whose pollution helped to give the Black Country its name. Coal mining had ceased by the end of the 20th century, however. Nail making was an important domestic industry from the 17th century, and chains and anchors were also made.
Glassmaking dates from the early 17th century, and crystal glassware is produced today. Metalworking remains an important industry of the borough; products range from heavy engineering castings to tubes, chains, cables, nuts, and bolts. Other industries include plastics, textiles, chemicals, and electronics. Within the borough is the Wren’s Nest Geological Nature Reserve, with classic exposures of Silurian limestone extensively quarried until 1924. Area 38 square miles (98 square km). Pop. (2001) 305,155; (2011) 312,925.
