Durango,  estado (state), north-central Mexico. It is bounded by the states of Chihuahua to the north, Coahuila and Zacatecas to the east, Jalisco and Nayarit to the south, and Sinaloa to the west. The state capital is the city of Durango (Durango de Victoria).
The western portion of the state’s territory lies within the mineral-laden Sierra Madre Occidental. Semiarid plains, which support ranching, make up the eastern portion. Coursing eastward from the Sierra Madre is the Nazas River, the largest river in the state. It flows for approximately 375 miles (600 km); when swollen by spring rains, it is the main source of water for irrigated crops of cotton, wheat, corn (maize), tobacco, sugarcane, vegetables, and fruits.
The state’s temperate coniferous forests are the site of logging operations and pulp mills. Although mining has been carried on for years, the deposits of silver, gold, sulfur, tin, coal, mercury, copper, and other minerals have been only partially exploited. Mercado Hill, about 700 feet (210 metres) high and consisting of nearly pure hematite iron ore, is adjacent to Durango city. A silver mine near San Dimas has long been renowned for its output. Other mining districts are Mapimí, Cuencamé, Nombre de Dios, Papasquiaro, and San Juan del Río. The state’s scenic areas include waterfalls and hot springs at La Joya and San Juan and the protected forests and wetlands of the Santiaguillo Lagoon, near Durango city.
First explored by Europeans in 1562–63, Durango shared the colonial history of Chihuahua as a major part of the province of Nueva Vizcaya; the two became sovereign and separate states in 1823. Native American peoples rebelled often in their frontier areas during the 19th century. In the late 20th century Durango became part of the so-called “hollow core” of Mexico as increasing numbers of migrants left to seek jobs in Mexico City, along the U.S.-Mexican border, or within the United States.
State government is headed by a governor, who is elected to a single six-year term. Members of the legislature (the unicameral House of Deputies) are elected to terms of three years. The legislature can levy taxes, but in reality Durango depends on the federal government for most of its revenue. Like other Mexican states, Durango is divided into local governmental units called municipios (municipalities), each of which may include a city or town and its hinterland or, alternatively, a group of villages.
Railroads traverse the state northeast to southwest, and another line crosses its eastern section. Durango is also crossed by two branches of the Pan-American Highway and has air connections. Area 47,560 square miles (123,181 square km). Pop. (2010) 1,632,934.
