Ealing,  outer borough of London, England, midway between central London and the western periphery of the metropolis. It is part of the historic county of Middlesex. The present borough was established in 1965 by the amalgamation of the former municipal boroughs of Ealing, Acton, and Southall, all in the former county of Middlesex. It includes the districts and neighbourhoods of (from west to east) West End, Northolt, Southall, Greenford, Perivale, Hanwell, Brentham, Northfields, Ealing, Acton, and East Acton.
Ealing’s name derives from the Saxon place-name Gillingas. In a 12th-century chronicle it was recorded as a village, with church and priest, in the great forest that lay to the west of London. As London grew, the locality of Ealing developed into a market gardening community and then into a spacious residential area. The world-renowned Ealing Studios were established there in the early 20th century. Perivale, Southall, and Northolt have parish churches dating from the Middle Ages. Pitshanger Manor (1770; now a museum) was owned by Sir John Soane in the early 1800s. Hanwell has a railway viaduct built in 1838 by Isambard Kingdom Brunel.
In 1231 Walter de Actune sold land in Acton to St. Paul’s Cathedral. In late 1642, after the Battle of Edgehill during the English Civil Wars, defense forces at Acton, Brentford, and Turnham Green (at the present border between Ealing and Hounslow) barred the access of Charles I’s forces to London. Acton became a popular health resort in Queen Anne’s reign (1702–14); notable residents have included the novelist Henry Fielding, the actor David Garrick, and members of the Rothschild financial dynasty. Bedford Park, founded in 1875, was the first English “garden community.” South Acton earned the byname Soapsuds Island because of its many laundries.
The district of Southall has many other Anglo-Saxon place-names, such as Elthorne and Waxlow. Its earliest record, from 830 ce, is of Warberdus bequeathing Norwood Manor and Southall Manor to the archbishops of Canterbury. St. Bernard’s Hospital, built in Southall in the early 19th century as an insane asylum, was the site of much pioneering work in the treatment of mental illness. The noted pottery works of the Martin brothers operated in the district from the 1870s to the 1920s. The markets granted Southall by William III still survive.
Ealing borough now has numerous retail shops and factories for consumer goods. Its many public parks include Elthorne, Pitshanger, Walpole, and Lammas. Ethnic minorities account for more than one-third of the borough’s population. From the 1950s South Asians (primarily Punjab Sikhs) were attracted to the Southall area, and their restaurants, social organizations, movie theatres, newspapers, and temples are well established. Area 21 square miles (56 square km). Pop. (2001) 300,948; (2011) 338,449.
