East Riding of Yorkshire, also called North Humberside and East Yorkshire,  unitary authority and geographic county, historic county of Yorkshire, northeastern England. It extends from the Yorkshire Wolds in the north to the River Humber in the south and from the North Sea in the east to the River Derwent in the west. The unitary authority is the largest in area in England. Beverley, in the south-central part of the unitary authority, is the administrative centre.
The geographic county of East Riding of Yorkshire covers not only the entire unitary authority of the same name but also the neighbouring city and unitary authority of Kingston upon Hull (Hull). The unitary authority of East Riding of Yorkshire comprises the entire geographic county except for Hull. The geographic county and unitary authority take their name from the East Riding, a division of the historic county of Yorkshire, but they do not cover the same area as this historic division, which, like the geographic county, includes Hull. However, the historic East Riding also includes two areas outside the geographic county. One is the area south of the Rivers Derwent and Hertford that lies in the district of Ryedale and the borough of Scarborough in the present administrative county of North Yorkshire. The other is the area between the Rivers Ouse and Derwent south of the historic York city limits that lies in the present unitary authority of York and in the Selby district of the administrative county of North Yorkshire. Finally, the geographic county and unitary authority encompass an area south of the Ouse, including the town of Goole, that lies in the historic West Riding of Yorkshire.
From their white cliffs at Flamborough Head, the Yorkshire Wolds rise inland to an elevation of nearly 800 feet (240 metres), sweeping in a crescent west and south to the Humber at Brough. The Wolds gradually descend to the low plain of Holderness in the southeast and to the alluvial plain of the Rivers Derwent, Ouse, and Aire in the southwest. The dry chalk surface of the Wolds has little soil, and the hills are bleak and windswept. The plain of Holderness terminates in a line of unstable clay cliffs along the coast of the North Sea to the east, where erosion is a serious problem north of Spurn Head. Several villages and their surrounding fields have been lost under the North Sea since Roman times, and costly seawalls protect the coastal resorts of Hornsea and Withernsea. Sediment from the River Humber has silted up many small harbours, such as Hedon, that were tidal in medieval times. Silt deposits to the south, such as Sunk Island, have been reclaimed as farmland. Similarly, marshland in the southwest along the Rivers Derwent, Ouse, and Aire has been drained and converted to cropland. East Riding of Yorkshire is one of the drier parts of Britain and in places has less than 24 inches (600 mm) of annual precipitation.
The barren Wolds and waterlogged plains of the region were sparsely settled during the Middle Ages and served mainly as rough pasture for sheep. Wool exports assured the prosperity of Hull as a medieval port. Drainage and other improvements in the 18th century made the region one of the most agriculturally productive in England and attracted a larger farming population. The industrialization of Yorkshire and the East Midlands during the 19th century promoted the growth of Hull as the region’s major seaport. Today it is the largest city in the region.
The unitary authority and much of the geographic county remain largely rural and agricultural. The area produces large crops of cereals, sugar beets, vegetables, and fodder and supports a high density of livestock, including intensive pig and poultry enterprises. Most of the geographic county’s population and employment, however, are concentrated in Hull and in its suburbs in the surrounding unitary authority, including Beverley, Cottingham, Kirk Ella, and Hessle. The main industries of that urban area, besides shipping, include food processing and chemical production. The extraction and processing of North Sea gas and oil play an important role in the region’s economy. A gas terminal at Easington receives natural gas from offshore fields, and salt cavities beneath the clay surface near Hornsea have been excavated for large-scale storage. Road access to the rest of England improved markedly in 1981 with the completion of the Humber Bridge; with its main span of 4,626 feet (1,410 metres) in length, it is the longest suspension bridge in the United Kingdom and one of the longest in the world. Besides Hull and its suburbs, East Riding of Yorkshire includes the towns of Bridlington, Great Driffield, and Goole in the west. Area unitary authority, 930 square miles (2,408 square km); geographic county, 957 square miles (2,479 square km). Pop. (2001) unitary authority, 314,113; geographic county, 557,702; (2011) unitary authority, 334,179; geographic county, 590,585.
