East Nusa Tenggara, Indonesian Nusa Tenggara Timur,  propinsi (or provinsi; province) of Indonesia comprising islands in the eastern portion of the Lesser Sunda Islands group: Sumba, Flores, Komodo, Rinca, the Solor Islands (Solor, Adonora, and Lomblen), the Alor Islands (Alor and Pantar), Sawu, Roti, Semau, and the western half of Timor.
The name Nusa Tenggara is Indonesian for “southeast islands.” The province fronts the Flores Sea to the northwest, the Banda Sea to the northeast, the Timor Sea and the country of East Timor (Timor-Leste) to the east, the Indian Ocean to the south, and the Sumba Strait to the west. Physiographically, East Nusa Tenggara comprises the islands that encircle the Savu (Sawu) Sea. Kupang, on the southwestern tip of the island of Timor, is the provincial capital.
The islands that now constitute the province were part of the Majapahit empire of eastern Java in the 14th century and were included in the Muslim Mataram kingdom of Java in the 16th century. In the 17th and 18th centuries the Portuguese and the Dutch were in frequent conflict in the area, and the island of Timor became a Dutch colony in 1859. The Japanese occupied East Nusa Tenggara during World War II (1939–45). It was incorporated into the Republic of Indonesia in 1950.
The islands in the province present a splintered topography of volcanic mountains that reach an elevation of 7,814 feet (2,382 metres) at Mount Mandasawu on Flores and 7,962 feet (2,427 metres) at Mount Mutis on western Timor. The mountain peaks are lower on the islands in the northeastern part of the province. Coral atolls and reefs border much of the narrow coastal lowland. The islands have a long dry season, and there are few perennial streams and no major rivers. Sandalwood and eucalyptus woodlands, scrub, and grasslands are common.
Agriculture is the main occupation; rice, corn (maize), coconuts, sandalwood, cotton, and coffee are the chief products. Horses are raised, and deep-sea fishing is important. Small- and medium-scale manufacturing activities include cotton spinning, weaving, dyeing, pharmaceutical production, and tanning.
The population consists primarily of Papuan peoples, but it also includes a notable Malay community. The great majority of East Nusa Tenggara’s residents are Christian; about half of the population is Roman Catholic, while about one-third adheres to a Protestant denomination. Muslims form the largest minority. Kupang is the principal city, and Ende, on Flores, is one of the major towns. Road transport is confined mostly to the coastal lowlands on all the islands. The largest airport is in Kupang, but more than a dozen smaller facilities serve other settlements throughout the province. Area 18,810 square miles (48,718 square km). Pop. (2000) 3,823,154; (2010) 4,683,827.
