Free State,  province, east-central Republic of South Africa. Under the name Orange Free State, it was originally a Boer state and then (from 1910) one of the traditional provinces of South Africa; it was renamed Free State in 1995. Free State is bordered on the north by North West, Gauteng, and Mpumalanga provinces, on the east by KwaZulu-Natal province and the independent state of Lesotho, on the south by Eastern Cape province, and on the west by Northern Cape province. The provincial capital, Bloemfontein, is also the national judicial capital.
The province is located on the Highveld, a plateau rising to elevations of 6,000 feet (1,800 m) in the east and sloping to about 4,000 feet (1,200 m) in the west. Two streams drain the province: the upper Orange River, which forms the province’s southern boundary, and the Vaal River, part of its northern boundary. The climate varies from warm and temperate with an annual rainfall of 40 inches (1,020 mm) in the east to semiarid with rainfall of only 15 inches (380 mm) in the far west. Mean annual surface temperatures gradually increase from about 58° F (14° C) in the east to 62° F (17° C) in the west. Frost is common over the entire province from May to September, and, because rainfall is unreliable, long periods of drought are frequent.
Blacks make up more than three-fourths of the province’s population, whites less than one-tenth. More than three-fifths of the population speak Sotho, and about one-tenth speak Afrikaans. Several other languages are also spoken. A large proportion of whites live in cities and towns, while the majority of blacks reside in rural areas.
Free State possesses sizable deposits of diamonds, coal, and bentonite. Much of the coal is transformed into oil and other petroleum products at Sasolburg. The province produces about two-fifths of South Africa’s corn (maize), and wheat is also an important crop. Undulating plains provide excellent grazing for sheep, and the Free State produces about one-sixth of South Africa’s wool.
Free State is predominantly rural, and the more austere and moralistic aspects of the Afrikaner character are probably more in evidence here than elsewhere. Black culture is still strongly influenced by tribal life; the supremacy of chiefs is recognized, and the heritage of traditional animist religion is still evident despite the influence of Christianity.
The University of the Free State (1904) is located in Bloemfontein. Free State is also home to Vredefort Dome, the world’s oldest and largest meteorite impact site, which was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 2005. Area 50,126 square miles (129,825 square km). Pop. (2009 est.) 2,902,400.
