Fylde,  borough (district), administrative and historic county of Lancashire, northwestern England. It lies on the north bank of the estuary of the River Ribble at the Irish Sea, just southeast of the resort of Blackpool.
Fylde borough is part of the Fylde geographic region, a low coastal plain 18 miles (29 km) wide between the Ribble and Morecambe Bay to the north. It is an area of undulating terrain containing unstratified glacial drift and pockets of marshland, now mostly drained. Extensive sand beaches are found at Lytham and St. Anne’s (St. Anne’s-on-the-Sea), where the Ribble meets the sea.
St. Anne’s, built on sand dunes overlooking the sea, is a residential and family resort community with little industry. International golf matches, including the Ryder Cup and the British Open, are sometimes played there. The town, a classic English seaside resort, was established in the 19th century as a residential area for owners of eastern Lancashire’s textile industry, and many of its streets are named for towns in east Lancashire. Neighbouring Lytham is a historic fishing village, though fishing has diminished in importance. An old windmill and the Jacobean (late 18th-century) Lytham Hall are architectural features in Lytham. Kirkham, an old market town in the centre of the borough, contains the ruins of an abbey founded in 1125 for Augustinian canons by Walter L’Espec, Henry I’s itinerant justice in the north. Kirkham was formerly a centre of the flax industry, and sails made in the town were used on English boats in the Battle of Trafalgar. In the 18th century the agricultural produce of the Fylde geographic region won it the epithet “granary of Lancashire”; dairy farming and poultry raising predominate in the contemporary borough. There is a major British aerospace industry at Warton, where the airfield was a base for the United States Army Air Force during World War II. The only plant in the country producing nuclear fuel elements is located at Salwick. Area 64 square miles (165 square km). Pop. (2001) 73,217; (2011) 75,757.
