Gujarat,  state of India, located on the country’s western coast, on the Arabian Sea. It encompasses the entire Kathiawar Peninsula (Saurashtra) as well as the surrounding area on the mainland.
The state is bounded primarily by Pakistan to the northwest and by the Indian states of Rajasthan to the north, Madhya Pradesh to the east, and Maharashtra to the southeast. Gujarat also shares a small segment of its southeastern border with the Indian union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, and, together with the Arabian Sea, it surrounds the territory of Daman and Diu. The coastline of Gujarat is 992 miles (1,596 km) long, and no part of the state is more than 100 miles (160 km) from the sea. The capital is Gandhinagar, on the outskirts of the north-central city of Ahmadabad (Ahmedabad)—the former capital, the largest city in the state, and one of the most-important textile centres in India. It was in Ahmadabad that Mohandas (Mahatma) Gandhi built his Sabarmati ashram (Sanskrit: ashrama, “retreat” or “hermitage”) as a headquarters for his campaigns against British rule of India.
Gujarat draws its name from the Gurjara (supposedly a subtribe of the Huns), who ruled the area during the 8th and 9th centuries ce. The state assumed its present form in 1960, when the former Bombay state was divided between Maharashtra and Gujarat on the basis of language. Area 75,685 square miles (196,024 square km). Pop. (2011) 60,383,628.
Gujarat is a land of great contrasts, stretching from the seasonal salt deserts of the Kachchh (Kutch) district in the northwest, across the generally arid and semiarid scrublands of the Kathiawar Peninsula, to the wet, fertile, coastal plains of the southeastern part of the state, north of Mumbai. The Rann of Kachchh—including both the Great Rann and its eastern appendage, the Little Rann—are best described as vast salt marshes, together covering about 9,000 square miles (23,300 square km). The Rann constitutes the Kachchh district on the west, north, and east, while the Gulf of Kachchh forms the district’s southern boundary. During the rainy season—slight though the rains may be—the Rann floods, and the Kachchh district is converted into an island; in the dry season it is a sandy, salty plain plagued by dust storms.
To the southeast of Kachchh, lying between the Gulf of Kachchh and the Gulf of Khambhat (Cambay), is the large Kathiawar Peninsula. It is generally arid and rises from the coasts to a low, rolling area of hill land in the centre, where the state reaches its highest elevation, at 3,665 feet (1,117 metres), in the Girnar Hills. Soils in the peninsula are mostly poor, having been derived from a variety of old crystalline rocks. Rivers, except for seasonal streams, are absent from the area.
To the east of the Kathiawar Peninsula, small plains and low hills in the north merge with fertile farmlands in the south. The richness of the southern soils is attributable to their partial derivation from the basalts of the Deccan, the physiographic plateau region that constitutes most of peninsular India. Southeastern Gujarat is crossed from east to west by the Narmada and Tapti (Tapi) rivers, both of which empty into the Gulf of Khambhat. Toward the eastern border with Maharashtra, the terrain becomes mountainous; the region is the northern extension of the Western Ghats, the mountain range that runs parallel to the Arabian Sea on the western edge of southern India.
Winter (November through February) temperatures in Gujarat usually reach a high in the mid-80s F (about 28 °C), while lows drop into the mid-50s F (about 12 °C). Summers (March through May) are quite hot, however, with temperatures typically rising well above 100 °F (38 °C) during the day and dropping only into the 90s F (low 30s C) at night.
Gujarat is drier in the north than in the south. Rainfall is lowest in the northwestern part of the state—in the Rann of Kachchh—where it may amount to less than 15 inches (380 mm) annually. In the central portion of the Kathiawar Peninsula as well as in the northeastern region, annual rainfall typically amounts to about 40 inches (1,000 mm). Southeastern Gujarat, where the southwest monsoon brings heavy rains between June and September, is the wettest area; annual rainfall usually approaches 80 inches (2,000 mm) along the coastal plain.
Forests cover only a small portion of Gujarat, reflecting human activity as well as meagre rainfall. Scrub forest occurs in the northwestern region and across the Kathiawar Peninsula, the main species being babul acacias, capers, Indian jujubes, and toothbrush bushes (Salvadora persica). In some parts of the peninsula and northeastern Gujarat, deciduous species such as teak, catechu (cutch), axlewood, and Bengal kino (butea gum) are found. Deciduous forests are concentrated in the wetter southern and eastern hills. They produce valuable timbers, such as Vengai padauk (genus Pterocarpus; resembling mahogany), Malabar simal, and haldu (Adina cordifolia). The west coast of the peninsula is known for its algae, and the east coast produces papyrus, or paper plant (Cyperus papyrus).
Gir National Park, in the southwestern region of the Kathiawar Peninsula, contains rare Asiatic lions (Panthera leo persica), and endangered Indian wild asses (Equus hemionus khur) are protected in a sanctuary near the Little Rann of Kachchh. The Nal Sarovar Bird Sanctuary, near Ahmadabad, attracts many species of birds migrating from the Siberian plains and elsewhere in winter. Saras cranes, Brahmini ducks, bustards, pelicans, cormorants, ibises, storks, herons, and egrets are among the most-notable species. The Rann of Kachchh is India’s only nesting ground of the greater flamingo. There is excellent offshore and inland fishing in Gujarat. Catches include pomfret, salmon, hilsa (a type of shad), jewfish (scianid fish), prawn, Bombay duck (a food fish), and tuna.
