Hackney,  inner borough of London, England, in the historic county of Middlesex. Hackney lies north of the City of London and Tower Hamlets, and its eastern boundary is the River Lea. The present borough was created in 1965 by the amalgamation of the former metropolitan boroughs of Shoreditch, Hackney, and Stoke Newington. It includes areas and historic villages such as (from north to south) Stoke Newington, Upper Clapton, Lea Bridge, Lower Clapton, Dalston, Homerton, Hackney Wick, Hackney, Kingsland, Haggerston, Hoxton, and Shoreditch. Shoreditch, near the City, is industrial and commercial in character, whereas the rest of Hackney is largely residential with pockets of industry, notably along the Lea valley.
Stoke Newington was a site of Paleolithic settlement, and it later became a Saxon village. Roman remains were discovered in the 18th century in the Hackney Marshes in the eastern part of the borough, an area that now contains football (soccer) and cricket fields. Shoreditch takes its name from a ditch that lay just outside the London wall as part of the city’s medieval defenses. Hoxton was listed in Domesday Book (1086) as pertaining to the canons of St. Paul’s Cathedral.
The first Elizabethan playhouse, the Theatre, stood in Shoreditch from 1576 to 1598. (The building was then dismantled, and its materials were taken across the Thames to Bankside, where they were used to build the Globe Theatre.) From the 16th century onward, many mansions were built in Hackney and, later, in Stoke Newington. The traditional associations of the borough with furniture and cabinetmaking trades are recalled by the exhibits of the Geffrye Museum in the former Ironmongers’ Company almshouses (1715). The writer Daniel Defoe resided with a Nonconformist community in Stoke Newington and was educated at Newington Green, where Edgar Allan Poe also attended school from 1817 to 1820. In the Abney Park Cemetery (1840) are the graves of William Booth, founder of the Salvation Army, and his wife and son. Notable edifices include the Hackney Empire theatre (1901) and the redbrick Sutton House (early 16th century). The Hackney Museum contains exhibits on local history.
The borough’s public open space is extensive and includes Hackney Marshes, Hackney Downs, Clissold Park, Springfield Park, London Fields, and Millfields. The New River empties into reservoirs north of Clissold Park, and the Grand Union Canal traverses the borough.
Hackney’s commodious older housing, its location in the long unfashionable East End area, and its proximity to the centre of London has made it a natural reception area for successive waves of immigrants. Ethnic minorities constitute more than one-third of the borough’s residents, with large numbers of Afro-Caribbeans. Stamford Hill is notable as a centre for Orthodox Jews. Area 7.4 square miles (19 square km). Pop. (2001) 202,824; (2011) 246,270.
