Haringey,  inner borough of London, England, part of the historic county of Middlesex. It is located north of Islington and Hackney and south of Enfield. Haringey was established in 1965 by the amalgamation of the former boroughs of Hornsey, Tottenham, and Wood Green. Haringey includes such districts and historic villages as (roughly from west to east) Portis Green (in part), Muswell Hill, Highgate (in part), Crouch End, Bowes Park (in part), Hornsey, Wood Green, Harringay, West Green, and Tottenham. The valley of the River Lea is adjacent to the east.
The names Haringey, Harringay, and Hornsey derive from the medieval place-name Haringeie (1201) or Haringesheye (1243), which means “Enclosure in the Gray Wood” or “Haering’s Enclosure,” probably in reference to an earlier Saxon settlement in the Middlesex forest. In the Middle Ages the area became the immense parish and manor of Hornsey. Suburban London spread over the area in the 19th century as the railway and tram (streetcar) systems were extended. The borough’s housing defies generalization: it includes grand Victorian villas, miles of small working-class terraces, interwar flats and family homes, and mass housing projects from late 20th-century urban renewal programs. Several fine Georgian houses line Highgate Hill.
Although largely residential in character, Haringey has varied industries (mainly in Tottenham), including light engineering and the manufacture of metal goods, confectioneries, furniture, clothing, and footwear. Wood Green is a centre for shopping and services and is the administrative centre of the borough. Alexandra Palace, with its surrounding park, was built in the late 19th century as an arts and entertainment complex, and it became the original home of British Broadcasting Television in 1936. After a fire in 1980, it was restored (1988) to serve as an exhibition and conference centre.
Haringey’s many parks and open spaces include Finsbury Park, Highgate Wood, and Queen’s Wood. Large sections of land on Haringey’s eastern boundary are designated for inclusion in the Lee (Lea) Valley Regional Park. The borough also is home to the Tottenham Hotspur Football (soccer) Club and includes such landmarks as Bruce Castle (with a museum containing local history collections and archives) and All Hallows Church, with medieval remnants.
Haringey’s ethnic minorities constitute roughly one-third of the population. The largest groups are Afro-Caribbeans and Africans. Area 11 square miles (30 square km). Pop. (2001) 216,507; (2011) 254,926.
