Havering,  outer borough of London, England, forming part of the northeastern perimeter of the metropolis. Havering belongs to the historic county of Essex. The present borough was created in 1965 from the former borough of Romford and the urban district of Hornchurch, and it includes such areas as (roughly from north to south) Havering-atte-Bower, Noak Hill, Collier Row, Chase Cross, Harold Hill, Harold Park, Marks Gate (in part), Mawney Park, Gidea Park, Harold Wood, Romford, Squirrel’s Heath, Emerson Park, Hornchurch, Upminster, Cranham, Hacton, Corbets Tey, North Ockendon (in part), South Hornchurch, Rainham, and Wennington. The Hornchurch Marshes, Rainham Level, and Wennington Level front the River Thames on the southern edge of the borough.
Since 1247 Romford has been the site of an enormous street market on High Street (formerly the Colchester highway), which at one time was lined by coaching inns. Church House, a 15th-century house and former coaching inn that serves as the administrative centre for the Church of England, stands next to the parish church of St. Edward. The Church of St. Andrew (mostly 15th century) in Hornchurch displays a copper-horned stone bull’s head (the town seal) over its east window. Havering-atte-Bower was the site of a royal palace until the early 17th century; a coat of arms from the palace is on display at Bower House (1729). There is an early 19th-century windmill at Upminster, and the Upminster Tithe Barn, a medieval structure, houses a museum of local history.
Havering developed rapidly in the 20th century after the extension of electrified suburban railways and the building of municipal housing estates. Many Havering residents commute to work in central London, but there are important engineering and other manufacturing industries in the borough. The Royal Air Force station at Hornchurch was a major fighter base during World Wars I and II.
The borough’s public open space includes Harrow Lodge Park, Bedfords Park, Tylers Common, Dagnam Park, Raphael Park, and other areas. Romford has large shopping and leisure centres. Area 43 square miles (112 square km). Pop. (2001) 224,248; (2011) 237,232.
