Huntingdonshire,  historic county and administrative district of the administrative county of Cambridgeshire, east-central England. The administrative district and the historic county of Huntingdonshire cover slightly different areas. The administrative district includes the town of Eaton Slocon, which lies in the historic county of Bedfordshire, and part of the historic county of Huntingdonshire lies outside the administrative district. The section of the unitary authority of Peterborough south of the River Nene belongs to the historic county of Huntingdonshire. The historic county also includes a small area west of Kimbolton, in the borough of Bedford in the administrative county of Bedfordshire. Huntingdon is the administrative centre and county town (seat).
Western Huntingdonshire is a low limestone upland generally about 200 feet (60 metres) in elevation and covered by Oxford Clay. Situated in the catchment basins of the Rivers Nene and Ouse, the county gradually descends eastward and extends into the Fens, an area of reclaimed marshland in the northeast. The clay-covered chalk uplands are generally in pasture or meadow; the more-fertile peat soils of the Fens are intensively cultivated for cereals and sugar beets.
In prehistoric times the county consisted mostly of dense woods and marshland and was thinly populated. During the Roman occupation the clay uplands were cleared and settled, and towns were established at Godmanchester and Chesterton. Little is known about the settlement of the county by Angles or Saxons during the early Middle Ages, but invading Danes established a headquarters in the town of Huntingdon in the 9th century. During the 10th century the English reconquered the area. Many medieval abbeys (now in ruins) were established within or adjacent to the former marshlands, which were drained and brought under cultivation by the 18th century. Old (mostly medieval) stone bridges still in use attest to the historic importance of the towns of St. Ives, St. Neots, and adjacent Huntingdon and Godmanchester. Oliver Cromwell spent his childhood in the town of Huntingdon. During the English Civil Wars (1642–51) the town and surrounding countryside nevertheless remained steadfastly Royalist. Huntingdonshire has been primarily an agricultural area for most of its history.
The town (parish) of Yaxley, atop thick Oxford Clay deposits in the north, is now one of the principal brick-making centres of England. Huntingdon, Godmanchester, St. Ives, and St. Neots have expanding light industries. Area administrative district, 350 square miles (906 square km). Pop. (2001) 156,954; (2011) 169,508.
