Ingushetiya, also spelled Ingushetia,  republic in southwestern Russia. The crest line of the Greater Caucasus range forms its southern boundary with Georgia; the Russian republic of Chechnya lies to the east, and that of North Ossetia–Alania (formerly North Ossetia) to the west and north. In 2002 the capital was moved from Nazran to Magas.
The northern lowland region, which merges into the southern extreme of the Nogay Steppe, is only 650 feet (200 metres) above sea level in some places, but much of Ingushetiya reaches elevations of at least 1,650 feet (500 metres), with scattered peaks of the Caucasus in the mountainous southern region rising to 9,850 feet (3,000 metres) and higher. The Sunzha River, a tributary of the Terek, crosses the northern area of Ingushetiya from west to east; the Assa, a tributary of the Sunzha, is the main stream in the region. The climate varies with the relief but generally approximates the dry continental type.
The majority of the population is Ingush, one of the many Muslim mountain peoples in the Caucasus. Traditionally, the chief occupations were farming in the lowlands and cattle raising in the mountain areas. Mineral water is of economic importance, and the republic has a growing tourism sector.
The Ingush became Russian subjects in 1810 and, unlike most of their neighbours, did not participate in the mid-19th-century war against the Russian occupation of the Caucasus or in the rebellion against Soviet Russia in 1920–22. In 1924 the Ingush autonomous oblast (region) was created. It was later combined with the Chechen autonomous oblast, inhabited primarily by the Chechen mountain peoples, who are also Muslim and whose language is closely related to Ingush; the autonomous republic of Checheno-Ingushetia was established in 1936. During World War II Checheno-Ingushetia was abolished, and its ethnic inhabitants, who had been accused of collaborating with the Germans, were deported to Soviet Asia. The republic was reestablished in 1957 and the exiles allowed to return.
In 1992 Checheno-Ingushetia was divided into two separate republics: Chechnya and Ingushetiya. In that year a territorial dispute between Ingushetiya and North Ossetia forced many Ingush living in the latter republic to flee to Ingushetiya. Chechen refugees, escaping the fighting between Russian forces and separatists in Chechnya, also entered Ingushetiya in the 1990s. Yet violence was not limited to Chechnya: in the early 21st century an insurgency within Ingushetiya gained momentum. While the Chechen conflict largely had abated by the spring of 2009, the Ingush insurgency—fueled by Islamic militancy and popular outrage over the reprisals of Russian security forces—escalated. In June 2009 the republic’s president narrowly survived a bomb attack, and two other political figures were assassinated. Area 1,450 square miles (3,750 square km). Pop. (2008 est.) 499,502.
