Jalisco,  estado (state), west-central Mexico. It is bounded by the states of Nayarit to the northwest, Zacatecas and Aguascalientes to the north, San Luis Potosí and Guanajuato to the east, and Michoacán and Colima to the south and by the Pacific Ocean to the west. Its capital and largest city is Guadalajara.
The volcanic Sierra Madre Occidental and Sierra Madre del Sur traverse the state, separating the narrow, heavily forested coastal plain from the high Mesa Central. Earthquakes are frequent. The coastal zone is tropical and humid, while the highlands are generally drier. Lake Chapala, Mexico’s largest freshwater lake, lies largely within Jalisco; however, it is silting up and shrinking as its source, the Lerma River, is diverted for crop irrigation and for drinking water in Mexico City.
Jalisco was invaded by Spaniards in about 1526. It was administered as Nueva Galicia, which also included Aguascalientes and Zacatecas, and later became the intendency of Guadalajara. In 1889 the territory of Tepic, now Nayarit state, was carved from its coastal zone. Jalisco’s government is headed by a governor, who is elected to a single term of six years. Members of the unicameral legislature, the State Congress, are elected to three-year terms. The state is divided into dozens of local governmental units called municipios (municipalities), each of which is headquartered in a prominent city, town, or village. More than four-fifths of the people live in urban areas.
Jalisco’s economy, which is based mainly on agriculture and other primary production, is one of the largest in Mexico. Its chief crops are corn (maize), wheat, and beans in the uplands and sugarcane, cotton, rice, and tobacco in the warmer districts. Jalisco is one of Mexico’s top producers of beef and pork, from livestock raised in the highlands. The beverage tequila, distilled from the juice of the agave cactus, is named for the town of that name in Jalisco and is one of the state’s best-known products. Forest products are obtained along the coast, and mining for silver, gold, mercury, copper, and precious stones is important. Among the state’s varied industries are textile mills, computer product manufacturers, and cement and electric-power plants. Rail and highway networks in Jalisco are extensive, linking Guadalajara with Mexico City and other population centres. Guadalajara is served by one of the country’s busiest airports and is one of the state’s major tourist centres. Puerto Vallarta is likewise a popular tourist destination.
Most of the state’s cultural institutions are based in Guadalajara, including the State Museum of Jalisco (founded 1918), the José Clemente Orozco Museum-Workshop (1951), the University of Guadalajara (1925), and the Autonomous University of Guadalajara (1935); the architecturally significant Cabañas Hospice, established in the early 19th century to provide housing and care for the disadvantaged, was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1997. Zapopan, which is now a northern suburb of the capital city, is the site of the military schools of aviation (1915), air force specialists (1925), supply and maintenance (1942), and signals (1953). Area 31,211 square miles (80,836 square km). Pop. (2010) 7,350,682.
