Jiangsu, Wade-Giles romanization Chiang-su, conventional Kiangsu,  sheng (province) on the east coast of China. It is bounded by the Yellow Sea to the east, Shanghai municipality to the southeast, and by the provinces of Zhejiang to the south, Anhui to the west, and Shandong to the north. The provincial capital is Nanjing, which was the southern capital of China during the Ming dynasty (1368–1644) and the capital under the Nationalist government (1928–49). The city also has been the economic and cultural centre of southern and southeastern China since ancient times.
Jiangsu became a separate province in 1667 (the sixth year of the reign of the Kangxi emperor). The name is derived from the prefixes of Jiangning and Suzhou, the names of the two most important prefectures within the province at that time. Area 39,600 square miles (102,600 square km). Pop. (2010) 78,659,903.
The province consists almost entirely of alluvial plains divided by the estuary of the Yangtze River (Chang Jiang) into two sections, Jiangnan (literally, “South of the River”) and Subei (“North [Jiang]su”). Jiangnan is fertile and well-watered, famed for its silk and handicrafts, and very densely populated and industrialized. The cities of Suzhou (Soochow), Nanjing, and Wuxi, as well as Shanghai, are all located in this region. Shanghai is situated at the mouth of the Yangtze River, although administratively the Shanghai municipality is at the province level and is controlled directly by the State Council of the central government.
Subei is relatively poor in comparison with Jiangnan. The northernmost section of Subei, from Xuzhou (Suchow) to the sea, is actually part of the great North China Plain in its physical geography, as well as in its agriculture and general way of living; it is densely populated.
The dominant physical characteristic of the province is its wide alluvial plain, which covers some two-thirds of the total area; nearly another one-fifth of the surface consists of lakes, rivers, and waterways. Stretching from north to south, the plain lies at a low elevation above sea level. Most of the province is less than 150 feet (45 metres) above sea level, making Jiangsu the lowest and flattest of the provinces. Hills of moderate elevation are found only in the southwestern corner of the province and in the extreme north along the Shandong border. Mount Yuntai, in northern Subei near the Yellow Sea, is the highest point in the province, at 2,050 feet (625 metres).
Most of the soils are thus alluvial, both calcareous and noncalcareous, and including some saline soils. There is an intricate network of rivers and canals, lakes and ponds, all protected from floods by dikes. The silt of the great rivers encroaches constantly on the sea, leaving seaports of former ages dry. In coastal areas below the high-water level, cultivation is carried on in polders (areas protected from the sea, mainly by dikes). Extensive canalization and a vast development of polders have been systematically carried out since the early 20th century. This section of the surface of the Earth has been completely altered by human hands.
Jiangnan is drained primarily by the Yangtze River, which enters the province to the southwest of Nanjing on the Jiangsu-Anhui border and flows generally east and southeast before reaching the East China Sea. The waters from upstream meet tidewaters at Nanjing. The river becomes broader at Zhenjiang, widening to more than 11 miles (18 km) at Nantong and more than 56 miles (90 km) at its mouth. It carries an enormous load of silt to the sea annually, depositing it to form the Yangtze delta. Tides and currents carry some of the sediment to form sandbars in the estuary and along the coast. Prior to the completion of the Three Gorges Dam, the delta itself grew at an average rate of about 82 feet (25 metres) per year from sediment deposition. However, the dam now retains a large proportion of the sediment, and the delta’s expansion has slowed considerably.
Subei’s major drainage systems are Hongze Lake and the Huai River, which flows into the lake; Gaoyou Lake, through which waters from Hongze Lake reach the Yangtze; the Subei Canal, which drains Hongze Lake; and the Grand Canal, which runs through the entire province from north to south and connects Subei with the Yangtze delta. During several periods in Chinese history, northern Jiangsu was also drained by the Huang He (Yellow River), which occasionally left its course and flowed into the Huai. Formerly, the Huai flowed into the sea, but when its channel was gradually usurped by the Huang, beginning more than a thousand years ago, it was unable to reach the sea and instead emptied itself into Hongze Lake.
The Jiangsu lowlands are floodplains formed by the alluvial deposits of the Yangtze, Huai, and (formerly) Huang rivers and their tributaries. Using the Yangtze and the old channel of the Huai as convenient landmarks, the area of these plains may be divided into three sections.
The Jiangnan plain south of the Yangtze forms the principal part of the Yangtze delta, characterized by flatness and lying only 10 to 16 feet (3 to 5 metres) above sea level. It is crisscrossed by streams and canals and dotted with ponds and lakes, forming an elaborate network of flowing water, meticulously maintained by farmers. This area actually has the highest stream density in China: within it, no place is more than 300 feet (90 metres) from the drainage system of Lake Tai (the southern shore of which forms much of the Jiangsu-Zhejiang border). The canals were all dug by farmers of the area. Isolated hillocks dot the edge of the Lake Tai area, which adds to its enchanting beauty. The lakes were parts of former shallow bays and inlets of the sea, obstructed and enclosed by the steady advance of the Yangtze delta. After being cut off from the sea, the water gradually decreased in salinity and formed freshwater lakes. Lake Tai is connected with the Yangtze and its estuary by many distributaries. The Jiangnan Canal (the name for the section of the Grand Canal south of the Yangtze), which runs through the full length of the Lake Tai plain from northwest to southeast, cuts across all the distributaries connecting the Lake Tai basin with the Yangtze, thus forming a vital link of the Lake Tai system.
Between the Yangtze and the ancient channel of the Huai is what Chinese geographers call the Yangtze (Jiang)-Huai plain, built by the alluvium of the two rivers. The centre of this plain is only 6.5 to 13 feet (2 to 4 metres) above sea level, while its periphery stands at about 16 to 33 feet (5 to 10 metres). It is considered to be a section of the Yangtze delta, as it has the same topographical elements, including alluvial deposits and drainage. As a sluggish tributary of the Yangtze, the Huai formerly caused widespread floods during the high-water season, but a water-control project has permanently restricted the high waters of the Huai.
North of the old channel of the Huai is the Xuzhou-Huai plain, built of the alluvium of the Huai and Huang rivers and standing about 30 to 150 feet (9 to 45 metres) above sea level. In the northern part of the plain are low hills with heights of about 650 feet (200 metres).
