Jilin, Wade-Giles romanization Chi-lin, conventional Kirin,  sheng (province) of the Northeast region of China (formerly called Manchuria). It borders Russia to the east, North Korea to the southeast, the Chinese provinces of Liaoning to the south and Heilongjiang to the north, and the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region to the west. The capital is Changchun, in the west-central part of the province. Area 72,200 square miles (187,000 square km). Pop. (2010) 27,462,297.
The province may be divided into three parts: the eastern mountains, the western plains, and a transitional zone of rolling hills between them. Elevation decreases from the highlands in the southeast toward the Northeast Plain in the northwestern part of the province. The mountains of eastern Jilin take the form of parallel ranges that are separated by broad valleys. The most famous of the ranges is the Changbai Mountains close to the Korean border. The eastern portion of the range is volcanic and includes the snow-covered Mount Baitou (or Jiangjun; Mount Paektu [or Paek] in Korean) massif on the border, which includes the highest peaks in both northeastern China and North Korea. The summit region encompasses a volcanic crater occupied by a lake; the highest point on the Chinese side is Baiyun Peak, at 8,829 feet (2,691 metres), while the Paektu high point on the Korean side reaches 9,022 feet (2,750 metres) above sea level. The Changbai range is the source of three important rivers: the Sungari (Songhua), the Yalu, and the Tumen. The middle section of the Northeast Plain forms the northwestern part of the province and constitutes three-eighths of its area. It has a rolling topography, with an average elevation of about 650 feet (200 metres).
The Yalu and Tumen rivers flow in opposite directions along the Sino-Korean border. The Yalu runs southwest to Korea Bay, the Tumen down the Changbai range northeastward to the Sea of Japan (East Sea). The two rivers are of great strategic importance, guarding the land approaches to northeastern China from the Korean peninsula. The Sungari River is the major stream of Jilin. It flows for almost 500 miles (800 km) within the province, draining an area of more than 30,000 square miles (78,000 square km). Its upper course runs northwest in a series of rapids through heavily forested mountains before it enters the Sungari Reservoir, a man-made lake. Emerging from the reservoir, the Sungari flows past Jilin city, situated at the head of navigation of the Sungari River and at the geographical centre of the province. The river enters the Northeast Plain and is shortly afterward joined by its chief tributary, the Nen River, which is in fact larger than the Sungari. It then turns sharply east to run along the boundary with Heilongjiang province for a short distance before it leaves Jilin province.
There are two main types of soil in the province: podzols in the eastern mountainous region and black earth in the western plains. The podzols occur in several forms and are of both high and low fertility. Central and western Jilin are the areas of the black earths of the Northeast Plain. Of high fertility and containing a high percentage of organic matter, they form good arable land. The young alluvial soils along the Sungari and its tributaries also provide excellent land for cultivation. In western Jilin are saline soils, alkaline soils, and high-alkaline soils of low agricultural value.
Jilin province forms a transitional climatic zone between the northern and southern portions of China’s Northeast. The winter is cold and long, and rivers are frozen for about five months; the ice on the Sungari is thick enough to support mule carts. Changchun, near the centre of China’s Northeast, has mean temperatures of 2 °F (−17 °C) for January and 74 °F (23 °C) for July. It has a mean annual precipitation of about 25 inches (630 mm), more than 80 percent of it during the five warm months from May to September. Precipitation increases southeastward to more than 40 inches (1,000 mm) in the Changbai Mountains area but decreases westward; the Northeast Plain receives only about 16 inches (400 mm).
The natural vegetation is prairie grass in the western plains and mixed conifer and broad-leaved deciduous forest in the eastern mountainous area. The vegetation in the eastern mountains includes tree species such as the Japanese red pine, Manchurian ash, fish-scale pine, larch, birch, oak, willow, elm, and the Manchurian walnut. In the deep mountain interior, virgin forest has been preserved. Tree types are distributed in distinct belts depending mainly on elevation: between 800 feet and 1,600 feet (245 and 490 metres) is the deciduous broad-leaved belt, mainly mountain willows and oaks; a mixed coniferous and broad-leaved forest is found between 1,600 feet and 3,000 feet (490 and 915) metres; between 3,000 feet and 5,900 feet (915 and 1,800 metres) there is coniferous forest; and mountain birch is found from 5,900 feet to 6,900 feet (1,800 to 2,100 metres).
Many valuable wild animals and medicinal plants are found in the forested mountain areas. The Manchurian hare, valued for its fur, and some species of rodent such as the rat hamster and the eastern field vole are believed to be peculiar to the Northeast forest. Among birds, finches, buteo hawks, needle-footed owls, black and white barriers, and certain species of flycatcher are typical. Among semiaquatic animals, the lungless newts are notable. Certain species of snakes, such as the Schrenk racer, found in the inhabited areas of the Northeast and Korea, live in a partially domesticated state and are used to eliminate harmful rodents in orchards and gardens. European wild boars, common hedgehogs, Asian red deer, harvest mice, and field mice are among the more common Eurasian species. Sikas (a type of deer) are prized for their antlers. Valuable pelts include fox, chipmunk, the light-coloured polecat, the Manchurian hare, and the sable. The sable population, however, has diminished considerably; sables are now protected, as are Siberian tigers.
