Kansas,  constituent state of the United States of America. It is bounded by Nebraska to the north, Missouri to the east, Oklahoma to the south, and Colorado to the west. Lying amid the westward-rising landscape of the Great Plains of the North American continent, Kansas became the 34th state on January 29, 1861. In that year the capital was located in Topeka by popular election, outpolling nearby Lawrence by some 2,700 votes. The state’s name is derived from that of the Kansa, or Kaw, whose name comes from a Siouan-language phrase meaning “people of the south wind.”
The geographic centre of the 48 coterminous United States is marked by a limestone shaft and a flag located in a pasture near Lebanon, Kansas, close to the Nebraska border. Some 40 miles (65 km) to the south is the magnetic, or geodetic, centre of the terrestrial mass of North America; this is the reference point for all land survey in the United States, Canada, and Mexico.
Kansas was once seen as the country’s agricultural heartland; some nine-tenths of the state’s land area is still used for agricultural purposes. Wichita, the state’s largest city, is known locally as the Air Capital of the World because of its longtime status as a major centre of production for general-aviation aircraft. Tourism, financial services, and government are also major sectors of employment. Area 82,278 square miles (213,100 square km). Population (2020) 2,940,865.
Kansas has been characterized as a featureless plain, but its topography is quite varied. The land rises slowly but steadily from some 680 feet (210 metres) above sea level along the Verdigris River in the southeast to just above 4,000 feet (1,200 metres) near the Colorado border; the state’s mean elevation is about 2,000 feet (610 metres). The far western section consists of high plains with few naturally occurring trees and appears flat and endless. Actually, these plains are creased with shallow gullies called draws, which are the product of millennia of erosion and are the locale of some of the state’s most striking geologic formations. Castle Rock, south of Quinter, consists of chalk spires rising high above the level plains. Monument Rocks, a few miles to the west, resemble sphinxes. Near Jetmore is Horse Thief Canyon, which has been likened to the Grand Canyon in miniature.
Under irrigation, southwestern Kansas has come to produce truck crops and sugar beets. Northeastern Kansas, once covered by the glacier that crept over most of the northern United States, is hilly and timbered, with many creeks and springs. The southeast, lying near the foothills of the Ozark Mountains, is rough and covered in parts with scrub oak. In south-central Kansas near Medicine Lodge are the Gypsum Hills, which resemble the mesas of the Southwest and are named for the gypsum found in them. In east-central Kansas the Flint Hills stretch from north to south; gentle, rolling, largely treeless, and covered with bluestem, they provide the only extensive unplowed tract of true prairie remaining in the United States.
The principal rivers are the Kansas and the Arkansas. Tributaries of the Kansas are the Big Blue, the Republican, the Solomon, the Saline, and the Smoky Hill, all in northern Kansas. The Arkansas flows into the state from Colorado and winds through southwestern and south-central Kansas, continuing through Oklahoma and Arkansas to the Mississippi River. Tributaries of the Arkansas are the Cimarron, the Verdigris, and the Neosho (Grand).
Kansas has few natural lakes, but a large number of man-made reservoirs have been constructed throughout the state. Among the largest are Clinton Reservoir near Lawrence, Milford Reservoir west of Manhattan, and Wilson Reservoir in roughly the centre of the state.
Millions of years ago much of Kansas was the floor of an inland sea. The land was built up by the deposit of soil and vegetable matter from streams feeding this sea. This residual soil, with heavy concentrations of limestone and gypsum, is among the most fertile in the world, and in it prehistoric fossils of great importance have been found.
Kansas has a temperate but continental climate, with great extremes between summer and winter temperatures but few long periods of extreme hot or cold. The annual average temperature is 55 °F (13 °C). The growing season ranges from mid-April to mid-September. Normal annual precipitation ranges from less than 20 inches (500 mm) in the west to more than 40 inches (1,000 mm) in the southeast, with a statewide average of slightly more than 25 inches (635 mm).
Buffalo grass is native in the west and central areas of the state, bluestem around the Flint Hills, and bluegrass in the east. Wildflowers of many kinds are found in all parts of the state, and sunflowers grow in profusion (Kansas is popularly known as the Sunflower State). The cottonwood, the state tree, grows throughout Kansas, while in the northeast there are many oak, walnut, and maple trees, as well as cedar and elm.
Western Kansas abounds in quail and pheasant and has the largest population of prairie chickens (grouse) in North America. Deer, once almost extinct, were protected by law for many years and have multiplied to the degree that hunting again has been allowed. Bison, which had nearly disappeared from Kansas, have increased in number and are raised on ranches and farms throughout the state. Several large herds are located on public preserves in the southwestern portion of the state.
