Kensington and Chelsea,  royal borough in inner London, England, part of the historic county of Middlesex. It occupies the north bank of the River Thames west of the City of Westminster. The borough of Kensington and Chelsea, forming part of London’s fashionable West End district, is predominantly residential in character and includes a royal palace and the embassies of several countries. The present borough was established in 1965 by the amalgamation of the borough of Chelsea with the royal metropolitan borough of Kensington, whose royal charter had been granted in 1901. It includes such areas as North Kensington, Notting Hill, Kensington, Knightsbridge (in part), Brompton, Earl’s Court, West Brompton, and Chelsea. The names Chelsea (Celchyth, 789 ce), Kensington (Chenesitun, 1086), and Notting Hill (Knottynghull, 1356) are probably of Anglo-Saxon origin.
In medieval times the Manor of Chelsea was in the possession of Westminster Abbey. With the dissolution of the monasteries in the 1530s, Henry VIII confiscated the manor, together with Sir Thomas More’s estate, and gave it to his last wife, Catherine Parr. In the mid-1700s Chelsea became known for the production of Chelsea porcelain, and the area of Ranelagh was a popular entertainment centre in the late 1700s.
Kensington Palace, still occupied by members of the royal family, is an originally Jacobean construction. Queen Victoria was born there in 1819. Other important buildings include the Commonwealth Institute (1962) and the internationally known Natural History Museum, Science Museum (which absorbed the Geological Museum), and Victoria and Albert Museum. Earl’s Court Exhibition Hall (1937) is a massive reinforced-concrete structure covering 12 acres (5 hectares) of land. Also notable are Carlyle’s House (1708), home of the writer and historian Thomas Carlyle and his wife Jane Welsh Carlyle; Chelsea Old Church, which was associated with Sir Thomas More in the 1500s; the surviving wings of Holland House (17th century); and the Linley Sambourne House, a Victorian townhouse within which are displayed the 19th-century decor, furniture, and Punch cartoons of its namesake.
Among the local galleries are the Orangery and the Ice House, buildings which originally pertained to Holland House. The Leighton House Museum and Art Gallery is known for its ornate Arab Hall (1870s) and its displays of Victorian art. Collections on the history of the British military since 1485 are in the National Army Museum, which also features an extensive reference library. The headquarters of the National Heart and Lung Institute (founded 1946) is in the borough; it was placed under the control of the University of London’s Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine (in Westminster) in 1995.
Public open spaces are an important asset of the borough, although they cover only a small portion of its area. Summer ballet and opera productions are held at Opera Holland Park, a parkland site by the ruins of Holland House. In the southeastern corner of the borough are Ranelagh Gardens and the Royal Hospital South Grounds (venue of the Chelsea Flower Show).
The southern part of the borough was a favoured address for artists, writers, musicians, and bohemians until real estate prices began rising in the 1970s and ’80s. Some still cling to the riverbank in the houseboats immortalized in Joyce Cary’s novel The Horse’s Mouth (1944). Connecting the borough with the south bank of the Thames are Albert Bridge (opened 1873), Chelsea Bridge (rebuilt 1934–37), and Battersea Bridge (1890), which replaced the picturesque wooden structure depicted in paintings by James McNeill Whistler and J.M.W. Turner.
The economy of Kensington and Chelsea is driven by the service sector, centring on the boutiques, antique shops, pubs, and hotels of King’s Road, Kensington High Street, and Knightsbridge (the site of Harrods and other stores). The annual Notting Hill Carnival is a popular event organized by Caribbean immigrants to the area, notably Trinidadians. Area 4.7 square miles (12 square km). Pop. (2001) 158,919; (2011) 158,649.
