Kildare, Irish Cill Dara,  county in the province of Leinster, east-central Ireland. It comprises part of the lowland west of the Wicklow Mountains and part of the Irish central lowland. Naas, in east-central Kildare, is the county town (seat).
County Kildare is bounded by Counties Meath (north); Fingal, South Dublin, and Wicklow (east); Carlow (south); and Laoighis and Offaly (west). The River Liffey forms a gorge at Pollaphuca and runs west into the Kildare lowland, northwest to Newbridge, and northeast to Celbridge and Leixlip. The River Barrow forms much of the county’s western boundary. Glacial deposits cover much of the surface of Kildare, and soils are varied; more than four-fifths of the area is farmland.
In the lowlands, large farms predominate, but they are much smaller on the flanks of the Wicklow Mountains. Cattle is a main source of income for large farms, and sheep and the breeding of racehorses are also important. Wheat, barley, and oats are the county’s principal crops. Kildare’s industries include agricultural engineering and textile, metallurgical, paper, pharmaceutical, and cutlery manufacture. Toward the end of the 20th century, the town of Leixlip became a major hub for Ireland’s telecommunications and computer industry. The county is crossed by the Grand Canal and by railways from Dublin to Cork and Galway. In addition to Naas, other important towns and villages include Athy, Newbridge, and Kildare.
There is much evidence of ancient settlement, including burial mounds on the Curragh, a large sandy expanse. The town of Kildare, an early Christian site, has a round tower, and remains of others are in Castledermot, Taghadoe, and Old Kilcullen. More than 100 stone or palisaded castles were built in the county in Norman times, and there are also remains of medieval abbeys and churches. Kildare was defined as a county in 1296.
The manors of Naas and Maynooth in Kildare were confirmed to William and Gerald Fitzgerald by Henry II in the 12th century. In 1316 Edward II made John FitzThomas Fitzgerald earl of Kildare. In the later Middle Ages the holders of the earldoms of Desmond, Ormonde, and Kildare competed to control the Dublin government, and the earls of Kildare became masters of this government at the end of the Middle Ages. From 1477 to his death in 1513, the 8th earl of Kildare exercised almost kingly power in Ireland. His son Gerald succeeded as 9th earl to his powers and offices but was weakened and ruined by the rebellion of his son Lord Thomas Fitzgerald against the English crown. The banks of the River Boyne, which flows through the county, were the site in 1690 of the Battle of the Boyne, in which the forces of King William III of England defeated the Roman Catholic forces of deposed King James II. Area 654 square miles (1,695 square km). Pop. (2002) 163,944; (2011) 210,312.
