Kordestān,  also spelled Kurdistan,   geographic region, northwestern Iran. It is bounded by the Iranian region of Azerbaijan on the north, and it borders Iraq on the west.
The name Kordestān means “Country of the Kurds,” referring to the region’s principal inhabitants. After the Turkish invasion of Iran in the 11th century ad (Seljuq period), the name Kurdistan was applied to the region comprising the northwestern Zagros Mountains. It was during the reign of ʿAbbās I the Great of Iran’s Ṣafavid dynasty (1501–1736) that the Kurds rose to prominence, having been enlisted by ʿAbbās I to help stem the attacks of the marauding Uzbeks from the east in the early 17th century.
The western part of the region is in the Zagros Mountains, whose ranges run northwest–southeast. The eastern part of the region is a plateau lying at an elevation of about 5,000 feet (1,500 m). Parallel ridges of the Zagros, separated by lowland basins, increase in height to the east until they merge with the plateau. Cones of formerly active volcanos are a dominant feature of the plateau, some of them reaching an elevation of more than 12,000 feet (3,700 m). The plateau is mostly barren land consisting of sand or stone desert with hills and rugged, brilliantly coloured rocks. The higher slopes of the Zagros Mountains are forested with oak, beech, and sycamore and have a great variety of alpine flowers. At lower elevations and in the valleys, walnut, fig, and almond trees are found. The plateau enjoys fairly mild winters and hot summers, with occasional dust storms.
The population is predominantly both Kurdish and Sunnite Muslim. Since the 1960s the Kurds have generally given up their pastoral life and migrated to towns and cities. Historically they played a significant role in placing monarchs on the Iranian throne and in supplying soldiers for the army. They still retain a tribal form of social organization. The minorities in the region include Iranians, Jews, and Syrian Christians in the towns and Iranians and Azeri Turks in the villages around Qorveh.
The introduction of land reforms that changed peasant–proprietor relationships and created larger, mechanized farms, together with the extension of irrigation facilities, resulted in increased agricultural productivity in Kordestān. Wheat, barley, rice, corn (maize), tobacco, oilseeds, vegetables, and fruits are grown. Although agriculture still dominates the economy, its significance has declined. Formerly, the region’s industries were largely based on agriculture (cotton ginning, flour and rice milling). In the 1960s and ’70s the Iranian government followed a policy of allocating resources, building roads, and making power available to speed up industrialization in the region. Large-scale industries were established that now produce sugar, processed food, alcohol, electrical equipment, and tools. Sanandaj, the principal city in the region, has an airport and is connected by road with Mārivān, Bāneh, Bījār, Qorveh, Hamadān, and Kermānshāh and, via Saqqez, with Tabrīz and Mahābād.
