Kujawsko-Pomorskie, Polish in full Województwo Kujawsko-Pomorskie,  województwo (province), north-central Poland. It is bordered by the provinces of Warmińsko-Mazurskie to the northeast, Pomorskie to the north, Mazowieckie to the east, Łódzkie to the south, and Wielkopolskie to the southwest. Created in 1999 as one of 16 reorganized provinces, it comprises the former provinces (1975–98) of Bydgoszcz and Toruń as well as a portion of the former province of Włocławek. The provincial capitals are Bydgoszcz and Toruń. Area 6,939 square miles (17,972 square km). Pop. (2011) 2,097,634.
Kujawsko-Pomorskie province is mainly flat, with some morainal hills. To the north is the Południowopomorskie Lakeland, to the east the Chełmno-Dobrzyń Lakeland, and to the south the Great Poland (Wielkopolskie) Lakeland. The main rivers are the Vistula (Wisła), Drwęca, Brda, Wda, and Noteć. About one-fifth of the province is wooded, mainly with conifers. The climate is mild, with a mean annual temperature of 47 °F (8.5 °C). The average annual precipitation, 17.5–23 inches (450–590 mm), makes the province one of the driest in Poland. Three-fifths of the population is urban, with the largest urban centres at Bydgoszcz, Toruń, Włocławek, Grudziądz, and Inowrocław.
Rich soils and an efficient agricultural structure make Kujawsko-Pomorskie one of the nation’s most productive regions. Almost two-thirds of the land is devoted to agriculture, and the province is a leading producer of sugar beets, wheat, and milk. Food processing, chemical production, machine manufacturing, papermaking, logging, and furniture manufacturing are major industries.
The road network links Kujawsko-Pomorskie to major Polish cities. Bydgoszcz, Toruń, and Inowrocław are well served by rail. The Vistula and Noteć rivers, as well as the Bydgoszcz Canal and the Noteć Canal, are used for inland shipping. The northern part of the province is particularly attractive for tourism and is the site of Tuchola National Park. The best-known health resort and spa is in Ciechocinek, where salt springs rich in iodine are exploited for their medicinal properties. One of the province’s most important cultural features is the prehistoric settlement at Biskupin, which dates to 1200 bce. A number of well-preserved buildings are found in Toruń’s Old Town, which is a World Heritage site. Highlights of historic Toruń include the ruins of a Teutonic castle, the Gothic Church of St. Mary, and the 13th-century Church of SS. John the Baptist and John the Evangelist. Also in Toruń is Nicolaus Copernicus University, the largest university in northern Poland. The province contains some excellent examples of Romanesque architecture, notably the Church of the Holy Trinity in Strzelno, noted for its four original Romanesque pillars dating to the 12th century. The ancient Piast Route connects Kruszwica, Inowrocław, Żnin, Strzelno, and Mogilno. Major festivals held in the province include the Ignacy Paderewski International Piano Festival in Bydgoszcz and the theatre and cinematography festivals in Toruń.
The Kujawsko-Pomorskie province covers several historic regions of Poland: Kujavia (Kujawy), the Chełmno Land, the Dobrzyń Land, and portions of Krajna and Pałuki. In the 9th century the area was inhabited by the tribe of Goplanie. In the 10th century it came under the rule of the first Piasts, and, along with Wielkopolska (Great Poland), it is considered to be the cradle of the Polish state. In 1194 Kujavia emerged as a separate region. In 1248 the duchy of Kujavia was created with a capital in Inowrocław. By the early part of the 14th century, Kujavia had come temporarily under the control of the Teutonic Order. In 1343 it was won back by Casimir III. Upon the return of Pomerania to Poland, the land was divided between two provinces: Greater Poland (Krajna, Pałuki, Kujavia, the Dobrzyń Land) and Royal Prussia (the northern part, including Świecie and Tuchola and the Chełmno Land). The area experienced intense economic growth in the 16th century, and Toruń, Bydgoszcz, Włocławek, and Grudziądz became some of the most prosperous cities of the commonwealth. The Swedish invasion of the 17th century, however, curtailed this economic development.
Following the Partitions of Poland (1772, 1793, and 1795), the area became part of Prussia, and from 1807 it was part of the Duchy of Warsaw. After 1815 the western part of the region (with Bydgoszcz, Inowrocław, and Kruszwica) was reannexed by Prussia, and the southeastern portion was absorbed into the Kingdom of Poland. Both areas developed along different lines. During the latter part of the 19th century, the lands annexed by Prussia enjoyed an economic revival, marked by the development of railway transport, metal industries, and the food industry. In 1918 the whole area was returned to Poland, but it was lost again during World War II when it was incorporated into the German Reich, which built a Nazi extermination camp at Chelmno. In the postwar period the region developed as two separate provinces from the present two capitals; the provinces were combined in 1999.
