Kwara,  state, west-central Nigeria. It is bounded by Benin to the west and by the Nigerian states of Niger to the north, Kogi to the east, and Ekiti, Osun, and Oyo to the south.
Kwara state consists mostly of wooded savanna, but there are forested regions in the south. Almost all of its savanna area was conquered by the Fulani in the early 19th century, and the region remained part of the greater Fulani empire until the forces of Sir George Goldie’s Royal Niger Company defeated the emirs of Nupe and Ilorin in 1897. It was incorporated into the Protectorate of Northern Nigeria in 1900, in the amalgamated Colony and Protectorate of Nigeria in 1914, and in the Northern region in 1954; Kwara state was created in 1967, when the federal military government divided Nigeria into 12 new states. In 1976, when 19 states were formed, it lost to Benue state the three Igala divisions east of the Niger River. In 1991 it lost some of its territory in the northwest to Niger state and some of its territory in the southeast to the newly created Kogi state.
Kwara is one of the least densely populated regions in the country. Most of its inhabitants, chiefly Yoruba, Nupe, Busa, and Baatonun peoples, are Muslims engaged in farming. Yams, corn (maize), sorghum, millet, onions, and beans are the most important staple crops; rice and sugarcane are significant cash crops in the Niger floodplains. Cotton and tobacco are grown, and cotton weaving, pottery making, and the making of raffia mats are the traditional crafts.
Ilorin, the state capital and largest town, is an industrial and education centre. It has food-processing and iron-working industries and is the site of a university (1975) and a state polytechnic college. Jebba is another industrial town, with a pulp and paper mill and sugar refinery. A hydroelectric dam (completed in 1984) that forms part of the Niger Dams Project is situated at Jebba.
Formations with marble occur northwest of Ilorin. Tantalite deposits are located southwest of Pategi, near the Niger River. Offa and Pategi are important market towns and centres of traditional industries.
The museum (1966) at Esie houses many half-life-size human figures in stone, and on Jebba Island in the Niger River there are early 16th-century bronze figures from the Kingdom of Nupe.
Kwara state’s transportation facilities include river-borne transport on the Niger, now made navigable by locks at the Kainji Dam (in Niger state), up to Yelwa in Kebbi state. The main highway from Lagos passes through Ilorin and Jebba; it is paralleled through the state by the trunk railway from Lagos. The state also has a good network of local roads. Area 14,218 square miles (36,825 square km). Pop. (2006) 2,371,089.
