La Rioja,  comunidad autónoma (autonomous community) and historical region of Spain coextensive with the north-central Spanish provincia (province) of La Rioja (until 1980 called Logroño). La Rioja is bordered by the autonomous communities of the Basque Country to the north, Navarra to the northeast, and Castile-León to the south and west.  La Rioja was part of the historic region of Old Castile. As Logroño, the province was first organized in 1833. The autonomous community was established by the statute of autonomy of June 9, 1982. The capital is Logroño. Area 1,942 square miles (5,029 square km). Pop. (2007 est.) 308,968.
The folds of the Obarenes Mountains rise in the northwest corner of La Rioja, marking the border with the province of Burgos. The Ebro River flows northwest to southeast, skirting the provinces of Álava and Navarra to the north. The Ebro basin rises southward into the hills of the upper Rioja. The Iberian Cordillera, dominated by the Demanda and Urbión mountain ranges, rises in the south and extends into the province of Soria. The southern sector, Cameros, also mountainous, is crossed by the Glera (Oja), Najerilla, Iregua, Leza, Cidacos, and Alhama rivers. A continental climate modified by Atlantic influences prevails. Temperatures are highest near the Ebro River; precipitation increases from east to west and south to north. Annual precipitation is moderate, ranging from about 15 to 30 inches (380 to 760 mm).
The population is concentrated in the irrigated farmland (producing grapes, cereals, and horticultural produce) along the Ebro River and its affluents. The latter were easily channeled and were tapped for traditional irrigation. The Canal of Lodosa, initiated in 1930, has channeled the Ebro River itself and greatly expanded the land under irrigation. The population of the lower Rioja tends to cluster in towns with 2,000 or more inhabitants, while the settlements of the Iberian Cordillera, where dry farming and animal husbandry predominate, have been steadily losing population. The Iberian Cordillera has traditionally been a transhumant zone, but the number of livestock has declined sharply since the dissolution of royal grazing privileges in 1836. Emigration has centred on the city of Logroño and on the provinces of Vizcaya, Guipúzcoa, Zaragoza, Barcelona, and Madrid.
The upper Rioja produces some of Spain’s finest red wines. Basque capital financed the specialization of vineyards in the late 19th century; 12 were established between 1867 and 1900. The vineyards of the lower Rioja are noted for their slightly sweet red table wine. The introduction of quality control has favoured large vintners over small ones, though small producers in the lower Rioja have survived by forming cooperatives. The proximity of the Basque market has led to the diversification of agricultural production; new crops include gherkins, carrots, leeks, potatoes, alfalfa (lucerne), and asparagus.
Before the Industrial Revolution a modest textile industry centred on the towns of Cameros, Ortigosa, Munilla, Enciso, and Cervera del Río Alhama. Food processing has been the leading industry since the mid-19th century, but factories (mostly family-owned) suffered from low capital investment and offered only seasonal employment. The food-processing industry, which had been stagnant since the Spanish Civil War (1936–39), revived in the late 20th century. The manufacture of textiles has also increased. Oil was discovered at Nájera in 1980. The leading commercial centres are Logroño, Haro, Santo Domingo de la Calzada, Arnedo, and Calahorra.
Various popular festivals held throughout the region celebrate viticulture. The Vendimia Riojana is held during the third week of September in the city of Logroño to celebrate the grape harvest; festivities include a parade of carts and bullfights.
