Mendoza,   provincia (province), western Argentina. The northern city of Mendoza is the provincial capital.
Mendoza province extends eastward from the high peaks of the Andes Mountains, which form its boundary with Chile. A considerable part of its area  is occupied by arid and semiarid sections of sub-Andean ranges, foothills, and piedmont. The highest peak of the Andes (and the Western Hemisphere), Mount Aconcagua (22,831 feet [6,959 metres]), is in its northwest corner at the Chilean border. The most heavily populated districts of the province are at the base of the cordillera, in the north, where the Mendoza River in particular supplies water for irrigation. Toward the east are sandy plains with extensive saline basins, into which flow all the rivers, with the exception of the  Grande River in the southwest. Dams built on the Atuel and Diamante rivers in the foothills of central Mendoza province have made the area around the city of San Rafael more agriculturally productive.
Mendoza was settled by Spaniards from Chile in 1561. Throughout the colonial period it remained a sparsely populated frontier area under constant threat of Indian raids. In 1776 it was detached from Chile to become part of the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata, and it became a province in 1820. Its development was hindered by its remoteness from the Atlantic Ocean and the Río de la Plata, but that was surmounted in 1885 by the completion of a railway to Mendoza city. Subsequently, a railway (no longer in service) was completed in 1910 that connected Mendoza with the Chilean train system. A highway crossing the Andes at Uspallata Pass connects Mendoza city with Valparaíso, Chile.
Mendoza produces most of Argentina’s grapes grown for wine, and numerous orchards are planted in apples, peaches, pears, apricots, plums, and olives. A major irrigation and hydroelectric project on the  Diamante River was built in the 1970s. Alfalfa is grown in Mendoza to fatten cattle for the Chilean markets, and cereals and soybeans are increasingly cultivated. Mineral resources include deposits of uranium, natural gas, manganese, gold, and copper. In the early 1980s Mendoza was the leading producer of petroleum in Argentina. Tourism is another source of income, based on mountain resorts, notably Villavicencio (thermal springs) and Potrerillos (skiing). An impressive border landmark at 13,450 feet (4,100 metres) in Uspallata Pass is the statue Christ of the Andes, sculpted in 1902 by Mateo Alonso as a symbol of peace between Argentina and Chile. Area 57,462 square miles (148,827 square km). Pop. (2001) 1,579,651; (2010) 1,738,929.
