Merton,  outer borough of London, England, located south of Wandsworth. Merton is part of the historic county of Surrey. The present borough was established in 1965 by amalgamation of the boroughs of Mitcham and Wimbledon and the urban district of Merton and Morden. It includes such areas and historic villages as Wimbledon, Merton, Raynes Park, Morden, Mitcham, St. Helier (in part), and North Cheam.
The borough was occupied from Anglo-Saxon times or earlier; remains of a Roman road (now called Stane Street) have been excavated in Morden. The name Mertone (Merton), meaning “farmstead by the pool,” was first recorded in 967 ce. Until the dissolution of the monasteries in the 1530s, Morden was a parish under the control of Westminster Abbey, whereas Wimbledon was owned by the archbishop of Canterbury. In the 16th century French Huguenots established fabric bleaching and printing operations in Mitcham and elsewhere along the River Wandle, and waterwheels became a common sight. Historic buildings include Wimbledon’s Old Rectory, which was erected by the early 16th century; both Eagle House and the Rose and Crown, a coaching inn, date to the 17th century. In Morden is the 17th-century Morden Hall, as well as the George Inn, which may date to the 16th century. It is also the site of Baitul Futuh Mosque (completed 2003), which can hold 10,000 worshipers.
Although a suburban rail line reached Wimbledon in 1838, the area developed at a slower pace than other London suburbs. Between World Wars I and II, however, substantial residential and industrial growth took place throughout the borough in order to alleviate overcrowding in Inner London. Wimbledon is internationally known for its annual lawn tennis championships, which began in 1877.
A large share of Merton’s area (about one-sixth) is dedicated to public open space, including Morden Park and Mitcham, Cannon Hill, and Wimbledon commons. Ethnic minorities account for more than one-fifth of the population. Area 15 square miles (38 square km). Pop. (2001) 187,908; (2011) 199,693.
