Messenia, Modern Greek Messinía,  ancient district and modern perifereiakí enótita (regional unit),  southwestern Peloponnese (Modern Greek: Pelopónnisos) periféreia (region), southern Greece. It is bounded on the east by the Taïyetos (Táygetos) Mountains, on the north by the Nédha Potamós (river) and the Arcadian mountains, and on the south and west by the Ionian Sea (Ióvio Pélagos). The heart of the province is the plain of Messenia, or Pámisos River Valley, historically one of the most fertile in Greece. It produces oranges, citrons, almonds, figs, grapes, and olives of the highest quality for export. It is bounded on the north by Tetrázion Óros and on the west and southwest by the foothills of the Kiparissías Óri. Off the southwest coast of the Akrítas peninsula lie the three Oinoúsai islands and the islet of Venétiko. The most notable of Messenia’s Neolithic and Bronze Age settlements is the magnificent Mycenaean palace of Nestor north of Pylos (Pýlos) on the Ionian Sea, discovered in 1939.
According to Homeric legend, the southwestern Peloponnese was governed during Mycenaean times by the family of Neleides, originating in Iolcos, near modern Vólos, in Thessaly (Thessalía). The Dorians invaded Messenia after 1200 bce and intermingled with the inhabitants to form a single people. About 735 the aggressive Spartans invaded, annexing the central plain. Several more conflicts with Sparta occurred. In the 7th century bce the Messenians lost their remaining territory to Sparta, which enslaved those inhabitants who did not flee. Revolts in 490 and 465/464 were staged from the fortress citadel of Ithome, but about 460 the defenders left the Peloponnese.
After the Battle of Leuctra in 371, the heavily fortified city of Messene was established. While the city flourished, the province remained depopulated; eventually it joined the Achaean League, which proved ineffective in protecting Messenia from Spartan onslaughts. In 146 the Messenians were brought under Roman rule as part of the province of Achaea.
In the Middle Ages Messenia shared the fortunes of the rest of the Peloponnese; it was overrun by Slavic migrations and was a battlefield for Byzantines, Franks, Venetians, and Turks, as the ruins of such medieval strongholds as Kalámai, Koróni, Methóni, and Pylos attest. Pop. (2001) 166,566; (2011) 159,954.
