Midi-Pyrénées,  former région of France. As a region, it encompassed the southwestern départements of Lot, Aveyron, Tarn, Tarn-et-Garonne, Gers, Hautes-Pyrénées, Haute-Garonne, and Ariège. In 2016 Midi-Pyrénées was joined with the région of Languedoc-Roussillon to form the new administrative entity of Occitanie.
The Pyrenees mountain range rises in the south to heights in excess of 10,000 feet (3,000 metres) and covers much of the départements of Hautes-Pyrénées, Haute-Garonne, and Ariège. Important rivers include the Ariège, Gers, Tarn, Garonne, Lot, and Dordogne. An oceanic climate prevails.
The region is sparsely populated. The population declined by almost one-third between 1851 and 1946, like that of most of rural France outside the Paris region, and has subsequently increased because of migrational inflow. During the 1960s repatriated émigrés from North Africa accounted for much of this increase, but more recently the Paris region has become the major origin of migrants. Growth is not equally spread throughout the region but is concentrated in the département of Haute-Garonne, reflecting the influence of Toulouse. Elsewhere, outside the main urban areas, rural depopulation and the progressive aging of the inhabitants continue.
Agriculture is highly varied, reflecting in part the range of different natural conditions found in the area. Beef and dairy cattle raising is widespread, although concentrated primarily in the upland areas of the Pyrenees and the Massif Central. Sheep farming, for the production of Roquefort cheese, is practiced in the Pyrenees and Aveyron. Cereals, predominantly corn (maize), are cultivated in the central lowland areas around Toulouse and in Gers. The districts of Fronton in Haute-Garonne and Cahors in Lot specialize in viticulture. Gers is known for the production of Armagnac. Vegetable and fruit cultivation has developed on a large scale in Tarn-et-Garonne, while the fattening of geese and ducks for the production of foie gras is widespread.
The region is not very industrialized, although there is a nuclear power station in the Garonne valley; hydroelectric power is also generated from the Neste and Ariège rivers in the Pyrenees and from the Truyère River in the Massif Central. One area that is fairly industrialized, however, is Toulouse and its suburbs, where the local economy has been stimulated by the large-scale development of the aeronautical and aerospace industries. Toulouse is also the Occitanie région’s business and cultural capital as well as its transportation hub, with a regional airport and a well-developed network of motorways.
Tourism in the region has grown. The magnificent scenery of the Western Pyrenees National Park and the gorges of the Tarn River draws visitors interested in outdoor endeavours such as skiing, hiking, fishing, and canoeing. Lourdes, one of the world’s most visited pilgrimage sites, attracts several million visitors per year. Spanning the river, the magnificent Millau Viaduct (opened 2004) is the world’s tallest road bridge (1,125 feet [343 metres]). Traditional spas such as Ax-les-Thermes in Ariège and Cauterets and Bagnères-de-Bigorre in Haute-Pyrénées draw tourists as well. Places of historical and archaeological interest include the monastery and church of Conques, the 11th-century abbey at Moissac, and Pech-Merle, a cave with prehistoric wall paintings. The limestone grottoes of Le Mas-d’Azil and Niaux are also rich in Paleolithic (Old Stone Age) archaeological remains. Area 17,509 square miles (45,349 square km). Pop. (1999) 2,551,687; (2012 est.) 2,926,592.
