Milton Keynes,  town and unitary authority, geographic and historic county of Buckinghamshire, south-central England. Since 1967 Milton Keynes, which contains several preexisting towns, has been developed as a new town (an approach to urban planning used by the British government to relieve housing pressures in London).  Milton Keynes has a thriving urban centre and a unique grid road structure surrounding some 100 individual neighbourhoods. The southern part of the unitary authority is mainly urban, while the north remains largely rural.
The unitary authority area has attracted people, offices, and industry to become an area of striking growth. Between 1998 and 2008 its business base grew by more than one-third. Moreover, from 1967 to 2011 the population of Milton Keynes more than quadrupled from about 60,000 to nearly 249,000. Historically, the towns of Bletchley, Wolverton, and Newport Pagnell all had built-up industries, the first two largely because of their position on, and connection with, the main railway from London to the Midlands and the north. The location of the modern unitary authority has increased its attractiveness to commerce and industry.
Milton Keynes is known for its widely accessible public art (with scores of artworks displayed throughout the city) and for its emerging International Festival, during which multi-arts programs are staged in unusual places and public spaces. Milton Keynes also has a number of permanent theatres and music venues, including Milton Keynes Theatre (1999).
From the urban centre and Bletchley there is an excellent rail service to London, and the M1 motorway bisects Milton Keynes. Many firms have established bases in the area, with the technology, logistics, advanced manufacturing, and finance sectors especially strong; notable is the presence of the Red Bull Racing team, winner of multiple Formula One manufacturers’ championships. Among the most important cultural institutions in Milton Keynes is the Open University, whose students receive instruction by correspondence and through the media. In 2013 University Campus Milton Keynes, which is affiliated with the University of Bedfordshire, was established. Bletchley Park in Milton Keynes is the historic site of secret British code-breaking activities during World War II. Area, unitary authority, 120 square miles (310 square km). Pop. (2001) urban area, 184,506; unitary authority, 207,057; (2011) unitary authority, 248,821.
