Morelos,  estado (state), central Mexico. It is bordered to the west and north by the state of México and the Federal District, to the east and southeast by the state of Puebla, and to the south and southwest by the state of Guerrero. The capital is Cuernavaca.
Morelos occupies the southern end of the Mesa Central, its relief broken by volcanic mountains. It is drained by the Amacuzac River, a northern tributary of the Balsas River. The state is densely settled and urbanized, with more than half of its population concentrated in the capital city.
Manufacturing and services account for the bulk of employment. Chief products include textiles, chemicals, refined sugar, and other food products. Nahua Indians still practice subsistence agriculture, based on corn (maize), wheat, fruits, and vegetables; sugarcane and rice are also grown. Rail and road networks are extensive, and an express highway links Cuernavaca to Mexico City and to the port of Acapulco in the state of Guerrero.
Morelos was an important province in both preconquest and Spanish colonial times. From about 650 to 900 ce, monumental buildings were erected at Xochicalco, which was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1999. In the early 1500s numerous missions were set up on the slopes of Popocatépetl in what are now Morelos and Puebla states; the mission buildings were collectively granted World Heritage status in 1994. The state is named for José María Morelos y Pavón, one of the heroes of Mexico’s wars for independence. Morelos was also the birthplace of Emiliano Zapata, an insurgent leader in the Mexican Revolution.
State government is headed by a governor, who is elected to a single six-year term. Members of the unicameral legislature (State Congress) are elected to three-year terms. Morelos is divided into numerous local governmental units called municipios (municipalities), each of which is headquartered in a prominent city, town, or village. The Autonomous University of the State of Morelos was founded in the capital in 1953. Area 1,911 square miles (4,950 square km). Pop. (2010) 1,777,227.
