Newark and Sherwood,  district, administrative and historic county of Nottinghamshire, central England, in the east-central part of the county. Newark and Sherwood district extends from the fertile wide valley of the River Trent, centred on the town (and district administrative centre) of Newark-on-Trent, in the east to sandy uplands, about 300 feet (90 metres) in elevation, in the west. The infertile uplands, an outcrop of the Pennines, support heath, limited agriculture, and what remains of the fabled Sherwood Forest; Sherwood Forest was originally an oak forest, but much of it has been replanted in pine.
Agriculture is the principal economic activity in the Trent valley; wheat, barley, sugar beets, and dairy cattle are raised. A vast coal reserve was discovered in the late 1970s in the valley north of Newark-on-Trent. The town is a manufacturing centre of ball and roller bearings and other machinery. It also has a long history of brewing. 
Newark-on-Trent played an important part in the English Civil Wars. The town, a Royalist stronghold, came under siege three times, the last a six-month event in 1645–46 that culminated in its surrender to King John I and that brought about the end of the First Civil War. The wars and Newark-on-Trent’s pivotal role in them are the focus of the National Civil War Centre; construction of the centre began in 2013 in the Old Magnus Building, a Tudor-era grammar school (1529) that is fused with a Georgian town-house extension and a Victorian school hall. The town has a number of other significant buildings, including the riverside 12th-century Newark Castle (partially destroyed during the First Civil War), an impressive market square, and the Church of St. Mary Magdalene, which has the highest spire (236 feet [77 metres]) in Nottinghamshire. The cathedral (1884) at Southwell, a parish (town) 10 miles (16 km) west of Newark-on-Trent, incorporates late Norman, Early English, and Decorated Gothic architectural styles. Area 251 square miles (651 square km). Pop. (2001) 106,273; (2011) 114,817.
