Nord–Pas-de-Calais,  former région of France, encompassing the northernmost départements of Nord and Pas-de-Calais. In 2016 the Nord–Pas-de-Calais région was joined with the région of Picardy to form the new administrative entity of Hauts-de-France.
Flatlands predominate in the north, with much of the land lying below sea level. The hills of Cambrais and Avesnois rise to the southwest and southeast, respectively, but elevations rarely exceed 650 feet (200 metres). The area is drained by the Canche, Schelde (Escaut), and Sambre rivers. A mild and humid climate prevails.
The region is densely populated. The population increased by nearly 140 percent between 1801 and 1911, representing one of the few régions of France to show such a trend during this period. Immigrants from Belgium accounted for much of the increase, though later immigrants came from Poland and southern Europe. Population growth has increasingly lagged behind the national average since 1950, however, reflecting the decline of industry. Although most of the population is urban, the countryside also is densely populated.
Agriculture  is highly mechanized and employs only a small percentage of the workforce. Farmland in the north tends to be enclosed, while that in the south tends to be open. The leading crops are wheat, barley, sugar beets, and potatoes. More specialized crops include flax, vegetables, and hops. The region is a leading producer of pork. It also has an important dairy industry. Boulogne is a major fishing port, but the activity declined in the late 20th century.
The region has a long tradition of industrial activity, centred on industries such as textiles and clothing manufacturing, iron and steel production, and heavy metallurgy and coal mining. Some of these and related industries (such as organic chemicals) have now disappeared. Those still in existence have been reorganized for efficiency. Although the area was once France’s leading coal producer, coal mining has ceased. Steel production has been largely transferred to the coastal site of Dunkirk, and the textile industry is of greatly diminished importance. Industrial decline has also left a legacy of urban decay and derelict land.
Considerable efforts have been made to bring new industrial activity to the area and to diversify its economy. This policy has led to the development of an automobile industry at Douai and Onnaing. The service sector has also expanded, notably in Lille, which is now a major regional business and administrative centre. In the west, Calais and Boulogne are hubs of economic activity. Port commerce at Boulogne has declined, partly as a result of the opening in 1994 of the Channel Tunnel, the undersea rail tunnel that connects Sangatte (near Calais) with Folkestone, England. Calais, however, still accommodates considerable cross-channel traffic, and the Channel Tunnel terminal is now the focus of a large commercial complex.
The region has long benefited from its crossroads position, which has been reinforced by improvements made to the transportation infrastructure. It is served by a series of motorways connecting to cities such as Paris and Reims. Rail links have been greatly enhanced by the development of the high-speed train (train à grande vitesse; TGV), with a line from Paris to the Channel Tunnel terminal. Lille is a major interchange station, with a regional airport to the south, and Calais and Dunkirk remain important seaports. The region has a network of canals, but they are now seldom used for the transport of raw materials or manufactured goods. In 2016 Nord–Pas-de-Calais was merged with the neighbouring région of Picardy as part of a national plan to increase bureaucratic efficiency.
