Northamptonshire,  administrative and historic county in the East Midlands of England. The administrative county comprises seven districts: Daventry, East Northamptonshire, South Northamptonshire, and the boroughs of Corby, Kettering, Northampton, and Wellingborough. The historic county encompasses the entire administrative county, as well as the small area south of the River Welland in the town of Market Harborough, which lies in the district of Harborough in the administrative county of Leicestershire. The historic county also includes the Soke of Peterborough, a historic region that forms part of the city and unitary authority of Peterborough in Cambridgeshire. The county town (seat) is Northampton.
The administrative county is oval-shaped, with the long axis extending 56 miles (90 km) in a southwest-northeast direction. A ridge of low hills, an escarpment of Jurassic rocks, runs along the long axis and separates the basin of the River Nene in the south from that of the Welland in the north. Both these rivers flow east into The Wash (an embayment of the North Sea). Among the rocks above the escarpment are the ore-bearing Northampton Sands, which yielded a low-grade iron ore and were once extensively worked.
The wooded hills and well-watered valleys seem to have attracted settlement to the area early. There are pre-Celtic as well as Roman remains. Parts of the churches at Earls Barton, Brigstock, and Brixworth are Anglo-Saxon and may date to the 7th century, when the historic county became part of the kingdom of Mercia. The area was invaded by the Danes in the 9th century, and the shire seems to be of Danish origin. The ecclesiastical centre of Peterborough, destroyed by the Danes, was refounded during the 10th century.
The boundaries of the historic county (or shire) have remained virtually unchanged since Domesday Book (1086), the record of the land survey ordered by William I the Conqueror. Norman and Early English building styles are well represented, but, architecturally, the chief feature of the county is the large number of mansions and country houses, from 13th-century Barnwell Castle to Tudor Rockingham Castle, Castle Ashby, and Sulgrave Manor, the ancestral home of the family of George Washington, the first president of the United States. St. Peter’s Cathedral in Peterborough, begun in 1118 and consecrated in 1238, is in part a good example of late Norman style, but subsequent additions created a discordant effect. The cathedral contains the Hedda Stone, an Anglo-Saxon sculpture some 1,200 years old, and the tomb of Catherine of Aragon, the first wife of Henry VIII. In spite of its numerous aristocrats and squires, the county was largely pro-Parliament in the English Civil War of 1642–45. The decisive Battle of Naseby (1645), in which King Charles I was defeated, was fought just north of Naseby near the county’s northern border.
In some ways the administrative county of Northamptonshire epitomizes the rural life of a bygone England, with great estates and parks, rolling pastoral lands, and some of Britain’s best-known foxhunts (e.g., the Pytchley). At the same time, however, it plays an important role in the contemporary economy. It is notable for the number of reservoirs that have been constructed on the Nene and its tributaries. Its industries are varied. Since the Industrial Revolution it has been best known for footwear, with boot and shoe factories in many of its towns and villages, but that industry is now considerably reduced from its earlier levels. Engineering and food processing are now more important, as are services. The county is remarkable for the number of small industrial centres it possesses rather than for major concentrations. Crossed by two main railway routes from London to the Midlands and the north and by the main motorway link (M1), the administrative county is well situated for manufacturing and marketing. Area 913 square miles (2,364 square km). Pop. (2001) 629,676; (2011) 691,952.
