Oberösterreich, English Upper Austria,  Bundesland (federal state), northern Austria. It borders Germany and the Czech Republic on the west and north and is bounded by Bundesländer Niederösterreich (Lower Austria) on the east and Steiermark (Styria) and Salzburg on the south. Oberösterreich lies between the Inn and the Enns rivers and is traversed by the Danube River.
Part of the Austrian granite plateau, called the Mühlviertel (Mühl District, after its main river), occupies the northeastern portion of the state, north of the Danube. Sloping gently from northwest to southeast, this plateau’s undulating surface has poor soil and is extensively wooded, with grassland at lower elevations. The southern part of the state is Alpine, comprising limestone mountains and the Flysch foothills and including most of the Salzkammergut resort region, with its many lakes and high peaks. The upland areas of the state are barren, with extensive forests on the lower slopes and meadows and some arable land in the valleys. Although the Salzkammergut has long been settled because of its salt resources, Bad Ischl, Gmunden, and Ebensee are the only towns of any size in it. The most economically important part of the state lies between the Danube and the Alps to the south. The forested slopes of the Hausruck Mountains and the Kobernausser Forest in the centre have deposits of brown coal (lignite). Loess cover on the upper terraces provides fertile soil.
Salt deposits attracted settlement in prehistoric times, especially at Hallstatt, and later in the Roman period. In 1192 the Traungau (the nucleus of modern Oberösterreich) became an appendage of the duchy of Austria, and the 10th-century name Ostarichi (“Eastern Region”) was extended to areas west of the Enns River. Oberösterreich was divided from Niederösterreich in about 1450, and Linz became its capital in 1490 (following Enns, Steyr, and Wels). The official name until 1918 was Österreich ober der Enns, but it was popularly called Oberösterreich. During the Anschluss, or incorporation of Austria into Germany (1938–45), Oberösterreich became the larger Reichsgau Oberdonau (“Upper Danube Reich District”).
After World War II the population was increased by more than 100,000 refugees, and the density is now one of the highest of all the Bundesländer. Ethnically the people are German, and about 90 percent are Roman Catholic. The principal towns are Linz, Wels, Steyr, Traun, Braunau, Bad Ischl, Gmunden, Ried, Vöcklabruck, Enns, Leonding, and Ansfelden.
Farming occupies more than half of the land, and forestry about one-third. More than half of the agricultural land is pasture, mainly in the highest regions. The most intensive stock farming is done in the Alpine foreland, where grain (wheat, rye), sugar beets, potatoes, and fruit are also raised. Large tracts of forest, especially in the Alps, are state-owned.
Salt is mined in the Salzkammergut; farther west, granite and limestone are quarried. After 1959 oil wells near Ried came in production.
There was massive industrial development in Oberösterreich during the Anschluss and after World War II. The important Linz chemical industry (nitrogen) and ironworks and steelworks, the Lenzing staple-fibre plant, and the aluminum plant at Ranshofen all date from that period. Other activities include dairying, food processing, beet-sugar refining, brewing, automobile, agricultural machinery, and textile manufacturing, tanning, and sawmilling (with a timber industry and paper and cellulose plants). In the later 20th century the service sector became the most important economic base of the state. Trade is also significant; major retail and wholesale centres include Linz, Vöcklabruck, Wels, Ried, Steyr, Gmunden, and Schärding. The Danube has retained its medieval role in commerce and trade, and Oberösterreich is well served by rail and road. Air traffic at Linz airport is of minor importance. Area 4,626 square miles (11,980 square km). Pop. (2006) 1,402,302; (2011) 1,413,762.
