Oslo, formerly (1624–1877) Christiania or (1877–1925) Kristiania,  capital and largest city of Norway. It lies at the head of Oslo Fjord in the southeastern part of the country. The original site of Oslo was east of the Aker River. The city was founded by King Harald Hardraade about 1050, and about 1300 the Akershus fortress was built by Haakon V. After the city was destroyed by fire in 1624, Christian IV of Denmark-Norway built a new town farther west, under the walls of the Akershus fortress, and called it Christiania. The growth of Christiania’s population in the 19th century was due in part to the absorption of surrounding municipalities, and the city replaced its rival, the west-coast port of Bergen, as Norway’s largest and most influential city.
The city was renamed Oslo in 1925 and developed rapidly after World War II. In 1948 Oslo incorporated the nearby township of Aker, and in the following decades a number of satellite towns and residential areas grew up to the east and west of the city. On July 22, 2011, the city centre was the target of a massive bomb attack that damaged government buildings, including the prime minister’s office. Eight people were killed and dozens were injured in the blast.
Oslo is the centre of Norwegian trade, banking, industry, and shipping. Oslo Harbour is the largest, as well as the busiest, in the country. The leading industries are the production of consumer goods and the electrotechnical and graphic industries. The important Norwegian fur auctions are held at Økern, to the northeast. Oslo is also the junction of road, rail, and airway networks of the country.
The leading Norwegian cultural institutions are to be found in Oslo. The city centre contains the National Theatre, the Norwegian Theatre, the Oslo New Theatre, the Oslo Concert Hall, and the Norwegian Opera. Near the oldest part of the University of Oslo are found the Historical Museum (with the Ethnographic Museum) and the National Museum of Art, Architecture, and Design, the latter of which contains an excellent collection of paintings, especially works by Edvard Munch. At Tøyen, in the east of the city, are the botanical gardens and several museums, including the Munch Museum. At Bygdøy, the Norwegian Folk Museum, the Viking Ship Museum, the Fram Museum (containing the Fram, a famous polar exploration vessel used by Fridtjof Nansen and Roald Amundsen), the Kon-Tiki Museum (commemorating the Pacific expedition of Thor Heyerdahl), and the Norwegian shipping museum serve as reminders of Oslo’s maritime connections. Frogner Park, located in the western section of the city, is noted for its display of works by the modern sculptor Gustav Vigeland.
A number of scientific institutions are attached to the University of Oslo, and the university’s library is the main library in the country. The city’s most distinguished auditorium is the university’s Aula (Hall), decorated by Munch, and it is there that the Philharmonic Society’s concerts are held. There are also other national centres of higher education.
Oslo has exceptional natural advantages for winter sports, especially cross-country skiing. The city’s annual Holmenkollen ski-jump competitions bring together participants from all the leading ski nations, and the site also houses an interesting ski museum.  Pop. (2010 est.) mun., 586,860.
