Oxfordshire,  administrative and historic county of south-central England. It is bounded to the north by Warwickshire and Northamptonshire, to the west by Gloucestershire, to the south by Berkshire, and to the east by Buckinghamshire. Wiltshire lies to the southwest of the administrative county, which covers a larger area than the historic county. Oxford, home of the famed University of Oxford, is the county seat.
The administrative county comprises five districts: Cherwell, the city of Oxford, South Oxfordshire, Vale of White Horse, and West Oxfordshire. The Vale of White Horse district and the part of South Oxfordshire to the west of the River Thames lie outside the historic county of Oxfordshire. Those areas belong to the historic county of Berkshire.
The administrative county consists of two upland areas divided by a broad vale, about 10 miles (16 km) wide. The North Oxfordshire Heights, rising to 700 feet (210 metres) at Edgehill in the northwest of the county, are developed on oolitic limestone and related strata of the Jurassic Period. The Berkshire Downs and Chiltern Hills are developed on Cretaceous chalk. The intervening clay vale stretches from northeast to southwest. It is divided into the Oxford Clay Vale and the White Horse Vale by an outcrop of Corallian limestone, giving rise to the Oxford Heights.
Oxfordshire is located almost entirely within the Thames basin. The river flows northeastward along the Oxford Clay Vale, receiving the Rivers Windrush, Evenlode, and Cherwell from the north. There is an elbow of capture, where the drainage system has become connected to a former portion of a neighbouring system, to the east of Oxford, from which the Thames flows southward, receiving the Ock and its tributaries from the south, passes through the Goring Gap, and then winds east and north past Henley-on-Thames into the lower Thames basin. There is little glacial drift except in the northeast corner of the county. Gravel deposits, both plateau (North Leigh, Combe, and Tiddington) and floodplain (Bampton, Oxford, and Dorchester), are important economically.
Many Paleolithic and Mesolithic artifacts have been recovered from the floodplain gravels that border the Thames. Neolithic tools and pottery have similarly been located at many points in the county. Also dating from that period are a number of long barrows (burial mounds) and the Rollright Stones (a collection of megaliths that includes a stone circle) on the Oxfordshire-Warwickshire border. Dorchester and Alchester (just outside Bicester), situated on the Roman road from Silchester to Watling Street and Towcester, were the most important Roman sites in Oxfordshire, which was thickly populated in Roman times. Subsequent Saxon settlement in the county was concentrated at valley sites along the line of the Thames and its major tributaries, and Oxfordshire was successively part of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms of Wessex and Mercia. During the 10th and 11th centuries the area was overrun by the Danes.
At the time of Domesday Book (1086), the land survey of England by William I the Conqueror, the county was fairly well populated, the major centres being Oxford itself and Bampton. Both were incipient towns with regular markets. The medieval period is commemorated by numerous ecclesiastical and domestic buildings. Iffley Church, just south of Oxford, is one of the best examples of pure Romanesque style in England; Adderbury, south of Banbury, has a cruciform Decorated-style church, and that at Minster Lovell is pure Perpendicular style. Secular buildings include Broughton Castle (14th century), Stonor Park, Stanton Harcourt (1450), Chastleton, and Blenheim Palace (early 18th century), built near Woodstock for the John Churchill, 1st duke of Marlborough, a member of one of the great political dynasties of England. The county saw action during the English Civil Wars (1642–51). The towns of Oxford and Banbury were both besieged by Parliamentary forces at some time, and Oxford was the Royalist headquarters.
Agriculture remains important in Oxfordshire. The North Oxfordshire Heights are important for sheep and arable farming, mostly on large farms. From medieval times until quite recently, wool was a mainstay of the economy. The clay vale is mainly sown to grass, and milk and beef are produced. The White Horse Vale and the northern slope of the Downs (in the southern part of the administrative county) are noted for fruit production.
Ironstone is mined near Banbury, and clay, sand, and gravel are also worked in various parts of the county. Cowley, a suburb of Oxford, is the major industrial centre, producing motor vehicles. Banbury, with light engineering, and Witney, with blanket manufacture, are also important centres. Paper mills are located at Wolvercote, Shiplake, Sandford, and Eynsham, using pure stream water. Area administrative county, 1,006 square miles (2,606 square km). Pop. (2001) 605,488; (2011) 653,798.
