Pernambuco,  estado (state) of northeastern Brazil, situated near the eastern tip of the South American coastline’s bulge into the Atlantic Ocean. It is bounded on the east by the Atlantic, on the south by the states of Alagoas and Bahia, on the west by Piauí, and on the north by Ceará and Paraíba. The state capital is Recife.
The first permanent European settlement of Pernambuco was at Olinda in 1535 by Duarte Coelho Pereira, who had been granted a captaincy extending from the mouth of the São Francisco River northward to the vicinity of modern Recife. The Dutch occupied the region from 1630 to 1654, and during their occupation a well-planned town was built where present-day Recife is located. This became the administrative capital. Pernambuco was ably governed by the Dutch and prospered with the production of sugar in the plantations located in the rich alluvial soil along the coast. Portuguese rule replaced that of the Dutch in Pernambuco in 1654.
In the early 18th century a bitter rivalry developed between Olinda, the administrative capital of the captaincy and residence of the rich aristocratic plantation owners, and Recife, inhabited by traders, ship chandlers, and warehouse workers. Recife continued to prosper, however, while Olinda declined, and in 1823 Recife was elevated to the category of city (cidade). In 1827 it was made the capital of the província.
In 1817 Pernambuco was the scene of a local armed rebellion against Portuguese rule. Pernambuco remained for years a hotbed of republicanism and revolutionary agitation. It was the site of unsuccessful insurrections against Portuguese rule in 1821–22, 1824, 1831, and 1848. Pernambuco became a state of the Brazilian republic in 1889.
Pernambuco’s Atlantic coastline, which extends approximately 116 miles (187 km) from south to north, is relatively short when compared with the state’s east-west extent of 447 miles (720 km). The coastal zone is comparatively narrow and is separated from the high inland plateau by an intermediate zone of terraces and slopes. The coastal zone is low, well-wooded, and fertile and has a hot, humid climate, with up to 70 inches (1,800 mm) of annual rainfall. The middle zone, called the agreste region, has a drier climate and lighter vegetation. The inland plateau is called the sertão; it is high, stony, and dry and frequently is devastated by prolonged droughts (sêcas). The climate of the sertão is characterized by hot days and cool nights. For the state as a whole there are two clearly defined seasons, rainy from March to July and dry for the remainder of the year.
The rivers of the state include a number of small plateau streams (dry for much of the year) flowing southward to the São Francisco River and several large streams in the eastern part flowing eastward to the Atlantic. The largest of the coastal rivers are the Goiana, Capibaribe, Beberibe, Ipojuca, Sirinhaém, and the Una and its tributary, the Jacuípe River.
Beginning in the 16th century and continuing through the colonial period, large numbers of black slaves were brought by the Portuguese from Africa to work the sugar plantations in Pernambuco. Thus, the population of the state includes a high percentage of blacks and mulattoes, especially in the coastal region. The majority of Pernambuco’s population lives within 200 miles (322 km) or less of the coast. Poor health and living conditions contribute to the state’s average life expectancy being among the lowest in Brazil and its infant mortality rate among the highest. Living conditions in general are better in the coastal region than they are in the interior, as are public health and education. Higher education is available in Recife at the Federal University of Pernambuco, the Catholic University of Pernambuco, and the Federal Rural University of Pernambuco.
Agriculture is the leading activity in Pernambuco, although grazing, commerce, manufacturing, and mining also contribute to the economy. Since the 16th century the coastal plain has been devoted to the production of sugarcane, but, as the production of this crop has declined, production of other crops has increased: tropical and semitropical fruits (bananas, grapes, melons, coconuts) are grown commercially in the coastal zone, as are food crops (sweet potatoes, corn [maize], cassava [manioc], rice). Fishing is also important for many of the coastal dwellers. The principal crops of the agreste region are cotton, coffee, beans, cassava, onions, tomatoes, corn, and tobacco. Livestock raising is the chief activity in the sertão, but, in areas of adequate rainfall or irrigation, cotton, sisal, castor beans, and food crops are also produced. Pernambuco’s large herds of cattle and goats are the source of meat, hides, skins, and leather.
The state’s traditional manufactures are refined sugar, cotton cloth, and cigars. Sugar processing continues to be a major industry, although there is today a broad range of other industries, such as furniture, computers, steel manufacture, and the processing of nonferrous metals.
Pernambuco’s port of Recife is one of the country’s most important because of its location on the South American coastline’s bulge into the Atlantic. The railways of the area converge on the port, as does the system of surfaced roads. Recife also is the site of an international airport. Other major population centres include Caruaru, Jaboatão, and Olinda.
The state’s cultural life and institutions also are concentrated in Recife (the home of famed social historian Gilberto Freyre). Olinda is a national monument with old colonial churches and houses and is the seat of a Roman Catholic archbishopric. Area 37,958 square miles (98,312 square km). Pop. (2010) 8,796,448.
