Peterborough,  city and unitary authority, geographic county of Cambridgeshire, England. At the core of the city and unitary authority is a historic region called the Soke of Peterborough, which encompasses the original town of Peterborough and an area extending west between the Rivers Welland and Nene; the Soke of Peterborough is part of the historic county of Northamptonshire. The city and unitary authority also embrace an area to the east, around Thorney, within the historic county of Cambridgeshire, and an area south of the Nene, within the historic county of Huntingdonshire.
Peterborough lies along the River Nene, which is navigable for small vessels to and from the North Sea. It also lies on the margin, or “shoreline,” of the Fens, a low-lying area of peat and silt, which was for many centuries intermediate between land and sea but which was drained and reclaimed between the 17th and the 19th centuries. Today the Fens is an area of great fertility and massive agricultural output, and a number of the region’s products are processed in Peterborough’s factories.
The flat city site is dominated by St. Peter’s Cathedral, a structure begun in 1118 and consecrated in 1238. It is in part a good example of Late Norman style; but it was added to in virtually every succeeding architectural period, and the total effect is discordant. The cathedral contains the Hedda Stone, an Anglo-Saxon sculpture some 1,200 years old, and the tomb of Catherine of Aragon, Henry VIII’s first wife. Apart from the cathedral, gatehouses, and the Church of St. John (1407), there are few other buildings of interest.
The draining of the Fens, the coming of the railway, and the development of some of England’s largest brickworks on the south bank of the Nene contributed to Peterborough’s 19th-century growth. In the mid-20th century its designation as an expanded town led to further substantial growth. Situated on the main rail line between London and Edinburgh, at a point of junction with cross-country routes, it is a choice location, particularly for warehousing and distributing trades.
Under the expanded town plan, the formerly concentrated city was surrounded by a ring of dispersed suburban communities linked by fast motor routes. The city and unitary authority, which stretch 20 miles (32 km) from east to west and some 8 miles (13 km) from north to south, also include extensive wooded and rural areas. Area 132 square miles (343 square km). Pop. (2001) 156,061; (2011) 183,631.
