Plateau,  state, east-central Nigeria, created in 1976 out of the northern half of former Benue-Plateau state. It is bounded by the states of Kaduna and Bauchi on the north, Taraba on the east, and Nassarawa on the south and west. The Jos Plateau rises to about 5,250 feet (1,600 m) above sea level in the state’s north-central part, and the Benue River valley stretches along the southwestern border. Although there are wooded valleys in the southeast, the vegetation is mostly open grassland (formerly wooded but now with only occasional hedges of cacti and scattered trees), which is used for grazing and farming. Although the state is best known for its mining production, agriculture is the major occupation of the people. Acha (a grain known as “hungry rice”) and millet are the chief cash crops; yams, sorghum, corn (maize), potatoes, cowpeas, rice, fruits, and vegetables are the staple crops. Fulani herdsmen graze their cattle on the tsetse-free plateau and supply milk to the dairy at Vom. Among the major exports of the state are hides and skins.
Plateau state is the most important mining area in Nigeria and is a major exporter of tin and columbite. The tin is smelted just outside Jos, the state capital and its largest town. The metals are shipped by rail to Port Harcourt for export. Other minerals, notably tantalite, kaolin, tungsten (wolfram), zircon, and thorium compounds, are also exploited on the plateau. Lead, zinc, and silver are mined on a small scale in the eastern part of the state around Wase, Zurak, and Kigom.
Known for its heterogeneity, the state has about 40 ethnic groups, including the Vergam, Ankwei, Angas, Jawara (Jarauci), Birom, Mango, Fulani, Hausa, and Eggen. The mining industry has attracted European, Igbo (Ibo), and Yoruba immigrants into the state. Jos is connected by road with Wamba, Akwanga, Keffi, and Lafia and has an airport. Lafia, Pankshin, Wamba, Shendam, and Akwanga are also sizable market and mining centres. Places of interest include a museum, with Nok terra-cotta sculptures, and a zoo, both located at Jos. There is a federal university at Jos and a college of technology at Bukuru. Major research institutes are located at Vom (veterinary sciences) and at Bukuru (strategic studies). Area 11,936 square miles (30,913 square km). Pop. (2006) 3,178,712.
