Purbeck,  district, administrative and historic county of Dorset, southern England, lying along the English Channel in the southeastern part of the county. It includes the nearly landlocked, shallow Poole Harbour on its northeastern border and derives its name from its southeasterly peninsula, the Isle of Purbeck. The small town of Wareham, near the mouth of the River Trent, is the administrative centre.
The central part of Purbeck is a westerly extension of the infertile Hampshire Basin sands and clays. Those lowlands are almost entirely barren heathlands, marshlands, or pine woodlands. Some mixed farming (mostly dairy cattle and cereals) occurs on the slightly elevated chalk plains at Purbeck’s northern edge and amidst the assorted chalk and limestone ridges running generally parallel to the English Channel in the south. The Rivers Trent and Frome drain central Purbeck from the west, discharging into Poole Harbour. The south coast, officially designated an Area of Outstanding Beauty, has excellent examples of differential marine erosion because of its diverse geologic strata. The entirety of Purbeck district, with its sparsely populated ridges, secluded coves (such as Chapman’s Pool along the south coast), marshes, and forests, was long recognized as a smuggler’s haven.
In addition to Wareham, the only other town of consequence is the isolated coastal resort of Swanage on the southeastern tip of the peninsula. Purbeck marble, quarried from the hills inland of Swanage, was once used in the construction of many famous churches in England. Oilfields, first worked in the mid-1970s, are located north and south of Wareham and are the United Kingdom’s principal onshore oilfield operation. A prototype nuclear power station, located near the small town (parish) of Winfrith Newburgh in the district’s southwest corner, was in operation from the late 1960s to 1990. Poole Harbour, separating the district from the resort town of Poole farther northeast, is popular with boaters. Area 157 square miles (406 square km). Pop. (2001) 44,416; (2011) 44,973.
