Ras al-Khaimah, also spelled Raʾs al-Khaymah,  constituent emirate of the United Arab Emirates (formerly Trucial States, or Trucial Oman). It consists of two irregularly shaped tracts on the Musandam Peninsula, oriented north-south. The northern section shares the Ruʾūs al-Jibāl peninsula with the sultanate of Oman and has a coastline of approximately 35 miles (56 km) on the Persian Gulf. A southern inland tract is separated from the northern by a projection of Fujairah emirate. Political fragmentation in the region is so extreme that Ras al-Khaimah’s two parts have borders with 10 political units; eight belong to five of the six other emirates in the federation, and the other two are with Oman and its exclave on the Ruʾūs al-Jibāl. Ras al-Khaimah’s estimated total area is 660 square miles (1,700 square km). The capital and most significant urban settlement is Ras al-Khaimah city.
Ras al-Khaimah was not one of the original Trucial States but was part of Sharjah emirate for most of its history. Both were ruled by the Qasimi dynasty, which first established itself at Ras al-Khaimah town by the early 18th century. The town sat on or near the site of Julfar, an ancient port which was previously ruled by the Omani Yaʿrubid dynasty. The region was an area of contention between both local interests and those of European imperial powers. In response to Qasimi raids on British ships, the British launched a campaign against the Qawasim (plural of Qasimi), razing Ras al-Khaimah town in 1809 and again besieging the town in 1819 after it had been rebuilt. In 1820 the British made Sulṭān ibn Ṣaqr, as the Qasimi sheikh, sign the General Treaty of Peace. Together with the other Gulf rulers, he also signed the later Trucial agreements. In 1869 Ras al-Khaimah became a separate state under Humayd ibn ʿAbd Allāh, a grandson of Sulṭān, but upon his death (1900) it reverted to Sharjah, and it was not finally recognized by Britain as a separate Trucial state until 1921.
As Britain prepared to leave the Persian Gulf in late 1971, Ras al-Khaimah, like Bahrain and Qatar, opted not to join the United Arab Emirates. A dispute arose that same year over the small islands of Greater and Lesser Ṭunb (Ṭunb al-Kubrā and Ṭunb al-Ṣughrā), in the gulf about 50 miles (80 km) northwest of Ras al-Khaimah town; these islands had long been claimed by both Ras al-Khaimah and Iran. On November 30, 1971, Iranian troops landed on Greater Ṭunb and met armed resistance from Ras al-Khaimah police. Iran, however, remained in possession of the islands. The incident was a significant factor in convincing the emirate’s leaders that Ras al-Khaimah would benefit from unity, and it joined the United Arab Emirates in 1972.
Ras al-Khaimah emirate is among the principal producers of the country’s crops. Truck crops (cabbages, onions, tomatoes), dates, tobacco, and fruits, especially bananas and citrus fruits, are grown along the coast around Ras al-Khaimah city for local consumption and for export to other states of the federation, mainly Dubai. Elsewhere along the coast, employment opportunities waned with the decline of the pearling industry, and much depopulation occurred. The Shiḥūh people of the Ruʾūs al-Jibāl sell surpluses of dates and raise goats. Petroleum exploration both onshore and offshore has produced no results. The emirate has received aid from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait as well as from its sister states Abu Dhabi and Dubai. From 1964 to 1972 much of Ras al-Khaimah’s revenue came from commemorative stamps, printed for sale to philatelists. Industries in Ras al-Khaimah include the production of ceramics, pharmaceuticals, cement, lime, and a variety of construction materials.
Ras al-Khaimah city’s name means “the tent point,” reputedly after a large tent erected as an aid to navigation by an early chief. The city, a port from ancient times, developed only in the 20th century. Ras al-Khaimah city is connected by a paved road to Dubai and Sharjah city and has an international airport. Several ports—including Port Ṣaqr—handle the emirate’s shipping traffic. Ras al-Khaimah city is also the site of Al-Ittiḥād University (1999). Pop. (2005) 210,063; (2015 est.) 345,000.
