Saint-Martin, also spelled Saint Martin,  overseas collectivity of France on the island of Saint Martin, in the Lesser Antilles, eastern Caribbean Sea. The collectivity of Saint-Martin occupies the northern two-thirds of the island; the southern third, named Sint Maarten, formerly part of the Netherlands Antilles, is an autonomous country within the Dutch kingdom. Until February 2007 Saint-Martin was a commune and, together with Saint-Barthélemy, an arrondissement of the French overseas département of Guadeloupe. Marigot is the capital.
Vegetation on Saint-Martin consists primarily of dry forest with groves of latania (a kind of fan palm) and cactus. There is an airport at Grand Case, near Marigot. Elsewhere on the island in the Dutch sector, Princess Juliana International Airport, west of Philipsburg, serves both the Dutch and the French parts of the island. Marigot is an important port and trade centre.
The island was sighted by Christopher Columbus in November 1493 and was claimed by several European powers—notably the Dutch and French, who partitioned the island in 1648. The French portion came under the jurisdiction of the government in the colony of Guadeloupe. The sugarcane industry—which utilized slave labour—became the mainstay of the Saint-Martin economy. Slavery was abolished in 1848, and the economy languished for a time. In the 1970s Saint-Martin began developing its tourism sector; the island is now a major Caribbean tourist destination.
Spurred by popular feeling in Saint-Martin favouring independence, Guadeloupe began preparing in the mid-1990s for the devolution of Saint-Martin and its change in political status to that of an overseas collectivity. Voters approved the change in 2003, which took effect in February 2007.
The collectivity, while remaining a part of France, has broad authority over its own fiscal and legislative affairs. The president of France is the head of state, represented by a local prefect. Saint-Martin also sends a representative and a senator to the French Parliament. The government is headed by the president of the unicameral legislature, a 23-member Territorial Council. The executive branch consists of a seven-member Executive Council elected by the Territorial Council. Members of the legislative and executive branches serve five-year terms. There is also an Economic, Social, and Cultural Council that is consulted on fiscal and developmental matters as well as social and cultural projects. On July 16, 2007, Louis-Constant Fleming was elected the first president of the Territorial Council. Area 21 square miles (55 square km). Pop. (2014 est.) 35,107.
