Salta,  provincia (province), northwestern Argentina. It is bounded to the southwest by Chile, to the north by Bolivia, and to the northeast by Paraguay. The provincial capital is Salta city.
In the southwestern part of the province, high cordilleras of the Andes Mountains, separated by broad 11,500-foot- (3,500-metre-) high salt flats (the Atacama Plateau), descend from the Andean Cordillera Oriental through quebradas (deep and broad ravines that were historically important as routes of penetration into the highest Andes) into valleys and the lowland plain of the Gran Chaco. Several small rivers, of which the chief is the Bermejo, drain the region into the Gran Chaco. The plateau is the home of a small number of Colla Indians. In the north and centre are Baritú and El Rey national parks, respectively. Both are mostly inaccessible areas covered in subtropical mountain rainforests at merger points of the Gran Chaco and the Andes.
Salta was the gateway in the 16th century for settlers coming into Argentina from Peru and Bolivia. With the breakup in 1943 of Los Andes national territory in the Atacama Plateau, Salta province absorbed the former departments of San Antonio de los Cobres and Pastos Grandes.
The province has nationwide rail, land, and air connections and has rail links with Bolivia. The upper Bermejo River valley near the Bolivian border contains an oil refinery and exploited oil deposits. Important deposits of borax and salt are mined in the western region of Salta along with lesser deposits of gold, silver, and iron ore. Agricultural pursuits vary according to altitude, with tobacco, grapes, and corn (maize) being the chief crops grown in the Lerma valley south of the city of Salta. The town of Cafayate, southeast of Salta city, is surrounded by vineyards and produces an array of distinctive wines. The province has a large hydroelectric complex on the Juramento River in the Lerma valley. Area 60,034 square miles (155,488 square km). Pop. (2001) 1,079,051; (2010) 1,214,441.
