San Luis Potosí,  estado (state), northeastern Mexico. It is bounded by the states of Coahuila to the north; Nuevo León, Tamaulipas, and Veracruz to the east; Hidalgo, Querétaro, and Guanajuato to the south; and Jalisco and Zacatecas to the west. The capital, the city of San Luis Potosí, is located in the southwest.
Although the relief is generally level, the state’s mean elevation is about 6,000 feet (1,800 metres). Precipitation is light and infrequent, but the state’s eastern corner, which drops toward the Gulf of Mexico’s coastal plain, is generally humid. The soil is fertile, and in favourable seasons large crops are cultivated in the uplands and in the lower tropical valleys. The principal crops are corn (maize), beans, wheat, and cotton. Livestock raising is important, and hides and wool are exported. Some of the richest silver mines in Mexico are located in northern San Luis Potosí. Gold, copper, and zinc are also mined. The state has good transportation networks; San Luis Potosí city is on a major highway and railroad that connect Piedras Negras (in Coahuila) and Mexico City via Monterrey (in Nuevo León).
In prehistoric times the region was home to Huastec, Chichimec, and Guachichile Indians. Their descendants make up a large segment of the state’s present population, and many of them speak an indigenous language.
State government is headed by a governor, who is elected to a single six-year term. Members of the unicameral legislature (the House of Deputies) serve for terms of three years. The state government can levy taxes, but it depends on the federal government for most of its revenue. The state is divided into several local governmental units called municipios (municipalities); each is headquartered in a city, town, or village that administers the surrounding rural areas.
San Luis Potosí has become part of Mexico’s so-called “hollow core” because many residents have left to seek jobs in the Federal District, along the U.S.-Mexican border, or farther north. Area 24,351 square miles (63,068 square km). Pop. (2010) 2,585,518.
