Saxony, German Sachsen,  Land (state), eastern Germany. Poland lies to the east of Saxony, and the Czech Republic lies to the south. Saxony also borders the German states of Saxony-Anhalt to the northwest, Brandenburg to the north, Bavaria to the southwest, and Thuringia to the west. The capital is Dresden. Area 7,109 square miles (18,413 square km). Pop. (2011) 4,056,799.
Present-day Saxony is composed largely of hill and mountain country, with only its northernmost portions and the area around Leipzig descending into the great North European Plain. The chief mountain range is the Ore Mountains (Erzgebirge), which stretch for about 100 miles (160 km) along the state’s southern border and reach elevations of more than 4,000 feet (1,200 metres). In the west and southwest are subsidiary groups of this range, while the northeastern angle of the state features the mountains of Upper Lusatia (Lausitz). South of this group, and along both banks of the Elbe River, extends a picturesque region of hills and deep gorges known as the Saxon Switzerland, the site of a national park. The upper course of the Elbe River flows from southeast to northwest through the state. The Mulde, a tributary of the Elbe, is the second largest river in Saxony. More than half of Saxony’s land area is used for agriculture, and about one-fourth is forested. The region’s climate is generally temperate, though the mountain country has a harsher one.
Saxony is one of the most densely populated and populous states in eastern Germany, although since the mid-20th century its population has declined. Between 1960 and the turn of the 21st century, the number of inhabitants declined by one-fifth. More than nine-tenths of the population is ethnically German; there is a small indigenous ethnic minority, the Sorbs, and there is also a relatively small foreign population.
Northern Saxony occupies one of the most fertile parts of eastern Germany and is highly developed agriculturally, though fertility diminishes toward the Ore Mountains of the south. Wheat, barley, rape, sugar beets, fodder crops, peas, apples, butter, and cheese are the principal agricultural products, while cattle raising is important on the extensive pastures of the Ore Mountains. Forestry is also of some importance.
Saxony long had important mineral production in the Ore Mountains, including the production of uranium, but the latter has ceased, and expensive clean-up projects were undertaken across the region to reduce the contamination of mining and waste sites, especially around Aue and Zwickau. Currently lignite is the only major industrial resource still mined in significant quantities, and both production and employment in this once important sector were dramatically reduced after German unification. Lignite is mined both in northeastern Saxony in the Lusatia field near Hoyerswerda and around Leipzig in the Central German field. One clear advantage of the decreased mining and use of lignite in Saxony and the wider region has been a dramatic improvement in air quality.
Although the Saxon economy, especially manufacturing, suffered severe cutbacks after unification, it remains one of the largest economies in eastern Germany and one of the few in which ‘‘new economy’’ sectors such as microelectronics have experienced considerable growth. Nevertheless, unemployment in the state has been significant since the mid-1990s. Major manufacturing sectors in Saxony include electronics, machinery, pharmaceuticals, auto and auto parts production, food processing, publishing, and textiles. The chief manufacturing industry was once textile production, focused on Chemnitz and Zwickau, as well as many smaller urban centres. While some production in this sector continues, employment has declined drastically. Dresden, the state’s largest city in terms of area, is the production site of many types of precision optical and electrical equipment. There are also silicon-chip-production facilities in Dresden. Leipzig, the most populous city in the state, is a centre of printing and publishing, heavy engineering, and auto manufacturing. Automaking has also been important in Mosel, near Zwickau. Meissen is an important and historic centre for the production of porcelain and other ceramics, and some production of traditional wooden toys and Christmas decorations continues in towns in the Ore Mountains, most notably Seiffen.
The principal urban centres are Leipzig, Dresden, Chemnitz, Plauen, Zwickau, and Meissen, and each has important regional service sectors. In addition, Leipzig and Dresden have important airports. Leipzig in particular is an important national transport centre, owing to a key location in the national rail and highway networks. For centuries it has been home to important trade fairs. Following unification many retailers took advantage of Leipzig’s centrality within the German transport network, its access to a large regional population, and a brief period of looser land-use controls to construct a number of large suburban shopping centres. Leipzig’s huge downtown rail station has also been renovated to serve as both a station and an attractive shopping plaza.
Saxony has a moderately important tourist industry focused in particular on the scenic Ore Mountains, Leipzig, the scenic Elbe River valley and Saxon Switzerland, and Dresden. Though the city was bombed into ruins by an Anglo-American bombing raid in 1945, some of Dresden’s former architectural glory has been restored. Reconstruction of the Saxon royal palace, the Zwinger, and other sites began after the war; unification opened up more resources and has allowed relatively rapid reconstruction, for example, on the city’s famed Frauenkirche. Along with taking Elbe River cruises, sightseers to Dresden often visit nearby Pillnitz (palace and gardens) and Radebeul (museum focused on the popular author Karl May). The Dresden Elbe Valley, including the Pillnitz Palace and the centre of Dresden, was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 2004. There are a host of architectural and cultural attractions in other parts of Saxony, notably in Görlitz, Bautzen, Freiberg, and Meissen. Also designated a World Heritage site in 2004 was Muskauer Park, a European country park laid out in the early 19th century; located on the border between Germany and Poland, it is jointly maintained by both countries.
The state of Saxony is governed by a Landtag (state parliament) and a minister-president, who is generally a leading member of the Landtag’s strongest party. The election of extreme right-wing politicians from the National Democratic Party (NDP) to the state parliament in 2004 generated controversy and concern among some within Saxony and Germany as a whole. Leipzig is a university town, as is Zwickau. There are technical universities in Dresden, Chemnitz, and Freiberg. Saxony’s primary cultural centres are Dresden and Leipzig. Dresden has important concentrations of historic buildings, museums, and musical groups, as well as major art collections and the renowned Semper Opera House. Leipzig is the site of one of Germany’s major national libraries (the Deutsche Bücherei), a nationally acclaimed orchestra (Gewandhaus Orchestra), and sections of the national Academy of Sciences.
