Schleswig-Holstein,  Land (state) located in northwestern Germany. Schleswig-Holstein extends from the lower course of the Elbe River and the state of Hamburg northward to Denmark and thus occupies the southern third of the Jutland Peninsula. Along its eastern coast is the Baltic Sea, and along its western coast is the North Sea. It has a southeastern land boundary with the state of Mecklenburg–West Pomerania. Schleswig-Holstein also includes Fehmarn Island in the Baltic and Helgoland, Sylt, Fohr, Amrum, and other German islands in the North Frisian group. The capital is Kiel. Area 6,085 square miles (15,761 square km). Pop. (2015 est.) 2,858,714.
Schleswig-Holstein can be roughly divided into eastern, central, and western regions. Along the Baltic coast are sheer cliffs indented by fjords. The hilly eastern countryside is rich in lakes. The loamy soil in this area is responsible for one of the best wheat harvests in Germany. In the middle of the state lie the uplands, an old moraine area. The soil is quite poor in this area. The western region consists of flat, marshy, treeless land that can be only partly cultivated. It is known for its numerous ditches, dikes, and ponds. West of the marshes are shallows and flats that are exposed to the tides. Some tidal flats and marshes have been reclaimed, planted with grass, and used for livestock grazing. Most of the western coast lies within a protected area, which limits its development. Climatically, Schleswig-Holstein lies in an area affected by the Gulf Stream, which gives it mild winters and temperate summers. High humidity and rainfall (a yearly average of about 30 inches [760 mm]) make for strong vegetation growth.
A substantial portion of the population is urbanized, being concentrated in Kiel (the main town and the administrative and industrial centre) and also in Lübeck, Neumünster, and Flensburg. The end of World War II brought difficult social problems as retreating German army units and more than one million German evacuees and refugees (most of whom had been driven from the east by the Soviet Red Army) raised Schleswig-Holstein’s population about 50 percent above the prewar level. More recently, young workers have tended to migrate away from the state, particularly to Hamburg.
The residual effects of the influx of people from Mecklenburg, East Prussia, and similar areas following World War II have led to a decline of dialects, although Low German (Plattdeutsch) is still spoken (see German language). In the north of the state, there is a small Danish-speaking minority with its own schools. The Danish and the Frisians on the west coast are both recognized as national minorities and granted special protections by the state’s constitution. Schleswig-Holstein is largely Protestant.
Although agriculture accounts for a very small portion of the state’s economic output, Schleswig-Holstein still uses most of its total area for agricultural purposes. The integration of farms, food-processing plants, and marketing concerns is increasingly characteristic of the agricultural system. Wheat, sugar beets, and potatoes are among the more common crops. Livestock provides a far higher proportion of farm incomes, however, than field crops. Milk and milk products, pigs, and cattle breeding are major sources of farm income. Although the state has few forest reserves, its importance as a supplier of nursery plants for the forests of other regions has caused it to be called “the cradle of German forests.”
Industries are important to the state’s economy. Major branches include shipbuilding, machine construction, and electrical engineering—all important in Kiel—as well as the paper industry. Tourism also contributes to the economy.
The state’s long coastline and strategic location have, for centuries, made the area a focus of sea traffic. The Baltic fjords contain the large harbours of Lübeck, Kiel, and Flensburg. The Kiel Canal, connecting the North Sea and the Baltic, is heavily used.
The popularly elected members of the state’s legislative body, the Landtag, serve five-year terms. The Landtag elects a minister-president, who in turn appoints a cabinet. The state government is responsible for education, culture, justice, and internal security of the state.
Schleswig-Holstein is known as an education centre and is the site of the historic University of Kiel, founded in 1665. The Institute for World Economies at Kiel is one of the oldest economic-research institutes in Europe and has a very large library specializing in political economy. There are dozens of significant museums, primarily concerned with local and state history. The Hanseatic City of Lübeck has been a UNESCO World Heritage site since 1987. Schleswig-Holstein Wattenmeer (Wadden Sea) National Park protects the tidal flats and coastal wetlands along the state’s west coast and, together with Wattenmeer National Park of Lower Saxony and the Waddenzee conservation area in the Netherlands, was inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List in 2009.
The state of Schleswig-Holstein was created out of the historical and cultural regions of Schleswig and Holstein. Schleswig lies directly north of Holstein on the Jutland Peninsula. Both Schleswig and Holstein have at times been subject to the claims and counterclaims of Denmark, Sweden, the Holy Roman Empire, Prussia, and Austria. The region has had Danish minorities in predominantly German areas and German minorities surrounded by Danes, and consequently its history has been one of border and sovereignty disputes and, more recently, accommodations.
In the 12th century Schleswig became a dukedom, and it remained a fief associated (but not without dispute) with Denmark until 1864. Holstein developed somewhat more independently; it was ruled for centuries as a duchy by the kings of Denmark but at the same time remained a fief of the Holy Roman Empire. After 1815 Holstein was incorporated in the newly formed German Confederation.
During the 1840s, issues relating to the rights of Schleswig’s and Holstein’s respective German- and Danish-speaking minorities, to the succession rights of the Danish royal family, and to Denmark’s interests in the two duchies resulted in the duchies’ becoming a bone of contention between Denmark and Prussia and then between Denmark, Prussia, and Austria. At this time the population of Schleswig was Danish in its northern portion, German in the south, and mixed in the northern towns and centre. The population of Holstein was almost entirely German.
The Napoleonic Wars had awakened German national feeling, and the political bonds that had historically existed between Schleswig and Holstein suggested that the two regions should form a single state within the German Confederation. A countermovement developed among the Danish population in northern Schleswig and from 1838 in Denmark itself, where the Liberals insisted that Schleswig had belonged to Denmark for centuries and that the frontier between Germany and Denmark had to be the Eider River (which had historically marked the border between Schleswig and Holstein). The Danish nationalists thus hoped to incorporate Schleswig into Denmark, in the process detaching it from Holstein. German nationalists conversely sought to confirm Schleswig’s association with Holstein, in the process detaching the former from Denmark. These differences led in March 1848 to an open uprising by Schleswig-Holstein’s German majority in support of independence from Denmark and close association with the German Confederation. The uprising was helped by the military intervention of Prussia, whose army drove Denmark’s troops from Schleswig-Holstein. This war between Denmark and Prussia lasted three years (1848–50) and ended only when the great powers pressured Prussia into accepting the London Protocol of 1852. Under the terms of this peace agreement, the German Confederation returned Schleswig-Holstein to Denmark. In an agreement with Prussia under the 1852 protocol, the Danish government in return undertook not to tie Schleswig more closely to Denmark than to its sister duchy of Holstein.
In 1863, nevertheless, the Liberal government prevailed on the new Danish king, Christian IX, to sign a new joint constitution for Denmark and Schleswig. Prussia and Austria were thus freed to intervene as the upholders of the 1852 protocol. In the ensuing German-Danish War (1864), Danish military resistance was crushed by Prussia and Austria in two brief campaigns. By the Peace of Vienna (October 1864), Christian IX ceded Schleswig and Holstein to Prussia and Austria. Prussia and Austria then quarreled with each other over the newly won territories, and, as a result of Prussia’s victory over Austria in the Seven Weeks’ War of 1866, both Schleswig and Holstein became part of Prussia. This arrangement left the Danish-speaking majority of North Schleswig discontent under Prussian rule.
After the formation of the German Empire in 1871, the Schleswig-Holstein question narrowed to a contest between Germany and Denmark over North Schleswig. The Treaty of Prague (1866), which had concluded the Seven Weeks’ War, provided that North Schleswig would be reunited with Denmark if the majority of that area’s population chose to do so by a free vote, but in 1878 Prussia and Austria agreed to cancel this provision. Following Germany’s defeat in World War I, separate plebiscites were held in 1920 in the northern and southern portions of North Schleswig so that their respective inhabitants could choose between Denmark and Germany. The northern part of North Schleswig voted 70 percent to join Denmark, while the southern part voted 80 percent to remain within Germany. The northern part of North Schleswig thus became part of Denmark, and the southern portion became part of Germany. The resulting Danish-German boundary in Schleswig has lasted to the present day and is no longer a matter of contention. After World War II the German part of Schleswig was joined with Holstein to form the constituent state of the Federal Republic of Germany. (See also Eider Program; Hanseatic League.)
