Suffolk,  county, southeastern New York state, U.S., on central and eastern Long Island. It consists of a coastal lowland bounded by Long Island Sound to the north, Block Island Sound to the east, and the Atlantic Ocean to the south. Embayments along the northern and eastern shores include Smithtown and Gardiners bays, while a string of barrier islands and beaches along the southern shore (notably Fire Island) enclose such bodies of water as Great South and Shinnecock bays. Also included in the county are such small islands as Shelter Island and, farther east, Fishers Island. The county is dotted with recreational areas, including Fire Island National Seashore, Wertheim National Wildlife Refuge, and Robert Moses, Connetquot River, and Montauk Point state parks.
The region was occupied by Montauk Indians when white settlers began arriving in the 17th century. Established in 1683 as one of New York’s original counties, it was named for Suffolk, Eng. The area was occupied by the British during the U.S. War of Independence and was again harassed by the British during the War of 1812. The completion of the railroad to Greenport in 1844 spurred economic and population growth. The county became a market gardening centre for New York City and also a popular location for fashionable suburban and resort communities, especially in the eastern portion known as the Hamptons.
Administratively, the county comprises 10 towns (townships), including Huntington, Southampton, and Riverhead (the county seat), and numerous villages, including Sag Harbor and Stony Brook. Institutions of higher education include the State University of New York at Stony Brook (founded 1957) and Suffolk County Community College (1959) at Selden, Brentwood, and Riverhead. Also located in the county are Brookhaven National Laboratory and the Poospatuck and Shinnecock Indian reservations.
Wholesale and retail trade, services, and manufacturing are the major economic activities; agriculture, once a mainstay, now plays only a minor role. Area 911 square miles (2,360 square km). Pop. (2000) 1,419,369; Nassau-Suffolk Metro Division, 2,753,913; (2010) 1,493,350; Nassau-Suffolk Metro Division, 2,832,882.
