Tokelau, also called (1916–46) Union Group or (1946–76) Tokelau Islands,  island territory of New Zealand, consisting of three atolls in the South Pacific Ocean. Tokelau lies about 300 miles (480 km) north of Samoa and 2,400 miles (3,900 km) southwest of Hawaii. Tokelau does not have a central capital; each atoll has its own administrative centre.
The Tokelau group’s three coral atolls are Fakaofo (1.5 square miles [4 square km]), Nukunonu (1.8 square miles [4.7 square km]), and Atafu (1.4 square miles [3.6 square km]), arranged in a southeast-to-northwest line. Each atoll consists of numerous islets, located on its reef, which falls off sharply a short distance from shore. The lagoons are shallow and dotted with coral outcrops and thus are unnavigable. The islands are low-lying and range from 8 to 15 feet (2.4 to 4.5 metres) above sea level. Their coral-sand soil is highly porous, necessitating rain catchments, traditionally made from hollowed-out coconut-palm trunks. Precipitation averages about 100 inches (2,500 mm), mostly falling during the trade-wind season (April–November), when typhoons (tropical cyclones) occasionally strike, with occasional droughts the rest of the year. The mean average temperature is in the low 80s F (about 28 °C), but it is cooler during the rainy season. Vegetation cover is dense, with about 40 plant species altogether, including coconut palm, pandanus, and other Polynesian trees and shrubs. Wildlife includes rats, lizards, seabirds, and a few migratory birds.
The people are overwhelmingly Polynesian and are culturally and linguistically linked to Samoa. There are also small numbers of Samoans, Tuvaluans, and people of mixed ethnicity. Tokelauan, a Polynesian language, is the official language, but English is widely used. Almost all of the people are Christian, with about seven-tenths Congregational and three-tenths Roman Catholic. Population density is greatest on Atafu. The population has been declining because of emigration to New Zealand and Samoa.
Tokelau’s economy consists largely of subsistence agriculture and fishing. Land tenure is based on kinship lines and land reserved for communal use. Coconuts, grown for copra, are the only cash crop. Taro, grown in special excavated gardens fertilized with leaf compost, and breadfruit, pawpaws, and bananas are subsistence crops. Some pigs and chickens are raised. Fishes and crustaceans are caught in the lagoons for local consumption. In the 1980s New Zealand established a 200-mile (320-km) exclusive economic zone, and a fisheries training program was started by the South Pacific Commission. Tauanave trees are specially grown on selected islets for canoes, houses, and other domestic needs.
Solar power installations on each of the three atolls provide enough electricity to meet nearly all of Tokelau’s energy needs. Manufacturing is restricted to copra production, tuna processing, canoe building, woodworking, and the fabrication of traditional woven hats, mats, and bags. Tokelau’s small size, isolation, and lack of resources greatly constrain economic development. Stamp and coin sales raise additional revenue, but Tokelau’s budgetary expenses regularly exceed revenue, requiring aid from New Zealand that is substantially greater than Tokelau’s gross domestic product. Remittances from the large expatriate community constitute an important source of revenue. The New Zealand dollar is the main currency used, although the Samoan tala is also sometimes used.
Tokelau’s external trade is mainly with New Zealand. Food, building materials, and fuels are the main imports; a small amount of copra is exported. The islands have neither roads nor motor vehicles. There are no navigable passages into the lagoons and hence no good ports. Ships must anchor off the reef and use lighters to transport passengers and goods on and off.
Tokelau is administered as part of New Zealand under the Tokelau Islands Act of 1948, which has been amended several times; Tokelauans have New Zealand citizenship. An administrator is appointed to a three-year term by New Zealand’s minister of foreign affairs and trade, but most authority is delegated to the Tokelau Council for Ongoing Government (or Tokelau Council), comprising elected leaders from each of the atolls, from which the head of government (Ulu-o-Tokelau) is selected annually. The meeting place of the Tokelau Council is rotated yearly among the three atolls. Legislative power rests with the General Fono (assembly), whose members are elected every three years by universal adult suffrage and represent the entire territory. The General Fono holds several annual sessions that can take place on any one of the atolls. It handles budgets, exercises a limited rule-making power, and makes recommendations to the New Zealand Parliament. The Tokelau Council takes over these duties when the General Fono is not in session.
Local government on each atoll is in the hands of the Taupulega (Council of Elders), whose members are the heads of family groups along with two elected members known as the faipule (village leader) and the pulenuku (village mayor). The three faipule and the three pulenuku form the Tokelau Council.
Each atoll has its own hospital, with a resident doctor. Perennial shortages of fresh water have been partly alleviated by installing water-storage and catchment tanks.
Education is free and compulsory for children ages 5 to 14, and attendance is nearly 100 percent. Each atoll has a school that provides both primary and secondary education. Secondary, vocational, and higher education is available in Samoa, Fiji, Tonga, New Zealand, and Niue, and scholarships are available for overseas study in several of those countries.
