Transcaucasia, Russian Zakavkazye,  small but densely populated region to the south of the Caucasus Mountains. It includes three independent states: Georgia in the northwest, Azerbaijan in the east, and Armenia, situated largely on a high mountainous plateau south of Georgia and west of Azerbaijan. Together these countries have an area of about 71,850 square miles (186,100 square kilometres). Transcaucasia, also known as Southern Caucasia, is bounded on the north by Russia, on the east by the Caspian Sea, on the south by Iran and Turkey, and on the west by the Black Sea.
The great historic barrier of the Caucasus Mountains rises up across the wide isthmus separating the Black and Caspian seas where Europe and Asia converge. Caucasia, the region including the mountain ranges of the Caucasus, comprises both Transcaucasia and the land north of the Caucasus, known as Ciscaucasia or Northern Caucasia.
The name Caucasus is a Latinized form of Kaukasos, which the ancient Greek geographers and historians used; the Russian Kavkaz is of the same origin. The ultimate derivation is thought to be from Kaz-kaz, the Hittite name for a people living on the southern shore of the Black Sea. This ancient nomenclature reflects the historical importance of the region: the Greeks made the mysterious range the scene of the mythical sufferings of Prometheus, and the Argonauts sought the Golden Fleece in the land of Colchis (modern Kolkhida), nestling against the range on the Black Sea coast. The ranges also became a major land route for cultural diffusion from south to north of the Middle Eastern Fertile Crescent civilizations.
The peoples of the region have exhibited an extraordinary ethnic and cultural diversity since early times: the Colchians, for example, as described in the 5th century bce by the Greek historian Herodotus, were black-skinned Egyptians, though their true origin remains unclear. In subsequent centuries, successive waves of peoples migrating across Eurasia added to and were molded by the more established groups in the region. Not surprisingly, a greater variety of different languages are spoken in Caucasia than in any other area of similar size in the world. Ethnic and cultural diversity in Transcaucasia was preserved by the geographic isolation of the many small ethnic groups that settled in the region’s inhospitable mountainous terrain.
During the 18th century Russia occupied the northern Caucasus, annexing part of Georgia in 1801. Throughout the 19th century Russia extended its occupation to much of Caucasia; western Armenia, however, was subject to Turkish rule. Nationalist movements emerged in the region at the end of the 19th century. With the collapse of the Russian Empire, a short-lived independent Transcaucasian federation was declared; after its collapse, independent states emerged in Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia. By 1922 these nations had been absorbed into the Soviet Union and became part of the Transcaucasian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic; they were designated distinct union republics in 1936.
Nationalist sentiment reemerged in the late 1980s after the liberalizing reforms implemented by the Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev; with the collapse of the Soviet Union, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia achieved full independence in 1991. The postindependence period in Transcaucasia, however, was marked by instability, economic decline, ethnic violence, and war, as the government of Georgia battled separatist movements in Abkhazia and South Ossetia and Armenians and Azerbaijanis fought over Nagorno-Karabakh, a predominantly Armenian enclave in Azerbaijan.
Trending generally from northwest to southeast, the Caucasus Mountains consist of two ranges—the Greater Caucasus in the north and the Lesser, or Little, Caucasus in the south. The watershed of the Greater Caucasus, the backbone of the system, traditionally has been part of the line dividing Europe and Asia, but the whole region has been so subject to Asian influences that there is now general agreement in assigning the ranges to Asia. The Greater Caucasus marks the northern boundary of Transcaucasia and extends for approximately 750 miles (1,200 kilometres) southeastward across the Caucasian isthmus from the Taman Peninsula, which separates the Black Sea from the Sea of Azov, to the Abşeron Peninsula, which juts into the Caspian Sea east of the oil-rich port of Baku (Bakı).
The southern slopes of the Greater Caucasus are steeper than the northern. The middle of the system is comparatively narrow, but its western and eastern ends have widths of 100 miles or more. The main axis of the system contains Mount Elbrus, which at 18,510 feet (5,642 metres) is the range’s tallest peak; Mount Dombay-Ulgen (Dombay-Yolgen; 13,274 feet) in the west; Mounts Shkhara, Dykhtau, and Kazbek, all more than 16,000 feet, in the central region; and Mounts Tebulosmta and Bazardyuzyu, both more than 14,600 feet, in the east. Spurs tonguing north and south from the main axis occasionally reach elevations approaching 10,000 feet. The highest parts carry permanent mountain glaciers, the shrunken remains of Quaternary ice fields and glaciers (i.e., those from about the past 2.6 million years).
South of the Greater Caucasus, on the Black Sea coast, lies the Kolkhida alluvial plain, the site of ancient Colchis. South of the range on the Caspian side the Shirak Steppe, between the Greater and Lesser Caucasus ranges, falls sharply into the Kura-Aras (Kür-Araz) Lowland, an extensive depression in the centre of which the Kura (Kür, or Mtkvari) River receives its major right-bank tributary, the Aras (Araks, or Araz) River. To the northeast the hills of southeastern Kobustan separate the Kura-Aras Lowland from the Abşeron Peninsula; and to the extreme southeast the narrow Länkäran Lowland extends to the south between the Caspian Sea and the Talish (Talysh) Mountains, which reach elevations exceeding 8,000 feet.
West of the Kura-Aras Lowland rises the Lesser Caucasus Range, which is extended southward by the Dzhavakhet Range and the Armenian Highland, the latter straddling the frontier with Turkey. East of Lake Sevan in the eastern Lesser Caucasus, the highest peaks rise above 12,000 feet, while Mount Aragats (Alaghez), the highest peak in the range, rises west of the lake to 13,418 feet. From their western sources in the Armenian Highland, the Kura and Aras rivers both flow around the Lesser Caucasus—the Kura to the north of the range and the Aras to the south—before their confluence in the east.
