Valencia, Catalan València,  comunidad autónoma (autonomous community) of eastern Spain. It encompasses the provincias (provinces) of Castellón, Valencia, and Alicante. The autonomous community occupies a long and narrow area aligned on a rough north-south axis along the Mediterranean Sea, which lies to the east. It is bounded by the autonomous communities of Catalonia to the north, Aragon to the northeast, Castile–La Mancha to the west, and Murcia to the south. The autonomous community of Valencia was established by the statute of autonomy of July 1, 1982. Its government consists of an executive council, headed by a president, and a unicameral legislative assembly. The capital is Valencia city. Area 8,979 square miles (23,255 square km). Pop. (2007 est.) 4,885,029.
The coastal plains on the Mediterranean side of the autonomous community rise into the Iberian and Baetic cordilleras to the west. The landscape of the western mountain region is deeply eroded, being subject to violent downpours followed by prolonged droughts; much of the zone has been stripped of its grass cover. Rolling hills predominate in the southernmost province of Alicante, softening the sharp contrast between coastal plain and mountainous hinterlands found elsewhere in the autonomous community of Valencia. The most sizable stream in the autonomous community, the Segura River, flows eastward through Alicante province. A Mediterranean climate prevails over the autonomous community, which has rainy and mild winters; winters are harsher in the hinterlands. Annual precipitation is low, ranging from 16 to 20 inches (400 to 500 mm), and the agricultural wealth of the coastal plains is based on intensive irrigation. Annual precipitation ranges from 17 inches (430 mm) in the province of Castellón to 11 inches (280 mm) around Elche; the number of months without rain increases from north to south.
The seacoast has been densely populated since the Muslim occupation (714–1238), and the region’s rich farmland is subdivided into small farms, or minifundios. The owners of the minifundios form a rural middle class with strong ties to the urban middle class through marriage and social mobility. The population is becoming increasingly concentrated in the coastal cities, making Valencia one of the largest cities in Spain. The development of the urban infrastructure has not kept pace with the growth of the cities, and urban sprawl is reducing the availability of the rich surrounding farmland.
Intensive irrigation has made the autonomous community one of the richest farming regions in the Mediterranean basin, with individual farms producing two to four cash crops a year. One-fourth of the land under cultivation is irrigated, with oranges and rice being the main crops. The large-scale cultivation of oranges dates from the late 19th century, when rail transport opened up the European market to Valencian produce. However, Israel, Algeria, and South Africa subsequently cut into the Valencian share of the world orange market. Rice paddies are widespread, and their exceptionally high yields frequently result in overproduction. One-third of the arable land is dry-farmed, producing traditional Mediterranean grapes and almonds. Many cooperatives are found in the region.
The traditional middle-class farmstead is the alquería, which is built of stone and features a central passage allowing carts access to an enclosed courtyard behind the living quarters. In the upper story the harvest is stored. The farmstead of the poorer peasant is the barraca, which is built of reeds and adobe and roofed with thatch.
The structure of the manufacturing sector closely parallels that of the agricultural sector, with production generally in the hands of small proprietors whose establishments manufacture a wide range of consumer goods, including furniture, candy, shoes, leather and plastic products, and toys. Factories are widely dispersed, though there is some concentration around the centres of Valencia city, Castellón de la Plana, Alcoy, Elche, Elda, Onteniente, and Sagunto. Several large automotive and metallurgical plants are concentrated in Valencia city.
The region’s service sector is well developed, accounting for a large share of the gross domestic product and employing a commensurate portion of the workforce. Tourism has expanded considerably, though it is unevenly distributed, favouring Alicante over the other provinces in the autonomous community.
Catalan has traditionally been the language of the middle class, and a Valencian variant has been discernible since the 15th century. Notable Valencian writers of the early 20th century include Vicente Blasco Ibáñez and Gabriel Miró; both authors, however, wrote in Castilian.
There are numerous religious festivals, many of them recalling the Muslim occupation. The gayates, or festivities, of Castellón commemorate the Reconquest, while various towns in Valencia and Alicante stage festivals featuring Moors and Christians.
Valencia (Valentia) was a prosperous area during the Roman Empire and was taken by the Visigoths in the early 5th century ad. In the early 8th century it was captured by the Moors, and in 1021 it became the newly established independent Moorish kingdom of Valencia. The Christian reconquest of the kingdom of Valencia from Muslim rule by the Crown of Aragon was completed by 1245. The kingdom continued to be administered separately under its own parliament and laws; the Furs de València, which were promulgated in 1261, confirmed Valencia’s autonomy under the Crown of Aragon. The regional government was formalized as the Generalitat del Regne in 1418 and was nullified in 1707 by the decree of Nueva Planta, which brought the region under the laws and administration prevailing in the rest of Spain. Various political parties advocating Valencian autonomy came to the fore after World War I.
