Veracruz, in full Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave, formerly (1863–2003) in full Veracruz-Llave,  estado (state), east-central Mexico. Veracruz is bounded by the state of Tamaulipas to the north, by the Gulf of Mexico to the east, and by the states of Tabasco and Chiapas to the southeast, Oaxaca to the southwest, and Puebla, Hidalgo, and San Luis Potosí to the west. The state capital is Xalapa (Jalapa; in full, Xalapa Enríquez).
Veracruz is shaped like a crescent, stretching some 400 miles (650 km) along the Gulf coast but averaging only about 60 miles (100 km) in width. The coast consists of low sandy strips interspersed with tidewater streams and lagoons, but the relief rises inland to the Sierra Madre Oriental, which is cut by valleys often covered by dense tropical rainforest. Citlaltépetl (Orizaba Peak), Mexico’s highest point, at 18,406 feet (5,610 metres), is located at the juncture of the Sierra Madre highlands and the Cordillera Neo-Volcánica. More than 40 rivers and tributaries provide water for irrigation and hydroelectric power; they also carry rich silt down from the eroding highlands, which is deposited in the valleys and coastal areas.
The state contains numerous remains of pre-Hispanic Olmec, Totonac, and Huastec cities. El Tajín, a ruined city that reached its apex between the 9th and 13th centuries, was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1992. Spanish colonial settlements began in the 16th century, including the river port of Tlacotalpan, which was made a World Heritage site in 1998. A small but significant proportion of the residents still speak indigenous languages.
Veracruz has one of Mexico’s leading economies. The state has about one-fourth of Mexico’s petroleum reserves and several refineries. Chief agricultural products include coffee, vanilla, sugarcane, tobacco, bananas, coconuts, and vegetables, but farmers depend mainly on corn (maize) and beans. Veracruz is one of the country’s leading producers of beef cattle. Forestry, flowers (notably orchids), and medicinal plants are also important. Among the state’s numerous and varied industries are sugar refining, distilling, chemical processing, metalworking, and textile production. Fisheries in the Gulf of Mexico and processing of the catches form an industry of national importance. Highway, rail, and air connections are good, especially in the south. Besides the major seaport of Veracruz city, there are minor ports at Tuxpan and Coatzacoalcos, among others. A major highway and railroad link Veracruz city and Xalapa to Mexico City.
Veracruz became a state in 1824. Its government is headed by a governor, who is elected to a single term of six years. Members of the unicameral legislature, the State Congress, are elected to three-year terms. The state is divided into local governmental units called municipios (municipalities), each of which is headquartered in a prominent city, town, or village. Veracruz University (1944) is located in Xalapa. The anthropological museum in Xalapa (1957) displays Olmec, Totonac, and Huastec artifacts. Area 27,683 square miles (71,699 square km). Pop. (2010) 7,643,194.
