West Devon,  borough (district), administrative and historic county of Devon, southwestern England. The borough lies directly north and east of the city of Plymouth. West Devon encompasses most of Dartmoor in the county’s southeast and is separated from the county of Cornwall on the west by the narrow lowland valley of the River Tamar. The small market and administrative centres of Tavistock and Okehampton are located on the southwestern and northern edges of Dartmoor, respectively.
The wild upland area of Dartmoor comprises about half of West Devon and has an elevation of 1,000 to 2,000 feet (305 to 610 metres); it is rough grazed by hardy breeds of sheep (such as Blackface) and wild ponies. The poorly drained clay soils of the lower-lying dissected plateau in the northern and western parts of the district are grazed by both sheep and cattle, and some cereals and fodder crops are cultivated. The mixed farming of early-season vegetables, fruits, pigs, and poultry is pursued in the lower Tamar valley near Plymouth.
West Devon was a centre of prehistoric, Anglo-Saxon, and Norman settlement and of tin and, later, copper and lead mining; remains of those periods of occupation or exploitation, including cairns, clapper bridges, and extant medieval farmhouses, are found throughout the district. In 2006 the mines in West Devon and nearby Cornwall county were designated a UNESCO World Heritage site. The site of Morwellham, an early 19th-century copper-shipping port on the River Tamar southwest of Tavistock, has become an open-air museum of industrial archaeology, where remains of inclined planes, quays, waterwheels, and the harbour itself have been preserved. The 13th-century Buckland Abbey south of Tavistock was lived in by the families of Sir Richard Grenville and Sir Francis Drake, both famous seafarers, and contains a maritime history museum. The austere granite Castle Drogo on the northeastern edge of Dartmoor is Great Britain’s last private home built (1910–30) on a grand scale. Dartmoor Prison, 7 miles (11 km) east of Tavistock, is England’s principal correction centre for serious offenders. Area 448 square miles (1,160 square km). Pop. (2001) 48,843; (2011) 53,553.
