West Sulawesi, Indonesian Sulawesi Barat,  propinsi (or provinsi; province), western Celebes (Sulawesi), Indonesia, bounded by Central Sulawesi (Sulawesi Tengah) to the north and northeast, South Sulawesi (Sulawesi Selatan) to the southeast, and Makassar Strait to the south and west. The capital is Mamuju, on the province’s southwestern coast. Area 6,482 square miles (16,787 square km). Pop. (2010 prelim.) 1,158,651.
West Sulawesi has a narrow strip of lowlands along its western coast and a somewhat more expansive area of low hills in the south. The central, north-central, and eastern regions, by contrast, are mountainous, with several peaks reaching above 8,200 feet (2,500 metres) in elevation. The province is drained by several rivers, the longest of which are the westward-flowing Karama, which bisects the northern third of the province, and the southward-flowing Sadang.
Roughly two-thirds of West Sulawesi is forested. Ebony, a few hardwoods of the Dipterocarpaceae family, and various palms, including rattan, are common in the lowland forests, although no particular tree or plant species is dominant. Oak and chinquapin (Castanopsis; closely related to chestnut) trees predominate in the lower montane areas. Conifers, such as the enormous Agathis trees (which produce dammar), are found at higher elevations.
In biogeographical terms, West Sulawesi is part of Wallacea, the transitional zone between the Asian, or Oriental (Paleotropical), and Australian (Notogaean) faunal realms. Consequently, it is home to numerous unique species, including babirusas, anoas (dwarf buffalo), and spectral tarsiers. Chickenlike megapodes known as maleos (Macrocephalon maleo) also inhabit the region.
West Sulawesi’s population is dominated by the Mandar, who live mostly in the south. The eastern highlands are home to various Toraja peoples, who together constitute a significant minority. Also important are the Mamuju of the west-central coastal area, as well as a cluster of small groups, historically united as the Pitu Ulunna Salu (“Seven Headwaters”), who inhabit the southwestern region. The most prominent of the Seven Headwaters peoples are the Bambam and Ulumandak. West Sulawesi also has notable communities of Buginese, Makassarese, and Javanese, especially in the lowland coastal areas. The Mandar, Mamuju, Buginese, Makassarese, and Javanese follow Islam, while the other groups follow Islam, Christianity, or a local religion.
Agriculture is the mainstay of West Sulawesi’s economy. Rice is the primary food crop, followed by corn (maize), cassava, and yams. Coconuts, coffee, cocoa, cashews, and cloves are the main plantation crops. Horticulture yields onions, tomatoes, eggplant, chili peppers, bananas, pineapples, mangoes, and various green vegetables. Cows, water buffalo, horses, goats, pigs, and poultry are the principal livestock. Marine, brackish water, and freshwater fisheries are important, and rattan is a notable forest commodity.
After agriculture, services—especially government—and trade are the largest sectors of the economy. West Sulawesi’s main overland route is the Trans-Sulawesi Highway, which generally follows the coast. Several other major roads serve the larger cities, particularly in the south-central region. The province has a number of seaports, and there is an airport near Mamuju.
Celebes was part of the Buddhist Srivijaya empire of Sumatra until the 14th century, when it came under the influence of the Hindu Majapahit empire of eastern Java. With the gradual disintegration of the Majapahit empire toward the end of the 15th century, many kingdoms were established across the island. The ruler of the southwestern state of Gowa—a Makassarese domain—adopted Islam in 1605. The kingdom soon became a sultanate, and it gradually extended its control over the northern states.
Just a few years after the conversion of Gowa, the Dutch arrived in Celebes. Their establishment of a trading post at Makassar, on the island’s southwestern peninsula, ultimately intensified the rivalry between Gowa and the neighbouring Buginese state of Bone. In 1660 the Buginese nobleman Arung Palakka was defeated by the Makassarese and took refuge on the island of Buton, off the southeastern coast of Celebes. Later that decade the Dutch rose in support of Arung Palakka and conquered Gowa. Arung Palakka later became not only the ruler of Bone but the most powerful figure in southern Celebes, and throughout his reign he extended his influence northward. The 18th century was marked by ongoing military confrontation between the Makassarese and Buginese states. The Dutch intervened in the conflict, and by the end of the century they had established colonial supremacy over both domains. Temporary control of Celebes by the British in 1811–16 encouraged the state of Bone to rebel against the Dutch in 1825. That resistance was not crushed until 1860. In 1911 Dutch rule was established across the island.
Following Japanese occupation (1942–45) during World War II, Celebes formed part of the Dutch-sponsored state of East Indonesia until it was incorporated into the Republic of Indonesia in 1950. The island was split in 1960 into two large administrative units—one encompassing the northern region, the other spanning the south. In 1964, in response to ongoing social and political unrest, these units were split further into the four provinces of Central, North, South, and Southeast Sulawesi. West Sulawesi was created from the northwestern segment of South Sulawesi in 2004.
