York,  city and unitary authority, geographic county of North Yorkshire, historic county of Yorkshire, northern England. It lies at the confluence of the Rivers Ouse and Foss, about midway between London and Edinburgh. It is the cathedral city of the archbishop of York and was historically the ecclesiastical capital of northern England. York is also the traditional county town of Yorkshire, located at the convergence of the three ridings (“thirds”; the administrative jurisdictions into which Yorkshire was formerly divided).
The Romans occupied the site in 71 ce and built a fortress and wall, traces of which remain. Under the name Eboracum, the settlement served as the Romans’ northern military headquarters until they withdrew about 400 ce. Anglo-Saxon rule eventually followed. In the 7th century Paulinus became the first archbishop of York, and Edwin, king of Northumbria, built a church where the present Minster stands. The Danes conquered York in 867 and retained it as their Northumbrian capital. The city’s present name was derived from the Danish Yorvick.
York suffered severely in William I’s conquest of northern England. Part of the city was demolished, land was flooded, and two defensive castles (now sites of Clifford’s Tower and the Castle Museum complex) were built to subdue the rebellious north. In time the city revived and prospered as a staple (wholesale commerce) town, dealing especially in wool. The York cycle of 48 mystery plays, performed by York’s many medieval craft guilds, survives. The city was incorporated in the 12th century and for a time was second only to London in size and importance. York’s Cathedral (Minster) of St. Peter, the largest Gothic church in England, was built between the 13th and the 15th century. Other medieval buildings include the Guildhall (1446–48; restored after bombing in World War II), the Merchant Adventurers’ Hall (1357), St. William’s College (1453; founded for chantry priests), and many more. The medieval walls that surround the city are 2.5 miles (4 km) in circumference and date from the 14th century.
Modern York is a major rail junction and the site of the National Railway Museum (1975). The city’s industrial products include railway cars as well as shock absorbers, optical instruments, glass containers, and sugar and chocolate candies. York’s many medieval churches and other historic buildings make tourism a significant component of the local economy. The University of York (1963) and the archbishop’s residence at Bishopthorpe lie just outside the city centre. The city and unitary authority also encompass open countryside and several rural villages. Area 105 square miles (272 square km). Pop. (2001) 181,094; (2011) 198,051.
