Zabaykalye, in full Zabaykalsky Kray, English in full Transbaikal Territory,  kray (territory) in Siberia, Russia. The territory was created in 2008 by the merger of the former oblast (region) of Chita with the former autonomous okrug (district) of Agin Buryat. The name of the territory means “east of Lake Baikal.” Although Zabaykalye and Lake Baikal are not contiguous, the territory is situated to the east of the republic of Buryatiya, which touches the lake’s eastern edge. The capital is Chita city.
The territory’s terrain is marked with a complex series of mountain ranges (principally the Yablonovo), plateaus, valleys, and broad basins. Most of the region is in coniferous forest, chiefly of Dahurian larch; in southern depressions there is forest-steppe and steppe vegetation. The climate is dry and severely continental. Apart from the Buryat, who constitute a significant minority group, the bulk of the population consists of Russians.
In 1654 Nerchinsk was founded as a major trading centre with China. After the 1689 Treaty of Nerchinsk, which halted the Russian advance down the Amur River, the region remained a frontier area and a place of exile and penal labour for criminals and political prisoners in the silver mines east of Nerchinsk. There was little free settlement until the coming of the Trans-Siberian Railroad in the 1890s. The railway remains the main axis of communication, and much international trade is conducted via the rail crossing at the territory’s eastern border with China. Mining and primary-ore processing dominate the economy; minerals and metals produced have included gold, tin, tungsten, molybdenum, lead, zinc, fluorspar, lithium, tantalum, and some lignite (brown coal). Petrovsk-Zabaykalsky is a metallurgical centre of regional significance, and Chita is a centre of manufacturing. Timber working and agriculture are important as well. Sheep, cattle, and reindeer are raised; furs are produced on fur farms; and grains such as rye, oats, barley, and spring wheat are grown. The territory is also known for its spas and resorts. Area 166,600 square miles (431,500 square km). Pop. (2008 est.) 1,118,931.
