Mike Pence, in full Michael Richard Pence,  (born June 7, 1959, Columbus, Indiana, U.S.), 48th vice president of the United States (2017–21) in the Republican administration of Pres. Donald Trump. In 2020 Trump and Pence were defeated by their Democratic opponents, Joe Biden and Kamala Harris. Pence had previously served as governor of Indiana (2013–17).
Pence was raised in an Irish Catholic family; his parents owned several gas stations. While studying history at Hanover College (B.A., 1981), he became a “born-again, evangelical Catholic.” It was at church that he met Karen Batten, and the couple married in 1985. After earning a law degree at Indiana University in 1986, he entered private practice. Two years later he unsuccessfully ran for the U.S. House of Representatives, campaigning as a populist and social conservative. In 1990 Pence staged another failed bid, which drew criticism for its negative ads. He later wrote “Confessions of a Negative Campaigner” (1991), an essay in which he apologized for his strategy in that campaign, believing it un-Christian.  He later hosted an Indiana radio talk show (1992–99), which he described as “Rush Limbaugh on decaf,” and a Sunday morning local TV program (1995–99).
Through his media experience, Pence became an effective orator and developed his conservative brand. In 2000 he again ran for the House of Representatives and this time was successful, taking office the following year. During his six terms in Congress, he became especially known for his social conservatism; he often stated that he was “a Christian, a conservative, and a Republican, in that order.” He opposed same-sex marriage and the repeal of “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell,” a U.S. policy under which gay and lesbian service members had to conceal their sexuality or risk expulsion from the military. Strongly opposed to abortion, Pence pushed to defund Planned Parenthood. He also garnered notice for breaking with his party on a number of economic issues, notably opposing the 2008 bailout of financial institutions during the subprime mortgage crisis. In addition, in 2003 he voted against the Medicare drug expansion, which he argued was an unfunded entitlement. His willingness to challenge the party establishment made him popular within the Tea Party movement.
In 2012 Pence ran for governor of Indiana. His campaign focused on economic issues, notably job creation and tax cuts. After narrowly winning the election, he took office in 2013. Two years later he received national attention when he signed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA), a state law that purported to protect individuals’ ability to exercise their religious beliefs. Opponents, however, claimed that the bill allowed discrimination, giving businesses permission to refuse to serve gays and lesbians. Amid a widespread backlash—which included companies and sports leagues threatening boycotts—Pence signed a revision that prevented service from being denied on the basis of “sexual orientation, race, religion, or disability.” He also made headlines in 2016 when he signed a law that barred abortions when the fetus had a disability.
On July 15, 2016, Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, named Pence as his running mate. It was thought that he would help Trump with conservative voters as well as provide political experience, which the presidential candidate lacked. In addition, he was a popular choice with the party’s establishment, which had become worried about Trump’s often controversial remarks as well as his failure to repudiate racist elements among his supporters. At the Republican National Convention the following week, both candidates received the party’s official nomination. A month before the election, the ticket faced a major scandal after a hot-mic video from 2005 surfaced in which Trump told an entertainment reporter in vulgar language that he had tried to seduce a married woman and bragged about grabbing women by the genitals. Pence stated that he was offended by the comments—later reports, denied by Pence, claimed that he tried to replace Trump as the presidential pick—but he remained Trump’s running mate. On November 8, 2016, the Trump-Pence ticket defeated Hillary Clinton and her running mate, Tim Kaine. Pence resigned as governor of Indiana shortly before being sworn in as vice president on January 20, 2017.
Once in office, Pence sought to advance Trump’s policies and staunchly defended him through a number of scandals. In 2019 he notably opposed the House’s impeachment proceedings against Trump, who allegedly had withheld aid to Ukraine in order to pressure the country into opening a corruption investigation into Joe Biden; in 2020 Biden became the Democratic presidential nominee. While Trump was impeached by the House, he was acquitted in the Senate trial in February 2020. That month Pence became head of the government’s task force handling the coronavirus outbreak, which, in March, was designated a global pandemic. As the cases spread in the United States, businesses and schools began to close, and the economy entered a downturn that rivaled the Great Depression. The government’s handling of the crisis drew sharp criticism as some people alleged a lack of leadership and claimed that both Trump and Pence made misleading or false statements that minimized the seriousness of the coronavirus.
In October 2020, about a month before the general election, Trump tested positive for the virus. As the president underwent medical treatment, Pence assumed a greater role in the reelection campaign. In the November election Biden and Harris were declared the winners, though the Trump-Pence ticket challenged the results, alleging voter fraud. However, no evidence was presented to back these claims, and by early December all states had certified the results. Pence subsequently faced pressure from Trump to block Congress’s certification of the election, which was scheduled to take place on January 6, 2021. That day Pence released a letter in which he stated that he would not try to overturn the results, noting that he lacked the “unilateral authority” to throw out electors, a false claim that the president had repeatedly advanced. Shortly thereafter Congress began the certification process, but it was halted when Trump supporters, who had just attended a rally with the president, stormed the Capitol. Pence was taken to a secure location, and some of the attackers were heard saying that he should be hanged. The siege lasted for several hours, but Pence and Congress eventually reconvened, and Biden’s win was certified.
Many accused Trump of inciting the Capitol attack, and on January 12 the House of Representatives passed a resolution that called on Pence to invoke the Twenty-fifth Amendment. However, he had earlier rejected the suggestion, stating that it was not “in the best interest of our Nation or consistent with our Constitution.” On January 20 Pence’s term as vice president ended.
