Al-Ahly, (Arabic: “The National”)  also called the Red Devils,  Egyptian professional football (soccer) club based in Cairo. Al-Ahly is one of Africa’s most successful and best-supported football clubs. The team is nicknamed the “Red Devils” for its red jerseys. In December 2000 the Confédération Africaine de Football (CAF) awarded Al-Ahly the title of African Club of the Century.
Al-Ahly was formed in 1907 as a sports club for Egyptian high-school students. Egypt was occupied by British forces at the time, and an Englishman, Mitchel Ince, was the club’s first president. The club took part in local and regional competitions, including the Sultan Hussein Cup, which was contested from 1917 until 1938. Al-Ahly won that competition seven times.
The Egyptian League (now called the Egyptian Premier League) began in the 1948–49 season, and Al-Ahly won the league’s first title. It would not lose a league championship until 1960, when Al-Ahly’s fiercest rival, Zamalek SC, won its own first league title. In total, Al-Ahly has won 42 Egyptian league championships, including eight in a row, beginning with the 2004–05 season. It has also won the Egypt Cup 36 times and the Egyptian Super Cup (a newer competition started in 2001 and played between the winners of the Egyptian Premier League and the winners of the Egypt Cup) a record 11 times. Abroad, Al-Ahly won its first African Champions League in 1982 and has won that competition 8 additional times.
Al-Ahly used to play in the relatively small Mokhtar El-Tetsh Stadium but now uses Cairo International Stadium, which seats more than 74,000 spectators. The club shares the stadium with Zamalek SC. Games between the two sides are often extremely tense and watched by football fans from all over Egypt. So intense would be the pressure on Egyptian referees that foreign referees are brought in to officiate these matches.
In February 2012 Al-Ahly’s passionate fans (known as the “Ultras”) were at the centre of one of the deadliest disasters in football history. Immediately following a 3–1 loss to the Al-Masry club in Port Said, Al-Masry fans stormed the pitch and opposing stands, and 74 people died in the attack and subsequent rush to the stadium exits. Many suspected that the attack was organized and politically motivated, as it took place nearly one year after a notable clash during the Egypt uprising of 2011—a number of Al-Ahly Ultras had been prominent protesters in Tahrir Square against the Hosni Mubarak regime—and many of the storming Al-Masry fans were armed with weapons (including knives, swords, and clubs). As a result of the riot, the remainder of the 2011–12 Egyptian Premier League season was canceled.
