Celtic, in full Celtic Football Club, also called Celtic FC,  Scottish professional football (soccer) team based in Glasgow. Nicknamed “the Bhoys,” (the h is said to have been added to phonetically represent an Irish pronunciation of the word boys) Celtic shares a fierce rivalry with the crosstown Rangers, which is often of a sectarian nature, with Celtic and its supporters seen as the Catholic team and Rangers as the Protestant side. Together, the two teams have long dominated Scottish domestic football.
Celtic was founded in 1887 at a meeting in St. Mary’s Church hall in the Calton district of Glasgow. The club played its first match, against Rangers, the following year, winning 5–2. Celtic moved to its longtime home, Celtic Park (also known as Parkhead), in 1892. Renovated in 1995, the stadium now accommodates more than 60,000 spectators. Celtic began playing in white shirts with green collars, and the club’s famous uniform of a green-and-white striped shirt with white shorts debuted in 1903.
Celtic won its first league championship in the 1892–93 season and has won 50 in total. The club has also won the Scottish League Cup 16 times and the Scottish Cup 37 times. Celtic went through a lean run of 11 seasons without a league championship before the arrival of Jock Stein as manager in 1965, but the team went on to win nine Scottish league championships in a row from 1965–66 to 1973–74.
The club has also had a number of notable accomplishments outside of domestic play. In 1967 Celtic became the first British club to win the prestigious European Cup (now the Champions League), defeating Inter Milan 2–1 in Portugal. That Celtic team—which featured star players such as Billy McNeill, Bobby Lennox, and Jimmy Johnstone—is remembered as “The Lisbon Lions.” Celtic almost repeated the feat three years later when it was the runner-up in the 1970 European Cup final. Wim Jansen, a player on the Dutch team Feyenoord that beat Celtic on that occasion, in 1997 became the club’s first manager from outside of Britain or Ireland. Six years later Celtic reached the 2003 Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) Cup final but lost to FC Porto.
