Didier Drogba, in full Didier Yves Drogba Tébily,  (born March 11, 1978, Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire), Ivorian professional football (soccer) player who was Côte d’Ivoire’s all-time leader in goals scored in international matches and was twice named the African Footballer of the Year (2006, 2009).
At age five Drogba was sent to France in the care of an uncle, a professional footballer. After three years he returned home, only to go back to France after three more years in Côte d’Ivoire. At age 15 Drogba became an apprentice with second-division Levallois, outside Paris, and then in 1997–98 he moved to Le Mans FC, where in his second season he signed as a professional.
In January 2002 Drogba joined top-division Guingamp, tallying 17 goals in 34 league games. This success prompted a 2003 trade to Olympique de Marseille, where he scored 19 goals in 35 domestic matches and an additional 11 goals in European play as the club reached the 2004 Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) Cup final, where it lost 2–0 to Valencia of Spain.
Drogba moved to England’s Chelsea FC in 2004 in a trade from Marseille. Though Chelsea won its first Premier League championship in 50 years the following season, its new centre-forward was inconsistent. Drogba was quick, alert, and supremely confident in his own ability, though he showed a tendency to a quick temper in matches. Even in his second season, when Chelsea’s title was successfully defended, fan appreciation was still muted. Yet by the end of the 2006–07 season, when Chelsea failed in its attempt to take a third straight league championship, Drogba had won over most of the skeptical Chelsea fans by being the league’s top scorer (with 20 goals) and by finishing the season with an overall tally of 33 goals. In addition, he was the key player in Chelsea’s winning both the Football Association (FA) Cup and Carling Cup trophies that season, as he scored the club’s only goals in the finals of those two tournaments. Drogba helped lead Chelsea to the 2008 Champions League final, where he once again earned fan ire by slapping an opposing player and getting sent off in a match that Chelsea ultimately lost to Manchester United by one penalty kick. In 2009 he earned a measure of redemption as Chelsea won its second FA Cup with Drogba on the squad. The following year Chelsea won both the FA Cup and the Premier League title, with Drogba leading the league in goals—29 for the season. In the 2012 Champions League final, he scored Chelsea’s lone regulation goal and the winning extra-time penalty kick to guide Chelsea past Bayern Munich and capture the team’s first European club championship.
In the following off-season, Drogba signed with the Chinese club Shanghai Shenhua, but he played only 11 matches with the team before returning to European football as a member of Istanbul’s Galatasaray SK in January 2013. He helped Galatasaray win the Turkish first-division championship in his inaugural season with the team. In July 2014 he returned to Chelsea on a one-year contract. The following year he signed with the Montreal Impact of Major League Soccer in North America. In 2017 he joined the Phoenix Rising of the second-tier United Soccer League as both a player and part owner. However, the following year he retired from competitive play.
Drogba made his first international appearance for Côte d’Ivoire in 2002. In 2006 he captained Côte d’Ivoire to the African Cup of Nations final match, where the team lost to Egypt on penalty kicks. His performance in the qualifying matches for the 2006 World Cup was key to Drogba’s winning that year’s African Footballer of the Year award, as his nine goals in eight preliminary matches catapulted the Ivorians into the World Cup for the first time. Drogba led Côte d’Ivoire to a fourth-place finish in the 2008 Cup of Nations, and the team qualified for its second consecutive World Cup in 2010. In 2012 he captained his country to a runners-up finish at the Cup of Nations and helped Côte d’Ivoire qualify for the 2014 World Cup, where his team, Les Éléphants, agonizingly missed out on advancing to the tournament’s knockout stage for the first time by conceding a stoppage-time goal on a penalty kick in its final group-stage match. Shortly thereafter Drogba announced that he was retiring from international play.
In 2011 Drogba’s native Côte d’Ivoire underwent civil war following a disputed presidential election, and in its aftermath Drogba was appointed to an 11-member truth and reconciliation commission established to ease the country’s divide. The commission submitted a final report in 2014.
Drogba was involved in philanthropic causes, and in 2007 he established the Didier Drogba Foundation.
