El Hadji Diouf, in full El Hadji Ousseynou Diouf,  (born January 15, 1981, Dakar, Senegal), Senegalese football (soccer) player who was named African Football Confederation (Confédération Africaine de Football; CAF) Player of the Year for 2001 and 2002. He was a fiery, controversial figure off the field and established himself as either an out-and-out striker or a right-side midfielder whose strength, pace, and quick thinking often unsettled opposing defenders.
When Diouf was 17, he went to France to play First Division professional football with the Sochaux club. Soon after Sochaux was relegated to the Second Division, Diouf was picked up by Rennes for the 1999–2000 season, which enabled him to continue playing in the First Division. He acquired a criminal record after crashing a teammate’s car and injuring a female passenger while driving without a license, though the French courts sentenced him to community service rather than prison. Subsequently, Rennes transferred him to Lens in 2000, where he played for two seasons.
In addition to playing for French football clubs, Diouf also was also a member of Senegal’s national team. Diouf and the team made it to the finals of the African Cup of Nations in February 2002 but ultimately lost to Cameroon. Senegal also qualified for the 2002 World Cup and upset defending champion France in the first round. Although the team succumbed in overtime to Turkey in the quarterfinals, Diouf had been outstanding throughout the tournament and was named to the 2002 World Cup All-Star team.
Following the 2002 World Cup, Diouf joined England’s Liverpool FC. During a Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) Cup quarterfinal match against Celtic in Scotland on March 13, 2003, Diouf had the misfortune to overrun the perimeter of the pitch, and he fell into the crowd. He reacted by spitting at a Celtic fan, and Liverpool fined him heavily for his misconduct. He was charged with assault, pleaded guilty, and was fined £5,000.
During the 2004–05 season, Diouf was on loan from Liverpool and played for Bolton. His performance was strong on the field; he was popular with the fans; and he fit well with the Bolton team, which signed him at the beginning of the 2005–06 season. His pattern of volatile behaviour continued to follow him, though: in late 2006 he was arrested after he allegedly assaulted his wife, but he was released without being charged.
Diouf was named captain of Senegal’s national team in fall 2006. While he was team captain, he announced his retirement from international football in fall 2007, which was largely viewed as a protest against organizational problems of the team’s management. His retirement was short-lived, however, and he returned to play with Senegal in the 2008 African Cup of Nations competition. Also in 2008, Diouf left Bolton and signed with Sunderland, but his performance there was lacklustre. After less than a year with the team, he was transferred to Blackburn Rovers in January 2009. In July 2011 he received a five-year suspension from all football-related activities in Senegal after he claimed that the governing body of African football was corrupt. Three months later he signed with the second-division English club Doncaster Rovers. In 2012 he joined second-division Leeds United. Two years later he signed with the Malaysian squad Sabah FA, with whom he played one season before retiring from professional football.
