Eric Cantona, in full Eric Daniel Pierre Cantona,  (born May 24, 1966, Marseille, France), French football (soccer) player who was one of the sport’s biggest stars in the 1990s and is best known for his key role in reviving the English powerhouse club Manchester United and for his temperamental play.
As a child, Cantona played for a well-regarded youth team based outside Marseille until he was discovered by the top-division football club AJ Auxerre at age 15. He made his first-team debut with Auxerre during the 1983–84 season and established himself in 1986–87. That same season he had his first international experience, playing for the French under-21 team. In 1988 Cantona was transferred to Olympique de Marseille, and around that same time his fiery temper began to have consequences on the pitch: he was banned from the national team for a year for openly criticizing France’s coach, and he was suspended from Marseille in 1989 after throwing his shirt at a referee during a charity match.
Unhappy with Cantona’s behaviour, Marseille loaned him to Bordeaux, Montpellier (where he helped the team win the 1990 French Cup), and Nîmes. After half a season at Nîmes, he was offered a trial by Sheffield Wednesday FC in England. He walked out on the club, however, and in February 1992 signed with Leeds United, where he became an overnight sensation and helped the team to the English First Division (now Premier League) title three months later.
After Leeds was eliminated from the European Cup, Cantona was surprisingly transferred to Manchester United. In 1993 he was a key factor in Manchester’s first league title in 26 years as he became the first player to win the championship with different teams in successive seasons. He led the club to a second Premier League championship as well as to an FA Cup win the following year. However, Cantona’s on-field success was soon overshadowed by his most controversial act: as he was leaving the pitch after receiving a red card in a January 1995 match against Crystal Palace FC, he was taunted by an opposing fan and retaliated by jumping into the stands and kicking the fan in the chest. As a result, he was banned from the game for eight months and sentenced to two weeks in jail (later reduced to 120 hours of community service). He returned to Manchester for the 1995–96 season and promptly led the team to both league and FA Cup wins in his first year back. After helping Manchester in 1997 to a fourth league championship in a five-year span, he retired from football at age 30. Cantona was much-beloved by the Manchester United faithful, who voted him the club’s Player of the Century in a 2001 poll.
Cantona began an acting career after his retirement, appearing in films in both French and English, including Elizabeth (1998), a drama that starred Cate Blanchett, and Looking for Eric (2009), which tells the story of a Manchester United fan who gets life lessons from an insightful Cantona, who appears as a hallucination. Cantona’s personal philosophy was expressed in the book Cantona on Cantona (1996; cowritten with Alex Flynn).
