Hristo Stoichkov,  (born February 8, 1966, Plovdiv, Bulgaria), Bulgarian football (soccer) player who was an explosive striker, noted for his fierce competitiveness.
Stoichkov began his soccer career early. By age 12 he was playing for Maritza Plovdiv in the Bulgarian second division, where his goal-scoring prowess earned him a contract with the powerful CSKA Sofia in 1984. The following year Stoichkov and five others received lifetime bans for fighting during a match. The bans were lifted 10 months later, however, after Bulgaria qualified for the 1986 World Cup. Stoichkov did not play for that World Cup team, but in 1987 he made the first of 60 appearances as a Bulgarian international. His professional career skyrocketed in 1989 when he tallied 38 goals for Sofia and shared the award for Europe’s leading scorer.
In 1991 Stoichkov signed with FC Barcelona. That year he helped the team win its first of four consecutive Spanish league championships. In 1992 Barcelona won the European Cup. Two years later Stoichkov was named European Player of the Year. Known as “the Raging Bull” for his emotional intensity, Stoichkov was a huge fan favourite, though he often battled with the team’s coach, Johan Cruyff. Many were stunned when Stoichkov shifted teams in the middle of the 1994–95 season, moving to Parma in the Italian first division. After playing there for one season, he returned to Barcelona and helped the team win the Spanish league championship in 1998. He subsequently played for a succession of teams, including several Major League Soccer teams in the United States.
Stoichkov was at his best during Bulgaria’s remarkable 1994 World Cup run. In five previous appearances, Bulgaria had failed to gain a World Cup victory (10 losses, 6 ties), but after the fall of the communist regime in 1989, the country’s best players were free to hone their talents against the world’s finest in leagues in western Europe. To qualify for the tournament, Bulgaria defeated heavily favoured France. Bulgaria then qualified for the final 16 by beating Greece and Argentina in group play. Led by Stoichkov, Bulgaria made it to the semifinals, which included a quarterfinal victory over defending champion Germany. Only a hard-fought loss to Italy kept Bulgaria from reaching the finals. With his six goals, Stoichkov was the leading goal scorer of the tournament.
After his retirement from play in 2003, Stoichkov became a coach, and in 2004 he was named head of the Bulgarian national team. Poor results and frequent clashes with players, however, led to his resignation in 2007. He went on to hold four mostly tumultuous managerial positions for club teams in Europe and South Africa over the following six years. In 2013 Stoichkov switched careers and became a Spanish-language football television commentator.
