Justin Fashanu, byname of Justinus Soni Fashanu,  (born February 19, 1961, London, England—found dead May 2, 1998, London), British football (soccer) player who was the first professional footballer to come out as gay.
Fashanu was initially raised in the London area of Hackney, where his Nigerian father was a law student and his Guyanese mother a nurse. When he was a young boy, his parents split up and his father returned to Nigeria. Fashanu and his three siblings were put into care, and he (along with his younger brother John, also a future professional footballer) spent most of his youth with foster parents in Shropham, Norfolk.
Fashanu first made headlines as a boxer, reaching two national finals for his age group as a teenager. Tall, strong, and aggressive, he was also making rapid progress in the youth and reserve football teams of Norwich City, playing as a central striker. He made his debut for the club’s first team at age 17. Fashanu played 103 matches for Norwich City Football Club (FC), scoring 40 goals. While at Norwich he was chosen for the English national under-21 team.
In 1981 he joined Nottingham Forest, becoming the first black footballer to be transferred for a fee of £1 million. He endured a miserable season with the team, scoring only three goals while being subjected to extreme verbal abuse from club manager Brian Clough. During that season Fashanu became a born-again Christian and struggled the rest of his life to reconcile his religious beliefs and his sexuality. After playing on loan for Southampton FC, Fashanu was transferred to Notts County FC in 1982. A year later he injured his right knee, and he was never able to play at the same level again. He moved to Brighton & Hove Albion FC in 1985, but his contract was cancelled in 1986, and he was advised to retire. Following an operation in Los Angeles, Fashanu played professionally in North America while unsuccessfully attempting a comeback in England. In 1990, knowing a British Sunday newspaper was about to expose his homosexuality, Fashanu sold his story to the British tabloid The Sun. It was published on October 22 under the headline “£1m Soccer Star: I am Gay.”
From 1991 to 1994—playing for Torquay United in England, followed by Airdrieonians FC and Heart of Midlothian FC in Scotland—Fashanu enjoyed his most successful period in British football since leaving Brighton. He was often mocked for being gay by opposing players and fans but was supported by most of his teammates and home fans. His last match as a professional footballer was back in the United States, for the Atlanta Ruckus of the North American Soccer League in 1997.
In 1998 Fashanu became a coach of a new franchise, the Maryland Mania. On March 25 of that year he was accused of sexual assault by a 17-year-old male. After being interviewed by the police, Fashanu returned to England. A warrant was issued for his arrest, and on May 1 Maryland authorities issued a statement noting that they wanted to interview Fashanu. The following day he was found dead in a garage in Shoreditch, London, having hanged himself.
