Kaká, byname of Ricardo Izecson dos Santos Leite,  (born April 22, 1982, Brasília, Brazil), Brazilian football (soccer) player who was named the World Player of the Year by the Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) in 2007.
Kaká owed his nickname to his younger brother Rodrigo, who as a child could not pronounce Ricardo and could manage only “Caca.” Kaká was seven when the family moved to São Paulo. A keen football enthusiast, he was taken on by the São Paulo FC the following year. At age 15 he was given a contract, but his progress was interrupted three years later by a serious spinal injury (sustained in a swimming accident), which threatened his career. He recovered, however, and made his first-team debut in January 2001. That year he scored 12 goals in 27 matches as an attacking midfield player. In 2002 he debuted on the Brazilian national team, playing in a match against Bolivia, and later that year Brazil won the World Cup.
Kaká’s growing exposure on the world stage prompted interest from leading European clubs, and in August 2003 AC Milan signed him for $8.5 million. He made his first appearance in Italy the next month in a 2–0 win over Ancona. Kaká was equally adept at initiating and finishing attacks, and his forceful all-around skills developed with Milan. Kaká finished eighth and seventh, respectively, in balloting for FIFA Player of the Year in 2005 and 2006 before winning almost every available honour in 2007, when he was named both European Player of the Year and FIFA World Player of the Year. In addition, Milan won the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) Champions League title in 2007.
After signing an extension with Milan in early 2008, Kaká became the highest-paid footballer in the world, with an annual income from the game alone amounting to €8 million (about $12 million) and extensive corporate sponsorship deals. Although he professed a desire to finish his career in Milan, Kaká transferred to Spanish powerhouse Real Madrid in June 2009, a move that was spurred by the Italian club’s dire financial straits. He was a key figure on the Real squads that won the 2011 Copa del Rey (Spanish cup) and the 2011–12 La Liga (Spanish top division) title. In 2013 Kaká returned to AC Milan. The following year Kaká and Milan mutually agreed to terminate his contract, and he signed to play with the expansion team Orlando City SC of North America’s Major League Soccer (MLS), which began play in 2015. (He was loaned to São Paolo for the 2014–15 season.) Unlike other notable stars who played in the MLS toward the end of their careers, Kaká kept up his strong play in the U.S., earning All-Star honours in each of his first two seasons with Orlando City. He retired from professional football in December 2017.
In international play Kaká was a key contributor to Brazil’s runs to the quarterfinals at the 2006 and 2010 World Cups, but he failed to make the national side when his home country hosted the 2014 Cup.
