Roberto Baggio, also called the Divine Ponytail,  (born February 18, 1967, Caldogno, Italy), Italian professional football (soccer) player who is widely considered one of the greatest forwards in his country’s storied football history. He won the Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) World Player of the Year award in 1993. He is also famous among football fans for missing the penalty kick that sealed the victory for Brazil in the 1994 World Cup final.
Baggio first played professional football in 1982, with the lower-division team Vicenza. In 1985 he joined Fiorentina, in Florence, a member of Italy’s top division, Serie A. Baggio blossomed into stardom with Fiorentina, his distinctive ponytail becoming famous throughout the country. When he transferred to Juventus for a then record fee in 1990, there were riots in Florence. In his first match against Fiorentina as a member of Juventus, Baggio refused to take a penalty kick, an act that endeared him to his fans in Florence but alienated supporters of his new team. His rocky relationship with Juventus fans was smoothed over in the following years as Baggio led the team to a Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) Cup title in 1993 and a Serie A championship in 1995.
Soon after that championship, he was transferred to AC Milan, where he played a supporting role as his new team won the Serie A title in his first year there. The rest of Baggio’s tenure with Milan was not particularly successful, however, and he signed with Bologna in 1997 in an attempt to revive his career. He scored a career-high 22 goals during the 1997–98 season and then signed a lucrative deal with Inter Milan. Baggio spent two seasons with Inter before closing out his domestic career with four years playing for Brescia.
Baggio had made his international debut for Italy in 1988. He played primarily as a substitute in the 1990 World Cup, but four years later he starred for Italy as it advanced to the final against Brazil. A scoreless tie after regulation play and two overtimes, the match went into a penalty kick shoot-out. With Italy trailing in the shoot-out 3–2, Baggio sent his side’s final shot over the crossbar, and Brazil won the World Cup. His playing time was limited during the 1998 World Cup, but he scored twice in the tournament and became the first Italian with goals in three World Cups.
After he retired from the game in 2004, Baggio was much celebrated for his charitable endeavours, which included becoming a global ambassador for the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in 2005. He served as the technical director of the Italian Football Federation from 2010 to 2013. His autobiography, Una porta nel cielo (“A Goal in the Sky”), was published in 2002.
