Romário, byname of Romário de Souza Faria,  (born January 29, 1966, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil), Brazilian football (soccer) player and politician who was one of the most prolific goal scorers in the sport’s history. He won the Golden Ball as most outstanding performer in the 1994 World Cup after helping Brazil win the tournament.
Romário was raised in Villa Pena, a Rio de Janeiro suburb. It was not until his father took him along to see the Olaria football club that any thoughts of a career in professional sports emerged. He signed with Olaria’s youth squad at age 13 and developed rapidly. In a friendly match against Vasco da Gama he scored four times, a feat that persuaded Vasco to sign him in 1985. Romário won two state championships with the team and scored 73 goals in 123 matches over four seasons. Selected for the Brazilian team that competed at the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul, he was the leading goal scorer in the competition, and Brazil took the silver medal. In 1989 Brazil won the Copa América, with Romário scoring the only goal in the final against Uruguay.
Romário then transferred to the Dutch club PSV Eindhoven, and the team captured both League and Cup championships in his first season (1988–89). His control, mobility, and vision—combined with his strength, fine body balance, and a surprisingly long stride—made him a potent striker, despite being just 5 feet 6 inches (1.68 metres) tall, which was the source of his nickname, “Baixinho” (Portuguese for “The Little One,” or “Shorty”). But Romário was uninterested in training, which he considered a waste of energy, and was fined for throwing temper tantrums, failing to report on time, complaining of the cold, and flying to Rio de Janeiro at every conceivable excuse. Though immensely popular with spectators, he was disliked by his fellow PSV players and made no attempt to learn Dutch. His goal-scoring prowess, however, was undeniable: in five seasons he scored 125 goals for PSV.
In March 1990, having already been banned from three international competitions for being sent off against Chile for fighting, Romário broke his leg. He was far from being match fit for the 1990 World Cup in Italy, and he served only as a reserve during the tournament. In 1993 he left PSV for FC Barcelona, where he helped the team to the 1993–94 La Liga championship. He scored five goals at the 1994 World Cup, where Brazil broke a 24-year title drought, and he was named the 1994 Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) World Player of the Year.
Soon after his World Cup triumph, Romário entered into an itinerant phase of his career: he played for seven teams (often serving multiple stints with a given team) on five continents between 1995 and 2008, which included three returns to Vasco da Gama. While he continued to have some success in his domestic club career, he was left off both the 1998 and 2002 Brazilian World Cup rosters.
One notable moment in his later years came in 2007 when, while playing for Vasco, he scored what he deemed was his 1,000th career goal, a tally that included goals scored in youth and friendly matches, which are not officially counted by FIFA. Romário retired from football in 2008, but in 2009 he came out of retirement to play one game with América, a second-division Brazilian club that he was managing at the time and that was his late father’s favourite team.
After his football career ended, Romário turned to politics. He became an outspoken advocate for the rights of people with disabilities, inspired by his daughter Ivy, who was born with Down syndrome. In 2010 he was elected to the Chamber of Deputies (Brazil’s lower house of parliament) as a member of the Socialist Party and took office the following year. He then successfully ran for the Federal Senate in 2014, assuming his seat in 2015. Two years later Romário switched parties, joining the centrist Podemos (“We Can”). In 2018 he announced his candidacy for governor of Rio de Janeiro state, but he lost in the first round of the election.
