Wheelchair,  any seating surface (e.g., a chair) that has wheels affixed to it in order to help an individual move from one place to another. Wheelchairs range from large, bulky, manually powered models to high-tech electric-powered models that can climb stairs. The modern standard wheelchair design is based on the so-called cross-frame design that was introduced in 1932 by disabled American mining engineer Herbert A. Everest and American mechanical engineer Harry C. Jennings. Together, Everest and Jennings patented the cross-frame wheelchair, which uses a cross brace to attach the two sides of the chair, allowing it to be folded when not in use. They later formed Everest & Jennings, Inc., which subsequently became one of the world’s major wheelchair manufacturers.
Typically, a wheelchair consists of four wheels: two large wheels in the rear, which are used for propelling the wheelchair, and two small wheels in the front, which swivel and are called casters. The large wheels support the majority of the individual’s weight and provide the primary means of propulsion. The casters facilitate maneuverability. Traditionally, wheelchairs are divided into two categories: manual and electric-powered. Those categories are defined by the mechanism used to propel the wheelchair. A manual wheelchair is propelled by human power, and an electric-powered wheelchair is propelled by an electrically based power source (typically a battery and electrical motor).
A manual wheelchair is powered either by the individual using the wheelchair or by an assistant. The most commonly recognized manual wheelchairs are seen at hospitals and nursing homes. Individuals who have the strength and endurance to independently propel the wheelchair typically use manual wheelchairs. They can propel the wheelchair in different ways. For instance, individuals with a spinal cord injury can use their upper extremities. Individuals who have had a stroke that affects only one side of the body can use one upper extremity and one lower extremity. Individuals who have neither the strength to walk without a walker or cane nor the endurance to walk with one can use their lower extremities. An assistant or attendant propels the manual wheelchair when individuals cannot do it themselves.
Manual wheelchairs can be divided into numerous categories based on their intended use and design. The most basic characteristic that distinguishes manual wheelchairs is the frame design, but wheelchairs are also categorized by style, material, and weight.
A standard folding wheelchair has a cross-brace design (X-frame), which allows the wheelchair to fold laterally via a scissor-like action. These wheelchairs are very popular because they can be easily folded for transportation. The limitation to folding-frame wheelchairs is that they tend to be heavy and have reduced performance characteristics compared with a rigid-frame manual wheelchair. A rigid frame does not incorporate a folding mechanism into the design, thereby significantly improving aesthetics, performance, strength, and weight.
Another feature that distinguishes wheelchairs is the type of material used. Initially, manufacturers used steel in all manual wheelchairs (primarily mild steel) because of its low cost and ease of machinability. Later there were numerous advances in the materials used to manufacture wheelchairs. Most modern wheelchairs are made using primarily steel, aluminum, and titanium. Steel is limited to standard wheelchairs that have folding-frame mechanisms. Aluminum is used throughout the wheelchair industry, primarily in ultralight wheelchairs and some lightweight wheelchairs. Aluminum has a higher strength-to-weight ratio than mild steel, thereby reducing the overall weight of the wheelchair, and it has the added advantage of being resistant to corrosion. Titanium has been used in ultralight manual wheelchairs, further reducing the weight because of its high strength-to-weight ratio. Titanium also is resistant to corrosion. The key limitations of titanium are its relatively high material costs compared with steel and aluminum and the greater difficulty in machining or welding titanium.
In general, there are three wheelchair weight categories: standard, lightweight, and ultralight.
Standard wheelchairs are typically folding-frame wheelchairs that are manufactured using mild steel. They are the heaviest of manual wheelchairs, usually weighing more than 18 kg (39.6 pounds) with limited adjustability in components. These wheelchairs are designed most often for temporary use and are usually found in medical facilities (e.g., hospitals and nursing homes).
Lightweight wheelchairs also are typically folding-frame wheelchairs. They have many adjustable components and are available with many features. They tend to be lighter than standard wheelchairs (typically between 13 and 18 kg [28.6 and 39.6 pounds]) because they are usually manufactured using aluminum.
Ultralight wheelchairs have the best performance characteristics of the three weight categories. As the name suggests, these are the lightest-weight wheelchairs (typically less than 13 kg [28.6 pounds]), because they are manufactured using aluminum, high-performance steel, or titanium. However, the key difference between lightweight and ultralight wheelchairs, besides weight, is an adjustable rear-wheel axle. A horizontally adjustable rear wheel (i.e., one that can be moved forward or backward) allows for the optimal placement of the rear wheel on the frame. This makes it easier for the individual to reach the rear wheels during propulsion, reducing stress and strain on the upper extremities.
