Hashimoto Ryūtarō,  (born July 29, 1937, Sōja, Okayama prefecture, Japan—died July 1, 2006, Tokyo), Japanese politician, whose election as prime minister in 1996 signaled a return to Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) rule after a brief Socialist regime (1994–95). He left office in 1998 after having failed in his attempts to end a long-lasting economic recession in Japan.
The son of a politician, Hashimoto was inspired by his father to take an active role in public life. After receiving a degree from Keio University in 1960, he began his political career in 1963 when he won election to his recently deceased father’s seat in the House of Representatives. Hashimoto went on to serve 11 terms as a Liberal Democrat representing the Okayama district. He was minister of transport (1986–87) and minister of finance (1989–91) but resigned the latter post in the wake of his department’s failure to curb scandals in the banking and securities industries. As minister of international trade and industry (1994–95), he won national attention for his combative bargaining stance in an automobile trade dispute between Japan and the United States. He served as the LDP’s secretary general (June–August 1989) and was chosen the party’s president in September 1995.
Hashimoto was elected prime minister of Japan on Jan. 11, 1996, following the resignation of Murayama Tomiichi, the leader of the Social Democratic Party of Japan. Hashimoto was thus heir to an unwieldy governing coalition between the LDP and the Social Democrats that had held power since 1994. The new prime minister was viewed as a dynamic leader who would undertake much-needed economic and financial reforms in order to end a recession that had lingered for five years and showed few signs of lifting. Hashimoto called general elections for the House of Representatives in October 1996 in which the LDP gained almost 35 seats but still lacked a voting majority. His party was thus able to pass legislation only by means of ad hoc coalitions with the Social Democrats and smaller parties.
Hashimoto’s attempts to deregulate Japan’s financial sector and place its floundering banks on a sounder footing were obstructed by his own party and made little progress. In 1997 his administration instituted a previously approved increase in the national sales tax, a measure that was intended to reduce the nation’s budget deficits but which instead sent the Japanese economy into its most severe recession in several decades. In elections for the House of Councillors (the upper house of the Japanese parliament) held on July 12, 1998, the LDP won only about one-third of the seats contested. In the face of this stunning rebuke by the electorate, Hashimoto on July 13 announced his resignation as both prime minister and president of the LDP. He continued in office until he was succeeded by the LDP’s new president, Obuchi Keizo, on July 30.
Hashimoto remained active in politics and later became leader of the LDP’s largest faction. He attempted to regain the party’s presidency in 2001 but was defeated by Koizumi Junichiro. In 2004 Hashimoto was implicated in a scandal involving an illegal campaign donation, and he subsequently resigned.
