Aztec, self name Culhua-Mexica,  Nahuatl-speaking people who in the 15th and early 16th centuries ruled a large empire in what is now central and southern Mexico. The name Aztec is derived from Aztlán (variously translated as “White Land,” “Land of White Herons,” or “Place of Herons”), an allusion to their origins, probably in northwestern Mexico. They were also called the Tenochca, from an eponymous ancestor, Tenoch, and the Mexica, probably from Metzliapán (“Moon Lake”), the mystical name for Lake Texcoco. From Tenochca was derived the name of their great city, Tenochtitlán, founded on an island in Lake Texcoco, in the Valley of Mexico. From Mexica came the name for the city that superseded the Aztec capital and for the surrounding valley, which was applied later to the whole Mexican nation. The Aztecs referred to themselves as Culhua-Mexica, to link themselves with Colhuacán, the centre of the most-civilized people of the Valley of Mexico.See alsopre-Columbian civilizations: Aztec culture to the time of the Spanish conquest.
The origin of the Aztec people is uncertain, but elements of their own tradition suggest that they were a tribe of hunters and gatherers on the northern Mexican plateau before their appearance in Mesoamerica in perhaps the 12th century ce; Aztlán, however, may be legendary. It is possible that their migration southward was part of a general movement of peoples that followed, or perhaps helped trigger, the collapse of the highly developed Toltec civilization of central Mexico and its capital, Tula, a spectacular urban centre that featured pyramids, temples, public buildings, and statuary.
At the beginning of the 12th century, catastrophe befell Toltec civilization when Tula was attacked and destroyed, as were other important Toltec centres. Tribes of hunters and gatherers, including a group of Chichimec under the leadership of Xólotl, took advantage of the situation and traveled from the arid plateau of northern Mexico toward the fertile, heavily settled central zone. Xólotl’s Chichimec joined forces with the remaining Toltecs, resulting in a period of relative peace and cultural progress in the Valley of Mexico. During this time the Aztecs, who, according to legend, had been wandering in search of a new place to settle, established a precarious home near the ruins of Tula. There they improved their approach to agriculture and acquired other technological knowledge.
However, their stay was temporary. Aztec tradition holds that the god Huitzilopochtli instructed them to depart again in search of a permanent home, the location of which would be revealed by the appearance of an eagle perched on a nopal cactus with a serpent in its beak (an image that is memorialized on Mexico’s national flag). A long pilgrimage ensued that ended in 1325 on a small island in Lake Texcoco, where, it is said, elder members of the people spotted the eagle, the cactus, and the serpent. There they built a temple and, around it, on islands in Lake Texcoco, the first dwellings of what was to become the powerful city of Tenochtitlán.
Under the ruler Itzcóatl (1428–40), Tenochtitlán formed alliances with the neighbouring states of Texcoco and Tlacopan and became the dominant power in central Mexico. Later, by commerce and conquest, Tenochtitlán came to rule an empire of 400 to 500 small states, comprising by 1519 some 5,000,000 to 6,000,000 people spread over 80,000 square miles (207,200 square km). At its height, Tenochtitlán itself covered more than 5 square miles (13 square km) and had upward of 140,000 inhabitants, making it the most densely populated settlement ever achieved by a Mesoamerican civilization. The empire that the Aztecs would establish was equaled in the New World only by that of the Incas of Peru, and the brilliance of their civilization is comparable to that of other great ancient cultures of America and the Old World.
The Aztec empire was still expanding, and its society still evolving, when its progress was halted in 1519 by the appearance of Spanish explorers. Hernán Cortés led a force of some 500 European soldiers into central Mexico, and made a prisoner of the ninth emperor, Montezuma II (reigned 1502–20), who died in Spanish custody. Among the reasons for the Spanish conquest of the Aztec empire was that Montezuma, at least initially, suspected that Cortés was a returning god. Cortés was a skillful leader, but he also benefited from his force’s possession of superior arms (crossbows, muskets, steel swords, and body armour), as well as horses and dogs that were trained for battle. Deadly European diseases against which the Aztecs had no immunity also took their toll. Finally, the Spaniards took great advantage of the hatred that tribes who had been conquered by the Aztecs held for their imperial overlords. Thousands of Native American warriors joined the Spanish invasion, which likely would not have succeeded without their participation.
Montezuma’s successors, Cuitláhuac and Cuauhtémoc, were unable to stave off Cortés and his forces. After a brutal two-year campaign, by August 13, 1521, the Spanish had taken control of Tenochtitlán. With its capture, the Aztec empire came to an end.
The basis of Aztec success in creating a great state and ultimately an empire was their remarkable system of agriculture, the high productivity of which made for a rich and populous state. Aztec agriculture featured intensive cultivation of all available land, as well as elaborate systems of irrigation and reclamation of swampland through the use of raised fields known as chinampas (“floating gardens”). Rich soil from the bottom of a lake was piled up to form ridges between rows of ditches or canals. As a result of the Valley of Mexico’s mild climate and ample water for irrigation, the chinampas yielded multiple harvests annually. A system of lakes (Texcoco, Chalco, Xochimilco, Xaltoca, and Zumpango) that were connected naturally and by means of artificial canals contributed to the strategic importance of the Valley of Mexico by providing extensive water transportation that furthered the early economic and political unification of the valley.
The Aztec empire also was characterized by a complex sociopolitical organization, the nature of which continues to be debated by anthropologists. Some academics point to the division of the tribe into calpulli (“big houses”), pseudo family units established in Tenochtitlán, as evidence of an egalitarian organization; others emphasize that the proof of social stratification is undeniable. Because of the existence of an Aztec hereditary nobility, it has been argued that Aztec society was “feudal”; however, the relation of these noble groups to the Aztec kings, to society in general, and to land ownership was distinct from Old World feudalism, partly because the Aztec monarch’s rule was more absolute. Records from Montezuma II’s reign indicate that the empire was organized into provinces and that tribute was paid according to the production of each region. A gigantic political, military, and religious bureaucracy was built up, with governors, tax collectors, courts of justice, military garrisons, mail and messenger services, and other civil offices.
Aztec religion was syncretistic, absorbing elements from many other Mesoamerican cultures. At base, it shared many of the cosmological beliefs of earlier peoples, notably the Maya, such as that the present earth was the last in a series of creations and that it occupied a position between systems of 13 heavens and 9 underworlds. Prominent in the Aztec pantheon were Huitzilopochtli, god of war; Tonatiuh, god of the sun; Tlaloc, god of rain; and Quetzalcóatl, the Feathered Serpent, who was part deity and part culture hero. Human sacrifice, particularly by offering a victim’s heart to Tonatiuh, was commonly practiced, as was bloodletting. Moreover, in order to guarantee human existence, the Aztecs, as “people of the sun,” had to nourish Huitzilopochtli with human blood. For them, ideologically at least, war was therefore a religious obligation that provided prisoners who could be sacrificed to the sun god. Of course, there was a more mundane purpose as well, and it would be a serious mistake to think of Aztec warfare as functioning primarily in the religious sphere. Still, as their power grew, the Aztecs ritually murdered prisoners from all parts of what is now Mexico in Tenochtitlán.
Closely entwined with Aztec religion was the calendar, on which the elaborate round of rituals and ceremonies were performed by a large professional priesthood (each temple and god had its attendant priestly order). Many of these ceremonies were public, in that the populace played the role of spectators. Elements in all the ceremonies were very similar and included ritual ablutions to prepare the priests for the contact; offerings and sacrifices to gain the gods’ favour; and theatrical dramas of myths by masked performers in the form of dances, songs, and processionals. The Aztec calendar was the one common to much of Mesoamerica, and it comprised a solar year of 365 days and a sacred year of 260 days; the two yearly cycles running in parallel produced a larger cycle of 52 years.
The language of the Aztecs was Nahuatl (also called Aztec), part of the Uto-Aztecan linguistic family that, at the time of the early explorations of America by Europeans, was influencing languages as far north as the Yellowstone River and as far south as Panama. The most important of the Uto-Aztecan languages, Nahuatl was the language of both the Aztec and Toltec civilizations. Once the Aztecs achieved political ascendancy, Nahuatl became the lingua franca of an area almost as large as present-day Mexico.
A large body of literature in Nahuatl that was produced by the Aztecs survives from the 16th century. It was recorded in an orthography that was introduced by Spanish priests and based on that of Spanish. Classical (16th-century) Nahuatl employed a set of 15 consonants and four long and short vowels and was notable for its use of a tl sound produced as a single consonant and for the use of the glottal stop.
