Delaware, also called Lenni Lenape or Lenape,  a confederation of Algonquian-speaking North American Indians who occupied the Atlantic seaboard from Cape Henlopen, Delaware, to western Long Island. Before colonization, they were especially concentrated in the Delaware River valley, for which the confederation was named.
Traditionally, the Delaware depended primarily on agriculture, with hunting and fishing as important additions to their economy. Summer farming communities numbered several hundred persons; in winter, smaller family bands traveled throughout smaller territories to hunt. Delaware individuals were members of one of three clans, based on maternal descent; clans were in turn divided into lineages, whose members generally lived together in a longhouse. Groups of longhouses formed the core of autonomous communities, of which there were probably 30 or 40 in 1600. A council consisting of lineage sachems (chiefs) and other distinguished men decided the public affairs of the community. The eldest woman of the lineage appointed and dismissed the sachem.
The Delaware were the Native Americans most friendly to William Penn; they were rewarded by the infamous Walking Purchase, a treaty that deprived them of their own lands and forced them to settle on lands assigned to the Iroquois. Encroached on by European colonizers and dominated by the Iroquois after 1690, they drifted westward in stages, stopping on the Susquehanna, the Allegheny, and the Muskingum rivers in Ohio and the White River in Indiana. After 60 years of displacement, Delaware individuals living beyond the Ohio River rekindled a tribal alliance, asserted their independence of the Iroquois, and opposed the advancing colonists. They defeated the British general Edward Braddock in the French and Indian War and at first supported the Americans in the Revolution. In the Treaty of Greenville (1795) they ceded their Ohio lands. Many of the bands dispersed, but by 1835 some had gathered again in Kansas; most of these were removed to Oklahoma in 1867. Delaware descendants numbered more than 16,900 in the early 21st century.
