Inca, also spelled Inka,  South American Indians who, at the time of the Spanish conquest in 1532, ruled an empire that extended along the Pacific coast and Andean highlands from the northern border of modern Ecuador to the Maule River in central Chile. A brief treatment of the Inca follows; for full treatment, see pre-Columbian civilizations: The Inca.
Inca society was highly stratified. The emperor ruled with the aid of an aristocratic bureaucracy, exercising authority with harsh and often repressive controls. Inca technology and architecture were highly developed, although not strikingly original. Their irrigation systems, palaces, temples, and fortifications can still be seen throughout the Andes. The economy was based on agriculture, its staples being corn (maize), white and sweet potatoes, squash, tomatoes, peanuts (groundnuts), chili peppers, coca, cassava, and cotton. They raised guinea pigs, ducks, llamas, alpacas, and dogs. Clothing was made of llama wool and cotton. Houses were of stone or adobe mud. Practically every man was a farmer, producing his own food and clothing.
The Inca built a vast network of roads throughout this empire. It comprised two north-south roads, one running along the coast for about 2,250 miles (3,600 km), the other inland along the Andes for a comparable distance, with many interconnecting links. Many short rock tunnels and vine-supported suspension bridges were constructed. Use of the system was strictly limited to government and military business; a well-organized relay service carried messages in the form of knotted cords called quipu (Quechua khipu) at a rate of 150 miles (240 km) a day. The network greatly facilitated the Spanish conquest of the Inca empire.
The Inca religion combined features of animism, fetishism, and the worship of nature gods. The pantheon was headed by Inti, the sun god, and included also Viracocha, a creator god and culture hero, and Apu Illapu, the rain god. Under the empire the Inca religion was a highly organized state religion, but, while worship of the sun god and the rendering of service were required of subject peoples, their native religions were tolerated. Inca rituals included elaborate forms of divination and the sacrifice of humans and animals. These religious institutions were destroyed by the Spanish conquerors’ campaign against idolatry.
The descendants of the Inca are the present-day Quechua-speaking peasants of the Andes, who constitute perhaps 45 percent of the population of Peru. They combine farming and herding with simple traditional technology. Rural settlements are of three kinds: families living in the midst of their fields, true village communities with fields outside of the inhabited centres, and a combination of these two patterns. Towns are centres of mestizo (mixed-blood) population. Communities are close-knit, with families usually intermarrying. Much of the agricultural work is done cooperatively. Religion is a kind of Roman Catholicism infused with the pagan hierarchy of spirits and deities.
In common with other Andean cultures, the Inca left no written records. Inca origins and early history are largely shrouded in legends that may be more mythical than factual. Their later history, particularly from the reign of Pachacuti Inca Yupanqui (Pachakuti ’Inka Yupanki) onward, is largely based on fact, even though it presents what the Inca wanted people to know. Whether these historical traditions are true, in the sense that they accurately relate what happened, is not so important as the fact that the Inca used them to justify their various imperial conquests.
The present knowledge of Inca society has been derived from a combination of archaeological studies, oral tradition preserved by official “memorizers,” and the written accounts sent to Spain by early Spanish observers. While the Inca kept detailed accounts of their dynastic history, knotted onto the quipu records kept by professional accountants, nonquantitative data remains to be deciphered. The major local ethnic lords also kept records. Some of the Spaniards transcribed events that were told to them, and systematic efforts were made by the Spanish in 1549 and in the 1570s to investigate the Andean past. These accounts became the main sources of the fragmentary information available to modern researchers.
The Inca established their capital at Cuzco (Peru) in the 12th century. They began their conquests in the early 15th century and within 100 years had gained control of an Andean population of about 12 million people. According to their tradition, the Inca originated in the village of Paqari-tampu, about 15 miles (24 km) south of Cuzco. The founder of the Inca dynasty, Manco Capac (Manqo Qhapaq), led the tribe to settle in Cuzco, which remained thereafter their capital. Until the reign of the fourth emperor, Mayta Capac (Mayta Qhapaq), in the 14th century, there was little to distinguish the Inca from the many other tribes inhabiting small domains throughout the Andes. Under Mayta Capac the Inca began to expand, attacking and looting the villages of neighbouring peoples and probably assessing some sort of tribute. Under Capac Yupanqui (Qhapaq Yupanki), the next emperor, the Inca first extended their influence beyond the Cuzco valley, and under Viracocha Inca (Wiraqocha ’Inka), the eighth, they began a program of permanent conquest by establishing garrisons among the settlements of the peoples whom they had conquered.
The earliest date that can be confidently assigned to Inca dynastic history is 1438, when Pachacuti Inca Yupanqui (Pachakuti ’Inka Yupanki), a son of Viracocha Inca, usurped the throne from his brother Inca Urcon (’Inka ’Urqon). Under Pachacuti Inca Yupanqui (1438–71) the Inca conquered territory south to the Titicaca Basin and north to present-day Quito, making subject peoples of the powerful Chanca, the Quechua, and the Chimú. A policy of forced resettlement of large contingents from each conquered people helped ensure political stability by distributing ethnic groups throughout the empire and thus making the organization of revolt very difficult. Local governors were responsible for exacting the labour tax on which the empire was based; the tax could be paid by service in the army, on public works, or in agricultural work.
Under Topa Inca Yupanqui (Thupa ’Inka Yupanki; 1471–93) the empire reached its southernmost extent in central Chile, and the last vestiges of resistance on the southern Peruvian coast were eliminated. His death was followed by a struggle for the succession, from which Huayna Capac (Wayna Qhapaq; 1493–1525) emerged successful. Huayna Capac pushed the northern boundary of the empire to the Ancasmayo River before dying in an epidemic that may have been brought by a tribe from the east that had picked it up from the Spanish at La Plata. His death set off another struggle for succession, which was still unresolved in 1532, when the Spanish arrived in Peru.
Upon their arrival, the Spaniards took advantage of the civil war, simultaneously aiding and hindering Atahuallpa (’Ataw Wallpa ’Inka; 1532–33) in his effort to consolidate the empire under his control. They ultimately executed him in August 1533 and his successor, Topa Huallpa (Thupa Wallpa; 1533), died soon afterward under mysterious circumstances. The ongoing instability and disintegration of the empire played into the hands of the Spanish as they consolidated their control, capturing Cuzco in November 1533 and establishing colonial Lima in 1535. A remnant Inca state lasted until 1572 in a remote mountainous area called Vitcos.
