Mixe-Zoquean,  group of Middle American Indian peoples inhabiting territories in southern Mexico. The Mixe-Zoquean peoples today comprise the Mixe, living in northeastern Oaxaca; the Zoque, primarily inhabiting northwestern Chiapas; and the Popoluca (not to be confused with the Popoloca), who live in eastern Veracruz and Oaxaca, about midway between the Mixe and Zoque. The languages of these people are closely related, and their cultures share a common origin.
The Mixe live in a rugged mountainous area and are quite traditional in culture and language. The Zoque live in a lower, more tropical region and are becoming rapidly assimilated into modern Mexican culture. There are several distinct Zoque dialects, but many Zoque have intermarried with the general population and may speak only Spanish. The Popoluca live in scattered highland villages and three lowland towns (Oluta, Sayula, and Texistepec); those of the highlands are more remote and more likely to retain their native language and culture than are the town Popoluca. Each of these Popoluca groups—highland (or Sierra), Oluta, Sayula, and Texistepec—speaks a distinct language.
All the traditional Mixe-Zoquean peoples are agricultural, growing the Middle American staples of corn (maize), beans, and squash. The digging stick (see hoe) is their chief agricultural implement, and they clear their land by burning the underbrush. Most Mixe-Zoquean groups live in central villages of thatched or adobe homes surrounded by their fields. Crafts are generally poor and undeveloped, but cotton weaving is of high quality. Traditional clothing is still worn by many women, but ready-made garments are replacing it in less remote areas. The traditional woman’s attire consists of a long wraparound skirt and an overblouse, or tunic (huipil).
The Mixe-Zoquean religious tradition shows many parallels with that of the Maya. Nominally Roman Catholic, modern Mixe-Zoqueans still practice many of their former rituals and ceremonies, including hunting and agricultural fertility rites. The compadrazgo, a system of ritual kinship established with godparents, is important among them.
