Nez Percé, self-name Nimi’ipuu,  North American Indian people whose traditional territory centred on the lower Snake River and such tributaries as the Salmon and Clearwater rivers in what is now northeastern Oregon, southeastern Washington, and central Idaho, U.S. They were the largest, most powerful, and best-known of the Sahaptin-speaking  peoples. They call themselves the Nimi’ipuu but were known by various names by other groups. The French called them the Nez Percé (“Pierced Nose”), having mistakenly identified individuals whom they saw wearing nose pendants as members of the Nimi’ipuu, though the Nimi’ipuu do not pierce their noses.
As inhabitants of the high plateau region between the Rocky Mountains and the coastal mountain system, the Nez Percé are considered to be Plateau Indians. Historically, as one of the easternmost Plateau groups, they also were influenced by the Plains Indians just east of the Rockies. Like other members of this culture area, the Nez Percé domestic life traditionally centred on small villages located on streams having abundant salmon, which, dried, formed their main source of food. They also sought a variety of game, berries, and roots. Their dwellings were communal lodges, A-framed and mat-covered, varying in size and sometimes housing as many as 30 families.
After they acquired horses early in the 18th century, life for the Nez Percé began to change dramatically, at least among some groups. Horse transport enabled them to mount expeditions to the eastern slope of the Rockies, where they hunted bison and traded with Plains peoples. Always somewhat warlike, the Nez Percé became more so, adopting many war honours, war dances, and battle tactics common to the Plains, as well as other forms of equestrian material culture such as the tepee. The Nez Percé built up one of the largest horse herds on the continent. They were almost unique among Native Americans in conducting a selective breeding program, and they were instrumental in creating the Appaloosa breed.
As the 18th century progressed, the Nez Percé’s increased mobility fostered their enrichment and expansionism, and they began to dominate negotiations with other tribes in the region. The 19th century was a period of increasing change in Nez Percé life. Just six years after the explorers Meriwether Lewis and William Clark visited the Nez Percé in 1805, fur traders and trappers began penetrating the area; they were followed later by missionaries. By the 1840s emigrant settlers were moving through the area on the Oregon Trail. In 1855 the Nez Percé agreed to a treaty with the United States that created a large reservation encompassing most of their traditional land. The 1860 discovery of gold on the Salmon and Clearwater rivers, which generated an influx of thousands of miners and settlers, led U.S. commissioners in 1863 to force renegotiation of the treaty. The new treaty reduced the size of the reservation by three-fourths, and continued pressure from homesteaders and squatters reduced the area even more.
Many Nez Percé, perhaps a majority, had never accepted either treaty, and hostile actions and raids by both settlers and Native Americans eventually evolved into the Nez Percé War of 1877. For five months a small band of 250 Nez Percé warriors, under the leadership of Chief Joseph, held off a U.S. force of 5,000 troops led by Gen. Oliver O. Howard, who tracked them through Idaho, Yellowstone Park, and Montana before they surrendered to Gen. Nelson A. Miles. During the campaign, more than 260 soldiers and more than 230 Nez Percé, including women and children, died. The tribe was then assigned to malarial country in Oklahoma rather than being returned to the Northwest as promised.
In the early 21st century the Nez Percé tribal nation, located on its reservation in north-central Idaho, had more than 3,500 citizens.
