Northern Mexican Indian,  member of any of the aboriginal peoples inhabiting northern Mexico.
The generally accepted ethnographic definition of northern Mexico includes that portion of the country roughly north of a convex line extending from the Río Grande de Santiago on the Pacific coast to the Río Soto la Marina on the Gulf of Mexico. This southern boundary coincides in a general way with the northern margins of pre-Columbian Mesoamerica. Northern Mexico is more arid and less favourable for human habitation than central Mexico, and its native Indian peoples have always been fewer in numbers and far simpler in culture than those of Mesoamerica. In the west the Sierra Madre Occidental, a region of high plateaus that break off toward the Pacific into a series of rugged barrancas, or gorges, has served as a refuge area for the Indian groups of the northwest, as have the deserts of Sonora. At present only the northwestern states of Baja California, Sonora, Sinaloa, Nayarit, Jalisco, Chihuahua, Durango, and Zacatecas have Indian populations.
Although accurate population data is lacking in parts of this region, estimates place the total population that is still Indian in language and culture at well under 200,000, making them a tiny minority among the several million non-Indians of northwest Mexico.
The Indian peoples of northern Mexico today fall easily into two divisions. By far the greater number are members of the first type, the groups that speak Uto-Aztecan languages and are traditionally agriculturists. The second type consists of five groups—the descendants of nomadic bands who resided in Baja California and coastal Sonora and lived by hunting and gathering wild foods. Their languages are not related to Uto-Aztecan.
The Uto-Aztecan languages of the peoples of northern Mexico (which are sometimes also called Southern Uto-Aztecan) have been divided into three branches—Taracahitic, Piman, and Corachol-Aztecan. The Taracahitic languages are spoken by the Tarahumara of the southwestern Chihuahua; the Guarijío, a small group which borders the Tarahumara on the northwest and are closely related to them; the Yaqui, in the Río Yaqui valley of Sonora and in scattered colonies in towns of that state and in Arizona; and the Mayo of southern Sonora and northern Sinaloa. Another Taracahitic group, the once prominent Ópata, have lost their own language and no longer maintain a separate identity. The Piman languages are spoken by four groups: the Pima Bajo of the Sierra Madre border of Sonora–Chihuahua; the Pima-Papago (O’odham) of northwest Sonora, who are identical with a much larger portion of the Tohono O’odham in the U.S. state of Arizona; the Tepecano, whose language is now extinct; and the Tepehuan, one enclave of which is located in southern Chihuahua and another in the sierras of southern Durango and of Nayarit and Zacatecas. The third branch of Uto-Aztecan, the Corachol-Aztecan family, is spoken by the Cora located on the plateau and gorges of the Sierra Madre of Nayarit and the Huichol in similar country of northern Jalisco and Nayarit. The Aztecan portion of this branch includes a small group of speakers of Nahuatl, remnants of central Mexican Indians introduced into the area by the Spaniards.
The remnants of the Baja California Indians—the Tiipay (Tipai; of the Diegueño), Paipai (Akwa’ala),  and Kiliwa—live in ranch clusters and other tiny settlements in the mountains near the U.S. border. Speaking Yuman languages, they are little different today from their relatives in U.S. California. A small number of Cocopa in the Colorado River delta in like manner represent a southward extension of Colorado River Yumans from the U.S. Southwest. The remaining group is the Seri, who are found along the desert coast of north-central Sonora. This much-studied group is probably related to now-extinct peoples who lived across the gulf in Baja California.
Missions and isolation helped to preserve the several surviving Indian groups of northwest Mexico through the colonial period (1530–1810), but all underwent considerable alteration under the influence of European patterns. Nearly all the agricultural tribes adopted some form of Roman Catholicism and much Spanish material culture. It was at this time that the traditional cultures of northern Mexico were formed, the basic patterns continuing until the present. Many groups faded away—gradually losing their languages and identities in the emerging mestizo (mixed-race European and Indian) population, the predominant people of present-day Mexico. Only the Huichol, Seri, and Tarahumara retained much of their pre-contact cultures.
In the 21st century those peoples exist as ethnic enclaves surrounded by—and in most cases sharing their traditional lands with—non-Indians and manifesting some of the characteristics of ethnic minorities everywhere. Most groups have a conscious desire to survive as distinct cultural entities.
