Nuu-chah-nulth, also called Nootka,  North American Indians who live on what are now the southwest coast of Vancouver Island, Can., and on Cape Flattery, the northwest tip of the state of Washington, U.S. The groups on the southeast end of the island were the Nitinat, those on Cape Flattery the Makah. The Nuu-chah-nulth are culturally related to the Kwakiutl. Their name means “along the mountains.” They speak a Wakashan language.
Local groups in the central and southern Nuu-chah-nulth regions were traditionally socially and politically independent; in northern areas they usually formed larger tribes with large winter villages. There were also several confederacies of tribes, dating to prehistoric times, that shared summer villages and fishing and hunting grounds near the coast. The Nuu-chah-nulth moved seasonally to areas of economic importance, returning to their principal villages during the winter when subsistence activity slowed.
Like several other Northwest Coast Indians, the Nuu-chah-nulth were whale hunters, employing special equipment such as large dugout canoes and harpoons with long lines and sealskin floats. The whale harpooner was a person of high rank, and families passed down the magical and practical secrets that made for successful hunting. There was also a whale ritualist who, by appropriate ceremonial procedures, caused whales that had died of natural causes to drift ashore. Many features of this whaling complex suggest ancient ties with Eskimo and Aleut cultures.
Before the Nuu-chah-nulth were colonized by Russia, England, Canada, and the United States, their religion centred on shamanism and animism. The most important Nuu-chah-nulth ceremony was the shamans’ dance, a reenactment of the kidnapping of an ancestor by supernatural beings who later gave him supernatural gifts and released him. The ceremony served to define each individual’s place in the social order. The public performance ended with a potlatch, a ceremonial distribution of property.
Early 21st-century population estimates indicated some 8,500 individuals of Nuu-chah-nulth descent.
