Oneida, self-name Onᐱyoteʔa∙ká (“People of the Standing Stone”),  Iroquoian-speaking North American Indian tribe living, at the time of European contact, in what is now central New York state, U.S. They are one of the original five nations of the Iroquois (Haudenosaunee) Confederacy. Like the other Iroquois tribes, the Oneida were semisedentary and practiced corn (maize) agriculture. Longhouses sheltered families related through maternal descent. The Oneida were divided into three clans, each having three representatives in the confederation. Each community also had a local council that guided its chief or chiefs.
The least populous of the Iroquois confederates during the 17th century, the Oneida had only one palisaded town of 60 to 100 longhouses; it was destroyed by a French Canadian expedition in 1696. Thereafter the community divided into Oneida (Upper Castle) and Canawaroghere. In the early 18th century a village of North Carolina Tuscarora joined the Oneida, becoming the sixth nation of the Iroquois Confederacy; their former enemies residing in the Carolinas became the targets of war parties for a generation.
The Oneida supported the colonists in the American Revolution and consequently felt the depredations of the pro-British Iroquois led by the Mohawk chief Joseph Brant. Oneida communities took shelter within American lines, and Oneida men served the fledgling American military as scouts. Returning to their homes after the war, they were compensated by the U.S. government for their losses and took in remnants of the Mohegan nation. In the following years the Oneida divided into factions resulting from disagreements over Quaker missions, traditional religion, and the sale of lands. By 1833 those who had not settled at Oneida on the Thames River in Ontario had emigrated to Green Bay, Wisconsin; a few families remained at Oneida and Onondaga, NewYork.
Early 21st-century population estimates indicated approximately 23,000 individuals of Oneida descent, most of whom lived in Wisconsin, New York, and Ontario.
