Pennsylvania German, also called (misleadingly) Pennsylvania Dutch,  17th- and 18th-century German-speaking settlers in Pennsylvania and their descendants. Emigrating from southern Germany (Palatinate, Bavaria, Saxony, etc.) and Switzerland, they settled primarily in the southeastern section of Pennsylvania, where they practiced any of several slightly different forms of Anabaptist faith, mostly Amish and Mennonite. Their descendants, some of whom participate only reluctantly in modern life, live mainly in Northampton, Berks, Lancaster, Lehigh, Montgomery, Bucks, York, and other counties of Pennsylvania, as well as in Ohio, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Oklahoma, Virginia, West Virginia, and Florida.
Some groups—especially those who remain apart—still speak (in addition to English) a German dialect known as Pennsylvania Dutch or Pennsylvania German, a blending of High German (in reference to the altitude of their natal region), various German dialects, and English. The word Dutch (from German Deutsch, meaning “German”), which once encompassed all non-English speakers of Germanic languages, is in the 21st century a misnomer, as Dutch has come to be associated strictly with people from the Netherlands.
Many Pennsylvania Germans are thoroughly assimilated, though they may retain elements of their traditional culture such as special cookery (e.g., shoofly pie, an extremely sweet pie made with molasses and brown sugar) and a decorative tradition known as fraktur (which blends calligraphic and pictorial elements). Some groups, such as the Old Order Amish, wear plain, modest clothing and head coverings and drive horse-drawn buggies. Men wear beards (but not mustaches) after they marry. They live according to relatively strict religious principles.
The Pennsylvania Germans, many of whom had been persecuted in their native land, were attracted to Pennsylvania by the liberal and tolerant principles of William Penn’s government. Their immigration began with the Mennonite Francis Daniel Pastorius, who in 1683 led a group of German Quakers to Philadelphia, where they founded Germantown, the pioneer German settlement. The early German settlers were for the most part Mennonites, Amish, Dunkers (or German Baptists), Schwenckfelders, and Moravians (see Moravian church). After 1727 the immigrants were mostly members of the larger Lutheran and Reformed churches. Their farming skills made their region of settlement a rich agricultural area. By the time of the American Revolution they numbered about 100,000, more than a third of Pennsylvania’s population.
