Tahltan,  an Athabaskan-speaking North American Indian people living on the upper Stikine River and other nearby streams in what is now northwestern British Columbia, Can. This region, though grassy and rocky with only sparse woodlands, provided plentiful salmon and such game as caribou, moose, bears, and various other furbearing animals.
Traditionally the Tahltan were nomadic, gathering at salmon runs in summer and dispersing to hunting territories in winter. Tahltan society was organized through kinship; there were six clans headed by chiefs and grouped three and three into the Raven and the Wolf subgroups, or moieties. The moieties had reciprocal ceremonial functions, reciprocal marital obligations (a Raven person had to marry a Wolf person and vice versa), and ownership of separate hunting grounds, though in practice the latter division was often ignored. In the 18th century the Wolf group added a fourth clan, making seven clans altogether. This form of organization was similar to that of other Northwest Coast Indians, as was Tahltan social stratification, which included classes of nobles, commoners, and slaves. Tahltan dwellings were made of poles, bark, and brush, and a typical central village included a more substantial 100-foot (30-metre) ceremonial and residential lodge for the chiefly families of the clans.
Tahltan individuals and families sponsored the potlatch, a gift-giving festival held for validating ennoblement, advancing one’s prestige, or marking an event, such as a funeral. They also carried on trade, as well as some raiding and warfare, with the coastal tribes and with the Kaska to the north.
The Tahltan recognized a sun god and a sky god. However, their religion was more focused on animism, a belief in the supernatural powers of the natural world, particularly of the creatures that constituted their food supply. The spirits seen in dreams or visions and evoked by medicine men were almost invariably animals.
Early 21st-century population estimates indicated some 3,000 individuals of Tahltan descent.
