Chinese music,  the art form of organized vocal and instrumental sounds that developed in China. It is one of the oldest and most highly developed of all known musical systems.
Chinese music history must be approached with a certain sense of awe. Indeed, any survey evokes the music of a varied, still-active civilization whose archaeological resources go back to 3000 bce and whose own extensive written documents refer to countless forms of music not only in connection with folk festivals and religious events but also in the courts of hundreds of emperors and princes in dozens of provinces, dynasties, and periods. For all the richness of detail in Chinese sources, however, it is only for the last segment of Chinese music history—from the Song dynasty (960–1279 ce) to the present—that there is information about the actual music itself. Yet the historical, cultural, instrumental, and theoretical materials of earlier times are equally informative and fascinating. This mass of information can be organized into four large chronological units: (1) the formative period, from 3000 bce through the 4th century ce, (2) the international period, from the 4th through the 9th century, (3) the national period, from the 9th through the 19th century, and (4) the “world music” period of the 20th and early 21st centuries.
Chinese writings claim that in 2697 bce the emperor Huangdi sent a scholar, Ling Lun, to the western mountain area to cut bamboo pipes that could emit sounds matching the call of the fenghuang, an immortal bird whose rare appearance signaled harmony in the reign of a new emperor. By imitating the sound of the bird, Huangdi made possible the creation of music properly pitched to harmonize his rulership with the universe. Even this symbolic birth of music dates far too late to aid in discovering the melodies and instrumental sounds accompanying the rituals and burials that occurred before the first historically verified dynasty, the Shang (c. 1600–1046 bce). The sounds of music are evanescent, and before the invention of recordings they disappeared at the end of a performance. The remains of China’s most ancient music are found only in those few instruments made of sturdy material. Archaeological digs have uncovered globular clay vessel flutes (xun), tuned stone chimes (qing), and bronze bells (zhong), and the word gu, for drum, is found incised on Shang oracle bones (turtle shells and ox bones used by rulers for ritual divination and sacrifice to obtain the grace of their ancestors).
The earliest surviving written records are from the next dynasty, the Zhou (1046–256 bce). Within the famous books of the period known as the Five Classics (Wujing), it is in the Liji (“Collection of Rituals”) of the 6th–5th century bce that one finds an extensive discussion of music. The Yijing (“Classic of Changes”) is a diviner’s handbook built around geometric patterns, cosmology, and magic numbers that indirectly may relate to music. The Chunqiu (“Spring and Autumn [Annals]”), with its records of major events, and the Shujing (“Classic of History”), with its mixture of documents and forgeries, contain many references to the use of music, particularly at court activities. There are occasional comments about the singing of peasant groups, which is an item that is rare even in the early historical materials of Europe. The Shijing (“Classic of Poetry”) is of equal interest, for it consists of the texts of 305 songs that are dated from the 10th to the 7th century bce. Their great variety of topics (love, ritual, political satire, etc.) reflect a viable vocal musical tradition quite understandable to contemporary audiences. The songs also include references to less-durable musical relics such as flutes, the mouth organ (sheng), and, apparently, two types of zithers (the qin and the se).
Despite the controversial authenticity and dates of ancient Chinese written sources, a combined study of them produces tantalizing images of courtly parties, military parades, and folk festivals, but it does not provide a single note of music. Nevertheless, in keeping with the prehistoric traditions of China, the philosophies of sages, such as Confucius (Kongfuzi; 551–479 bce) and Mencius (Mengzi; c. 371–c. 289 bce), and the endless scientific curiosity of Chinese acousticians furnish a great deal of rather specific music theory as well as varied aesthetic principles. The straightest path to this material is found in the legendary quest of Ling Lun for bamboo pipes that replicate the song of the mythical fenghuang.
The charm of such a tale tends to cloud several interesting facts it contains. First, it is noteworthy that the goal of the search was to put music in tune with the universe. The value of bringing music and the cosmos into alignment is upheld in theory in the “Yueji” (“Annotations on Music”) section of the Liji with such comments as:
Such cosmological ideals may be not merely ancient superstitions but actually cogent insights into the cultural function of music in human societies. Confucius, as pictured in The Analects written long after his death, had a similar view of music, including a concern for the choice of music and modes proper for the moral well-being of a gentleman. It is an open question as to how much performance practice followed the admonitions and theories of the scholars, but centuries later one finds numerous pictures of the wise man standing before some natural beauties while his servant follows closely behind him carrying his seven-stringed zither (qin) for proper use in such a proper setting.
Another point to be noted in the legend of the origin of music is that Ling Lun went to the western border area of China to find the correct bamboo. Indeed, cultures from Central and West Asia or tribal China greatly influenced the growth and change of music in imperial China. Finally, it is significant that, although the emperor in the myth was primarily concerned with locating pipes that would bring his reign into harmony with the universe, the goal was also the creation of precise, standard pitches.
