Devendra Banhart , in full Devendra Obi Banhart,  (born May 30, 1981, Houston, Texas, U.S.), American singer-songwriter whose experimental genre-transcending recordings, which blended acoustic folk, psychedelia, and stream-of-consciousness lyrics, formed the cornerstone of an early 21st-century musical aesthetic often termed “freak folk.”
Banhart spent the majority of his childhood in his mother’s native Caracas. Upon returning to the United States, he studied for a time at the San Francisco Art Institute before eventually focusing on a career in music. The first album to bring Banhart to wide attention was Oh Me Oh My… (2002), an extension of the distinctly personal lo-fi recordings he first made on four-track tape recorders. His flexible approach to songwriting, coupled with his penchant for the unusual or surreal, won favour from critics. As his popularity grew, Banhart’s albums—including Niño Rojo and Rejoicing in the Hands (both 2004), Cripple Crow (2005), and Smokey Rolls down Thunder Canyon (2007)—became more-elaborate affairs. He subsequently released What Will We Be (2009), Mala (2013), Ape in Pink Marble (2016), and Ma (2019). Banhart’s Latin American background revealed itself in his occasional use of Spanish lyrics and in the echoes of Tropicália in some of his compositions, though the sounds of that Brazilian artistic movement were among many that influenced him. In addition to employing disparate musical styles, he borrowed from a variety of literary and visual art forms. The latter were of special interest to Banhart, who was also a visual artist. A collection of his drawings, paintings, photographs, and mixed-media works, I Left My Noodle on Ramen Street, was published in 2015.
Although Banhart’s mainstream appeal was decidedly limited, in the first decade of the 21st century he stood at the centre of a burgeoning musical subgenre that was variously branded neofolk, psych-folk, freak folk, and New Weird America. (The latter term was a takeoff on “Old, Weird America,” a phrase used by rock critic Greil Marcus to refer to the landscape of early 20th-century regional American folk music.) While the artists primarily associated with the sound—including Banhart, Joanna Newsom, Vetiver, Feathers, and Espers—resisted easy categorization, many of them drew inspiration from British folk and psychedelic artists from the 1960s and ’70s, including the Incredible String Band, Vashti Bunyan, Pentangle, Fairport Convention, Bert Jansch, Nick Drake, and Syd Barrett of Pink Floyd.
