Folk music,  type of traditional and generally rural music that originally was passed down through families and other small social groups. Typically, folk music, like folk literature, lives in oral tradition; it is learned through hearing rather than reading. It is functional in the sense that it is associated with other activities, and it is primarily rural in origin. The usefulness of the concept varies from culture to culture, but it is most convenient as a designation of a type of music of Europe and the Americas.
The term folk music and its equivalents in other languages denote many different kinds of music; the meaning of the term varies according to the part of the world, social class, and period of history. In determining whether a song or piece of music is folk music, most performers, participants, and enthusiasts would probably agree on certain criteria derived from patterns of transmission, social function, origins, and performance.
The central traditions of folk music are transmitted orally or aurally, that is, they are learned through hearing rather than the reading of words or music, ordinarily in informal, small social networks of relatives or friends rather than in institutions such as school or church. In the 20th century, transmission through recordings and mass media began to replace much of the face-to-face learning. In comparison with art music, which brings aesthetic enjoyment, and popular music, which (often along with social dancing) functions as entertainment, folk music is more often associated with other activities, such as calendric or life-cycle rituals, work, games, enculturation, and folk religion; folk music is also more likely to be participatory than presentational.
The concept applies to cultures in which there is also an urban, technically more sophisticated musical tradition maintained by and for a smaller social, economic, and intellectual elite in cities, courts, or urbanized cultures. Generally, “folk music” refers to music that broad segments of the population—particularly the lower socioeconomic classes—understand, and with which they identify. In this respect it is the rural counterpart to urban popular music, although that music depends mainly on the mass media—recordings, radio, television, and to some degree the Internet—for dissemination.
Traditionally, folk music performers were amateurs, and some folk songs were literally known to all members of a community; but specialists—instrumentalists and singers of narratives—were important to folk communities. In the 20th century, the role of professionals as performers and carriers of folk traditions expanded dramatically. Folk music as it is believed to have existed in earlier times may be discussed separately from periods of revival such as that of 19th-century European nationalism and the 20th-century revivals, shortly before and after World War II, that were motivated by political agendas. In the context of popular music, performances of “folk music” may be distinguished by the use of songs with political agendas and the use of traditional instruments and acoustic guitars. On the other side of the musical spectrum, lines between folk music and art music were blurred beginning in the 19th century, when art music composers introduced songs from folklore into urban musical culture.
The terms used for folk music in different cultures illuminate aspects of the concept. The English term and its French and Italian analogues, musique populaire and musica popolare, indicate that this is music associated with a social class, the “folk.” The German Volksmusik (“people’s music”) combines the concept of class with the unification of an ethnic group, as does the Hindi term log git (“the people’s music”) in India. Czech, like some of the other Slavic languages, uses the term narod (“nation”) and its relatives, indicating that folk music is the musical unifier of all Czechs. Conversely, the Persian term mūsīqī-ye maḥallī (“regional music”) emphasizes the distinctions in folk music style and repertory among different areas of Iran. The term folk music has also, perhaps unwisely, been used for traditional art musics of Asian and African cultures, to distinguish them from the Western classical system.
The typical 21st-century conception of folk music comes from beliefs about the nature of music and musical life in the village cultures of Europe from the 18th into the 19th century; but this traditional folk music culture was affected greatly by the rise of industrial society and of cities, as well as by nationalist movements beginning in the 19th century. Both the threat to folk culture and the rise of nationalism spurred revival and preservation movements in which learned musicians, poets, and scholars provided leadership. In the 20th century, further revivals associated folk music with political and social movements and blurred the musical distinctions among folk, art, and popular musics. Nevertheless, vigorous remnants of the traditional culture of folk music were retained in 19th-century western Europe and in eastern Europe into the 20th century; these are the bases for the following characterization.
