Luogu, (Chinese: “gongs and drums”)  Wade-Giles romanization lo-ku,  Chinese percussion ensemble composed of a variety of instruments, including—in addition to an assortment of gongs and drums—cymbals, bells, and woodblocks. The luogu accompanies parades, folk dances, and theatre. Luogu also are present to accompany the popular lion dance held during the Chinese New Year in the ethnic Chinese neighbourhoods of several Western cities. These ensembles can be composed entirely of percussion instruments or of some combination of percussion with winds or strings or both.
A gong-and-drum percussion ensemble can range from two or three players to a dozen, and instrumentation and style vary according to function and region. Even the sizes and names of instruments differ. The three major instruments present in most styles are daluo (large gong without a boss, beaten with a padded mallet), bo (cymbals), and gu (skin-headed drum, beaten with two sticks). The xiaoluo (small gong without a boss, beaten with a stick or a thin plate), ling (handbells), and ban (woodblock) are sometimes added. Whatever the ensemble’s composition, the drummer is usually the leader.
Before gongs became common in China, the percussion ensemble was usually a zhonggu (“bells and drums”) ensemble. The earliest known gong was found in a tomb in Guangxi province that was dated to the early Xi (Western) Han dynasty (3rd century bc). Records show that musical instruments of the gong and cymbal types were introduced into China no later than the Nan (Southern) dynasty (ad 420–589) and Bei (Northern) dynasty (ad 386–581), accompanying the importation of Buddhism from India as well as Central Asian influences by way of the Silk Road. Gongs, cymbals, clappers, and drums were featured prominently in the court orchestras of the Sui (ad 581–618) and Tang (ad 618–907) dynasties and were depicted in many Buddhist mural paintings. They eventually became popular in folk music.
Chinese luogu music is taught through sounds and speech patterns, using a method called luogujing, whereby each percussion pattern is given a name to let the performers know what instruments should be played and when. Contemporary teaching and performance also employ Chinese characters or Western letters as notation.
