Violeta Parra, in full Violeta del Carmen Parra Sandoval,  (born October 4, 1917, San Carlos, Chile—died February 5, 1967, Santiago), Chilean composer, folk singer, and social activist, best known as one of the founders of the politically inflected Nueva Canción (“New Song”) movement. In addition, she painted, wrote poetry, sculpted, and wove arpilleras (folk tapestries). Her best-known song, “Gracias a la Vida” (“Thanks to Life”), endures throughout the West as a beloved and poignant folk song.
Parra was born to a large, poor family in the small town of San Carlos in the southern province of Ñuble. Her father, a music teacher, taught all of his children how to sing and play various instruments, especially the guitar. She started writing songs at an early age, initially performing at bars, small ballrooms, and circuses. In 1952, encouraged by her brother poet Nicanor Parra, she travelled throughout Chile to record the breadth of Chilean folk music. Her exposure to that music served as her inspiration for Nueva Canción, and her work began to synthesize Chilean folk traditions and her growing concern for social conditions.
Embracing a broad spectrum of musical styles, Nueva Canción stood as an emblem of the socially, economically, and politically marginalized peoples of Latin America and their struggle for social justice. Parra’s music and art often served as a critique of the wealthy landowning elite of Chilean society as well as of the church and the military, all of whom she held responsible for the social and economic plight of Chile’s disenfranchised poor.
In 1954, having been awarded what was referred to as the "Chilean Oscar" at the Caupolicán Theatre for her music, Parra was invited to Poland to play at a youth festival. She popularized her music as she travelled throughout the Soviet Union and Europe, and she finally settled in Paris for two years, where she recorded several albums. Parra’s stay was cut short by the sudden death of her youngest daughter, and she returned to Chile in 1956. In 1957 she met with folksinger Víctor Jara and inspired the young artist to join the movement. Both artists strongly supported Salvador Allende’s early bids for the Chilean presidency, and Parra maintained ties with members of Chile’s socialist and communist parties. She committed suicide at age 49 while living in a tent on the outskirts of Santiago.
