Pinhas Lavon, born Pinhas Lubianiker, Pinhas also spelled Pinchas,  (born July 12, 1904, Kopyczynce, Eastern Galicia, Austria-Hungary [now Kopychintsy, Ukraine]—died January 24, 1976, Tel Aviv–Yafo, Israel), Israeli politician who held a number of government posts and was accused in 1954 of involvement in a plot to discredit Egypt by secretly attacking U.S. facilities in that country. Although he was cleared of all charges, the “Lavon Affair,” as it came to be known, effectively ended his political career.
Lavon was educated at Lwow (now Lviv) University and joined the Zionist movement in 1924. He settled in Palestine in 1929 and became secretary of David Ben-Gurion’s Israel Labour Party (Mapai) in 1935 and a member of its executive committee in 1942. After the proclamation of the state of Israel in 1948, Lavon was elected to the Knesset (parliament) the following year, becoming at the same time secretary-general of Histadrut (General Federation of Labour), an organization that became one of the countries most important economic bodies. He was named minister of agriculture in 1950 in Ben-Gurion’s cabinet and in January 1954 became minister of defense under Prime Minister Moshe Sharett. Shortly thereafter Lavon was accused of involvement in a miscarried plot to damage Egypt’s reputation in the United States—the plan allegedly entailed a series of bomb attacks by Israeli agents against U.S. facilities in Egypt that would be blamed on Arab extremists. Although three inquiries cleared him of guilt, Lavon had to resign from the government in February 1955. He returned, however, to his Histadrut post. In September 1961, supported by testimony of a former agent, Lavon accused a group of officers—all Ben-Gurion appointees—of having attempted to frame him in 1954. Ben-Gurion, who had returned to the premiership in the summer of 1955, rejected a new inquiry into the “Lavon Affair” and resigned from office, asserting that he would not return as long as Lavon remained secretary-general of Histadrut. The Labour Party’s central committee then voted to remove Lavon from that position.
