Abu Sayyaf Group, Arabic Abu Sayyaf (“Bearer of the Sword”),  militant organization based on Basilan island, one of the southern islands in the Philippine archipelago. Beginning in the mid-1990s, the group, whose origins are somewhat obscure, carried out terrorist attacks in the Philippines, including a series of high-profile kidnappings in 2000 and 2001.
The southern Philippines have had a substantial Muslim population for centuries. Sixteenth-century Spanish colonizers spread Christianity to the northern islands, treating the Muslims as a despised minority, and the area has seen periodic violence ever since. The people of the southern islands are among the poorest in the country. In the early 1970s, the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) began a war of secession against the Philippine government. Although the fortunes of the MNLF and its splinter group, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF), subsequently rose and fell, violence and lawlessness remained a constant in the southern islands. Over time, defections, desertions, and ideological disputes caused rebel groups to break into smaller armed bands.
The Abu Sayyaf Group began as one such band of former guerrillas, led by Abdurajak Abubakar Janjalani, a charismatic former Islamic scholar who had traveled to Afghanistan in the 1980s to fight against the Soviet occupation. When Abu Sayyaf first came to light in the early 1990s—some sources place the group’s founding as early as 1990—it was generally thought to be a splinter faction of the MILF. Afterward, however, observers came to consider it an entirely independent group. Though based on Basilan island, it also operated on other islands with large Muslim populations, and its total membership was estimated to be as few as 500 fighters in the mid-1990s. Early in its existence, Abu Sayyaf established connections with international Muslim militant organizations, including al-Qaeda, and group members reportedly received training and support from these organizations.
Abu Sayyaf’s professed goal was for an independent state encompassing the Philippines’ Muslim population, to be governed according to Sharīʿah law. The group carried out a string of attacks against Filipino Christians, but it also engaged in criminal activities—particularly kidnappings—that seemed to be motivated more by a desire for money than by ideology. Kidnappings by Abu Sayyaf on Basilan and elsewhere increased in the late 1990s, with wealthy Filipino businessmen the main targets. Captives were usually released after the payment of a ransom, but some were killed.
Abu Sayyaf gained international notoriety in early 2000 with a series of dramatic attacks. On March 20 it raided two schools on Basilan, taking more than 50 hostages, most of them children. On April 23 the Philippine army launched a dangerous rescue operation against the Abu Sayyaf compound housing the hostages. Four Abu Sayyaf fighters were killed, and 15 hostages were freed. Most of the fighters escaped into the jungle, taking five hostages with them.
Later that day a separate group of Abu Sayyaf fighters abducted victims from a resort on the nearby island of Sipadan, which belonged to Malaysia. The second group included Malaysian and Filipino hotel staff as well as several foreign tourists. Some journalists covering the kidnappings were also abducted. The presence of French, German, Finnish, Lebanese, U.S., and South African nationals among the hostages focused an international spotlight on the Philippine response. Concerned for the safety of their citizens, the French, German, and South African governments prevailed upon the Philippine government to negotiate rather than launch another risky raid. After months of negotiations, a ransom of an undisclosed amount was paid to Abu Sayyaf, and a dozen of the hostages were released. The kidnappers refused to part with the remainder, and Philippine Pres. Joseph Estrada launched a massive military strike against the group in September 2000 that secured the hostages’ release. The ransom paid to Abu Sayyaf reportedly enabled the group to increase its recruiting efforts, and estimates of the group’s total membership after the Sipadan kidnappings ranged from 1,000 to 4,000.
Following the terrorist attacks on the United States on September 11, 2001, and taking into consideration Abu Sayyaf’s connections to al-Qaeda, the United States government acceded in January 2002 to the request of the new Philippine president, Gloria Arroyo, and pledged $100 million in military aid for the elimination of Abu Sayyaf. The United States sent 660 U.S. Army Special Forces soldiers to act as military advisers and train the Philippine army in counterterrorism tactics. The aid caused considerable controversy in the Philippines but seemed to have the support of the public, especially because U.S. forces were not to take part in actual combat. The United States also offered significant monetary rewards for information leading to the capture of top Abu Sayyaf members.
The collaboration resulted in some successes, including the capture or death of several of Abu Sayyaf’s leaders, but the organization continued to kidnap Filipino and foreign civilians for ransom and to attack police and other targets. In February 2004 Abu Sayyaf bombed a ferry departing from Manila, causing a fire and killing at least 116 people. The following year the group set off bombs in three cities, killing more than a dozen people. In both cases Philippine authorities were able to capture and try many of those responsible.
