Aden-Abyan Islamic Army,  Yemen-based Islamist militant group that has been implicated in several acts of terrorism since the late 1990s. It is most recognized for its involvement in the 2000 bombing of the USS Cole.
Aden-Abyan was formed sometime in the mid-1990s as a loose guerrilla network of a few dozen men, with a mix of veterans of the Soviet-Afghan war and Islamists from various countries. In May 1998 the group issued the first of a series of political and religious statements on Yemeni and world affairs. In December 1998 Aden-Abyan kidnapped a party of 16 Western tourists in southern Yemen, four of whom later died during a botched rescue by Yemeni security forces. In 1999 group leader Zayn al-Abidin al-Mihdhar (Abu al-Hassan) was executed for his role in the kidnappings.
Numerous connections have been drawn between Aden-Abyan and the al-Qaeda network. After the 1998 attack on the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, Aden-Abyan claimed they were a “heroic operation carried out by heroes of the jihad.” Later, following an American raid on Osama bin Laden’s camp in Afghanistan, Aden-Abyan announced its support for him and asked the Yemeni people to kill Americans and destroy their property. It is believed that Aden-Abyan ran a training camp in a remote part of southern Yemen; when the government tried to close it, a bin Laden representative attempted to intervene.
In October 2000 two suicide bombers aligned with Aden-Abyan exploded their boat alongside the USS Cole, then in port in Aden. Most experts agreed that the attack was the combined work of Aden-Abyan and al-Qaeda. One day after the Cole incident, a bomb was lobbed into the British embassy in Sanaa, shattering windows at both the embassy and nearby buildings. Four members of Aden-Abyan were later sentenced for the embassy bombing.
Aden-Abyan also claimed responsibility for the October 2002 bombing of a French oil tanker, which killed a crew member. As with the Cole, the tanker was attacked by a small boat laden with explosives. The following June, Aden-Abyan operatives attacked a military medical convoy, triggering a substantial military response. That October the leader of Aden-Abyan, Khalid Abd al-Nabi, surrendered to Yemeni authorities. This and other events signaled a decline in the power of Aden-Abyan, but the escape or release of dozens of al-Qaeda members from Yemeni prisons in subsequent years breathed new life into militant Islamic networks in Yemen. Reorganized as al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), these groups were linked to a number of attempted bombing attacks on commercial airliners.
