Al-Qaeda in Iraq, also called al-Qaeda in Mesopotamia,  militant Sunni network, active in Iraq after the U.S.-led invasion of 2003, comprising Iraqi and foreign fighters opposed to the U.S. occupation and the Shīʿite-dominated Iraqi government.
Al-Qaeda in Iraq first appeared in 2004 when Abū Muṣʿab al-Zarqāwī, a Jordanian-born militant already leading insurgent attacks in Iraq, formed an alliance with al-Qaeda, pledging his group’s allegiance to Osama bin Laden in return for bin Laden’s endorsement as the leader of al-Qaeda’s franchise in Iraq. Al-Zarqāwī, who quickly came to be regarded as one of the most destructive militants in Iraq, organized a wave of attacks, often suicide bombings, that targeted security forces, government institutions, and Iraqi civilians. Intending to deepen the sectarian conflict at the heart of the Iraq War, al-Qaeda in Iraq especially targeted Iraqi Shīʿites, sometimes during religious processions or at Shīʿite mosques and shrines. A 2006 attack widely attributed to al-Qaeda in Iraq destroyed the golden dome of Al-ʿAskariyyah Mosque in Sāmarrāʾ, one of Shīʿism’s holiest mosques, amplifying the existing cycle of violent retribution and provoking some of the worst sectarian violence of the post-invasion period.
Al-Qaeda in Iraq remained active even after al-Zarqāwī was killed by U.S. forces in 2006. The organization was severely weakened in 2007, however, after Sunni tribes paid by the United States began to form militias known as “Awakening Councils” to expel al-Qaeda in Iraq from their territories. Many of those groups had previously participated in the insurgency but were alienated by al-Qaeda in Iraq’s often brutal treatment of civilians, as well as its efforts to replace local tribal power structures with an al-Qaeda-governed state. Although that reversal, coupled with an increasingly successful effort by U.S. and Iraqi forces to kill al-Qaeda in Iraq leaders, greatly diminished the organization’s power, the network continued to operate on a reduced scale, targeting Shīʿites, Christians, members of the Awakening Councils, and the Iraqi government.
