arbitration,  nonjudicial legal technique for resolving disputes by referring them to a neutral party for a binding decision, or “award.” An arbitrator may consist of a single person or an arbitration board, usually of three members.
Arbitration is most commonly used in the resolution of commercial disputes and is distinct from mediation and conciliation, both of which are common in the settlement of labour disputes between management and labour unions. In mediation, the parties resort to a third person to offer a recommendation for a settlement or to help them to reach a compromise. Such intervention by a third party, which also occurs in international disputes between states in the form of diplomatic intervention and good offices, has no binding force upon the disputants, unlike the arbitrator’s ruling.
Commercial arbitration is a means of settling disputes by referring them to a neutral person, an arbitrator, selected by the parties for a decision based on the evidence and arguments presented to the arbitration tribunal. The parties agree in advance that the decision will be accepted as final and binding.
Historically, commercial arbitration was used in resolving controversies between medieval merchants in fairs and marketplaces in England and on the European continent and in the Mediterranean and Baltic sea trade. The increased use of commercial arbitration became possible after courts were empowered to enforce the parties’ agreement to arbitrate. The first such statute was the English Arbitration Act of 1889, which was later consolidated into an act of 1950 and adopted by arbitration statutes in most countries of the British Commonwealth. It was followed in the United States by an arbitration statute of the state of New York in 1920 and the Federal Arbitration Act of 1925. The latter dealt with the enforcement in federal courts of arbitration agreements and awards in maritime transactions and those involving interstate and foreign commerce. Most U.S. states adopted, sometimes with minor changes, the Uniform Arbitration Act of 1955, as amended in 1956, which had been promoted by the Commissioners on Uniform State Laws and recommended by the American Bar Association. This act provided for the judicial enforcement of an agreement to arbitrate existing and future disputes and thereby made the arbitration agreement no longer revocable, as it had been under common law. It also provided for the substitution of arbitrators in the event of a party’s failing to select an arbitrator and for a suspension of any court action instituted in contravention of a voluntary arbitration agreement. The courts thereby play an important role in implementing arbitration agreements and making judicial assistance available against a recalcitrant party. This concept of modern arbitration law, which recognizes the irrevocability of arbitration agreements and the enforceability of awards, also prevails in the arbitration statutes of nearly all countries.
Arbitration customarily has been used for the settlement of disputes between members of trade associations and between different exchanges in the securities and commodities trade. Form contracts often contain a standard arbitration clause referring to specific arbitration rules. Numerous arrangements between parties in industry and commerce also provide for the arbitration of controversies arising out of contracts for the sale of manufactured goods, for terms of service of employment, for construction and engineering projects, for financial operations, for agency and distribution arrangements, and for many other undertakings.
The usefulness and significance of arbitration are demonstrated by its increasing use by the business community and the legal profession in many countries of the world. An advantage of arbitration can be the speed with which controversies can be resolved by arbitration, compared with the long delays of ordinary court procedure. The expert knowledge of arbitrators of the customs and usages of a specific trade makes testimony by others and much documentation unnecessary and thereby eliminates some expenses generally associated with court procedures. The privacy of the arbitration procedure also is much valued by parties to the controversy; situations unfavourable to the party’s credit or deficiencies in manufactured goods revealed in arbitration proceedings do not become known to outsiders. There are, however, disadvantages in the arbitration process. Because in Anglo-American practice abitrators generally do not have to provide any reason to accompany an award, it has been difficult to develop guidelines for the conduct of business relations. Moreover, this uncertainty makes the arbitral decision less predictable. Further obstacles to the wider use of commercial arbitration are the divergences in municipal laws and court decisions that result in different interpretations of similar arbitration questions and the fact that awards usually are not published.
Because the arbitrator’s ability and fairness are the decisive elements in any arbitration, the selection process is an important aspect of arbitration. Generally, both parties select an arbitrator at the time a conflict arises or at the time the arbitration agreement is concluded. The two arbitrators then select a chairman, forming a tribunal. The selection of arbitrators often is made by agencies administering commercial arbitration under preestablished rules of procedure. These organizations—various trade associations, produce exchanges, and chambers of commerce in many countries—maintain panels of expert arbitrators. The parties may either make their own selection or entrust the appointment of the arbitrators to the organization.
Challenges to the arbitration process are not uncommon. For example, a party may claim that no valid arbitration agreement existed because the person signing the agreement had no authority to do so or that a condition precedent to arbitration was not fulfilled. More often, arbitration is contested on the ground that the specific controversy is not covered by the agreement. In such cases, the issue of whether the arbitrator has authority to deal with the conflict is usually determined by a court. The arbitration process is also sometimes challenged on the grounds that an arbitrator lacked impartiality. Any such challenge generally can be maintained only after the arbitration has been concluded, as courts are reluctant to interfere with the arbitration process before an award has been rendered.
The arbitration process is governed by the rules agreed to in the arbitration agreement; otherwise, the procedure is determined by the arbitrators. The arbitration proceedings must be conducted so as to afford the parties a fair hearing on the basis of equality. The arbitrator generally has the authority to request the parties and third persons to produce documentary evidence and to enforce such a request by issuing subpoenas. If a party fails to appear at a properly convened hearing without showing a legitimate cause, the arbitrator in most instances can proceed and render an award after investigating the matter in dispute.
Under the law and arbitration practice of most countries, an award is valid and binding upon the parties when rendered by a majority of the arbitrators unless the parties expressly request a unanimous decision of the arbitrators. The statutory law of various countries and the rules of agencies administering commercial arbitration contain provisions on the form, certification, notification, and delivery of the award, with which requirements the arbitrator has to comply.
A much-disputed question in commercial arbitration concerns the law to be applied by the arbitrators. Generally, the award must be based upon the law as determined by the parties in their agreement. This failing, the arbitrator must apply the law he considers proper in accordance with the principles of the conflict of laws. In both cases, the arbitrator must take into consideration the terms of the contract and the usage of the specific trade. If a compromise is reached by the parties during any arbitration proceeding, that compromise may be recorded as an award by the arbitrator.
Appeals to the courts from the award cannot be excluded by agreement of the parties, since the fairness of the arbitration process as a quasi-judicial procedure has to be maintained. However, any court control is confined to specific matters, usually enumerated in the arbitration statutes, such as misconduct of the arbitrator in denying a party the full presentation of its claim or refusing a postponement of the hearing for good cause. A review of the award by a court generally does not address the arbitrator’s decisions as to facts or his application of the law. The competence of the courts usually is restricted so as not to make the arbitration process the beginning of litigation instead of its end. Recognition of an award and its enforcement will be denied when it appears to be contrary to public policy. An arbitration award has the authority of a court decision and may be enforced by summary court action according to the procedural law of the country in which execution is being sought.
