Bankruptcy fraud,  the act of falsifying information when filing for bankruptcy. It may also take the form of filing for bankruptcy to deceive creditors.
In the United States, about 10 percent of bankruptcy filings involve fraudulent claims. The four most commonly encountered fraud schemes are concealment of assets, petition mills, multiple-filing schemes, and bust-out schemes.
When debtors file for bankruptcy, they are required to list all their assets so that creditors will have the opportunity to claim a share of the earnings from the sale of those assets. Debtors who commit concealment of assets fraud will intentionally neglect to list all their assets, in the belief that creditors cannot obtain payment from the sale of assets that are not known. Concealment of assets is the most commonly encountered form of bankruptcy fraud, over two-thirds of all fraudulent bankruptcy cases invoking variants of this scheme.
There are several variations of concealment of assets fraud. In one variation, debtors will transfer the assets they wish to keep to the name and financial accounts of a family member who has good credit. Another variation involves hiding cash assets in accounts overseas and outside the legal jurisdiction of U.S.-based creditors.
Petition mills take advantage of poor debtors who wish to save their homes. Under this form of fraud, a tenant will be contacted by an agency offering to work with the debtor’s landlord to prevent eviction. The debtor then agrees to pay the agency for its services. Many times these agencies have no intention of contacting the landlord. Instead, the agency will take the personal information collected from the debtor and file bankruptcy without the tenant’s knowledge. The tenant continues paying the agency, while the agency will extend the eviction process out over several months. By the time tenants realize that they have been duped, their credit has been destroyed, their bank accounts have been drained, and their homes have been taken. These operations tend to take place in large metropolitan and urban neighbourhoods with substantial numbers of poor people.
Some petition mill operations also function under the guise of credit counseling services. The activities are similar, only the pretense changes. Debtors are still charged for the services of the credit counselor who is filing bankruptcy in the debtor’s name without permission, instead of working with creditors. In the end, when the scheme is discovered, the debtors will find that counselors have made their credit record worse and that they have lost the money spent on counseling.
Multiple-filing schemes work in much the same manner as concealment of assets fraud. In both instances, debtors decline to list all their assets when filing for bankruptcy. Unlike concealment of assets, these operations are repeated multiple times in separate states. Individuals who engage in this form of fraud will travel from state to state filing bankruptcy claims in each state.
Many times the debtor will use his or her own personal identifying information, including social security number, birth date, and name. However, when this information becomes unusable, the debtor will move to the use of illegally obtained information. By combining fraudulent bankruptcy skills with the skills of an identity thief, the debtor can move from state to state filing bankruptcy claims in the names of unknowing victims.
Bust-out schemes have long been a problem but have only recently been classified by many scholars as bankruptcy fraud. Historically, individuals who engaged in this type of activity were labeled as careless but not criminal; today, the same cannot be said. When an individual is engaged in a bust-out scheme, he or she will apply for as much credit as possible and then fail to pay on any of the accounts. Once the debtor has maximized the number of credit accounts that can be offered, he or she will file the bankruptcy claim with no intention of ever paying back the goods. Often, these activities involve buying luxury items that may not be reclaimed by creditors during the bankruptcy proceedings.
One of the most famous incidents of bankruptcy fraud in the United States involved the activities of Robert Brennan. Brennan was suspected of numerous financial crimes but was eventually convicted of bankruptcy fraud. During the mid-1990s, Brennan became involved in a scheme where it became apparent that he was going to owe the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) approximately $75,000,000. To avoid losing everything, Brennan secured a large amount of liquid assets, including several million dollars worth of New York state bearer bonds and several hundred thousands of dollars worth of casino chips from the Mirage Casino. Eventually, investigators were able to track down Brennan’s accounts, and he was charged and convicted of bankruptcy fraud.
In response to the growing problem of bankruptcy fraud, numerous federal law enforcement agencies, including the U.S. Secret Service, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the U.S. Postal Inspection Service, and the Internal Revenue Service, joined forces to begin actively prosecuting those who attempt to defraud creditors through bankruptcy fraud. Individuals who are found guilty of bankruptcy fraud may be sentenced to a fine of up to $250,000 and a prison sentence of up to 5 years.
Individuals are also no longer the only ones investigated by federal law enforcement. Corporations are also frequently investigated for their role in fraudulent bankruptcy-related activity. The emphasis on bankruptcy fraud has moved from a reactive nature to that of a proactive nature. Several cooperative efforts among the various law enforcement agencies have resulted in large-scale sting operations designed to deter others from committing bankruptcy fraud.
Another modification in the response to bankruptcy fraud is the focus on prosecuting accountants and other professionals in the financial industry. These are the individuals who typically are responsible for large-scale increases in fraudulent bankruptcy claims. Individuals may not be familiar with how bankruptcy operates, but accountants and financial advisers who engage in bankruptcy fraud can encourage criminal activity. There are a large number of individuals who may file bankruptcy, but the number of these “one-timers” is far outweighed by the number of fraudulent claims that can come from bankruptcy fraud professionals.
