Bank Secrecy Act, also called Currency and Foreign Transactions Reporting Act,  U.S. legislation, signed into law in 1970 by Pres. Richard Nixon, that requires banks and other financial entities in the United States to maintain records and file reports on currency transactions and suspicious activity with the government. The Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), sometimes referred to as BSA/AML (anti-money laundering), was formulated to facilitate the investigation of cases of suspected money laundering and fraud and to detect illegal financial activities by tracking suspicious currency transactions. The BSA is used by different U.S. government agencies, including the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
The BSA has been amended multiple times since its enactment. Substantial modifications entailed the broadening of the BSA to include the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, which contained the Money Laundering Control Act of 1986, and the Money Laundering Suppression Act of 1994. The additional legislation enhanced the enforcement effectiveness of the law by making money laundering a criminal activity, requiring researchers to develop more-successful examination methods, and calling for more examiner training in order to better identify suspicious schemes at financial institutions.
The BSA requires that all financial institutions comply with certain provisions and that banking officials formulate internal compliance programs in order to do so. In its simplest form, an internal compliance program must be written, be approved by the directors, and include a structure of internal controls to guarantee compliance with the BSA, external or internal auditing of the institution’s compliance, daily supervision by a specified person, and training for the money-tracking personnel. The BSA also requires detailed monitoring of accounts that have been opened or closed. Senior management employees of a financial institution must be updated regularly with compliance and audit reports in order to ensure their knowledge of compliance.
Testing by external or internal auditors is an essential check to ensure that there are no lapses in compliance. Auditors are required by the BSA to monitor a financial institution’s internal compliance program and to evaluate the employees’ knowledge concerning BSA requirements and the quality of the BSA training program. They also are required to observe the bank’s ability to identify suspicious activity.
The designation of a compliance officer and the establishment and maintenance of a BSA training program are two other components of an internal compliance program. A qualified employee directly employed by the financial institution is required to oversee all the components of the BSA internal compliance program, including the training program. Training must involve all relevant banking personnel, whether an employee is a bank teller or a bank president. It is essential that the training program be updated often to address new bank-crime schemes and new regulations.
According to the BSA, there are five reporting requirements with which banks must comply. These include the filing of a Currency Transaction Report (CTR) detailing any transaction amounting to over $10,000, the filing of a Report of International Transportation of Currency or Monetary Instruments (CMIR) for any person who transports, mails, or receives foreign currency amounting to more than $10,000, and a Report of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts (FBAR) with a list of foreign accounts that exceed $10,000. A fourth report, the Suspicious Activity Report (SAR), details any transaction that is deemed to be suspicious. A Designation of Exempt Person Form must be filed in order to gain authorization for an exempt customer; exemptions must be renewed every two years. Banks must also keep a Monetary Instrument Log, with records of transactions—namely, the issuing of cashier’s checks, money orders, and traveler’s checks between $3,000 and $10,000—along with identity verification of the customer.
Enforcement of the BSA depends upon bank employees’ ability to recognize and report suspicious activities and illegal conduct. BSA training guides stipulate numerous signals of foul play. For example, suspicious activities include the opening of several accounts and constant transferring of substantial amounts of money, frequent large transactions in cash, complete repayment of a loan with no explanation as to the source of the repaid money, large wire transfers from foreigners, frequent exchanges of small bills for large bills in substantial amounts, and the purchase of cashier’s checks or money orders with large amounts of cash.
