Berea College v. Kentucky,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on November 9, 1908, upheld (7–2) a Kentucky state law that prohibited individuals and corporations from operating schools that taught both African American and white students. Although the majority ruling did not endorse racial integration, Justice John Marshall Harlan’s strongly worded dissent influenced subsequent judicial decisions that struck down segregated educational facilities as unconstitutional.
Since its founding in 1855, Berea College had educated both African American and white students in a nondiscriminatory manner. However, in 1904, the Kentucky legislature passed the Day Law, which prohibited African American and white students from receiving an education at the same school or in schools that were located less than 25 miles (40 km) apart. Insofar as Berea College was the only integrated educational institution in Kentucky, it was clearly the target of the Day Law. The college was soon charged with violating the law and was criminally convicted and fined $1,000. The college took the case to the Court of Appeals of Kentucky, which decided that the law had the legitimate purpose of preventing racial violence and interracial marriage. Thus, the law and Berea College’s fine were permitted to stand.
Having agreed to hear the case, the Supreme Court affirmed the decision of the Kentucky Court of Appeals. The Berea majority was careful not to overrule the Supreme Court’s earlier opinion in Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), which had maintained that separate but equal facilities for African Americans and whites were constitutional under the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In fact, the court extended Plessy’s rationale to include institutions of higher education. In order to follow precedent, the Berea court did not base its judgment on Fourteenth Amendment grounds. Rather, the court was of the view that Kentucky was legally able to change a past charter of one of its corporations. In other words, even though Berea College was still legally incorporated, the court asserted that officials in Kentucky could amend the institution’s original charter through subsequent legislation, making it illegal for Berea College to admit both African American and white students. In essence, the Berea majority ignored the college’s argument that, because voluntary and private association was protected by the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment (“nor shall any state deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law”), it was beyond the scope of governmental regulation. The court held, to the contrary, that, because Kentucky could create Berea College as a corporation, commonwealth officials also had the legal authority to limit its activities.
In his dissent, Justice Harlan (who had also famously dissented in Plessy v. Ferguson) argued that the purpose of the Kentucky legislature in passing the Day Law was not simply to amend Berea College’s charter but to segregate students on the basis of race, as was clear from the title of the law, An Act to Prohibit White and Colored Persons from Attending the Same School. In light of this clear discriminatory intent, Harlan insisted that the law was unconstitutional under the due process clause, pointing out that the right to teach was a protected property right and a fundamental liberty. Harlan warned that, by allowing Kentucky to prohibit teaching African American and white students in the same school, the court was opening the door to allowing jurisdictions to regulate whether African Americans and whites could voluntarily worship next to one another.
Almost 50 years later, when it finally struck down racially segregated educational facilities in Brown v. Board of Education (1954), the Supreme Court adopted a position like that of Justice Harlan.
