Bethel School District No. 403 v. Fraser,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on July 7, 1986, ruled (7–2) that school officials did not violate a student’s free speech and due process rights when he was disciplined for making a lewd and vulgar speech at a school assembly.
In April 1983 Matthew Fraser, a student at Bethel High School in Washington state, gave a nominating speech for a classmate who was running for an office in student government. The speech—which occurred at a school assembly that was attended by approximately 600 students—featured numerous sexual innuendos and references, causing the audience to react in a variety of ways; some appeared embarrassed, while others yelled and made obscene gestures. Prior to the student assembly, two educators had warned Fraser that he should not give the speech and that if he did, serious consequences could result. The following day, the assistant principal told Fraser that he had violated the school’s policy prohibiting the use of obscene language. As punishment, school officials suspended Fraser for three days and removed his name from the list of possible graduation commencement speakers.
After Fraser was unable to get his punishment overturned through the school board’s grievance procedure, his father filed suit on his behalf, alleging that officials infringed on his First Amendment right to freedom of speech. A federal district court agreed. In addition, it held that the discipline policy that prohibited the speech was “unconstitutionally vague and overbroad” and that officials violated the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment in removing Fraser’s name from the list of graduation speakers. The court granted Fraser monetary damages and ordered that the school board not prevent him from speaking at the graduation ceremony.
The school appealed the case to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, which affirmed the lower court’s ruling. It maintained that Fraser’s speech was no different from the student speech in Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District (1969), in which the U.S. Supreme Court held that school officials could not discipline students who wore black armbands to protest the Vietnam War solely on the basis of the fear that the students would cause a disruption. The Ninth Circuit rejected the notion that Fraser’s speech differed from the passive speech in Tinker because his speech actually caused a disruption. In addition, the court disagreed that officials had the responsibility to protect minors from “lewd and indecent” language, and it did not think that officials had the authority to control speech that occurred during a school-sponsored event.
On March 3, 1986, the case was argued before the Supreme Court. Although Tinker established that students should be afforded free expression rights while at school, the court held that their rights are not equivalent to an adult’s freedom of speech. Moreover, the Court pointed out that the sexual content of Fraser’s speech was distinguishable from the nondisruptive political speech that was at issue in Tinker. The Court added that the state has an interest in protecting children from vulgar and offensive language and that school boards should thus have the authority to determine what speech is inappropriate. Although school officials should allow controversial views to be expressed, they must balance that interest with those of other students who may be offended by certain language. The Supreme Court thereby found that the school’s actions were not in violation of the First Amendment.
Turning to the Fourteenth Amendment, the Court decided that officials did not violate Fraser’s due process rights. First, the Court was of the opinion that a school’s disciplinary policy does not need to be as descriptive as a criminal code, because such a policy does not impose criminal sentences. Second, the Court found that Fraser received ample notice that his inappropriate speech could result in punishment. Not only did the school have an antiobscenity rule, but teachers warned Fraser of the consequences of his actions. The Supreme Court thus reversed the Ninth Circuit’s decision.
