Boot camp,  a correctional institution, usually in the United States, modeled after military basic training, where strict discipline, rigorous physical training, and unquestioning obedience are emphasized. The term boot camp encompasses a wide variety of publicly and privately run facilities (both nonprofit and for-profit) where adult or juvenile inmates may be sent as an alternative to traditional incarceration. Other private facilities commonly identified as boot camps accept juveniles sent by their parents or guardians rather than by the courts.
The first boot camps appeared in the U.S. states of Georgia and Oklahoma in 1983, and rising fear of youth crime in the late 1980s and the ’90s drove the rapid proliferation of juvenile boot-camp programs at the local, state, and federal levels. Boot-camp programs enjoyed strong support from politicians and the general public as a means of getting “tough on crime,” and they were also supported by many corrections administrators because of their potential to reduce inmates’ time served, save correctional dollars, and reduce prison overcrowding.
Although boot-camp sentences are typically shorter than those served in traditional institutions, boot camps intensify the experience of incarceration. Nearly all use the first 7 to 10 days of confinement as an “intake phase,” during which correctional officers (called “drill instructors”) use physically and verbally aggressive tactics in an attempt to “break inmates down” by requiring strenuous physical activity and strict compliance with program rules.
Most aspects of life in a boot camp are modeled after military practices. Inmates follow a strict daily schedule. They rise early and participate in several hours of physical training, followed by drill and ceremony. The rest of their day is similarly regimented, with set times and procedures for schooling, bathing, studying, visiting, and eating. Inmates are often assigned to units such as squads or platoons. Employees wear military uniforms and have military ranks and titles. Male inmates often have their heads shaved. Some programs utilize summary punishment, which involves simple physical exercise such as push-ups or running when a minor rule has been violated and more strenuous activities (carrying logs on one’s back, digging a six-foot hole with a small garden tool) for more serious transgressions. Major rule violations often result in dismissal from the program.
Boot camps vary depending on the philosophy of the institution. Some devote as many as five hours per day to military activities, such as drill and ceremony, marching, and physical labour; others may devote more time to other activities, such as individual and group counseling, life-skills training, or substance-abuse education and treatment.
After the breakdown phase, drill instructors begin building inmates back up by telling them that their boot-camp experience will lead to a law-abiding lifestyle after their release. As their performance improves, inmates gradually earn more privileges and greater responsibility; a hat or uniform of a different colour may be the outward sign of advancement. Those who successfully complete the program may be rewarded with a graduation ceremony attended by friends and family, during which awards are given for achievement. At graduation the inmates often perform the drills that they practiced during their time in camp.
Support for boot camps waned in the United States during the first decade of the 21st century. Abuse and inmate deaths at boot camps received national attention, and several studies showed no rehabilitation benefit over conventional incarceration. The Federal Bureau of Prisons and a handful of U.S. states closed their boot-camp programs, and others were scaled back.
