Bōryokudan, (Japanese: “violence groups”)  any of various Japanese criminal gangs, many of which combined in the 20th century into Mafia-like organizations. The word was embraced by Japanese officials in the late 20th century to serve as a replacement for the term yakuza (“good for nothing”), which had taken on increasingly positive connotations in Japan. Bōryokudan, however, is still used interchangeably with yakuza, especially in the West.
Members of bōryokudan, themselves often called yakuza, or gyangu (“gangster”), adopt samurai-like rituals and often bear elaborate body tattoos. They engage in extortion, blackmail, smuggling, prostitution, drug trafficking, gambling, loan sharking, day-labour contracting, and other rackets and control many restaurants, bars, trucking companies, talent agencies, taxi fleets, factories, and other businesses in major Japanese cities. Bōryokudan have also been involved in criminal activities outside Japan.
The relationship between gangs and police in Japan is a complicated one; yakuza-owned businesses and gang headquarters are often clearly marked, and gang whereabouts and activities are often known to Japanese police without the latter’s taking any action. While their methods are often questionable, they have been known to perform charitable acts, such as donating and delivering supplies to earthquake victims. It is in part because of this dual nature as criminals and humanitarians and because of the idolization of yakuza in global popular media that the national police agency in Japan in the 1990s instated the name bōryokudan in an antigang law to reinforce the criminal nature of yakuza organizations, which had endeared themselves to the public as societal “underdogs” and self-proclaimed ninkyō dantai (“chivalrous organizations”). Despite police crackdowns, at the beginning of the 21st century there were some 80,000 gang members in Japan, organized into hundreds of gangs and several prominent gang conglomerates. The largest conglomerates include the Yamaguchi-gumi, Inagawa-kai, and Sumiyoshi-kai.
