Boumediene v. Bush,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 12, 2008, held that the Military Commissions Act (MCA) of 2006, which barred foreign nationals held by the United States as “enemy combatants” from challenging their detentions in U.S. federal courts, was an unconstitutional suspension of the writ of habeas corpus guaranteed in the U.S. Constitution.
In 2002 six Algerians were arrested in Bosnia and Herzegovina on suspicion of plotting to attack the U.S. embassy in Sarajevo; designated enemy combatants, they were imprisoned at the Guantánamo Bay detention camp on the U.S. naval base at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba. One of the detainees, Lakhdar Boumediene, petitioned in federal district court for a writ of habeas corpus, which was denied on the grounds that the camp was outside U.S. territory and therefore not within the court’s jurisdiction. In 2004, however, the Supreme Court held in Rasul v. Bush that the “plenary and exclusive” jurisdiction of the United States over the Guantánamo Bay naval base entitled foreign nationals held there to habeas corpus privileges. Foreseeing a rash of habeas corpus petitions by hundreds of foreign detainees in the camp, Congress passed the MCA, which stripped the federal courts of jurisdiction to hear habeas corpus petitions on behalf of foreign detainees who had been designated enemy combatants according to procedures established in the Detainee Treatment Act (DTA) of 2005. On the basis of the MCA, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit denied Boumediene’s second appeal. The Supreme Court granted a writ of certiorari, and oral arguments were heard on Dec. 5, 2007.
The main issue to be decided was whether the MCA violated the Suspension Clause of Article I of the Constitution, which states: “The Privilege of the Writ of Habeas Corpus shall not be suspended, unless when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion the public Safety may require it.” In a 5–4 ruling issued on June 12, 2008, the court held that the MCA did violate the Suspension Clause. Writing for the majority, Justice Anthony M. Kennedy argued that “because the DTA’s procedures for reviewing detainees’ status are not an adequate and effective substitute for the habeas writ, [the] MCA…operates as an unconstitutional suspension of the writ.” Detainees “are not barred from seeking the writ or invoking the Suspension Clause’s protections because they have been designated as enemy combatants or because of their presence at Guantánamo.” In his separate dissenting opinion, Justice Antonin Scalia memorably warned that the court’s decision “will almost certainly cause more Americans to be killed.”
