Brehon laws, Gaelic Feinechus,  ancient laws of Ireland. The text of these laws, written in the most archaic form of the Gaelic language, dates back to the 7th and 8th centuries and is so difficult to translate that the official renderings are to some extent conjectural. The ancient Irish judge, or Brehon, was an arbitrator, umpire, and expounder of the law, rather than a judge in the modern sense.
Analysis of the extant remains of the Brehon law manuscripts has revealed the character of ancient Irish life, society, and social institutions. The basis of that society was the clan. Kinship with the clan was an essential qualification for holding any office or property. The rules of kinship largely determined status with its correlative rights and obligations. The solidarity of the clan was its most important characteristic. The entire territory occupied by a clan was the common and absolute property of that clan, although in the course of time a large and increasing proportion of the good land became limited private property. Thus, the area of arable land available for the common use of the clansmen gradually diminished.
Land was seldom sold and not often rented in ancient Ireland. Nobles and other persons holding large areas would rent to clansmen not the land itself but the right to graze cattle, and they sometimes even rented out the cattle themselves. There were two distinct methods of letting and hiring: saer (“free”) and daer (“unfree”). The conditions of saer tenure were largely settled by the law; the clansman was left free within the limits of justice to end the relationship, and no liability was imposed on the clansman’s joint family. On the other hand, daer tenure, whether of cattle or of the right to graze cattle, was subject to a security. The members of the tenant’s joint family were liable to make good out of their own property any default in payments.
No contract affecting land was valid unless made with the consent of the joint family. Other contracts had to be made in the presence of the noble or magistrate. The parties to a contract had to be free citizens, of full age, free to contract, and under no legal disability. A witness was in all cases important—and, in some, essential—to the validity of a contract.
The criminal laws uniformly discountenanced revenge, retaliation, the punishment of one crime by another, and capital punishment. Reparations were paid to the family of the victim.
