Bush v. Gore,  legal case, decided on December 12, 2000, in which the Supreme Court of the United States reversed an order by the Florida Supreme Court for a selective manual recount of that state’s U.S. presidential election ballots. The 5–4 per curiam (unsigned) decision effectively awarded Florida’s 25 Electoral College votes to Republican candidate George W. Bush, thereby ensuring his victory over Democratic candidate Al Gore.
On the evening of election day—November 7, 2000—a clear winner of the presidential election had yet to emerge. Print and broadcast media cited often contradictory exit-polling numbers, and the races in Oregon and New Mexico would remain too close to call for some days. Ultimately, the contest focused on Florida. Networks initially projected Gore the winner in that state but later declared that Bush had opened an insurmountable lead. Gore called Bush to concede the election, but in the early hours of the following morning it became apparent that the Florida race was much closer than Gore’s staff had originally believed. Fewer than 600 votes separated the candidates, and that margin appeared to be narrowing. At about 3:00 am Gore called a stunned Bush to retract his concession.
Under Florida election law, a machine recount of all votes cast was required because the margin of victory was less than 0.5 percent. In this race, the gap appeared to be roughly 0.01 percent. Both campaigns immediately dispatched teams of lawyers to Florida. Charges of conflict of interest were leveled by both sides—Bush’s brother Jeb was the governor of the state and Secretary of State Katherine Harris was cochair of Bush’s Florida campaign, while Florida Attorney General Bob Butterworth headed the Gore campaign. By November 10 the machine recount was complete, and Bush’s lead stood at 327 votes out of six million cast. As court challenges were issued over the legality of hand recounts in select counties, news stories were filled with the arcane vocabulary of the election judge. County officials tried to discern voter intent through a cloud of “hanging chads” (incompletely punched paper ballots) and “pregnant chads” (paper ballots that were dimpled, but not pierced, during the voting process), as well as “overvotes” (ballots that recorded multiple votes for the same office) and “undervotes” (ballots that recorded no vote for a given office). Also at issue was the so-called butterfly ballot design used in Palm Beach county, which caused confusion among some residents who had intended to vote for Gore—leading them to inadvertently cast some 3,400 votes for an ultraconservative third-party candidate, Pat Buchanan, which amounted to about 20 percent of his total votes statewide.
A tug-of-war ensued between Harris, who initially sought to certify the state’s election results on November 14, and the Florida Supreme Court, which ruled that hand recounts of questionable ballots should proceed in four counties and that the results must be included in the state’s final count. In the month following the election, some 50 individual suits were filed concerning the various counts, recounts, and certification deadlines. On December 8, in a 4–3 decision, the Florida Supreme Court ordered immediate manual recounts of undervotes for the office of president in all counties where such recounts had not already taken place.
The Bush campaign immediately petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court for a stay of the recount order, which was granted on December 9. Treating the petition as a writ of certiorari (a formal request for review), the Court agreed to take up the case, Bush v. Gore.
At oral arguments on December 11, Bush’s legal team asserted that the Florida Supreme Court had exceeded its authority by ordering the manual recount of undervotes, while Gore’s team contended that the case, having already been decided at the state level, was not a matter for consideration at the federal level. In a per curiam ruling issued the following day, the Court found (7–2) that, owing to inconsistencies in manual recounting methods and standards between Florida counties, the Florida court’s order of a manual recount amounted to a violation of the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. By a smaller majority (5–4), the Court also ruled that no new recount could take place, because none could be finished by the “safe harbor” deadline—the date, set by federal law (3 U.S.C. §5), by which states were required to resolve any disputes regarding the selection of presidential electors in order to guarantee that their final determination “shall be conclusive, and shall govern in the counting of the electoral votes as provided in the Constitution.” Although failure to meet the deadline, which fell on December 12 (six days before the meeting of the Electoral College on December 18), would not have prevented Florida’s electoral votes from being counted, the majority argued that any court order for a new, “constitutionally proper” recount would violate a provision of Florida election law that empowered state courts to grant “appropriate” relief in response to legitimate challenges to certified election results. And that provision would be violated, according to the majority, because in drafting it the Florida state legislature presumably intended that any such relief be completed by the safe-harbor deadline. (The majority also argued that the Florida Supreme Court itself had recognized this intention when, in earlier related cases, it had referred to voters’ “participating fully in the federal electoral process” and to election statutes’ being “cognizant of the federal grant of authority derived from the United States Constitution and derived from 3 U.S.C. §5.”)
In a concurring opinion joined by associate justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas, Chief Justice William Rehnquist agreed with the majority regarding the intentions of the Florida state legislature (“Surely when the Florida Legislature empowered the courts of the State to grant ‘appropriate’ relief, it must have meant relief that would have become final by the cutoff date of 3 U.S.C. §5.”) but also suggested that the safe-harbor provision itself imposed a strict deadline beyond which no recounts could proceed (“In Presidential elections, the contest period necessarily terminates on the date set by 3 U.S.C. §5 for concluding the State’s ‘final determination’ of election controversies.”). Rehnquist argued in addition that the recount order was invalid because it effectively created new election law in violation of Article II, Section 1 of the U.S. Constitution, which reserves that power to the state legislatures.
The decision of the majority was heavily criticized by the minority, each one of whom wrote a dissenting opinion. All of the dissenting justices contended that the majority was wrong to prevent any remedial manual recount from taking place. In his dissent, Justice John Paul Stevens argued that the manual recount order had not violated the equal protection clause and that the majority’s reversal of the order contradicted principles of federalism and the Court’s tradition of deferring to state courts regarding the interpretation of their own states’ laws. He also disputed the stricter interpretation of the safe-harbor provision as prohibiting vote counting beyond the deadline: “those provisions [of Title 3 of the U.S. Code] merely provide rules of decision for Congress to follow when selecting among conflicting slates of electors.…They do not prohibit States from counting…legal votes until a bona fide winner is determined.” Justice David Souter asserted that the Court’s initial stay of the Florida Supreme Court’s recount order was unnecessary (“If this Court had allowed the State to follow the course indicated by the opinions of its own Supreme Court, it is entirely possible that there would ultimately have been no issue requiring our review”) and defended the Florida court’s interpretation of appropriate relief under state election law. Justice Stephen Breyer contended that the Florida Supreme Court would have been in a far better position than the majority to judge whether a remedial recount could have been completed before the meeting of the Electoral College on December 18, and he pointedly observed,
Finally, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg offered a detailed refutation of Rehnquist’s contention that the Florida Supreme Court had created its own election law; agreed with Stevens that the recount order had not deprived Florida voters of equal protection (“I cannot agree that the recount adopted by the Florida court, flawed as it may be, would yield a result any less fair or precise than the certification that preceded that recount”) and that the majority had discarded the Court’s former commitment to federalism and deference to state courts; and agreed with Breyer that, in Ginsburg’s words, “the December 12 ‘deadline’ for bringing Florida’s electoral votes into 3 U.S.C. §5’s safe harbor lacks the significance the Court assigns it” (“were that date to pass,” she continued, “Florida would still be entitled to deliver electoral votes [that] Congress must count”). Her decision to conclude her opinion with “I dissent,” rather than the traditional “I respectfully dissent,” was widely noted.
With the termination of the recount process, Florida’s 25 electoral votes were awarded to Bush. Gore officially conceded on December 13 and stated in a televised address, “While I strongly disagree with the Court’s decision, I accept it.”
