Canadian aboriginal reserves,  system of reserves that serve as physical and spiritual homelands for many of the First Nations (Indian) peoples of Canada. In 2011 some 360,600 people lived on reserves in Canada, of which 324,780 claimed some form of aboriginal identity. Reserves are governed by the Indian Act, and residence on a reserve is governed by band councils as well as the minister of Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development. Under the Indian Act, reserves that serve as residences are referred to as Indian Bands. Many reserves or bands are now referred to as First Nations. Because reserves are tangible representations of colonial governance, they are often the focal point of activism relating to land claims, resource management, cultural appropriation, socioeconomic conditions, self-governance, and cultural self-determination.
The reserve system as governed by the Indian Act relates to First Nations bands and people, referred to in a legal context as Indians. Inuit (see Eskimo) and Métis people normally do not live on reserves, though many live in communities that are governed by land-claims or self-government agreements.
Under the Indian Act, an “Indian Reserve” is land held by the crown “for the use and benefit of the respective bands for which they were set apart” under treaties or other agreements. Many First Nations (Indian Bands) include several separate portions of land as their reserve. Only those with Registered Indian status—or “status Indians,” as they are known—may “own” land on a reserve, though such ownership remains at the discretion of the minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development and does not entail full legal possession. Certificates of Possession, often referred to as CPs, convey “ownership” of reserve lands to their holders but they lack the legal status of deeds. Furthermore, not all bands have reserves. The Caldwell First Nation in Ontario does not have a reserve, nor do several bands in Newfoundland.
Many communities prefer the term First Nation rather than band in self-reference. However, band is the term used by the federal government to describe “a body of Indians” in a community, residing on one or more reserves. In 1982 there were 577 bands in Canada, and by 2011 the number had gradually grown to 617, representing more than 50 nations. A majority of bands in Canada have fewer than 1,000 members; in 2013 the Assembly of First Nations reported more than 900,000 members living both on and off reserves, representing 634 First Nations reserves.
Reserve residents are normally members of the band with which they reside. Though those with Registered Indian status are automatically members of a band by virtue of their status, those who are not registered may become members of a band if the band council approves their membership. According to the 2011 National Household Survey—which excludes data from a number of incompletely enumerated reserves or settlements—there were precisely 360,620 people living on reserves in Canada. Of those, 324,780 claimed some form of aboriginal identity, with 320,030 claiming First Nations identity. Furthermore, 97.3 percent of people resident on reserves had Registered Indian status. Of the 697,510 aboriginal people in Canada with Registered Indian status, 45.3 percent live on reserve. The census definition of “on reserve” includes Indian reserves, Indian settlements (excepting five Yukon settlements), Indian government districts, terres réservées aux Cris, terres réservées aux Naskapis, Nisga’a land, and the village of Sandy Bay, Saskatchewan.
As a result of amendments made to the Indian Act by Bill C-31 in 1985, people without Registered Indian status are permitted to reside on reserves at the discretion of band councils. In addition, sometimes people with neither status nor band membership are permitted to live on reserve land. In 2011 there were 35,840 such people across Canada.
In 1985 Parliament passed Bill C-31, which, among other changes to the Indian Act, removed some discriminatory clauses and allowed many disenfranchised people to claim Indian status. As a result, between 1982 and 2005 the number of Registered Indians in Canada more than doubled. In 2005 approximately 56 percent of aboriginal people identified as Registered Indians lived on reserves (including a small percentage on crown land), and 44 percent lived off-reserve. However, the number of aboriginal people identified as Registered Indians living off-reserve continued to grow, as many migrated to urban centres; by 2011 the National Household Survey indicated that more than half of all aboriginal people identified as Registered Indians were living off-reserve.
Two of the largest band membership reserves in Canada are those of the Six Nations of the Grand River, near Brantford, Ontario, and the Mohawks of Akwesasne, who live near Cornwall, Ontario, in a territory that straddles the borders of Ontario, Quebec, and New York. In the Northwest Territories, Nunavut, and Yukon, where few reserves have been established, the bands have been gathered into communities known as settlements, which are generally on crown land, but these bands and settlements do not have reserve status. There are reserves in most parts of southern Canada, but about half of on-reserve communities are in areas designated “rural” or “remote.”
The earliest reserves in Canada appear to have been established on seigneurial holdings by Roman Catholic missionary orders and private persons in New France. Reserves such as Sillery, established in 1637, were a means of imposing a sedentary lifestyle on previously semi-nomadic peoples like the Innu and Algonquin in order to convert them to Catholicism. The practice of coercing aboriginal peoples to live amongst French settlers in the hopes that such proximity would engender conversions led to the French crown granting lands for reserves at Kahnawake and St. Regis, Kanesatake, Odanak, Lorette and Becancour for the use of Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) peoples. The French and Haudenosaunee established a Great Peace in 1701, which was meant to strengthen peace between the nations of the Haudenosaunee Confederacy and with the French crown.
Subsequent British colonials were less interested in establishing reserves. Rather they attempted to establish political and economic alliances to augment their position in the booming fur trade. However, tensions mounted in the face of the rapid westward expansion of settlers under colonial officials less interested in following crown directives than securing land for themselves and other settlers. The Royal Proclamations of 1761 and 1763 were thus issued by King George III to ease those tensions. Improving on the faulty 1761 proclamation, the Royal Proclamation of 1763 declared all land west of the Appalachian Mountains to be the exclusive domain of aboriginal peoples and required treaty negotiations if such land were to be surrendered.
In Atlantic Canada, though east of the Appalachians, colonial officials created reserves, despite the proclamation not requiring it. Rather than through treaties, officials created reserves through orders-in-council or through the purchase of private lands for aboriginal settlement. However, the unregulated nature of these transactions meant that areas like Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland were established without recognition of aboriginal title. In the case of Newfoundland, such title was not recognized until 1987, when the Conne River Mi’kmaq were granted reserve status.
In Quebec, colonial officials ignored the proclamation’s requirements, settling reserve claims as necessary to coincide with settlement or disputed boundaries. The James Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement of 1975 marked a new era of modern treaty negotiation. In northern Quebec, many Inuit and Cree settlements enjoy legislative protection and self-governance.
In Ontario, colonial officials attempted to follow the proclamation, but, after agreements were made, rapid settlement eroded aboriginal title and rights. Eventually this resulted in agreements and acts that all but denied aboriginal people title and land rights.
In British Columbia, aggressive expansion and disinterest in treaty negotiation led to rapid appropriation and segregation, with colonial officials enacting changes unilaterally and without consultation. As such, land claim negotiations in British Columbia were long and complex, resulting in a number of positive settlements of appropriated land.
In the Prairie provinces, multiple treaties were negotiated in the late 19th century. Some scholars contend that these negotiations were intended to reflect reciprocal relationships; however, this was soon forgotten, as rapid settlement and policies of both assimilation and segregation took over. In the territories, some treaties from the Prairies overlapped, resulting in some small reserves. By and large, there are few reserves in the territories; rather there are Métis or Inuit settlements and communities.
The Indian Act of 1876 codified the methods through which Indian status and reserves were governed by the federal government. Immensely problematic, that act has been amended several times to remove discriminatory policies, but it remains an imperfect document. The nature of the reserve system, in that its creation involved agreements to forfeit land and rights that were not always honoured, understood, or properly elucidated, means that reserves are often the focus of land claim disputes and considerable animosity over settler encroachment.
