Parliament of Canada,  the Crown, the Senate, and the House of Commons of Canada, which, according to the British North America Act (Constitution Act) of 1867, are the institutions that together create Canadian laws. When Parliament is referred to in some formal usages, all three institutions are included. In common usage, however, the legislative branch of government—the House of Commons and the Senate—is often equated with Parliament.
Parliament refers to three institutions: the Crown, the Senate, and the House of Commons. This parliamentary system flows from the Westminster tradition in Britain, which is a blend of parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy. Within the Canadian system, each institution (Crown, Senate, Commons) must agree with a given law before it is enacted. While the government of the day acts in the name of the Crown—which is largely a symbolic and ceremonial institution—it derives its authority from the Canadian people who elected it and is therefore a “representative” government.
Parliament has two branches, the executive and the legislative.
Executive authority in Parliament belongs to the Crown (i.e., the King or Queen) and is carried out by the governor general on his or her behalf, the prime minister, and the Cabinet. The governor general is appointed by the monarch on the recommendation of the prime minister and acts on the advice of the prime minister and Cabinet. Legislation passed by the Senate and House of Commons must receive Royal Assent from the governor general before passing into law.
The Crown is the collectivity of executive powers exercised by or in the name of the sovereign—the head of state who reigns by hereditary right, as opposed to the elected head of government. Such powers stem from rights and privileges known as prerogative powers. In 1947, all of the sovereign’s powers and authorities in Canada were delegated federally to the governor general and provincially to lieutenant-governors. According to the House of Commons Procedure and Practice, the Constitution reserves certain powers for the Crown:
The prime minister is the head of the federal government and usually the leader of the largest party in the House of Commons that is able to maintain the confidence (or support) of Parliament. The prime minister’s main parliamentary duties include, but are not limited to, naming senators, directing the Cabinet (the seat of government), and consulting with the governor general.
The Cabinet is the committee of ministers that holds executive power. The Cabinet is chaired by the prime minister, and its ministers are most often elected politicians drawn from the party holding the most seats in the House of Commons—though unelected persons and senators may also be appointed to the Cabinet.
The capacity of the Cabinet to exert leverage on party members guarantees that the government’s business will be protected from opposition votes. However, this power is often criticized and is thought to undermine Parliament’s duty to hold government responsible by way of the confidence convention, which holds the executive to account.
Canada’s legislature is a bicameral institution, meaning that it has two separate branches, or chambers: the House of Commons and the Senate. When new laws are proposed, they are debated and subjected to votes in both the Lower House (Commons) and Upper House (Senate). A bill must be adopted in identical form by both houses before it can receive Royal Assent and pass into law.
The House of Commons has 338 members, or Members of Parliament (MPs), the elected representatives of federal electoral districts. MPs can serve infinite mandates in the Lower House, so long as they are reelected.
Between the Senate and the House of Commons, the House of Commons has become the more important chamber, not least because the government of the day stands or falls on its support. Only the Commons can introduce bills on taxation and spending. But as with all bills, the Senate must pass them also. The Senate, despite its power to say no to Commons legislation, rarely obstructs the Commons because the Senate is not itself an elected body.
According to House of Commons procedure, “the Prime Minister and the Cabinet are able to exercise authority only with the consent and approval (‘confidence’) of a majority of the Members of the House of Commons.” For instance, in a minority Parliament, the party that forms government does not hold the majority of votes required to completely ensure its approval. It must therefore earn its approval from members of other parties and independents.
The House of Commons’ capacity to act as the great debating forum for the nation is one of its strengths. According to constitutional requirement, Parliament (as well as each provincial legislature) meets at least once a year. Between 1867 and 1940, the annual sessions lasted on average four months; now they normally run a full year, with three long adjournments.
No more than five years should elapse between elections for a new legislature—only a war, invasion, or insurrection can interfere with this guarantee. In 2007, Parliament passed a law that set a fixed election date. Under this law, the federal election is held on the third Monday in October in the fourth year following the last election. Elections can occur more frequently, namely in minority government situations and during wartime.
The Senate has 105 members, or senators, who are appointed and hold their seat until age 75, at which point they must retire. Its purpose is to consider and revise legislation (acting as a committee of “sober second thought”), investigate national issues, and provide the regions of Canada an equal voice in Parliament.
The bicameral nature of Parliament was a necessary inducement to bring provinces of varying size and power and with widely different regional concerns into Confederation in 1867. However necessary to the original union, the Senate, a nonelective body, has been constantly subjected to cries for its abolition or reform.
The Speaker of the House of Commons and Speaker of the Senate are two important figures who preside over their chambers and enforce procedure and discipline in a nonpartisan manner. The Senate Speaker is appointed by the governor general on the recommendation of the prime minister. The House Speaker was at one time appointed by the prime minister but is now elected by Members of Parliament by secret ballot. Any member can be a speaker of their own house, though it tends to be a government member in each case.
Political parties are organizations that unite around an ideology and seek to gain political office in order to develop their views and policies in law. They are the base upon which the business of the legislature is organized and conducted. Elections are fought and successful candidates find their seats in the legislature on a party basis, and it is through parties that the Upper and Lower House and their committees conduct business. On rare occasions, independent candidates—who are not affiliated with a given party—win a seat in the Commons or are appointed to the Senate.
Opposition in the House of Commons is meant to ensure respect for dissenting points of view, with Members of Parliament sitting opposite the government, acting as its watchdogs. The Official Opposition is usually the largest opposition party in the House of Commons. However, if two opposition parties hold the same number of seats, the Speaker of the House of Commons designates which party becomes the Official Opposition. Along with the Official Opposition, other opposition parties (those with at least 12 seats) receive special parliamentary funding in order to facilitate research for the purpose of encouraging opposition, criticism, and debate. Opposition members also facilitate the existence (in the case of the Official Opposition) of a “government in waiting.”
The Leader of the Opposition is a formal office of Parliament. The leader can come from either the Senate or the House of Commons but usually comes from the Commons, where he or she sits directly opposite the prime minister (two swords’ length away). The Leader of the Opposition commands the same salary as a Cabinet minister and has the privilege of always asking the first question in Question Period. The Leader of the Opposition must be consulted, by law, before certain decisions are made by government.
A normal parliamentary session is divided into sitting days and adjournment periods. The prorogation of Parliament brings an end to a particular session. When Parliament reconvenes, the new session begins with a Speech from the Throne, which announces the government’s legislative program for the session. Dissolution, which marks the end of a Parliament, can occur anytime within the 5-year period and is invoked by the governor general on the advice of the prime minister. Dissolution involves an election and the formation of a newly elected Parliament.
Parliamentary privilege ensures that Parliament shall not only be unconstrained in what it can debate but that the individual legislators shall enjoy complete freedom of speech. The written rules of Parliament guarantee the rights of opposition parties to criticize without fear of retribution by the governing party. Privilege also protects legislators from slander for anything said in the chambers and committees.
Parliament has many committees, which perform functions that cannot be adequately accomplished in debate or during Question Period. Much of the day-to-day work of both the Senate and the House of Commons takes place in standing or special committees. There are six types of committees in total. The work carried out by committees helps inform parliamentarians on issues of concern to the electorate. They often collect information that is valuable to public debate. Committees interact with citizens, bringing their voice directly to elected representatives. While Question Period in Parliament receives full media attention, the valuable work in committees tends to go unreported; however, most of it is recorded by Parliament and available to the public.
An earlier version of this entry was published by 
The Canadian Encyclopedia
.
