Cannon v. University of Chicago,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court held (6–3) on May 14, 1979, that Section 901 of the Education Amendments of 1972, more commonly referred to as Title IX, created a private right of action on the basis of which individual plaintiffs could initiate civil suits for alleged sex discrimination against educational institutions that receive federal financial assistance. Title IX stated that
The court’s judgment paved the way for the subsequent application of Title IX in a wide array of cases involving gender equity in higher education.
In 1975, Geraldine Cannon, a 39-year-old female, applied for but was denied admission to two private medical schools in Illinois, the Pritzker School of Medicine at the University of Chicago and the Northwestern University Medical School. Both schools, which were recipients of federal financial assistance, had formal policies of not admitting candidates who were over the age of 30 unless they had already earned advanced degrees. In addition, Northwestern’s medical school had a policy of denying applicants who were over 35 years of age. When Cannon learned of these restrictions, she claimed they discriminated against women, whose educations were typically more interrupted than those of men. She filed a legal complaint with what was then the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare alleging that university officials had engaged in sex discrimination in violation of Title IX. Cannon’s primary legal argument against the admission policies was that women often need to interrupt their studies in higher education to give birth and raise families, which increased the proportion of women among applicants over the age of 30 as compared with their numbers among younger applicants.
Three months later Cannon unsuccessfully filed suit in a federal trial court in Illinois against both universities, alleging that the schools had discriminated against her on the basis of sex in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, the Civil Rights Act of 1871, and Title IX. The court dismissed the complaint for failure to allege purposeful discrimination and granted the universities’ motions to dismiss the complaint, because, in the court’s view, Title IX did not expressly authorize or properly imply a private right of action for alleged victims of sex discrimination.
Shortly after the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed in favour of the defendants, Congress passed the Civil Rights Attorney’s Fee Awards Act of 1976, which authorized the awarding of fees to prevailing private parties in suits seeking to enforce Title IX. After having granted a rehearing, the Seventh Circuit again affirmed that even in light of the new statute, the 1976 act did not intend to create a remedy that did not previously exist.
Undaunted, Cannon appealed the dismissal of her claims to the Supreme Court. In so doing, she asserted that Congress had used language similar to that of Title IX in Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which the Supreme Court had interpreted as implying a private remedy, and that Congress had allowed awards of attorney fees for successful claimants in such disputes.
The primary issue before the Supreme Court in Cannon was whether Congress intended a private remedy to be implied from Title IX for institutions that were recipients of federal financial assistance. Reversing in favour of the plaintiff, the Supreme Court relied on the similarity between Title VI and Title IX in finding that an implied private right of action did exist pursuant to Title IX. In reaching its decision, the court found it necessary to rely on the four-part test that it had enunciated in Cort v. Ash (1975), a case that addressed corporate expenses in connection with federal election campaigns when a statute is silent or unclear about private remedies.
In Cannon, the Court applied the so-called Cort test for determining whether Congress intended a law to be enforceable privately, or individually, and found that all four factors supported the plaintiff’s contention. The test first addresses whether a plaintiff is a member of a special class for whose benefit a statute was enacted. Second, the test examines whether a statute’s legislative history supports an intention to create or to deny private rights of action. Third, the test considers whether a private remedy would frustrate or further the underlying purpose of the legislation. Fourth, the test considers whether the supposed private right would inappropriately involve an area of concern to the states. Having reviewed the four-part test, the court determined that, because all of its elements supported the plaintiff, it was unnecessary to weigh the factors against one another. The court thus concluded that it had no choice but to reverse the Seventh Circuit’s judgment. The court remanded the dispute for further proceedings consistent with its opinion, thereby opening the door for later litigation under Title IX aimed at eradicating discrimination on the basis of sex in higher education and beyond.
