Chancery Division, formerly (until 1873) Court of Chancery,  in England and Wales, one of three divisions of the High Court of Justice, the others being the Queen’s Bench Division and the Family Division. Presided over by the chancellor of the High Court in that judge’s capacity as president of the Chancery Division, it hears cases involving business and property disputes, including intellectual-property claims, trusts, estates, and related matters. It began to develop in the 15th century as a court of equity to provide remedies not obtainable in the courts of common law. Today, courts of chancery or equity are still maintained as separate jurisdictions in certain areas of the Commonwealth and in some states of the United States.
In England the common-law courts became firmly established as the principal organs of royal justice by the 14th century. In earlier days they had exercised a wide jurisdiction in framing and applying the rules of the common law, but their most creative period was over. A large body of rules, many of them highly technical and artificial, had come into existence; the common law was increasingly rigid and inflexible. In civil cases the relief available was largely limited to payment of damages and to the recovery of the possession of land and chattels. The court refused to extend and diversify types of relief so as to meet the needs of new and more complex situations. In their insistence on the letter of the law, the courts often failed to deal fairly and equitably between the parties. Another cause of dissatisfaction was that, in the growing political chaos of the 15th century, powerful local lords were able to bribe or intimidate juries and defy court orders.
Disappointed litigants consequently turned to the king and council with petitions for justice. These petitions were referred to the lord chancellor, who by the 15th century had begun to build up a series of equitable remedies, together with policies governing their operation. In the exercise of his equitable jurisdiction, the chancellor initially was not bound by precedent, as were the common-law judges. He had wide powers to do justice as he saw fit, and he exercised them with a minimum of procedural formality. The chancery was relatively cheap, efficient, and just; during the 15th and 16th centuries, it developed spectacularly at the expense of the common-law courts. During the 17th century, opposition arose from the common-law judges and Parliament; they resented chancery’s encroachment upon the province of the common-law courts, and the chancellor was forced to agree not to hear any case in which there was adequate remedy, such as damages, at common law.
By the early 16th century, the development of a system of precedent exercised another restrictive influence on the continued growth of equitable remedies. Although most of the early chancellors had been clerics, the later ones were usually lawyers who used the newly initiated reports of cases to begin shaping equity into an established set of rules. By the middle of the 17th century, the equity administered by the Court of Chancery had become a recognized part of the law of the land. By the Judicature Act of 1873, the competitive, separate common-law law and equity courts in England—with their attendant delays, expense, and injustice—were abolished. The act transferred the jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery, now dissolved, to a new Chancery Division of the High Court of Justice.
