Charity fraud,  type of fraud that occurs when charitable organizations that solicit funds from the public for philanthropic goals, such as seeking cures for diseases or aiding the families of slain police officers, solicit donations in a deceptive manner or use the monies that they collect for purposes not intended by the donors. Charities are subject to the kinds of fraud that can also plague business organizations, such as embezzlement and misappropriation of funds by executives.
Establishing and prosecuting charity fraud is not necessarily straightforward. Many scholars agree that money solicited by persons or groups that are not legitimate charitable organizations constitutes charity fraud, but the question of fraud is complicated when considering charities that use a high percentage of donations for administrative costs or additional fund-raising rather than for the charitable cause. These kinds of issues, as well as the very large number of charitable organizations worldwide, make charity fraud difficult to monitor and eradicate.
Charity fraud is perceived as a particularly abhorrent kind of deceptive business practice because it abuses the trust of altruistic persons who offer donations with the expectation that they are assisting those in need. Charity fraud can result in a lasting backlash because those responsible have manipulated the emotions and generosity of donors in order to elicit a donation, leading to anger and disillusionment if it is revealed that the charity and philanthropic promises were invalid. Disillusionment and suspicion caused by fraudulent charitable solicitation or misappropriation of funds has the additional effect of tainting the fund-raising appeals of legitimate charities, which suffer by association with those who defraud donors.
Charities may be guilty of fraud when they mislead donors about the percentage of contributions that is applied to various business expenses, thereby vastly overstating the amount of the contribution that will go to the charitable cause. All charities have some administrative costs, but some charities have exorbitant overhead costs that result in almost none of the donation actually going to the charitable cause.
Charitable organizations may also act in a fraudulent way by misrepresenting themselves or associating themselves in a deliberately vague way with known famous charities or with governmental associations for the purpose of obtaining donations. An example of this kind of deception on the part of a charity is the case of the Police Survivors Fund. It was established in 1999 and disbanded by 2003 when its founder pleaded guilty to various fraud charges.
The aim of the Police Survivors Fund was to aid widows and children of police killed on the job. Though this aim was clearly stated in telephone solicitation calls, other factors were left more vague. Consumers may have been confused by the name of the organization as stated during the telephone solicitations because it sounded official. The actual connection between any municipal police force and the Police Survivors Fund was not made clear to donors because there was no such sponsorship of the charity by a police force, despite the official-sounding name. The Police Survivors Fund had a fund-raising strategy familiar to prosecutors of charity fraud. Fund-raisers would tell those who were solicited that the donation was for widows and children. They initially asked for a large sum, such as $1,000, and then revised it to a lower figure if the potential donor balked, implying that a $99 donation was the least that could be done for the “widows and children.” The founder of the Police Survivors Fund also used the September 11 terrorist attacks as a marketing tool, mentioning vaguely that his group was coordinating efforts with a “World Trade Center fund” and noting that other donors had given $911 as a symbolic figure to commemorate the attacks. He collected $441,000, only $14,500 of which was actually given to survivors of slain police officers. Fraudulent fund-raisers may also intimidate those they call by misrepresenting the result of refusing a donation, using fear (suggesting that police departments will no longer answer calls from the residence of a hesitant donor, for example) or social pressure.
Legitimate and well-meaning charities that do not engage in the practices described above do not necessarily escape charges of fraud, because they may suffer from mismanagement of funds by charity executives. Perhaps the most famous example of a scandal affecting a well-respected charity is the 1995 case involving the former president of United Way of America, who received a seven-year prison sentence for using money donated to the charity to fund his personal expenses, including lavish vacations and support for mistresses.
Charities that are constantly seeking new fund-raising opportunities may themselves fall victim to fraudsters. Many charities depend for fund-raising on third-party fund-raisers, usually for-profit businesses, which opens the door to additional possibilities for fraud. Charities may be victimized by fund-raisers that refuse to deliver the donations raised or that only pass on a much lower percentage of collected funds than originally promised.
Another example of a fraud perpetrated through charities is the mid-1990s case of the Foundation for New Era Philanthropy. It lured investment from charitable organizations by promising a double return on the initial investment. The chief executive of New Era Philanthropy claimed that the returns would come from philanthropists who were seeking organizations for charitable donations, though in truth he was running a pyramid scheme, in which later investments were used to pay off earlier ones. When the company filed for bankruptcy in 1995, it took with it the investments of charitable organizations who could ill afford to lose such large sums of money, especially in the eyes of the donors who had been funding the bad investment decision.
