Corporation of the Presiding Bishop of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints v. Amos,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 24, 1987, ruled (9–0) that organizations affiliated with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS) had not committed religious discrimination under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 when they fired employees who refused or were ineligible to become members of the church. In its decision the court held that Section 702 of the act did not violate the First Amendment’s establishment clause, which generally prohibits the government from establishing, advancing, or giving favour to any religion.
The case centred on Arthur F. Mayson, a building manager at the Deseret Gymnasium, a nonprofit facility that was run by two organizations affiliated with the LDS church, one of which was the Corporation of the Presiding Bishop of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In 1981, after being employed at the gymnasium for some 16 years, Mayson was fired for not becoming a member of the LDS church. He filed suit, alleging a violation of Section 703 of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, which prohibits an employer from discriminating on the basis of religion; his case was later combined with one filed by Christine J. Amos and others. The defendants, however, claimed that their actions were protected by Section 702, which states that
The employees countered that allowing religious employers to be exempt from liability under Section 702 for nonreligious jobs would, in actuality, have promoted religion in violation of the establishment clause.
A federal district court ruled in favour of Mayson. It noted that the gymnasium was “intimately connected to the Church” and that there was no obvious link between the gymnasium’s primary function and the beliefs of the LDS church. In addition, the former employees’ duties were not religious in nature. Thus, the court held that the case centred on “nonreligious activity.” Having made that finding, it addressed the constitutionality of Section 702 by applying the so-called Lemon test, which the Supreme Court had outlined in Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971). The test required that a statute must (a) have “a secular purpose,” (b) “have a primary effect that neither advances nor inhibits religion,” and (c) “avoid[s] excessive government entanglement with religion.” Although the court held that Section 702 met the first requirement, it found that the law advanced religion, a violation of the second prong. The court noted that the section “single[d] out religious entities for a benefit” and that it “burdens the free exercise rights of employees of religious institutions who work in nonreligious jobs.”
On March 31, 1987, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. The court also applied the Lemon test but reached a different result. It agreed with the lower court’s finding that Section 702 had a “secular legislative purpose.” As to the second prong, however, the court found that the section did not advance religion. The court pointed out that it is not unconstitutional for religious organizations to advance their beliefs. Rather, the court explained, it is only forbidden for the government to advance religion through its influence and activities. Moreover, the court observed that it was the LDS church, not the government, that fired its employees. When considering the third prong, the court held that there was no impermissible entanglement between church and state. In its application of the test, the court was of the view that because it was the LDS church, not the government, that dismissed the employees, their rights were not violated. The decision of the district court was reversed.
