Corporal punishment,  the infliction of physical pain upon a person’s body as punishment for a crime or infraction. Corporal punishments include flogging, beating, branding, mutilation, blinding, and the use of the stock and pillory. In a broad sense, the term also denotes the physical disciplining of children in the schools and at home.
Early Babylonian law developed the principle of lex talionis, which asserted that criminals should receive as punishment precisely those injuries they had inflicted upon their victims. Many subsequent societies applied this “eye-for-an-eye and tooth-for-a-tooth” principle quite literally in dealing with offenders. From ancient times through the 18th century, corporal punishments were commonly used in those instances that did not call for the death penalty or for exile or transportation. But the growth of humanitarian ideals during the Enlightenment and afterward led to the gradual abandonment of corporal punishment, and by the later 20th century it had been almost entirely replaced by imprisonment or other nonviolent penalties.
Corporal punishment no longer exists in the legal systems of most developed nations of the world. The last floggings in the United States, for example, were carried out in the state of Delaware in 1952 (the practice was abolished there in 1972). British criminal law stood as a rare exception in its legal prescription of whipping as punishment for some offenses, but the infliction of this penalty was severely limited by the Criminal Justice Act of 1948 and was abolished in 1967. Whipping and even amputation remain prescribed punishments in several Middle Eastern nations that strictly observe Islamic law, however. Beatings and other corporal forms of disciplinary action are still administered, whether legally or covertly, in the prison systems of many countries. Corporal punishment is explicitly prohibited by several international conventions on human rights, including the European Convention on Human Rights and the United Nations’ “Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.”
An important rationale for the use of corporal punishment has historically been that the pain, injury, humiliation, and degradation it inflicted would deter the offender from committing similar offenses in the future. It was also maintained that, for instance, the amputation of a pickpocket’s right hand would lessen his physical ability to commit similar crimes in the future or that the branding of a telltale mark upon his forehead would alert his potential victims in a crowd to take special precautions while they were in his vicinity. The claim that corporal punishment is an especially effective deterrent has been refuted by empirical evidence, however, which shows that offenders who are punished by corporal means are actually slightly more likely to commit further crimes than are those punished by imprisonment. Although there have been some calls for the reinstitution of corporal punishment in response to rising crime rates in the United States and other countries in the post-World War II era, corporal punishment continues to be regarded as an inhumane and barbaric relic of the criminal justice systems of bygone eras.
Most European countries have partially or completely banned the corporal punishment of children in schools and at home, in compliance with the European Social Charter—adopted in 1961 and revised in 1996—which protects children from physical abuse. The Council of Europe, an organization of nearly all European countries that promotes human rights and democracy on the continent, has sought to abolish the practice. The corporal punishment of children by parents or caregivers has also been banned in some non-European countries. The Convention on the Rights of the Child, which was adopted by the United Nations in 1989, forbids the physical abuse of children by parents or other caregivers. The convention has been ratified by all UN members except the United States and Somalia. By the early 21st century, more than 100 countries had also banned the corporal punishment of children in schools.  See also flogging.
