Criminal investigation,   ensemble of methods by which crimes are studied and criminals apprehended. The criminal investigator seeks to ascertain the methods, motives, and identities of criminals and the identity of victims and may also search for and interrogate witnesses.
Identification of a criminal who has left no fingerprints or other conclusive evidence can often be advanced by analysis of the modus operandi; professional criminals tend to stick to a certain technique (e.g., forcing entrance), to seek certain types of booty, and to leave a certain trademark (e.g., the means by which a victim is tied up). Criminal-investigation departments compile such data, as well as lists of stolen and lost property, and have ready access to such public records as automobile and firearms registrations and such private records as laundry and dry-cleaners’ marks, pawnshop and secondhand-dealers’ transactions, and many more.
Information flows in more or less continuously from police informants and undercover agents. Wiretapping and other electronic-surveillance methods have become extremely important, though subject to legal restraints.
Interrogation of suspects is one of the most important functions of criminal investigation. In most countries this proceeding is delicate because a confession gained in violation of the suspect’s rights can be repudiated in court. The use of the polygraph, or lie detector, is also subject to widespread courtroom limitations.
Of increasing assistance in criminal investigation is the crime laboratory, equipped to deal with a wide range of physical evidence by means of chemical and other analysis. Techniques of identification, especially fingerprinting, and more recently voiceprinting and even “DNA fingerprinting” (a technique that is still experimental), have come to prominence in modern investigation. Photography and photomicrography, document examination, ballistics, and other scientific techniques are also standard crime-laboratory tools. Forensic medicine can supply analysis of blood and urine and identify traces of chemical substances in bodily organs of homicide victims. 
