Cumming v. Board of Education of Richmond County,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on December 18, 1899, ruled (9–0) that a Georgia county board of education did not violate any constitutional rights when it decided to discontinue high-school services for 60 African American students in order to provide elementary education for 300 African American students.
In 1880 the board of education in Richmond county, Georgia, established Ware High School for African American students and charged a yearly tuition of $10. Seven years later a special committee recommended that for economic reasons the high school be closed and converted into four elementary schools. The board agreed, asserting that the high-school students could obtain an education at the Haines Industrial School, the Walker Baptist Institute, or the Payne Institute for a fee no greater than that charged by Ware; the suggested alternatives were private sectarian schools.
African American parents, including J.W. Cumming, objected to the closing of Ware. They unsuccessfully sought an injunction against the tax collector, arguing that the board could not levy taxes that supported a high-school system that served only white students. A lower court, however, did issue an order restraining the board of education from expending any of the tax funds, but it suspended its directive until the Supreme Court of Georgia could render a decision on the issues. The state’s high court then reversed in favour of the board, removing the injunction and dismissing the parents’ petition. The court explained that the parents had not specified what parts of the Fourteenth Amendment the school board had violated. Although the board did devote some of the school taxes that it collected to support a high school for white girls and a denominational high school for boys, the court was of the opinion that insofar as the board had not established a high school for white boys, it did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment.
On October 30, 1899, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. It began by analyzing Article 8, Section 1 of the Georgia constitution, which required local boards to provide a thorough system of free elementary schools for English education—with separate schools for white and black students—the cost of which would be supported by tax funds “or otherwise.” (Three years earlier in Plessy v. Ferguson, the U.S. Supreme Court had advanced the “separate but equal” doctrine, and the issue of segregated schools thus was not raised in Cumming.) In light of this language, the court believed that the board made a nondiscriminatory decision to provide education for 300 elementary students in lieu of offering a secondary education for 60 high-school students. The court pointed out that the affected secondary-school students could still have received an education in private schools for tuition that was no greater than they already were paying at Ware High School. The court concluded its analysis by deferring to the power of the states to determine who should be educated in the schools provided that the benefits of taxation are shared by all without any discrimination. Absent a clear violation of rights, the court did not think that federal authorities had the authority to interfere in the operation of the schools. The ruling of the Georgia Supreme Court was thus upheld.
In 1954 the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Cumming with its decision in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka.
