Date rape, also called acquaintance rape,  a term used largely in industrialized countries to describe the forcing or coercing of a victim into unwanted sexual activity by a friend, romantic suitor, or peer through violence, verbal pressure, misuse of authority,  use of incapacitating substances, or threat of violence. Although some prefer the more-inclusive term acquaintance rape, which does not imply any sort of romantic relationship between the rapist and the victim, both terms acknowledge the facts that the majority of women and men who are raped know their attackers and that the victim did not consent to sexual activity.
The terms date rape and acquaintance rape were originally introduced into public health parlance in the 1980s in an attempt to dispel the myth that the majority of rapes occurred as random attacks by strangers. The concept of non-stranger rape was also used to give voice to sexual experiences that many victims believed had been nonconsensual but which were not criminal in nature because they occurred in the context of a romantic relationship. Advocates for the rights of rape victims emphasized the concept of date rape to promote awareness that all sexual activity requires explicit consent from both parties. A new, prior, or ongoing dating or intimate relationship does not necessarily imply that either party has a “right” to sexual contact. The new awareness of date rape led to legal changes in the United States that gave grounds for victims to prosecute attackers, although much discussion remained about the legal standards of consent.
It is difficult to determine the rates of date rape worldwide, especially in cultures in which dating and premarital romantic and sexual relationships either do not occur or do so in diverse contexts. Marital rape is a related concept and has been utilized particularly in developing countries to describe unwanted sexual contact by a spouse. It has become a part of efforts toward increasing women’s sexual rights as a means of preventing HIV infection.
Intoxication due to alcohol or other drugs is often associated with date rape through the victim’s diminished capacity and inability to consent, the rapist’s diminished inhibitions, or a combination of both. Further, of great concern, particularly among young people such as college students, is the use of incapacitating “date-rape drugs” such as Rohypnol, GHB (gamma hydroxybutyrate), and ketamine. Such substances can be slipped into alcoholic or other drinks when a victim is not looking. The drugs are usually odourless and colourless, although Rohypnol, after it became notorious as a date-rape drug, has been altered chemically to change the appearance of drinks into which it is introduced. The drugs produce paralysis, blackouts, and memory loss, making victims vulnerable to attackers.
