Davenport v. Washington Education Association,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 14, 2007, ruled (9–0) that a Washington state law that required public-sector labour unions to obtain the formal permission of nonunion member employees before spending their fees on politically related expenses, including campaigns and elections, was not a violation of the unions’ First Amendment rights.
In 1992 Washington voters passed Section 760 of the state’s Fair Campaign Practices Act. The section states that
“Fair-share” or “agency-shop” fees are mandatory union fees or dues collected from employees who are not union members. In 2001 David Davenport and other nonunion members of the Washington Education Association (WEA), the state’s largest teacher union, filed a lawsuit against the WEA, claiming that it had failed to obtain the affirmative authorization required in Section 760; the state of Washington also brought a similar suit against the WEA (Washington v. Washington Education Association). After various lower-court proceedings, the Supreme Court of Washington ruled that Section 760 violated the First Amendment’s freedom of speech and association clauses. The court held that the “opt-in” rule placed an unconstitutional burden on unions; most such laws in other states require an “opt-out” provision, in which it is up to nonunion members to make their objections known.
The two cases were consolidated, and the U.S. Supreme Court heard oral arguments on January 10, 2007. The court held that the Supreme Court of Washington had erred, basing its decision on a misinterpretation of the U.S. Supreme Court rulings in two previous agency-shop fee cases, Abood v. Detroit Board of Education (1977) and Chicago Teachers Union, Local No. 1 v. Hudson (1986). According to the justices, the Washington court had extended those decisions beyond their intended scope to conclude that nonunion members should shoulder the burden of objecting to certain uses of fees. The court also rejected the WEA’s claim that Section 760 was unconstitutional in light of the Supreme Court’s earlier rulings concerning campaign finance. Those decisions, the court noted, involved entities that had obtained money without coercion. In Davenport, however, the members had been compelled to pay the dues. Moreover, the court held that there were no violations of free speech, because voters did not “distort the marketplace of ideas when they placed a reasonable, view-point neutral limitation” on the unions. According to the court, Section 760 was designed to “protect the integrity of the election process.”  On the basis of those findings, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed the lower court’s ruling.
