Davis v. Board of School Commissioners of Mobile County,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on April 20, 1971, ruled (9–0) that the desegregation plan for Mobile county, Alabama, did not make use of all possible remedies and that lower courts needed to develop a more realistic plan. Davis was one of numerous cases in which the Supreme Court showed its impatience with inadequate desegregation efforts.
Nearly 10 years after Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954) struck down desegregation, the Mobile county school system had failed to implement an effective desegregation plan. In 1963 a lawsuit was filed on behalf of a number of African American students, including Birdie Mae Davis. The case subsequently was involved in protracted legal proceedings as various plans were considered and rejected. In the late 1960s the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals declared that a plan based on unified geographic zones inadequately eliminated desegregation to achieve a unitary school system. It remanded, and a federal district court then fashioned another plan, which left 18,623, or 60 percent, of the district’s African American students in 19 schools that were all Black or almost all Black.
The Fifth Circuit reviewed and called for the elimination of the seven all-Black schools that still existed under the district court’s plan. According to the Fifth Circuit, that could be achieved through pairing and adjusting grade structures; busing and split zoning was not suggested. In the next proposal, the district court treated the eastern and western parts of the county as distinct. It achieved desegregation in the western section, which was 88 percent white and 12 percent Black, but the eastern section—which contained 94 percent of the Black students in the Mobile metropolitan area—remained segregated, with 12 all-Black or almost all-Black elementary schools. The Fifth Circuit rejected that proposal and instead accepted a modified version of a U.S. Department of Justice plan, which was expected to reduce the number of all- or nearly all-Black schools but still treated the eastern and western sections as separate entities. The plan was put into place for the 1970–71 school term. However, it was largely ineffective, as nine elementary schools in the eastern section remained all Black, and half of the Black “junior and senior high school students” were in all-Black or nearly all-Black schools.
On October 13–14, 1970, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. It held that once constitutional violations had been discovered in a desegregation plan, the lower courts should have used every available remedy, including restructuring contiguous and noncontiguous attendance zones. The Supreme Court found that the Fifth Circuit should have abandoned treating the eastern and western sections separately. In addition, the court held that inadequate attention had been given to using bus transportation and split zoning. Citing Green v. County School Board of New Kent County (1968), the court remanded with instructions to fashion a remedy “that promises realistically to work” and to work at the present time.
More legal proceedings ensued, and the case was finally dismissed in 1997.
