Davis v. Monroe County Board of Education,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on May 24, 1999, ruled (5–4) that, under Title IX of the Federal Education Amendments (1972), school boards are liable for failing to stop student-on-student sexual harassment under certain circumstances.
The case centred on LaShonda Davis, a fifth grader in Monroe county, Georgia. Over a six-month period in 1992–93, a classmate identified as G.F. allegedly sexually harassed or abused Davis (and others) by attempting to fondle her, touching her, and directing offensive language toward her. An example of G.F.’s behaviour occurred in December 1992, when he allegedly tried to touch Davis’s breasts and genital area, telling her, “I want to get in bed with you” and “I want to feel your boobs.” Davis repeatedly reported G.F. to her teachers, and her mother called the teacher and the principal to see what could be done to protect her daughter. The requests for protection went unfulfilled, and no disciplinary action was taken. Even Davis’s request to change seats because G.F. sat next to her was not allowed until after she had complained for more than three months. In May 1993 G.F. was charged with sexual battery and pled guilty.
In 1994 Davis’s mother brought a lawsuit under Title IX, which states that
The suit, which named the school board and several school officials as respondents, sought injunctive relief and compensatory damages for the alleged continuous sexual harassment of her daughter by a classmate. The suit contended that school officials knew of the harassment but failed to take any meaningful action to prevent it from continuing. The case started in a federal district court in Georgia and went on to the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals, with both rejecting the notion of board liability for student-on-student sexual harassment.
On January 12, 1999, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. Writing for the majority, Justice Sandra Day O’Connor held that school boards are liable when officials are
Moreover, the court also required that the harassment be “serious enough to have the systemic effect of denying the victim equal access to an education program or activity.” According to the majority, a systemic effect means that it is unlikely that a single act of one-on-one peer harassment would meet the requisite level of systemic effect. The Supreme Court thus overturned the decision of the Eleventh Circuit and remanded the case.
