Dennis v. United States,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 4, 1951, upheld the constitutionality of the Smith Act (1940), which made it a criminal offense to advocate the violent overthrow of the government or to organize or be a member of any group or society devoted to such advocacy.
The case originated in 1948 when Eugene Dennis, general secretary of the American Communist Party, along with several other high-ranking communists, was arrested and convicted of having violated the Smith Act. The conviction was upheld by lower courts, despite the fact that no evidence existed that Dennis and his colleagues had encouraged any of their followers to commit specific violent acts, and was appealed to the Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the case.
Against the backdrop of the case was a growing fear in the United States during the Cold War of a communist takeover of the country. Oral arguments were held on December 4, 1950, and on the following June 4 the Supreme Court issued a 6–2 ruling upholding the convictions, in essence finding that it was constitutional to restrict the guarantee of freedom of speech found in the U.S. Constitution’s First Amendment when an individual’s speech was so grave that it represented a vital threat to the security of the country. The court’s plurality opinion was written by Fred M. Vinson, joined by Harold Burton, Sherman Minton, and Stanley Reed, who argued: “Certainly an attempt to overthrow the Government by force, even though doomed from the outset because of inadequate numbers or power of the revolutionists, is a sufficient evil for Congress to prevent.” The ruling further maintained that government need not wait to prohibit speech “until the putsch is about to be executed, the plans have been laid and the signal is awaited. If Government is aware that a group aiming at its overthrow is attempting to indoctrinate its members and to commit them to a course whereby they will strike when the leaders feel the circumstances permit, action by the Government is required.” Two other justices, Felix Frankfurter and Robert H. Jackson, voted with the majority but wrote special concurrences that deviated somewhat from the ruling’s overall logic. Frankfurter, in particular, argued that Congress needed to balance free speech protections against the threat of that speech. The court’s opinion ran somewhat contrary to the clear and present danger rule of Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., in Schenck v. United States in 1919, which required that immediate violence or danger be present for speech to be lawfully limited.
Dissenting from the majority were Hugo L. Black, who had developed a literal interpretation of the Bill of Rights and an absolutist position on First Amendment rights, and William O. Douglas. Black’s eloquent opinion both captured the tenor of the times and was a strong defense of freedom of speech:
In Yates v. United States (1957), the court later amended its ruling to make parts of the Smith Act unenforceable, and though the law remained on the books, no prosecutions took place under it thereafter.
