Electrocution,  method of execution in which the condemned person is subjected to a heavy charge of electric current.
Once the most widely used method of execution in the United States, electrocution was largely supplanted by lethal injection in the late 20th and early 21st centuries and is now used relatively rarely. The method applies one or more high voltage electrical currents through electrodes attached to the head and legs of a condemned inmate, who sits strapped to a chair. A typical electrocution lasts about two minutes.
Electrocution was first adopted in 1888 in New York as a quicker and more humane alternative to hanging. Two years later, on August 6, 1890, New York state initiated its electric chair, executing William Kemmler at Auburn State Prison; in 1899 Martha Place became the first woman to be electrocuted. Kemmler’s highly publicized execution was a grotesque and fiery botch. One New York Times reporter described the incident in detail, noting that it was “awful” and “the witnesses were so horrified by the ghastly sight that they could not take their eyes off it.” Kemmler’s face was bloody, his hair and skin scorched, and the death chamber’s “stench…unbearable.” According to the three doctors who conducted Kemmler’s autopsy, there was “[e]xtensive charring” of the body where the electrodes had been attached. Nevertheless, electrocution was soon adopted in other states and by its peak in 1949 was the method of execution in 26 states.
The U.S. Supreme Court has never rendered a judgment as to whether electrocution violates the U.S. Constitution’s Eighth Amendment prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment. However, considerable evidence suggests that the method can inflict on the inmate unnecessary pain, indignity, and physical mutilation (e.g., severe external burning and bleeding). Documentation of witnessed executions has shown a substantial pattern of consecutive mishaps.
Court challenges over the decades, which began with the Kemmler case, eventually led most states to abandon electrocution in favour of lethal injection. By the early 21st century, electrocution was one of two methods (the other being lethal injection) that an inmate could choose in several states. (Nebraska was the last U.S. state to use electrocution as the sole method of execution; in 2008 the Nebraska Supreme Court ruled it unconstitutional.) Nevertheless, even in jurisdictions where it was permissible, electrocution was rarely employed, a sharp contrast from earlier practice. For example, from 1890 to 1972 (when the Supreme Court commenced its moratorium on the death penalty), electrocution was used in 4,251 executions; from 1976 (when the Supreme Court ended the moratorium) through the early 21st century, it had been used in about 160 executions. Electrocution has not been widely adopted outside the United States, though it was used in the Philippines until 1976. See also capital punishment.
