Extraordinary rendition,  extrajudicial practice, carried out by U.S. government agencies, of transferring a prisoner to a foreign country for the purposes of detention and interrogation. Those agencies asserted that the practice exempted detainees from the legal safeguards afforded to prisoners under U.S. and international law. The technique was widely criticized, as prisoners were subject to indefinite imprisonment without trial and the possibility of torture, in violation of basic due process protections and international human rights law.
During the administration of U.S. Pres Bill Clinton, the practice of extraordinary rendition was first utilized, albeit sparingly. Typically, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) would kidnap a terrorism suspect abroad and take that person to another country to be interrogated. The interrogation could include extreme measures, including torture, which sometimes led to the death of the suspect. Clinton acknowledged that in all likelihood such covert operations were illegal but insisted that they were necessary.
Two things happened during the presidency of George W. Bush to accelerate the use of extraordinary rendition. First, the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, brought a sense of urgency to the interrogation of terrorism suspects, as it was feared that another attack was imminent. A global sweep of terrorism suspects began, and scores of defendants were tried in criminal courts in the United States and abroad. Nevertheless, many suspected terrorists were outside the reach of any criminal court and enjoyed asylum in countries friendly to their cause. Second, the Supreme Court’s decision in Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain (2004) found that government agents are generally immune from civil or criminal liability for their official conduct abroad, even if that conduct originates in the United States. The practice of extraordinary rendition then accelerated to unprecedented levels.
Bush’s secretary of state Condoleezza Rice stated that extraordinary rendition was a necessary element of U.S. counterterrorism efforts and that terrorism suspects had been neither transported nor tortured by U.S. agents. That claim, however, did not preclude the possibility that suspects had been tortured at the behest of the U.S. government.
As the practice of extraordinary rendition expanded, terrorism suspects were transported to and detained in a number of foreign prisons around the world. In addition, the CIA operated a network of secret “black site” facilities for the interrogation of prisoners outside the United States, most notably at locations in Afghanistan, Poland, Romania, and Thailand. It was estimated that more than 50 foreign governments had participated in the program to some degree. Pres. Barack Obama issued an executive order in 2009 that reaffirmed the prohibition of torture and created a task force to explore options for the detention of terrorism suspects. Although observers agreed that the use of extraordinary rendion as a detention or interrogation tactic had been seriously curtailed in subsequent years, the extreme secrecy surrounding the practice made its cessation impossible to verify.
