German Civil Code, German Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch,  the body of codified private law that went into effect in the German empire in 1900. Though it has been modified, it remains in effect. The code grew out of a desire for a truly national law that would override the often conflicting customs and codes of the various German territories.
The code is divided into five parts. The first is general, covering concepts of personal rights and legal personality. The subjects of the other four parts are: obligations, including concepts of sale and contract; things, including immovable and movable property; domestic relations; and succession.
The concept of law embodied in the code was the gemeines Recht, the common law based on the 6th-century codification of Roman law put in force by the emperor Justinian. In family law and to some extent in the law of property, some elements of Germanic tribal law also influenced the code. Although altered to some extent by feudal law, customary law again came under Roman influence in the 15th century, when Roman law was received into Germany in an effort to systematize customs and legal institutions. In some areas it superseded custom, particularly when there was no conflict between the two; in others, Roman and customary law existed side by side, with custom prevailing when there were insurmountable differences.
The movement for codification began in the 18th century with the Bavarian Code of 1756 and the Prussian Civil Code of 1794 and received its major impetus from the Napoleonic Code, which remained in operation in the 19th century throughout much of the western area of Germany, including Alsace and Westphalia. As had been the case at the time of the French codification (1804), there was a desire in Germany to reconcile the vast incongruities in the law among different towns and territories. Even within cities there were sometimes two distinct bodies of private law in operation. Some areas of Germany were under the Napoleonic Code, others under the Prussian Civil Code, others under local codes and customs, and still others under various combinations of all of these.
Throughout the 19th century, German legal scholars argued about the type of national code that should be written and, indeed, whether one should be written at all. The arguments were intense enough to have the effect of delaying codification. Only with the formation of the Reich (“empire”) in 1871 was it possible to undertake a program of national codification. Commissions were established, and, when the first draft of the code was presented for critical appraisal in 1888, it was rejected as being too Roman. A second draft was promulgated in 1896 and went into effect in 1900.
The German Civil Code has had an important influence on the private law of other countries, particularly Japan, Switzerland, and Greece. It has influenced the law of Austria and, in conjunction with the Swiss Civil Code, that of Russia and the Scandinavian countries, among others. Compare Napoleonic Code; Prussian Civil Code.
