Griswold v. State of Connecticut,  legal case, decided by the U.S. Supreme Court on June 7, 1965, that found in favour of the constitutional right of married persons to use birth control.
The state case was originally ruled in favour of the plaintiff, the state of Connecticut. Estelle Griswold, the executive director of the Planned Parenthood League of Connecticut, and Lee Buxton, a physician and professor at Yale Medical School who served as Medical Director for the League, were convicted as accessories to the crime of providing married couples information about contraception and in some cases writing prescriptions for contraceptive devices for the woman. At the time of their arrests (1961), Connecticut law made it a crime for any person to use a device or drug to prevent conception, and it was also a crime for any person to assist, abet, counsel, cause, or command another to do the same. The defendants were found guilty of such assistance and fined $100 each.
In its judgment the Supreme Court ruled that Connecticut’s birth control law was unconstitutional based on rights set down in the Fourth and Fifth amendments that protect an individual’s home and private life from interference by the government. Judging marriage to be a sacred and private bond that lies within a zone of privacy guaranteed by several provisions within the constitution, namely the concept of liberty implied in the Bill of Rights, the Court found that the original decision against Griswold and Buxton should be overturned, and that citizens in the state of Connecticut should enjoy the freedom to use birth control within the bonds of marriage. In his concurring opinion, Associate Justice Arthur Goldberg also asserted the Ninth Amendment—which had lain dormant for much of U.S. constitutional history—as a basis for the decision, arguing:
This particular privacy case has been cited in other important Supreme Court judgments, including Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania et al. v. Casey, governor of Pennsylvania, et al.
