Gunpowder Plot,  the conspiracy of English Roman Catholics to blow up Parliament and King James I, his queen, and his eldest son on November 5, 1605. The leader of the plot, Robert Catesby, together with his four coconspirators—Thomas Winter, Thomas Percy, John Wright, and Guy Fawkes—were zealous Roman Catholics angered by James’s refusal to grant more religious toleration to Catholics. They apparently hoped that the confusion that would follow the murder of the king, his ministers, and the members of Parliament would provide an opportunity for the English Catholics to take over the country.
Catesby had conceived of the plot as early as May 1603, when he told Percy, in reply to the latter’s declaration of his intention to kill the king, that he was “thinking of a most sure way.” Subsequently, on or about November 1, 1603, Catesby sent a message to his cousin Robert Winter at Huddington, near Worcester, to come to London, but Winter refused. On the arrival of a second urgent summons shortly afterward, he obeyed, and at a house in Lambeth, probably in January 1604, he and John Wright were initiated by Catesby into the plot to blow up Parliament. Before putting this plan into motion, however, it was decided to try a “quiet way” to obtain the repeal of the Penal Laws, a body of laws that essentially criminalized Roman Catholicism. Winter was sent to Flanders to enlist the aid of Juan de Velasco, duke of Frias and constable of Castile, who was conducting the negotiations for a peace between England and Spain. Winter, having secured nothing but vain promises from the constable, returned to England about the end of April, bringing with him Fawkes, a man devoted to the Roman Catholic cause and recommended for undertaking perilous adventures.
Subsequently Catesby, Winter, and Fawkes, along with Percy, who joined the conspiracy in May, met in a house behind St. Clement’s Church. There they swore an oath of secrecy together, heard mass, and took Communion in an adjoining apartment from a priest stated by Fawkes to have been Father John Gerard. Later several other persons were included in the plot, including Winter’s brother Thomas, John Grant, Ambrose Rokewood, Robert Keyes, Sir Everard Digby, Catesby’s cousin Francis Tresham, and Catesby’s servant Thomas Bates. The Jesuits Oswald Tesimond (also known by the alias Father Greenway) and Father Henry Garnet were also cognizant of the plot. On May 24, 1604, a house was hired in Percy’s name adjoining the House of Lords. From the cellar of this house the conspirators proposed to work a mine. They began digging on December 11, 1604, and by about March had gotten halfway through the wall. They then discovered that a vault immediately under the House of Lords was available. This was at once hired by Percy, and 36 barrels of gunpowder (some sources say fewer), amounting to about 1.5 tons (some 1,400 kg), were brought in and concealed under coal and firewood. The preparations being completed in May 1605, the conspirators separated. Fawkes was dispatched to Flanders, where he imparted the plot to Hugh Owen, a Welsh Roman Catholic expatriate whose intrigues in England dated to at least the Ridolfi Plot against Elizabeth I in 1571. Sir Edmund Baynham was sent on a mission to Rome to be on hand when the news of the plot’s success came so that he could win over the pope to the cause of the conspirators.
