Harlem race riot of 1943,  riot that occurred in the Manhattan neighbourhood of Harlem on August 1–2, 1943. It was set off when a white police officer shot an African American soldier after he attempted to intervene in the police officer’s arrest of an African American woman for disturbing the peace. The spark was ignited in the lobby of the Braddock Hotel, a seven-story hotel on the southeast corner of 126th Street and Eighth Avenue.
After the 1943 Detroit riots had left 30 people dead, mayors across the country attempted to quell the racial unrest simmering beneath the surface in their cities. New York City was suffering from spiraling cost increases because of the wartime economy, and Harlem, with its predominantly Black population, was hit especially hard. Tensions were high because of the high cost of living resulting from shortages of food and other essentials. Further, African Americans throughout the country continued to suffer from racial discrimination, and the Black residents of Harlem felt that the New York City police were harassing the African American community.
On August 1, 1943, an African American soldier tried to intervene when a white police officer tried to arrest an African American woman in Harlem for disorderly conduct. Bullets were fired, and the soldier was shot and wounded. As in the noted 1935 riot, rumours swirled through Harlem that the Black soldier was dead, and another riot began.
Rioters looted stores, smashed windows, and battled with police. On August 2 Mayor Fiorello La Guardia requested that U.S. Army troops help contain the violence. The mayor went on the radio, asking Harlem residents to remain in their homes, and he put a 10:30 pm curfew into effect. Meanwhile, army troops were posted on many street corners throughout Harlem.
During the course of the riot, which ended on August 2, 6 people died, 495 were injured, and more than 500 were arrested. As in 1935, a number of stores and shops in Harlem suffered damage. The value of damage in the 1943 riot was estimated at $5 million.
In the aftermath of the riot, the federal Office of Price Administration (OPA) agreed to open an office on 135th Street in Harlem to investigate complaints about price gouging. The office was soon flooded with complaints. Mayor La Guardia was warned that when lease renewals came due, the landlords would violate voluntary price restraints. The mayor thus increased pressure on the city agencies involved, which forced the landlords to comply with price controls, a circumstance that may have prevented another riot. The event was recalled by several African American writers, including James Baldwin, Langston Hughes, Claude Brown, and Malcolm X (then Malcolm Little).
