Hortonville Joint School District No. 1 v. Hortonville Education Association,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 17, 1976, ruled that a Wisconsin school board had not violated the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment when it fired teachers for staging a strike that was in violation of state law.
On March 18, 1974, following months of unsuccessful negotiations to renew a collective-bargaining agreement, the Hortonville Education Association, a teachers union, went on strike. On March 20 the Hortonville Joint School District’s superintendent of schools sent a letter to each striking teacher, requesting that they return to work. Three days later the superintendent sent another letter, which informed the striking teachers that state law prohibited public employees from striking and asked them to return. No teacher did, and the board then initiated disciplinary proceedings, sending each teacher a notice of individual hearing times.
At the disciplinary hearing, the teachers, represented by counsel, informed the school board that they preferred to be treated as a group. The teachers argued that, under the due process clause, their cases should be reviewed by an impartial decision maker and that the adversarial relationship between the parties caused by the strike rendered the board an improper tribunal. The board rejected the teachers’ arguments and dismissed the teachers.
The teachers then sued the board for violating their due process rights. A state trial court upheld the board’s action. However, the Supreme Court of Wisconsin reversed in favour of the teachers, declaring that due process required that an impartial decision maker review the teachers’ dismissals and that the board’s interest in the outcome of the contract negotiations provided evidence sufficient to show that it was incapable of impartiality.
On February 23–24, 1976, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. Its opinion maintained that the due process clause did not guarantee the teachers an independent review of their termination. The court noted that the state legislature granted local boards and their officials broad power to manage school district affairs, which included the authority to hire and dismiss teachers. Furthermore, the court reasoned that the board did not have a personal or financial interest in the dismissal of the teachers but rather was fulfilling its statutory obligation to direct the school system. If anything, the court asserted, ending the strike and resuming instruction was in the best interest of the district and its students. Thus, according to the court, the board officials did not have the bias necessary to disqualify them as decision makers. The court concluded that the dismissal of teachers, who had violated state law, fell within the board’s policy-making role as envisioned by the state legislature. The decision of the Wisconsin Supreme Court was overturned.
