Ikhwān, (Arabic: Brethren)  in Arabia, members of a religious and military brotherhood that figured prominently in the unification of the Arabian Peninsula under Ibn Saud (1912–30); in modern Saudi Arabia they constitute the National Guard.
Ibn Saud began organizing the Ikhwān in 1912 with hopes of making them a reliable and stable source of an elite army corps. In order to break their traditional tribal allegiances and feuds, the Ikhwān were settled in colonies known as hijrahs. These settlements, established around desert oases to promote agricultural reclamation of the land, further forced the Bedouin to abandon their nomadic way of life. The hijrahs, whose populations ranged from 10 to 10,000, offered tribesmen living quarters, mosques, schools, agricultural equipment and instruction, and arms and ammunition. Most importantly, religious teachers were brought in to instruct the Bedouin in the fundamentalist precepts of Islam taught by the religious reformer Ibn ʿAbd al-Wahhāb in the 18th century. As a result the Ikhwān became arch-traditionalists. By 1918 they were ready to enter Ibn Saud’s elite army.
In 1919 the Ikhwān began a campaign against the Hashemite kingdom of the Hejaz, on the northwestern coast of Arabia. They defeated King Hussein ibn Ali at Turabah (1919) and then conducted border raids against his sons Abdullah of Transjordan and Faisal of Iraq (1921–22). In 1924, when Hussein was proclaimed caliph in Mecca, the Ikhwān labelled the act heretical and accused Hussein of obstructing their performance of the pilgrimage to Mecca. They then moved against Transjordan, Iraq, and the Hejaz simultaneously, besieged Al-Ṭāʾif, outside Mecca, and massacred several hundred of its inhabitants. Mecca fell to the Ikhwān, and, with the subsequent surrender (1925) of Jiddah and Medina, they won all of the Hejaz for Ibn Saud. The Ikhwān were also instrumental in securing the provinces of Asir, just south of the Hejaz on the coast (1920), and Ḥāʾil, in the north of the peninsula, along the borders of Transjordan and Iraq (1921).
By 1926 the Ikhwān were becoming uncontrollable. They attacked Ibn Saud for introducing such innovations as telephones, automobiles, and the telegraph and for sending his son to a country of “unbelievers” (Egypt). Despite Ibn Saud’s attempts to mollify the Ikhwān by submitting their accusations to the religious scholars (ʿulamāʾ), the Ikhwān provoked an international incident by destroying an Iraqi force that had violated a neutral zone established by Great Britain and Ibn Saud between Iraq and Arabia (1927–28). The British bombed Najd in retaliation.
A congress convened by Ibn Saud in October 1928 deposed Ibn Humayd, al-Dawish, and Ibn Hithlayn, the leaders of the revolt. A massacre of Najd merchants by Ibn Humayd in 1929, however, forced Ibn Saud to confront the rebellious Ikhwān militarily, and, in a major battle fought in March on the plain of Al-Sabalah (near Al-Arṭāwiyyah), Ibn Humayd was captured and al-Dawish seriously wounded. Then in May 1929 Ibn Hithlayn was murdered. In retribution, the Ikhwān killed his murderer, Fahd, the son of one of Ibn Saud’s governors, and commandeered the road between Ibn Saud’s capital, Riyadh, and the Persian Gulf. The rebels suffered a setback in August at the hands of Abd al-Aziz ibn Musaʿid: their leader, Uzayyiz, al-Dawish’s son, and hundreds of his soldiers were either killed in battle on the edge of Al-Nafūd desert or died of thirst in the desert. Shortly afterward an important Ikhwān faction defected, and Ibn Saud was able to surround the rebels and force them to surrender to the British in Kuwait in January 1930. The Ikhwān leaders, al-Dawish and Ibn Hithlayn’s cousin Nayif, were subsequently imprisoned in Riyadh.
Not all of the Ikhwān had revolted. Those members who had remained loyal to Ibn Saud stayed on the hijrahs, continuing to receive government support, and were still an influential religious force. They were eventually absorbed into the Saudi Arabian National Guard.
