Ingraham v. Wright,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on April 19, 1977, ruled (5–4) that corporal punishment in public schools did not fall within the scope of the “cruel and unusual punishments” clause of the Eighth Amendment and did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment’s guarantee of procedural due process.
The case centred on James Ingraham, an eighth-grade student at a public junior high school in Florida, who in 1970 was paddled by the principal (Willie J. Wright) while being restrained by the assistant principal (Lemmie Deliford) and the principal’s assistant (Solomon Barnes). Ingraham was hit more than 20 times and required medical attention. A complaint was filed (1971) on behalf of Ingraham and Roosevelt Andrews, another student at the school who had also been paddled. The complaint claimed that the practice of corporal punishment in public schools violated both the Eighth Amendment’s ban on cruel and unusual punishments and the Fourteenth Amendment’s guarantee of procedural due process, insofar as it did not provide schoolchildren with notice and a hearing prior to imposition of the punishment. A district court dismissed the complaint, and the decision was upheld by the court of appeals.
In November 1976 the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. In a majority opinion written by Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr., and issued the following year, the Court ruled that the cruel and unusual punishments clause of the Eighth Amendment applied only to convicted criminals and therefore could not be violated in the corporal punishment of schoolchildren.  “The prisoner and the schoolchild,” the Court observed, “stand in wholly different circumstances, separated by the harsh facts of criminal conviction and incarceration.” As to procedural due process, the Court held that, since corporal punishment was “authorized and limited by common law,” schools did not need to issue prior notices and conduct hearings to avoid violating their students’ right to procedural due process. “Even if the need for advance procedural safeguards were clear,” the Court added, the “incremental benefit” thus obtained would not justify the cost.
In reaching its decision, the Court gave great weight to the historical tradition of corporal punishment in public schools in the United States, the long-standing common-law requirement that corporal punishment be reasonable but not excessive, and the various states’ procedural safeguards that subjected teachers and administrators who inflicted unreasonable or excessive corporal punishment to civil or criminal liability. The tradition of judicial deference to the judgment of educators and school administrators regarding the education of children was also influential in the Court’s ruling.
