International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons (ICAN),  international coalition of organizations that was founded in 2007 to eliminate nuclear weapons, with a focus on enacting international law to ban them. It played a key role in the United Nations’ Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. The group received the Nobel Peace Prize in 2017.
The group’s origins date to 2006, when the organization International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War announced plans to create it. The following year the International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons (ICAN) was formally established in Australia, and soon afterward it was launched internationally in Vienna. Within a decade it had more than 450 partner organizations in some 100 countries.
ICAN sought to “stigmatize, prohibit, and eliminate nuclear weapons.” To this end it staged demonstrations, conferences, and other events, and in 2012 the organization released a study that outlined the humanitarian toll of such weapons. However, perhaps its most significant work was involvement in enacting international legislation prohibiting them. ICAN helped to attract international support for the Humanitarian Pledge (originally issued as a national pledge by Austria in 2014), which asked signees to commit to creating such a treaty. It was endorsed by more than 125 countries as a UN resolution. This helped lay the groundwork for the UN to begin negotiations on a ban in 2017, though the nine countries that possessed nuclear weapons boycotted the talks. In July 2017 the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons was adopted by the UN, and two months later more than 50 member states signed it. At that time only three ratified the pact, but ICAN pledged to continue its efforts in order to obtain the 50 ratifications required for it to enter into force. While the document’s fate was uncertain, it was groundbreaking as the first legally binding treaty concerning a nuclear ban, and ICAN was praised for its work. In 2017 the organization received the Nobel Peace Prize as “a driving force when it comes to disarmament issues.”
