International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),  autonomous intergovernmental organization dedicated to increasing the contribution of atomic energy to the world’s peace and well-being and ensuring that agency assistance is not used for military purposes. The IAEA and its director general, Mohamed ElBaradei, won the Nobel Prize for Peace in 2005.
The agency was established by representatives of more than 80 countries in October 1956, nearly three years after U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s “Atoms for Peace” speech to the United Nations General Assembly, in which Eisenhower called for the creation of an international organization for monitoring the diffusion of nuclear resources and technology. The IAEA’s statute officially came into force on July 29, 1957. Its activities include research on the applications of atomic energy to medicine, agriculture, water resources, and industry; the operation of conferences, training programs, fellowships, and publications to promote the exchange of technical information and skills; the provision of technical assistance, especially to less-developed countries; and the establishment and administration of radiation safeguards. As part of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (1968), all non-nuclear powers are required to negotiate a safeguards agreement with the IAEA; as part of that agreement, the IAEA is given authority to monitor nuclear programs and to inspect nuclear facilities.
The General Conference, consisting of all members (in the early 21st century some 135 countries were members), meets annually to approve the budget and programs and to debate the IAEA’s general policies; it also is responsible for approving the appointment of a director general and admitting new members. The Board of Governors, which consists of 35 members who meet about five times per year, is charged with carrying out the agency’s statutory functions, approving safeguards agreements, and appointing the director general. The day-to-day affairs of the IAEA are run by the Secretariat, which is headed by the director general, who is assisted by six deputies; the Secretariat’s departments include nuclear energy, nuclear safety, nuclear sciences and application, safeguards, and technical cooperation. Headquarters are in Vienna.
