juvenile justice,  system of laws, policies, and procedures intended to regulate the processing and treatment of nonadult offenders for violations of law and to provide legal remedies that protect their interests in situations of conflict or neglect. Punishable offenses that are classified as criminal offenses for adults (e.g., murder, robbery, and larceny) are referred to as delinquency when committed by juveniles, whereas juvenile offenses mandating legal intervention only (e.g., alcohol and tobacco use, truancy, and running away from home) are referred to as status offenses. Children are also subject to specialized laws, procedures, and policies designed to protect their interests when parents or other legal guardians are unavailable, negligent, or involved in custodial disputes.
A controversial method of juvenile punishment has been the use of corporal punishment. Although such physical punishment is prohibited in many Western countries, it is still used in some parts of the United States and in much of the non-Western world. Historically, an increase in juvenile crime (such as the late 20th-century rise in juvenile gun offenses in the United States) has been followed by calls for the reinstatement of corporal punishment in those regions where it had been prohibited. Opponents of corporal punishment, however, argue that it is inhumane and that juvenile corporal punishment risks reinforcing the delinquent behaviour of those who receive it.
The specific mechanisms for administering juvenile justice have varied over time—among societies and even among jurisdictions within countries. The concept of delinquency, as well as special trials and institutions for confining and controlling youth, was established in the mid-19th century in Great Britain, where courts acquired the authority to intervene as parens patriae (Latin: “parent of the land”) to protect the property rights of children. Yet juveniles were tried in the same courts as adults until the Juvenile Court of Law was founded in Chicago in 1899. The first court dedicated to cases involving delinquent children was a success, which led to the creation of other juvenile courts, known colloquially as children’s courts or family courts, in other states. The model was soon adopted in other countries such as Canada and Great Britain (1908), France (1912), Russia (1918), Poland (1919), Japan (1922), and Germany (1923).
Early common law made no special provision for children who committed crimes. Provided that the child was over the minimum age for criminal responsibility (originally seven) and had “mischievous discretion” (the ability to tell right from wrong), the child was fully liable as an adult to the penalties provided by the law. During the 19th century, children who were criminally liable were regularly imprisoned, and there are records of children’s being hanged as late as the 1830s. In practice, however, age usually served as a mitigating factor in punishments accorded to children. In the 19th century the reformatory movement, which established training institutions for young offenders as an alternative to confinement in adult prisons, advanced the concept of treating juvenile offenders differently from adult criminals. The Children Act in 1908 created a special justice system for juvenile offenders—the Juvenile Court (renamed Youth Court in 1991), intended to handle both criminal and noncriminal cases.
The English youth courts exercise jurisdiction over offenders aged 10 (the minimum age of criminal responsibility) to 16. (Those under 14 are designated as “children,” and those over 14 and under 17 are classified as “young persons.”) Offenders aged 17 and over appear in the normal adult courts, though special sentencing provisions apply to offenders under the age of 21.
In addition to age, youth and adult courts are distinguished by the types of cases they handle, with youth courts hearing a much wider variety of offenses. Nearly all offenses committed by children are tried in youth courts, though the courts are not bound to deal with extremely serious offenses such as robbery or rape. On such charges, a young person will nearly always be tried as an adult. In most cases a youth also will be tried as an adult for murder or manslaughter. If he is charged jointly with an adult crime while being tried in juvenile court, he can be sent to an adult court for trial, though he is normally returned to the youth court for sentencing.
Youth courts also deal with children of any age up to 17 in what is called a care proceeding, which is based on the idea that the child is in need of court-ordered care, protection, or control because one of a number of conditions is satisfied. Reasons for care proceedings can include neglect or assault by parents, but they always stem from the fact that the juvenile has committed an offense. Thus, a juvenile who commits an offense will come before the youth court in one of two ways: criminal proceedings or care proceedings. This combination of two different roles in the youth court was a source of difficulty and controversy for many years, particularly because the court in its criminal jurisdiction was required by law to “have regard to the welfare of the child or young person” and, if satisfied that it was necessary to do so, remove the youth from unsatisfactory surroundings for his own good, irrespective of the gravity of the offense. In appearing before the youth court, a juvenile charged with a minor offense could be removed from parental custody and required to reside in an institution (known as a community home), perhaps for a period of several years and possibly under conditions of security. Under legislation passed in the late 1960s, a care order mandated by the youth court could effectively transfer parental rights to the local authority.
The care order is only one of many sanctions available to the English youth court and is used only in a minority of the cases that come before it. Another measure, the supervision order, places the juvenile under the general supervision of a social worker but sometimes requires participation in a wide range of organized, constructive activities as intermediate treatment. A supervision order can also include restrictive requirements prohibiting the juvenile from certain activities or a curfew in the form of a “night restriction,” a requirement to remain at home during the evening for a specified period. Juveniles can also be fined (though the court usually orders the parent to pay the fine) or be ordered to pay compensation for the offense.
In 1991 the Criminal Justice Act allowed the newly named Youth Court to handle cases involving 17-year-olds, and in 1994 the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act assigned stiffer punishments to juvenile offenders. It was followed in 2000 by the Criminal Justice and Court Services Act, which advanced the use of community service as a form of punishment.
