Khobar Towers bombing of 1996,  terrorist attack on a U.S. Air Force housing complex in the town of Khobar, near Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, on June 25, 1996. The bombers drove a tanker truck packed with 5,000 pounds (2,268 kg) of explosives near the complex and then jumped into waiting vehicles, escaping just before detonation. The explosion, which was so loud that it was heard some 20 miles (32 km) away, left a crater 85 feet (26 metres) wide and 35 feet (10.6 metres) deep. Nineteen U.S. service members were killed, and some 500 people were injured.
The targeted complex, known as Khobar Towers, housed 2,000 U.S. military personnel assigned to the King Abdulaziz Air Base in Saudi Arabia. The service members had been stationed there in order to patrol the no-fly zone in southern Iraq that had been declared after the Persian Gulf War (1990–91).
After the attack, U.S. officials built a case against leaders of the Iranian-backed Saudi Hezbollah al-Hejaz terrorist group, and, as the fifth anniversary of the bombing grew near, the U.S. indicted 14 men—13 Saudis and one Lebanese man. According to the 46-count indictment, the bombing had been in the planning stage for more than three years by Hezbollah al-Hejaz members, who wanted to oust Americans from Saudi Arabia. The explosives used in the attack had been transported from Beirut. At a news conference announcing the indictment, Attorney General John D. Ashcroft said that Iranian government officials “inspired, supported, and supervised members of Saudi Hezbollah” in the attack. However, no Iranian officials were charged in the indictment, and Iran denied any role in the bombing.
Saudi Arabia challenged U.S. jurisdiction in the case, as the act took place in Saudi Arabia, and 13 of the men charged were Saudi citizens. Some of the suspects were in Saudi custody, whereas others remained fugitives. Saudi officials said that extradition was impossible and that the men in their custody would be tried in Saudi Arabia.
Four of the men indicted by the United States in the Khobar case—Abdelkarim Hussein Mohamed al-Nasser, Ahmad Ibrahim al-Mughassil, Ali Saed bin Ali el-Hoorie, and Ibrahim Salih Mohammed al-Yacoub—were still on the FBI’s list of most-wanted terrorists some two decades after the attack.
