Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on January 11, 2000, struck down (5–4) a 1974 amendment to the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) of 1967 that abrogated the general immunity of states under the Eleventh Amendment to lawsuits by individuals to permit such actions against states and state agencies that violated the statute. The original ADEA was a federal law that protected workers over the age of 40 from age discrimination by private employers, and the 1974 amendment extended the same protections to workers employed by the states. Although the Eleventh Amendment gives states sovereign immunity from lawsuits, this immunity is not absolute. For instance, when exercising its power to enforce the Fourteenth Amendment, Congress may abrogate the states’ immunity. In Kimel, the court held that Congress did not have the power to abolish state immunity to ADEA claims and thereby to enable individuals to sue states and state agencies in federal court for age discrimination. Because most public institutions of higher education are considered to be arms of their states for the purposes of the Eleventh Amendment, Kimel meant that public colleges and universities were immune from lawsuits filed under the ADEA.
Congress has the power to abrogate sovereign immunity to enforce claims of discrimination brought under the Fourteenth Amendment. Also, when ongoing violations of federal law are present, federal courts may generally enjoin state officials from continuing to break the law. Moreover, states may voluntarily waive their immunity. The question in Kimel was whether claims under the ADEA could be considered further exceptions to the Eleventh Amendment’s prohibition of lawsuits in federal court against the states.
Kimel arose out of a dispute between the Florida Board of Regents and faculty members who sued for age discrimination in federal court. Although the governing board ordinarily would have been immune from liability as an arm of the state, Congress had enacted a provision in the ADEA purporting to abrogate sovereign immunity. The board contended that this purported abrogation was unconstitutional, but a federal trial court rejected its argument and ruled against the board. However, after the Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit reversed in favour of the board on the basis that the ADEA did not abrogate Eleventh Amendment immunity, the Supreme Court agreed to hear an appeal.
The Supreme Court affirmed both that Congress had expressed its intention to abrogate sovereign immunity for ADEA claims and that the attempted abrogation was unconstitutional.
Insofar as Congress may abrogate sovereign immunity only when it expresses its intention in a clear and unambiguous manner, the first issue was whether Congress had done so in the ADEA. The Supreme Court observed that, unlike other statutes, the ADEA did not explicitly mention a desire to abrogate sovereign immunity. Nevertheless, seven justices agreed that the generalized language referring to lawsuits and enforcement, along with the inclusion of the states in certain definitions, meant that Congress intended to abrogate the states’ sovereign immunity.
Having determined that Congress had intended to abrogate the states’ immunity, the Supreme Court turned to the more critical question of whether its attempt to do so was successful. The court began by reaffirming a basic point, namely that Congress may not use its general powers under Article I of the U.S. Constitution to abrogate sovereign immunity, because any abrogation must come from its power to enforce the Fourteenth Amendment. In evaluating whether Congress acted properly to enforce the Fourteenth Amendment, the court applied the test articulated in City of Boerne v. Flores (1997), wherein it explained that Congress had exceeded its enforcement powers in enacting the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (1993). Under this test, Congress must establish a pattern of actual constitutional violations by the states and must demonstrate that its remedy of abrogating sovereign immunity is proportionate to the pattern of constitutional violations.
The Supreme Court ruled that Congress failed in both tasks. First, the court decided that Congress had not identified a pattern of unconstitutional violations of the ADEA by the states. The court noted that violations of the ADEA are not necessarily violations of the Constitution. The court also indicated that the evidence that Congress did have of age discrimination by the states was anecdotal and limited to a few jurisdictions. Furthermore, the court did not think that discrimination by the private sector could form the basis of a finding of discrimination by the states. Because the findings were inadequate, the court viewed the remedy, namely the abrogation of sovereign immunity, as also clearly inadequate. Thus, the court invalidated the statutory attempt to abrogate the board’s sovereign immunity.
The court subsequently expanded the scope of Kimel in substantive areas of the law, such as in Federal Maritime Commission v. South Carolina State Ports Authority (2002), wherein it concluded that sovereign immunity forbade the commission from adjudicating a dispute over whether a private cruise ship could berth at a state-run port. For state universities that are considered arms of the state, Kimel remains a foundational case.
