Lau v. Nichols,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on January 21, 1974, ruled (9–0) that, under the Civil Rights Act of 1964, a California school district receiving federal funds must provide non-English-speaking students with instruction in the English language to ensure that they receive an equal education.
The case centred on the San Francisco Unified School District (SFUSD), which had nearly 2,900 non-English-speaking students of Chinese ancestry. While approximately 1,000 of those students were provided supplemental classes in English language, the others were not. In the early 1970s the students without access to such instruction, including Kinney Kimmon Lau, filed suit, claiming that the SFUSD violated their rights under the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection clause and Section 601 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits discrimination based on race, colour, or national origin in any program or activity receiving federal financial assistance. Alan H. Nichols, president of the school board, was named as a respondent.
The case came some 20 years after Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954), in which the U.S. Supreme Court relied on the equal protection clause in reasoning that “separate but equal” educational facilities were unconstitutional. In Lau a federal district court in 1973 ruled in favour of the SFUSD. Interpreting Brown as mandating the provision of education on equal terms, the district court concluded that the board did not violate the equal protection clause, because the non-English-speaking students received the same education that was available to all other students in the SFUSD. The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed. Insofar as the SFUSD had not directly or indirectly caused the language deficiencies, the Ninth Circuit found that the requisite discriminatory state action was absent. The court further explained that there were neither constitutional nor statutory mandates requiring the SFUSD to provide special remedial programs to students who were disadvantaged.
The case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court on December 10, 1973. The court began its review by noting that, according to the California Education Code, “the mastery of English by all pupils in the schools” is a key state goal. In addition, the code states that students who fail to meet standard proficiency levels of English will not receive a high-school diploma. According to the court, providing all students with the same facilities and curriculum does not mean equal treatment, because non-English-speaking students “are effectively foreclosed from any meaningful education.”
The court then focused on Section 601 of the Civil Rights Act. It noted that on several occasions the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare had clarified the section, notably in 1970, when it issued a guideline that specifically imposed upon federally funded school systems the responsibility of rectifying students’ linguistic deficiencies to make instruction accessible for such students. The court thus held that the SFUSD was in violation of Section 601. Having made that ruling, it did not address the equal protection complaint. The decision of the Ninth Circuit was reversed.
