Law report,  in common law, published record of a judicial decision that is cited by lawyers and judges for their use as precedent in subsequent cases. The report of a decision ordinarily contains the title of the case, a statement of the facts giving rise to the litigation, and its history in the courts. It then reproduces the opinion of the court and concludes with the court’s judgment—affirming or reversing the judgment of the court below. The report of a modern decision is usually preceded by an analytic summary of the opinion, called a headnote, that states the points decided.
The earliest English court reports were the Year Books produced from the late 13th to the 16th century. From 1537 until 1865 hundreds of series of English reports were published under the names of the reporters themselves. During both periods reporting was a disorganized private enterprise, the reporters being volunteers who made and circulated notes of court proceedings and decisions. Their work was very uneven, and reports were often overlapping and irreconcilable. The modern report form was standardized in the second half of the 18th century, and in 1865 the Law Reports, though still privately published, were established as semiofficial. In England today a law reporter must be a barrister-at-law who signifies that he has followed the hearing and can vouch for the accuracy of the report. Although all decisions of the highest English appellate court, the House of Lords, are reported, decisions of other courts of appeals are reported only if they reveal a new principle or application of law. Comparatively few decisions of lower courts are reported.
The first state and federal reports in the United States were also privately published under the reporter’s name, although the appointment of an official reporter was an early development. Today reported opinions are almost invariably written by the court and are officially published. Late in the 19th century a private publishing concern began unofficial publication of all state and federal reports in the National Reporter System, a practice that continues today.
Until recently, the decisions of most U.S. appellate courts were reported and published unless they dealt with settled propositions of law. Since most trial courts do not write opinions, their findings are not ordinarily reported. However, in jurisdictions such as New York, Pennsylvania, and the federal district courts, where trial courts prepare opinions in a substantial number of cases, many of them are reported and published. The growing volume of legal precedent has created considerable burdens for legal scholarship and libraries. Consequently, many U.S. courts have begun to report their decisions on a much more selective basis.
