Legislative investigative powers,   powers of a lawmaking body to conduct investigations. In most countries this power is exercised primarily to provide a check on the executive branch of government. The U.S. Congress, however, has exercised broad investigative powers, beginning in 1792 with an investigation of a military disaster.
In the 1820s Congressional committees regularly began to summon witnesses to testify about proposed legislation. In 1857 it provided criminal penalties for witnesses who refuse to answer questions, although in Kilbourn v. Thompson (1881), the Supreme Court held that Congress may not inquire “into the private affairs of the citizen.” Nearly four decades later, in Sinclair v. United States (1929), the court, less hostile to congressional inquiries, ruled that a witness could not refuse to answer questions on the grounds that questions related to his private affairs.
In the 1950s, investigations conducted by the House Un-American Activities Committee into alleged Communist activities prompted claims that congressional investigations were violating First Amendment rights by “engaging in exposure for exposure’s sake.” Because these cases invariably included allegations of Fifth Amendment violations, the court disposed of the cases on Fifth Amendment grounds, thus avoiding the First Amendment issue. Several contempt-of-Congress convictions were sustained, however, before the judicial climate changed in the 1960s.
In Gibson v. Florida Legislative Commission (1963) the Supreme Court held that a state legislative investigation of the Miami National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) was a violation of First Amendment rights. Writing for the majority, Justice Arthur Goldberg stated that “groups which themselves are neither engaged in subversive or other illegal or improper activities . . . are to be protected in their rights of free and private association.” Later, in DeGregory v. New Hampshire Attorney General (1966), the court held that the First Amendment prevents the government from “using the power to investigate enforced by the contempt power,” in the absence of any showing of “overriding and compelling state interest that would warrant intrusion into the realm of political and associational privacy protected by the First Amendment.”
