Lethal injection,  method of executing condemned prisoners through the administration of one or more chemicals that induce death.
Lethal injection—now the most widely used method of execution in the United States—was first adopted by the U.S. state of Oklahoma in 1977, because it was considered cheaper and more humane than either electrocution or lethal gas (see gas chamber). Texas was the first state to administer lethal injection, executing Charles Brooks, Jr., on December 2, 1982. By the early 21st century, lethal injection was the sole method of execution in most U.S. states where capital punishment was legal, and it was an option for prisoners in all states. The method is also used by the U.S. federal government and the U.S. military. From 1976 (when the U.S. Supreme Court ended its moratorium on the death penalty) to the second decade of the 21st century, lethal injection was administered in some 1,100 executions.
During a lethal-injection procedure, a prisoner is strapped to a gurney, a padded stretcher normally used for transporting hospital patients. Until late in the first decade of the 21st century, the typical lethal injection consisted of three chemicals injected into a viable part of the prisoner’s body (usually an arm) in the following order: (1) sodium thiopental, a barbiturate anesthetic, which is supposed to induce deep unconsciousness in about 20 seconds, (2) pancuronium bromide, a total muscle relaxant that, given in sufficient dosages, paralyzes all voluntary muscles, thereby causing suffocation, and (3) potassium chloride, which induces irreversible cardiac arrest. If all goes as planned, the entire execution takes about five minutes, with death usually occurring less than two minutes after the final injection. However, botched lethal injections have sometimes required more than two hours to achieve death. In 2009 the attempted execution of Romell Broom in Ohio was halted before any drugs had been injected; after continual probing with hypodermic needles, executioners were unable to find a usable vein. It was the first lethal injection—and only the second execution—in the United States to have been halted in progress.
Substantial evidence suggests that botched lethal injections can inflict on the prisoner unnecessary pain and indignity, and media-witnessed injections have shown a significant pattern of mishaps—particularly in Texas, where lethal injection has been administered most frequently. For example, prisoners can suffer if they do not have suitable veins or if they receive an inadequate dosage of sodium thiopental (in which case they might regain consciousness and sensation while being injected with the two other chemicals). In such a scenario (or through a mix-up of the drug sequence), a prisoner might feel excruciating pain but not be able to show it because he is paralyzed by the pancuronium bromide. A study of state lethal-injection protocols showed that such failures can be linked to vague lethal-injection statutes, uninformed prison personnel and executioners (who typically are not medically trained, because doctors are normally precluded from participating in executions), and skeletal or inaccurate directions that reveal errors and ignorance about the procedure.
In two separate cases in 2004 and 2006, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled on the constitutionality of certain procedural aspects of lethal injection under the U.S. Constitution’s Eighth Amendment prohibition of cruel and unusual punishments. In response to mounting criticism of the three-drug combination by lower courts, in 2007 the Supreme Court agreed to decide whether Kentucky’s administration of its particular three-drug protocol violated the Eighth Amendment. In a 7–2 plurality ruling (Baze v. Rees [2008]), the court upheld the constitutionality of the protocol, determining that it did not pose a “substantial” or “objectively intolerable” risk of “serious harm” to prisoners. The court also concluded that a proposed alternative method of execution, consisting solely of a large dose of sodium thiopental, was unacceptable.
Baze, however, did not quell lethal-injection litigation. As two justices and some legal commentators noted, the plurality’s vague and limited analysis did not definitively resolve the constitutional issue, because many critical questions were not addressed. Indeed, within months of the Baze decision, lawyers once again began to challenge the use of the three-drug protocol on the basis of a range of associated issues.
Following Baze, other developments arguably increased the risks of prisoners suffering during lethal injections. They included the adoption by states of entirely untested single-drug protocols using only sodium thiopental, as well as a shortage of sodium thiopental after production of the drug was halted by its sole U.S. manufacturer, Hospira, Inc., in 2011. The shortage led prison officials to purchase the drug from companies in foreign countries, where a lack of government or industrial controls increased the risk that the drug obtained would be impure, expired, or for other reasons ineffective at rendering prisoners unconscious during execution. Some states replaced sodium thiopental with pentobarbital, which had not previously been used for executions, prompting concerns that prisoners on death row were being subjected to continuous execution experiments.
At the time of the Baze decision, all states that conducted lethal injections incorporated sodium thiopental into their three-drug protocols. Continuous protocol shifting among the states after Baze, however, eventually resulted in four distinct protocols, which differed with respect to the number and kinds of drugs used (some used three drugs and some just one; some used sodium thiopental and some pentobarbital). The division and instability in lethal-injection drug regimens, which had never existed before, suggested to some scholars and policy makers that some states might try to bring other drugs into the lethal-injection mix. Meanwhile, the accumulation of constitutional challenges to the method led some states to abolish the death penalty altogether, as did New Jersey in 2007 and Connecticut in 2012.
Lethal injection has also been used in other countries. For example, there is evidence to suggest that China, which may have executed hundreds of prisoners with lethal injection, has used the same three-drug regimen originally adopted in Oklahoma.
