National Industrial Recovery Act,  U.S. labour legislation (1933) that was one of several measures passed by Congress and supported by Pres. Franklin D. Roosevelt in an effort to help the nation recover from the Great Depression. The National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA) was an unusual experiment in U.S. history, as it suspended antitrust laws and supported an alliance of industries.
Under the NIRA, companies were required to write industrywide codes of fair competition that effectively fixed wages and prices, established production quotas, and placed restrictions on the entry of other companies into the alliances. These codes were a form of industry self-regulation and represented an attempt to regulate and plan the entire economy to promote stable growth and prevent another depression.
Employees were given the right to organize unions and could not be required, as a condition of employment, to join or to refrain from joining a labour organization. Prior to this act, the courts had upheld the right of employers to go to great lengths to prevent the formation of unions. Companies could fire workers for joining unions, force them to sign a pledge not to join a union as a condition of employment, require them to belong to company unions, and spy on them to stop unionism before it got started.
The law created the National Recovery Administration (NRA) to promote compliance. The NRA was chiefly engaged in drawing up industrial codes for companies to adopt and was empowered to make voluntary agreements with companies regarding hours of work, rates of pay, and prices to charge for their products. More than 500 such codes were adopted by various industries, and companies that voluntarily complied could display a Blue Eagle emblem in their facilities, signifying NRA participation.
The NIRA was declared unconstitutional in May 1935 when the U.S. Supreme Court issued its unanimous decision in the case Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States. The Court ruled that the NIRA assigned lawmaking powers to the NRA in violation of the Constitution’s allocation of such powers to Congress. Many of the labour provisions in the NIRA, however, were reenacted in later legislation.
