National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act,  U.S. legislation that required automobile manufacturers to institute safety standards to protect the public from unreasonable risk of accidents occurring as a result of the design, construction, or operation of automobiles. A closely related legislative act, the Highway Safety Act, included nonoperational safety factors, such as highway design, and it empowered a new agency—the National Highway Safety Bureau (NHSB), which was in 1970 succeeded by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)—to mandate uniform safety standards.  Both acts were passed by Congress and signed by Pres. Lyndon Johnson in 1966.
By 1965, automobile accidents had become the leading cause of death of Americans under age 44. Both government and manufacturers had largely ignored the issue, though, until a series of events focused national attention on automobile safety and culminated in litigation and automobile recalls in the years following the establishment of the NHSB and NHTSA. A relatively obscure lawyer named Ralph Nader emphasized the issue of automobile safety in his 1965 book Unsafe at Any Speed, which focused on the alleged defects of the Chevrolet Corvair. Extensive congressional automobile safety hearings the following year, chaired by Senator Robert Kennedy, grabbed the spotlight when they revealed that General Motors, the manufacturer of the Corvair, secretly employed detectives in an unsuccessful attempt to find personal “dirt” on Nader. Those hearings created the necessary popular support to pass a federal law that made automobile manufacturers responsible for the safety of their products.
During the next decade, lifesaving shoulder-lap belts, collapsible steering columns, strengthened door latches, shatterproof windshields, and protective dashboards became the mandated standard. Those new legal requirements led to a record number of product safety lawsuits and many product recalls and, ultimately, to significantly lower traffic death rates. Additional regulation was added in 1975 with a 10-year schedule of improvements to the fuel efficiency standards of new cars. Critics from the automobile industry and many free market advocates decried such requirements as overly bureaucratic edicts that restricted consumer freedom and were far too costly for industry.
A 1985 article by Nader in The New York Times asserted that those regulations had already saved more than 150,000 lives and cited a government report that motorists had also saved “a cumulative $90 billion in transportation costs since 1975 from improvements in fuel economy.” Many consumer advocates believed that those savings had largely resulted from design and engineering changes that Detroit automakers would never have done without pressure from the NHTSA. Even Henry Ford II in 1977 allowed that the first wave of NHTSA standards had advanced car and highway safety, fuel efficiency, and pollution controls. By 1998 the NHTSA estimated that seat belts alone saved at least 10,000 lives a year.
After the heady early years of the agency’s existence, NHTSA regulatory programs slowed considerably, beginning in the late 1970s. Mandates for the second wave of engineering advances such as the air bag were delayed for more than a decade by successive congresses that were increasingly skeptical about regulation and more susceptible to the auto industry’s very extensive lobbying activities. In the middle of the first decade of the 21st century, however, significant increases in fuel prices, coupled with large numbers of fuel-inefficient sport-utility vehicles, prompted a renewal of congressional mandates for increased fuel standards.
