Obscene Publications Act,   in British law, either of two codifications of prohibitions against obscene literature adopted in 1857 and in much revised form in 1959. The earlier act, also called Lord Campbell’s Act (one of several laws named after chief justice and chancellor John Campbell, 1st Baron Campbell), not only outlawed obscene publications but empowered police to search premises on which obscene publications were kept for sale or distribution. It also empowered post office and customs authorities to seize mailings or shipments containing such matter and to prosecute their senders and provided for the destruction of obscene publications.
The 1857 law was under more or less constant attack, for it was widely felt that it often compelled authors to falsify social realities. The law was also criticized for reducing literary standards to the level of what was morally proper for the young. The application of the law in specific cases was also attacked, for judges frequently permitted prosecutions on the basis of isolated passages. Judges also refused to permit evidence of the author’s intent or purpose or of his literary reputation, or to hear the testimony of recognized literary critics. The law was also criticized because the prosecutions were often directed against booksellers, who were indifferent to the fate of the book in question.
In one significant case (Regina v. Hicklin, 1868) the test of literary morality was put as what a father could read aloud in his own home. While there were many successful prosecutions for outright pornography, the law was also invoked against works of literary merit and works with a social or moral purpose.
In 1954 an effort was begun in Parliament to amend Lord Campbell’s Act, resulting in 1959 in a new Obscene Publications Act, whose most important provisions are (1) that a person shall not be convicted if publication was “in the interests of science, literature, art or learning,” (2) that the opinion of experts as to the literary, artistic, scientific, or other merits of the publication may be admitted as evidence, (3) that the work is to be read as a whole, and (4) that authors and book publishers may speak in defense of the work though they have not been summoned in the case. It was amended in 1964 to affect the wholesaler or anyone merely “having an obscene article for publication for gain,” unless he can prove “that he had not examined the article and had no reasonable cause to suspect that it was such that his having it could make him liable to be convicted of an offence.”
The Obscene Publications Act was further broadened in 1977 to include the distribution of pornographic films.
