Ordnungspolizei, (German: “Order Police”)  uniformed police agencies of the Third Reich. They became an integral part of the SS and police bureaucracy in Nazi Germany and were key participants in the conduct of mass murder and atrocities in the occupied areas under German control during World War II.
Organizations falling under the umbrella of the Ordnungspolizei included the Schutzpolizei (Protection Police), the gendarmerie, and the Gemeindepolizei (Rural Community Police). During the Weimar era, individual German states exercised control over the police forces within their borders. After Adolf Hitler became chancellor on January 30, 1933, however, he, Hermann Göring, Wilhelm Frick, and Heinrich Himmler began measures to centralize control of all German police forces. Himmler had assumed control of the SS in 1929 and after 1933 began to consolidate his control over the political police in the German states, a process that culminated in his appointment by Hitler as Reichsführer SS and Chief of the German Police in June 1936. In that position, Himmler was in charge of the SS; the Sicherheitspolizei (Security Police), which included the criminal police and the Gestapo; and the Ordnungspolizei.
During the Third Reich, the Ordnungspolizei routinely cooperated with the criminal police and the Gestapo at the local level in monitoring and controlling social and political behaviour and enforcing Nazi racial policies. Additionally, Ordnungspolizei formations participated in the annexation of Austria and the occupation of the Sudetenland in 1938. The Ordnungspolizei numbered almost 100,000 by 1939. Upon the invasion of Poland in September of that year, Himmler ordered the creation of police battalions for security operations in the occupied territories. Ultimately, 21 police battalions of approximately 500 men each participated in the campaign in Poland, conducting a wide variety of duties ranging from traditional security and policing functions to the participation in mass executions individually or as part of the Einsatzgruppen (“deployment groups”). The use of the police battalions in Poland set the precedent for the use of Ordnungspolizei forces in the invasion and pacification of Yugoslavia and invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, with more than 100 police battalions participating.
Throughout the occupied eastern territories, Ordnungspolizei units—ranging from small gendarmerie detachments of fewer than 10 men to 500-man police battalions—became involved in the full range of Nazi efforts to subjugate, exploit, and annihilate subject populations. Ordnungspolizei units confiscated harvests, forced local populations into slave labour in the Reich, escorted trains bound for the death camps, participated in combat operations, brutally suppressed suspected partisan activity, and murdered an estimated one million people, mostly Jews in the east. The Ordnungspolizei played a critical role in the Final Solution and in the war against the racial and political enemies of the Third Reich.
