Oslo and Utøya attacks of 2011, also called July 22 attacks,  terrorist attacks on Oslo and the island of Utøya in Norway on July 22, 2011, in which 77 people were killed—the deadliest incident on Norwegian soil since World War II.
At 3:26 pm an explosion rocked downtown Oslo, shattering windows and damaging buildings. The blast was centred a short distance from a building complex that housed numerous government offices, including those of Norwegian Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg. Stoltenberg was unharmed in the explosion. Eight people were killed and dozens were injured. Had the bombing occurred at another time of the year, the casualty list likely would have been much longer; because many Norwegians take their vacations at the end of July, this unofficial “common holiday” meant that many public offices in the area of the blast were empty on the afternoon of the attack.
Police officials determined that the explosion had been caused by a car bomb, and they drew parallels to the Oklahoma City bombing of 1995. The Norwegian military established a cordon around downtown Oslo. Fearing the detonation of additional devices, officials warned residents to remain in their homes. As the rescue and recovery effort continued in Oslo, police received reports of gunshots on the resort island of Utøya, some 25 miles (40 km) to the northwest.
About 5:00 pm, roughly an hour and a half after the bomb detonated in Oslo, a man dressed as a police officer took a ferry from the mainland to the island of Utøya. Stating that he was performing a security check in connection with the bombing, he gained access to a youth camp hosted by the Norwegian Labour Party. At 5:26 pm police began to receive reports of gunfire on the island. Armed with an automatic rifle and a pistol, the gunman spent the next hour methodically targeting the roughly 600 young people at the camp. Many of the campers were teenagers—one survivor was just 10 years old—and the gunman used his police disguise to lure some of his victims closer with the promise of rescue.
A shortage of transport helicopters delayed the law enforcement response. By the time police arrived on the island at 6:25 pm, at least 68 people had been killed. Police apprehended the suspected gunman, Anders Behring Breivik, minutes later without incident. The combined death toll of the bombing and shooting approached 80, making the attacks the deadliest in the country since World War II.
An independent inquest into the attacks, completed in August 2012, harshly criticized the actions of Norwegian law enforcement and intelligence agencies. The July 22 Commission, which took its name from the date of the attacks, ruled that police could have prevented the incident or disrupted it as it was occurring. The findings of the report led to the resignation of numerous officials, including Norway’s national police chief.
Breivik, the 32-year-old Norwegian accused of executing the two attacks, had no previous criminal record. He was active on neo-Nazi and anti-Islamic Web sites; however, he had not demonstrated a propensity for violent rhetoric. After his arrest a 1,500-page manifesto attributed to “Andrew Berwick,” an Anglicization of Breivik’s name, was found online. Titled 2083: A European Declaration of Independence, the tract borrowed heavily from the antitechnology manifesto issued by Ted Kaczynski (the so-called Unabomber, who conducted a 17-year bombing campaign in the United States), and it was filled with anti-Islamic language and imagery that evoked the Crusades and the Templar religious military order. It also detailed the day-to-day preparations that Breivik had made prior to the attacks. He spent several years amassing the funds to finance what he called his “martyrdom operation,” and he leased a secluded farmhouse in eastern Norway, which made his purchase of several tons of fertilizer in the weeks prior to the blast look less suspicious. Ammonium nitrate fertilizer can be combined with fuel oil to create a powerful improvised explosive device.
Stating that the Labour Party had failed to prevent the encroachment of “cultural Marxism” (a pejorative term for multiculturalism) and a “Muslim takeover,” Breivik sought to precipitate an armed revolt. His attack on the Labour Party youth camp was designed to limit the party’s ability to recruit in the future, and he intended to target former Labour prime minister Gro Harlem Brundtland, who delivered a speech at Utøya just hours before the massacre.
Although Breivik admitted to both the bombing in Oslo and the shootings at Utøya, he pleaded not guilty to the criminal charges that were filed against him. In November 2011 court-appointed psychiatrists concluded that Breivik suffered from paranoid schizophrenia. A second court-ordered examination determined that Breivik was sane at the time of the attacks, and the trial was allowed to proceed, with the ultimate decision on his sanity left to the trial judges. In August 2012 the court ruled that Breivik was sane at the time of the attacks, and he received the maximum sentence of 21 years in prison. If, at the end of that time, Breivik were to continue to constitute a danger to society, additional five-year terms could be added.
