Parliamentary procedure, also called rules of order,  the generally accepted rules, precedents, and practices commonly employed in the governance of deliberative assemblies. Such rules are intended to maintain decorum, to ascertain the will of the majority, to preserve the rights of the minority, and to facilitate the orderly transaction of the business of an assembly.
Rules of order originated in the early British Parliaments. In the 1560s Sir Thomas Smith wrote an early formal statement of procedures in the House of Commons, which was published in 1583. Lex Parliamentaria (1689; “Parliamentary Law”) was a pocket manual for members of Parliament and included many precedents that are now familiar. Drawing from the Journal of the House of Commons, it included points such as the following:
Depending heavily on procedures developed in the British Parliament, colonists in America governed under written charters and grants, an experience that influenced the framing of state constitutions and the Constitution of the United States (1787). The first work to interpret and define parliamentary principles for the new American government was A Manual of Parliamentary Practice (1801), written by Thomas Jefferson, the third president of the United States.
The modern system of general parliamentary law and practice is, in many respects, at wide variance with the current systems of procedure of both the British Parliament and the U.S. Congress. Rules designed for legislatures that use a bicameral system with paid memberships, that meet in continuous session, that require a majority for a quorum, and that delegate their duties largely to committees address special legislative requirements. They are, as a whole, unsuited to the needs of an ordinary assembly.
An early attempt in the United States to serve “assemblies of every description…especially…those not legislative in their character” was the Manual of Parliamentary Practice (1845), by Luther S. Cushing (1803–56), a jurist and clerk of the Massachusetts House of Representatives. Robert’s Rules of Order (1876), codified by U.S. Army officer General Henry M. Robert (1837–1923), which has gone through various editions and reprintings and continues to be published in periodic editions, has had a lasting impact on the development of parliamentary procedure.
According to Robert’s Rules, a “deliberative assembly,” to which parliamentary law is ordinarily applied, has the following characteristics: it is an independent or autonomous group convened to determine actions of the group in free discussion; its size is sufficiently large that formal proceedings are necessary; its members are free to act, and each member’s vote has equal weight; failure to agree “does not constitute withdrawal from the body”; and members who are present act for the entire membership “subject only to such limitations as may be established by the body’s governing rules.”
The will of such a deliberative assembly is expressed by its action on proposals submitted for consideration in the form of motions or resolutions offered by members. In order to make a motion, a member ordinarily must rise and address the chair and secure recognition. If the motion is considered in order and is seconded by another member, it is “stated” by the presiding officer and then is subject to the action of the assembly.
Motions may be classified as main motions, which introduce a proposition, or as secondary motions, which are designed to affect the main motion or its consideration. A main motion is in order only when there is no other business before an assembly. It yields in precedence to all other questions.
Secondary motions may be subdivided into (1) subsidiary, (2) incidental, and (3) privileged. Subsidiary motions are applicable to other motions for the purpose of modifying the main question or affecting its consideration and disposition. The subsidiary motion to lay on the table is, in American usage, a motion to suspend consideration of the question until such time as the assembly may determine to take it from the table for further consideration. The motion is not debatable and may not be amended, postponed, committed, divided, or reconsidered. The purpose of the motion for the previous question is to close debate peremptorily and bring the assembly to an immediate vote on the pending question. It precludes both debate and amendment and requires a two-thirds vote for passage under general parliamentary procedure. The motions to commit, recommit, and refer are practically equivalent.
Motions to amend, which call for changes in the text or terms of the proposition, require a second and must be reduced to writing if requested by the chair. There is no limit to the number of amendments that may be proposed, and new amendments may be offered as rapidly as the pending amendment is disposed of. Motions to amend generally are not entertained unless germane or relevant to the main question.
Incidental motions include questions arising incidentally in the consideration of other questions and decided before disposition of the one to which they are incident. They comprise motions to suspend the rules, withdraw motions, read papers, raise the question of consideration, raise questions of order and appeal, reconsider, take up out of order, determine the method of procedure, divide pending questions, and raise questions relating to nominations. Points of order may be made while another has the floor and when the question concerns the use of unparliamentary language. The question must be raised at the time the proceeding giving rise to the objection occurs.
Privileged motions relate to matters of such urgent importance that they temporarily supersede pending business. They take precedence over all other motions and may be offered while other questions are pending. In this class of motions are the motions to fix the time at which to adjourn, to adjourn, to take a recess, and to raise questions of privilege, all of which are undebatable.
Motions to take from the table, to discharge a committee, to accept the report of a committee, to rescind, to repeal, to annul, to expunge, and to permit a member to resume the floor after having been called to order for words spoken in debate are unclassified.
To debate a question, a member must be recognized by the presiding officer. The presiding officer first recognizes the mover of a proposition or the member of a committee presenting a report and endeavours to alternate recognitions between those favouring and those opposing a question. Under general parliamentary procedure, a member securing the floor may speak without limit, though it is customary to adopt a rule limiting debate to a specified number of minutes. In debate a member must confine remarks to the question under consideration, must avoid personalities, and must not arraign motives. A presiding officer who is a member of the assembly has the right to debate and to participate in the proceedings but generally calls another to the chair before taking the floor and does not resume it again until the pending question has been decided.
Voting may be by ballot, by division (i.e., a rising, or standing, vote), by viva voce (a voice vote), by show of hands, by tellers who may take the count in various ways, and by yeas and nays (the clerk calling the roll and recording each vote). If there is doubt as to the result of a voice vote, any member may request that a formal vote be taken. Only members in attendance may vote, unless provision has been made for proxy votes. A tie vote defeats an affirmative motion. The presiding officer, if a member of the assembly, may vote to break a tie or to make one.
The committee of the whole consists of the entire assembly acting as a general committee. It affords greater freedom of consideration, but in bodies other than legislative assemblies it is rarely used.
