Pierce v. Society of Sisters of the Holy Names of Jesus and Mary,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 1, 1925, ruled (9–0) that an Oregon law requiring children to attend public schools was unconstitutional. In its decision, the court upheld the right of parents to make educational decisions on behalf of their children while acknowledging the states’ right to regulate education, even in nonpublic schools.
In 1922 Oregon amended its compulsory attendance statute to require that children between 8 and 16 years old be sent to public schools in the districts where they lived. Two organizations operating private schools in Oregon, the Society of Sisters of the Holy Names of Jesus and Mary and the Hill Military Academy, challenged the constitutionality of the statute under the Fourteenth Amendment, alleging that it deprived them of property without due process of law; Walter M. Pierce, the governor of Oregon, was named as a respondent. A federal district court subsequently entered judgment for the schools, enjoining the state from enforcing the statute and finding that “the right to conduct schools was property” and that the statute not only had taken the schools’ property without due process but had also deprived parents of the right to “direct the education of children by selecting reputable teachers and places.”
On March 16–17, 1925, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. It held that the two schools, as Oregon corporations and property owners within the state, were entitled to “protection against arbitrary, unreasonable and unlawful interference with their patrons and the consequent destruction of their business and property.” Thus, the court ruled that the statute violated the due process clause. Furthermore, the court ruled that the Oregon statute “unreasonably interfere[d] with the liberty of parents and guardians to direct the upbringing and education of children.” According to the court, the state could not force schoolchildren to “accept instruction from public teachers only.” However, the court did acknowledge that states have wide-ranging rights in regard to education:
Thus, the court invalidated only state action that prevents parents from making an educational choice for their children; the court did not prohibit states from exercising regulatory control over education, including nonpublic schools. Finding that the Oregon statute was unconstitutional, the Supreme Court upheld the decision of the federal district court.
