Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey,  legal case, decided by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1992, that redefined several provisions regarding abortion rights as established in Roe v. Wade (1973).
In 1988 and 1989 the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, led by Governor Robert Casey, enacted new abortion statutes that required that a woman seeking an abortion give her informed consent, that a minor seeking an abortion obtain parental consent (the provision included a judicial waiver option), that a married woman notify her husband of her intended abortion, and, finally, that clinics provide certain information to a woman seeking an abortion and wait 24 hours before performing the abortion. Before any of these laws could take effect, Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania brought suit against the governor, protesting the constitutionality of the statutes.
In a plurality opinion, the Supreme Court affirmed the “essential holding” (i.e., the basic principle) of Roe v. Wade, that women have a right to obtain an abortion prior to fetal viability, but rejected Roe’s trimester-based framework for allowing states to curb the availability of abortion in favour of a more flexible medical definition of viability. The decision restated that the source of the privacy right that undergirds women’s right to choose abortion derives from the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, placing individual decisions about abortion, family planning, marriage, and education within “a realm of personal liberty which the government may not enter.” The judgment also revised the test that courts use to scrutinize laws relating to abortion, moving to an “undue burden” standard: a law is invalid if its “purpose or effect is to place substantial obstacles in the path of a woman seeking an abortion before the fetus attains viability.” Ultimately, the court upheld all the provisions of the Pennsylvania statute under attack except for the requirement of spousal notification.
Many suits brought after Planned Parenthood v. Casey centred on the meaning of “undue burden.” In Whole Woman’s Health v. Hellerstedt (2016), the Supreme Court invoked the undue burden standard to strike down two provisions of a Texas state law that had required abortion doctors to have admitting privileges at a nearby hospital and abortion clinics to meet the standards of ambulatory surgical centres. Each of the two provisions, the court held, “places a substantial obstacle in the path of women seeking a previability abortion, each constitutes an undue burden on abortion access,…and each violates the Federal Constitution.”
