Richmond Bread Riot, also called Richmond Women’s Bread Riot,  riot in Richmond, Virginia, on April 2, 1863, that was spawned by food deprivation during the American Civil War. The Richmond Bread Riot was the largest civil disturbance in the Confederacy during the war.
During the Civil War, the population of Richmond, the capital of the Confederacy, had more than tripled to over 100,000 people as thousands of civilians and Confederate soldiers sought refuge there. The Union blockade of Confederate ports prevented food from being imported from other countries, and much of the food that might have fed the growing civilian population was being used to feed the Confederate troops. Moreover, less food was being grown, both because the men were at war and because fighting had destroyed farmlands. As food became scarcer, prices for what was available skyrocketed to 10 times their prewar values.
The situation in Richmond in the spring of 1863 was the result of an unusual sequence of bad luck. A massive snowstorm struck the city in March, and the melting snow turned roads into muddy paths, which made it difficult to transport what little food was being grown on nearby farms into town. In addition, the city’s proximity to the war and the continued influx of wounded soldiers, civil servants, and government staff placed further stress on an already overburdened system. Confederate Pres. Jefferson Davis’s call for a day of fasting and prayer on March 27 angered many and increased the stress on already strained nerves.
On April 1 a group of women made up of Confederate ordnance workers and the wives of local iron workers met at the Belvidere Hill Baptist Church in Richmond to discuss what to do about the severe food shortage. They decided to march on Gov. John Letcher’s office and demand that he do something about the problem.
Led by Mary Jackson, a mother of four, and Minerva Meredith, whom Varina Davis (the wife of President Davis) described as “tall, daring, Amazonian-looking,” the crowd of more than 100 women armed with axes, knives, and other weapons took their grievances to Letcher on April 2. Letcher listened, but his words failed to pacify the crowd, and the women began marching toward government food storehouses, crying, “Bread! Bread!” and “Bread or blood!” As the group marched, they were joined by additional people brandishing weapons. The original group swelled to hundreds, perhaps thousands, of rioters. The governor called out the public guard, but its forces could not stop the crowd, which broke into government storehouses and nearby businesses, taking whatever they could get their hands on.
The bread riot was eventually quelled when Jefferson Davis climbed atop a wagon and threatened to have Confederate troops—which had been called out to support the public guard—open fire on the crowd. He pulled out his watch and gave the rioters five minutes to disperse and return home. At first, it appeared as though the mob would defy the order, but at the last minute, they obeyed and began to drift homeward. More than 60 rioters, including Jackson, were arrested for theft and rioting.
There were no further riots in Richmond during the Civil War, because the government placed cannons at strategic locations in and around the city and increased efforts to distribute food to the poor. City leaders went to great lengths to keep the fact of the riot out of the news, fearing the impact the story would have on troop morale. However, news leaked out via Union prisoners of war in Richmond, and the riot was front-page news in The New York Times on April 8.
