School Committee of the Town of Burlington v. Massachusetts Department of Education,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on April 29, 1985, ruled (9–0) that, under the Education for All Handicapped Children Act (EAHCA; now the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act [IDEA]), parents could be reimbursed for unilaterally placing their child in a private school after they disagreed with the individualized education program (IEP) that public school officials had designed.
The case involved the EAHCA, which provided procedural safeguards to ensure that qualified students with disabilities received a free appropriate public education in the least-restrictive environment. Among those procedures were the parents’ right to participate in the creation of IEPs for their children and to challenge proposed IEPs if they disagreed with any of their content. In addition, the EAHCA gave courts the authority to grant whatever relief they determined was appropriate.
While in the first grade, Michael Panico was found to be handicapped as defined by the EAHCA. Public school officials in Burlington, Massachusetts, subsequently created an IEP for him. However, after two years it became clear that the school he was attending “was not equipped to handle his needs,” and a new IEP was created, which involved his moving to another school for the 1979–80 academic year. His parents, however, did not agree with the proposed IEP and sought review consistent with the EAHCA’s provisions. In the meantime, Panico’s parents, at their own expense, enrolled him in a private special-education school that was state approved. During that time the Bureau of Special Education Appeals (BSEA), part of Massachusetts’s department of education, held a series of hearings, and in 1980 it decided that the private school was the most-appropriate placement for the child. Consequently, the BSEA directed officials in Burlington to pay the child’s tuition at the school and to reimburse his parents for the expenses that they had already incurred. When town officials ignored the BSEA’s order, state officials threatened to freeze all of their special-education funds unless they complied with the directive. Eventually, town officials agreed to pay for the current school year and to continue to pay until the matter had been resolved in the courts. However, it refused to reimburse for 1979–80, because the revised IEP was still being assessed at that time.
Burlington officials subsequently sought a review of the BSEA’s order. A federal district court ultimately overturned the bureau’s decision and ordered the Panicos to reimburse the town for the payments it had already made. The First Circuit Court of Appeals later held that the parents’ reliance on the BSEA order allowed them to be reimbursed for the tuition that they had paid for their son’s education.
On March 26, 1985, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. It explored whether the language of the EAHCA, which granted the judiciary the authority to award the relief that judges deemed appropriate, included reimbursement for tuition at private schools if they thought that that would be a proper placement. Interpreting the EAHCA as authorizing such reimbursement and finding that “relief” was not specified further, the justices noted that the courts had broad discretionary power. Although the act was focused primarily on providing education for students with disabilities, the court pointed out that the EAHCA permitted placements in private schools at public expense if necessary. Thus, the court determined that if a private school can be considered a proper placement, then, in order for relief to be appropriate, school officials would have to create IEPs to permit children to attend the private schools and reimburse their parents retroactively. Town officials claimed that reimbursement should have been seen as “damages,” but the court disagreed. Rather, it indicated that reimbursing parents was only paying what the town would, or should, have spent in the first place had officials initially developed a proper IEP.
Officials in Burlington also argued that the parents waived their right to be reimbursed because they chose to move their son to a private school unilaterally. In rejecting the town’s position, the court observed that the parents had not changed their son’s placement, because before the parents moved him to the private school, state educational officials and they had agreed that he should attend a new school. As a result, the court considered the private school to be his placement during the IEP appeals proceedings.
Also examined was the BSEA’s decision that called for the child to be placed in the private school. To that end, the court recognized that the EAHCA allowed changes of placements if officials in state or local educational agencies agreed with such modifications. Insofar as it considered the BSEA’s order to be an agreement with regard to the child’s placement, the court was satisfied that the parents had not violated the EAHCA. The court thus concluded that the parents should be reimbursed because the private school was the child’s appropriate placement. The decision of the First Circuit was affirmed.
