School Board of Nassau County v. Arline,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on March 3, 1987, ruled (7–2) that an individual with the contagious disease tuberculosis could be considered handicapped under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
The case centred on Gene Arline, an elementary school teacher in Nassau county, Florida, who had recurring lapses of tuberculosis. After a third bout with the disease, school board officials terminated her employment in 1979. Arline filed suit, claiming that because her dismissal constituted discrimination on the basis of a “handicap,” it was prohibited under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, which provided:
The act further defined a handicapped individual as someone with “a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person’s major life activities.” Major life activities were understood to include walking, speaking, and breathing.
A federal district court in Florida ruled that Arline did not have a disability as defined by Section 504, and thus it entered a judgment in favour of the school board. However, the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals reversed, ruling that individuals with contagious diseases are covered by Section 504.
On December 3, 1986, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. In its decision the court found that Arline’s tuberculosis resulted in a physical impairment and, because she had been hospitalized for the illness, at least one major life activity had been limited. Therefore, Arline was handicapped as defined by Section 504. The court also rejected the school board’s argument that her impairment was irrelevant. According to the board, she was dismissed because her tuberculosis was a health concern to others, not because her physical capabilities were diminished. The court, however, held that it would be wrong to permit an employer to distinguish “between the effects of a disease on others and the effects of a disease on a patient and use that distinction to justify discriminatory treatment.”
The court next addressed the issue of whether Arline was “otherwise qualified” to do her job in light of the possible health and safety risks posed by her tuberculosis. To make such a determination, the court provided guidelines taken from an amicus curiae brief filed by the American Medical Association. Those guidelines required the consideration of
Finding that the lower courts had not made findings of fact on those issues nor had they engaged in an analysis related to each factor, the Supreme Court remanded the case for further consideration. The district court subsequently ruled that Arline was “otherwise qualified.” Thus, it ordered the school board to reinstate her or pay her salary from the 1988–89 school year to her retirement.
