Selective Service Acts,  U.S. federal laws that instituted conscription, or compulsory military service.
Conscription was first implemented in the United States during the American Civil War (1861–65). However, it was common for wealthy men to hire substitutes to fulfill their service obligation. In addition to employing conscription, the Union sought troops by offering cash rewards to enlistees through the bounty system. Both substitution and enticed enlistment led to widespread abuse, and “bounty jumpers” were a persistent drain on Northern manpower and finances. Support for conscription was far from universal in the North, and public resistance culminated in the Draft Riot of 1863, a racially charged four-day melee in which white rioters attacked federal buildings and African American workers in the streets of New York City. The draft was suspended with the end of the war in 1865, and it would not return for more than half a century.
As the United States had a peacetime army of just over 100,000 men, the reinstitution of conscription was an unsurprising result of U.S. entry into World War I in April 1917. The Selective Service Act, signed by Pres. Woodrow Wilson on May 18, 1917, created the Selective Service System, which managed the induction of some 2.8 million men into the armed forces over the next two years and abolished the much maligned bounty system. Initially targeting male citizens age 21 to 30, the draft was eventually expanded to include all able-bodied men age 18 to 45. American armed forces demobilized after the armistice of November 1918, and the number of men under arms diminished to prewar levels.
As World War II raged in Europe and Asia, Congress narrowly passed the Selective Training and Service Act, instituting the first peacetime draft in U.S. history. Pres. Franklin Delano Roosevelt signed the bill into law on September 16, 1940, and all males of ages 21 to 36 were required to register with the resurrected Selective Service System—although, for the first time, provisions were officially made for conscientious objectors. Some 45 million men registered and more than 10 million were inducted through the Selective Service System between November 1940 and October 1946.
The Selective Training and Service Act expired in March 1947, but Pres. Harry S. Truman, asserting that the peacetime army could not attract the numbers that it needed to uphold its global commitments, pushed for an extension of the draft. Congress obliged, and the Selective Service Act was reenacted in June 1948. A flood of volunteers prompted the Selective Service System to unofficially suspend the act with a “draft holiday” in early 1949. The act was scheduled to expire in June 1950, but the outbreak of the Korean War that month prompted Congress to extend it for another year. The Selective Service Act was reauthorized in 1951 as the Universal Military Training and Service Act, and all males age 18 to 26 were required to register for the draft. More than 1.5 million men were inducted into the armed services during the Korean War, and an additional 1.5 million were inducted between 1954 and 1961.
As the U.S. role in the Vietnam War expanded, the Selective Service System fell under scrutiny. A series of deferments, based on family status or academic standing, had been introduced over the previous decade. The merits of a given deferment request were weighed by an inductee’s local Selective Service board in a process that was highly subjective. As a result of these inconsistencies, as well as growing antiwar sentiment, in 1966 Pres. Lyndon B. Johnson commissioned a study to improve the Selective Service System. The resulting legislation, the Military Selective Service Act of 1967, rationalized the deferment system, but it did little to stifle public resistance to the draft. Increasingly, opponents of the war had taken to destroying their Selective Service registration certificates (draft cards) as statements of public protest. While protestors asserted that these acts amounted to symbolic expression protected by the First Amendment, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in United States v. O’Brien (1968) that the destruction of a draft card inhibited the furtherance of an important government objective that was unrelated to the stifling of unpopular speech. The decision severely curtailed the burning of draft cards as a form of protest, but the narrow scope of the ruling actually created a precedent that served to protect other forms of symbolic speech, such as flag burning (affirmed in the 1989 Supreme Court ruling Texas v. Johnson).
Johnson chose not to run for reelection in 1968, and the following year his successor, Pres. Richard M. Nixon, signed an amendment to the Military Selective Service Act that returned selection by lottery to the draft process for the first time since World War II. While this was portrayed as more equitable than the existing system of conscription by age (in which the oldest members of a given eligibility pool were selected first), public opinion had already soured on the draft. Between 1965 and 1973, some 1.7 million were inducted into the armed forces through the Selective Service System. During that same period, an estimated 500,000 men “dodged” the draft through methods both elaborate (fleeing the country) and mundane (simply refusing to respond to conscription notices). Ultimately, 200,000 men were charged with draft evasion, and some 8,000 were convicted. On January 27, 1973, the Department of Defense announced that it was suspending the draft, and the Military Selective Service Act expired that June.
On January 21, 1977, as one of his first actions upon assuming office, Pres. Jimmy Carter issued a blanket pardon for all those who had evaded the draft during the Vietnam War (the amnesty applied only to those civilians who had refused induction and not to the thousands of service members who had deserted or gone absent without leave). In response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, Carter reactivated the Military Selective Service Act by executive order on July 2, 1980. While it did not mandate military service, it did require that males age 18 to 26 register with the Selective Service System.
During the 1980 presidential campaign, Ronald Reagan criticized the reintroduction of registration and promised that, if elected, he would abolish the Selective Service System. While president, however, Reagan made no move to terminate the program. The Solomon Amendment (proposed by Rep. Gerald Solomon in 1982) compelled young men to comply with the Military Selective Service Act by making registration a prerequisite for federal student aid eligibility. The Thurmond Amendment (proposed by Sen. Strom Thurmond in 1985) did the same for federal jobs, and many states enacted laws that made registration a condition for obtaining or renewing a state driver’s license.
The Military Selective Service Act remains in effect, and noncompliance with it carries the risk of prosecution. However, there has not been an induction through the Selective Service System since June 1973. While there have been occasional efforts to reintroduce the draft—most notably in the period following the September 11 attacks—the U.S. military in the 21st century is an all-volunteer body.
