Shelton v. Tucker,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on December 12, 1960, ruled (5–4) that an Arkansas statute which required all public school educators to disclose every organization to which they were affiliated over a five-year period was unconstitutional. The court held that the broad requirements of the statute went beyond the scope of legitimate and substantial inquiries of teacher fitness and competency.
In 1958 the Arkansas legislature passed Act 10, a statute that required teachers and administrators at state-supported schools and colleges to annually file affidavits that listed every organization to which they belonged or had made regular contributions within the preceding five years. Failure to provide the affidavit would result in their employment contract not being renewed; at the time, educators in Arkansas were hired on a year-to-year basis. The statute was widely believed to be an effort by the state to determine if a teacher was affiliated with the NAACP.
Initially, plaintiffs filed two separate actions challenging the statute. One case went through the federal courts, while the other worked its way through state courts in Arkansas. In the federal case, B.T. Shelton, who had taught in the Little Rock public school system for 25 years, refused to file an affidavit, and, as a result, the board chose not to renew his employment contract. In 1959 he filed suit—Everett Tucker, Jr., president of Little Rock’s school board, was named as a respondent—and at trial the evidence demonstrated that Shelton was a member of the NAACP but not of any subversive organization. The lower federal courts upheld the statute and declared it constitutional.
Similarly, at the state court level, Max Carr, an associate professor at the University of Arkansas, and Ernest T. Gephardt, a public school teacher in Little Rock, also failed to comply with the statute, and their contracts were not renewed. At trial Carr and Gephardt also indicated that they did not have any affiliations with subversive organizations. The case eventually reached the Arkansas Supreme Court, which upheld the statute and declared it constitutional.
As the plaintiffs in both cases pursued further appeals, the litigation was eventually brought to the attention of the U.S. Supreme Court, which consolidated them as one case, and on November 7, 1960, Shelton v. Tucker was argued before the court. A month later it declared that when the government has a legitimate and substantial interest, it may act to achieve those purposes. However, in achieving those purposes, the Supreme Court explained that the government cannot infringe on fundamental individual rights with the exercise of broad authority when narrowly tailored provisions could achieve their goals. According to the justices, a fundamental problem with the Arkansas statute was that its scope was limitless. The court found that the statute was too broad, that it constrained liberties, and that it could be more narrowly written so as to not restrict more freedoms than necessary. The court noted that many of the organizational affiliations that educators might report would have no connection to matters related to teacher fitness and competence. Moreover, the court indicated that public disclosure of the reported affiliations might lead to pressures from groups outside the public schools to discharge a teacher if the teacher were affiliated with an unpopular organization. Taking these reasons as a whole into consideration, the court struck down the Arkansas statute, ruling that it violated the Fourteenth Amendment’s due process clause, which protected an individual’s rights to “personal, associational, and academic liberty.”
