South Africa Act,  act of 1909 that unified the British colonies of the Cape Colony, Natal, Transvaal, and Orange River (see Orange Free State) and thereby established the Union of South Africa. It was the work of white delegates (who represented white electorates, less than one-fifth of the population of the new country) to a national convention—meeting variously at Durban, Cape Town, and Bloemfontein—in 1908–09. Indigenous Black African, Coloured (a person of mixed European and African or Asian ancestry), and Asian representatives were excluded from the process.
The South Africa Act and resulting constitution were largely the work of John X. Merriman, prime minister of the Cape Colony, and Jan Smuts, then colonial secretary of the Transvaal, the latter noting:
By “we,” Smuts meant whites alone. After the constitutions of Canada, Australia, and the United States had been consulted, a decision was made against a federation and in favour of a unitary state. Most power was to be concentrated in the all-white union bicameral Parliament, effectively disenfranchising the nonwhite majority. The Senate was to have 40 members: eight from each colony and eight additional members, including four to represent “Native” (Black African) interests, that would be appointed by the British governor. The House of Assembly would begin with 121 single-member seats but was to expand to 150 as the white population increased; initially the Cape Colony received 51 seats, the Transvaal 36, and Natal and the Orange River Colony 17 each. Suffrage in the new union was limited to whites, except in the Cape Colony, where Black African and Coloured persons of sufficient wealth would be permitted to vote—rights that would be removed in 1936 and 1956, respectively. Constitutional amendments were to be permitted with a simple majority of votes, except in the case of the removal of the vote of the nonwhite Cape voters or interference with the equal rights of whites of either English or Dutch descent; these instances would require a two-thirds majority. One of the political issues that vexed the convention delegates was that of the capital of the new union. A compromise was reached, with Pretoria becoming the administrative capital, Cape Town the legislative, and Bloemfontein the judicial.
The South Africa Act was approved by the four colonial parliaments in June 1909 and passed into law by the British Parliament by September 1909. The new union was inaugurated on May 31, 1910, with Louis Botha as the first prime minister. The discriminatory nature of the act was evident to many, but it was argued that the political and economic advantages of union would outweigh the disadvantages. The act was unequivocally condemned by Black South Africans, whose representatives met in a parallel, though unofficial, Native Convention. In 1912 this became the founding organization of the South African Native National Congress, which was renamed the African National Congress in 1923.
