Soviet law, also called socialist law,  law developed in Russia after the communist seizure of power in 1917 and imposed throughout the Soviet Union in the 1920s. After World War II, the Soviet legal model also was imposed on Soviet-dominated regimes in eastern and central Europe. Later, ruling communist parties in China, Cuba, North Korea, and Vietnam adopted variations of Soviet law. Soviet law, which changed radically during its more than 70 years of development in the Soviet Union, revived certain features of earlier tsarist law, shared key elements with the law of other dictatorships, and introduced public ownership of the means of production and subordination of the legal system to the Soviet Communist Party.
Many basic features of Soviet law came into effect very soon after the Russian Revolution of 1917. The regime immediately placed itself above the law and gave the head of the Communist Party powers similar to those enjoyed for centuries by the tsars. The new government replaced elected officials with its own leaders; it decreed that suspected enemies of the revolution should be eliminated without trials; it expropriated land, banks, insurance companies, and large factories; and it promulgated its ideology and suppressed opposing speech. In important ways, however, the legal system of the immediate postrevolutionary period differed from Soviet law as it developed later. The ideology imposed by the party was hostile to law, proclaiming, on the authority of Karl Marx, that the state and all its institutions (including legal ones) would “wither away” after the communist revolution. Accordingly, the new regime destroyed the prerevolutionary legal structure of the market economy, including property, contract, and business law. In 1921 Soviet communist leader Vladimir Lenin introduced the New Economic Policy, which restored the legal basis necessary for the economy to function. He ordered that a civil code based upon western European civil law be drafted and enacted. The code allowed the formation of business entities and protected basic contract and property rights. Other legislation established a court system to enforce these rights and to try criminal cases.
The New Economic Policy was ended after Joseph Stalin became leader of the Soviet Union and asserted total central control over the economy. The Soviet government nationalized the remaining private businesses and forced peasants onto party-controlled collective farms (kolkhozy). Soviet law developed a new role as an instrument for the implementation of party policy and national economic planning. Although political repression had begun immediately after the revolution and had continued afterward, it returned on an extensive scale in the 1930s, when large numbers of suspected political opponents and peasants who resisted forced grain requisition and farm collectivization were executed or sent to forced-labour camps. Some of this repression was accomplished through the regular courts, but much of it occurred through the state security apparatus, which had the authority to imprison anyone without a trial. In high-profile, carefully scripted purge trials, perceived political opponents of the government were convicted of heinous offenses that they had not committed. With the aid of his chief legal adviser, Andrey Vyshinsky, Stalin abandoned traditional Marxist ideology and announced that a strong Soviet state and legal system were necessary. In 1936 he promulgated a new constitution and proclaimed a new ideology, portraying Soviet law as a just system that would bring about an orderly transformation of society to a communist utopia. Legislation that contradicted this ideology was kept secret, and Stalin and his successors greatly restricted foreign travel by Soviet citizens to prevent exposure to free societies.
After Stalin’s death in 1953, the new Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, set out to rectify some of the Stalinist legal system’s worst features. Many who had been condemned to labour camps were formally rehabilitated; freer speech was allowed; and decentralized regulation of the economy was attempted. After Khrushchev’s ouster in 1964, his successors restored centralized legal control of the economy and again limited freedom of speech, but through perversion of the legal system rather than by other means. They fired editors of liberal publications and committed dissidents to insane asylums or imprisoned them on false criminal charges.
The liberalization of the Soviet economy and political system by Mikhail Gorbachev in the mid-1980s undermined some of the basic elements of the Soviet legal system. The use of false criminal charges and psychiatric diagnoses to control dissidents was largely halted; partially free elections and some free speech were allowed; and private businesses were legalized. As the Soviet legal system disintegrated, the Soviet Union weakened. The Soviet republics and the satellite states of central and eastern Europe escaped from Soviet control and soon rejected Soviet law. The countries that retained systems based on Soviet law—for example, Belarus, China, Cuba, North Korea, Turkmenistan, and Vietnam—continued the arbitrary imprisonment of dissidents and eschewed open and fair democratic elections. With the exception of North Korea, however, these countries at least partially repealed the ban on private businesses. The prevailing ideology in these countries turned from Marxism to nationalism, and as a consequence their legal systems began to lose much of their Soviet flavour and became much more like the legal systems of ordinary dictatorial regimes.
Excluding the brief period of experimentation with decentralization during the Khrushchev era, from the time of the revolution until Gorbachev’s reforms, all aspects of the Soviet legal system were effectively subordinate to the leadership of the Soviet Communist Party. Legislation was debated and approved by top party leaders and then transmitted to the Supreme Soviet, the Soviet Union’s legislature, for unanimous rubber-stamp approval. The court system was designed to ensure party control of judicial decisions at all levels. Juries—which had shown considerable independence under the tsars—were abolished, replaced by a trial court consisting of a judge, who was selected by party officials and who almost always was a party member, and two carefully chosen laypersons, who were under pressure to agree with the judge. The system was designed to give the outward appearance of popular participation without actually involving it. Control over judicial decisions also was exercised by allowing easy appeals through higher judicial levels to the supreme courts of the Soviet republics and the Supreme Court of the Soviet Union. Cases of political importance were subject to so-called “telephone law”—legal decisions dictated by telephone calls from party officials to judges. The centuries-old Russian institution of the procuracy was revived, creating a nationwide organization that was responsible for ensuring the enforcement of the laws and regulations and that reported directly to the party leadership.
