Stone v. Graham,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on November 17, 1980, ruled (5–4) that a Kentucky statute requiring school officials to post a copy of the Ten Commandments (purchased with private contributions) on a wall in every public classroom violated the First Amendment’s establishment clause, which is commonly interpreted as a separation of church and state.
In addition to the posting of the Commandments, the Kentucky statute (1978) required that this notation was to be placed, in small print, at the bottom of each display: “The secular application of the Ten Commandments is clearly seen in its adoption as the fundamental legal code of Western Civilization and the Common Law of the United States.” Opponents of the statute claimed that it violated the establishment and free exercise clauses of the First Amendment. Sydell Stone, among others, sued, and James B. Graham, the state’s superintendent of education, was named as the respondent. A trial court upheld the statute, ruling that its purpose was secular. The case then went to the Kentucky Supreme Court, which was divided, thereby leaving the lower court’s ruling in place.
In 1980 the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. In a per curiam (unsigned) opinion, it used the so-called Lemon test to evaluate whether the statute was permissible under the establishment clause. In Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971), the Supreme Court held that (a) a “statute must have a secular legislative purpose”; (b) “its principal or primary effect must be one that neither advances nor inhibits religion”; and (c) the statute cannot promote “an excessive government entanglement with religion.” If any of the points are violated, the statute must be ruled unconstitutional.
The Supreme Court held that the Kentucky statute violated the first part of the so-called Lemon test. The court rejected arguments that the notation on the bottom of the Ten Commandments was sufficient to indicate the secular purpose of the posting. Moreover, the court was of the opinion that the posting of the Ten Commandments was clearly religious and not educational. The Commandments were not part of the curriculum, and the court maintained that the state was instead encouraging students “to read, meditate upon, and perhaps venerate and obey” the Commandments, which is a violation of the establishment clause. The court considered it to be irrelevant that the copies were bought with private funds, because displaying the Commandments demonstrated official state support of their message.
