Sunset law, also called sunset provision,  a legal provision that provides for the automatic termination of a government program, agency, or law on a certain date unless the legislature affirmatively acts to renew it. Sunset laws were widely promoted in the United States in the 1970s as reform measures to eliminate bloated and unresponsive government bureaucracies. Some political theorists touted sunset laws as a way to diminish interest-group power over government programs and to promote more active legislative oversight. Legislators have to be convinced of the independence and efficacy of programs facing sunset provisions if these programs are to survive; presumably, programs that are failing or that serve only a few special interests are not renewed.
In the 1970s, despite support from prominent politicians and government reform groups such as Common Cause, no comprehensive federal sunset law was passed in the United States. A majority of states did create sunset programs, however, and a large number of individual federal statutes were drafted with sunset provisions. These generally provided for formal review of agencies, boards, and commissions, with program termination looming for those that could not persuade sunset audit staff (and the legislators to whom they reported) of their efficacy.
In practice, these sunset provisions did not prove to be terribly successful. From the beginning, many exempted larger agencies from any review. Moreover, by the early 1980s it was widely recognized that the burden of proof had shifted from the agencies undergoing sunset review to the staff conducting it. Program renewal was commonplace, and actual sunsets were rare. Agencies—supported by the powerful interest groups that sunset laws were supposed to disempower—successfully defended the status quo. A large number of laws originally passed with sunset provisions had those provisions removed by technical amendments, often even before any audit or review took place. Nonetheless, some scholars argued, while few state programs are actually threatened by sunset provisions, sunset laws have encouraged more active legislative oversight than previously existed.
Sunset provisions have been used tactically in at least two ways. First, they are used as a bargaining chip to gather votes in favour of controversial legislation. The presence of a sunset provision can persuade a wavering legislator (or that legislator’s public) of the temporary nature of a controversial law. Thus, for example, sunset provisions are thought to have been partially responsible for the bipartisan support for the USA PATRIOT Act (2001), which greatly enhanced federal prosecutorial powers in the wake of the September 11 attacks on the United States. Sunset provisions can also be used to reduce the projected costs of a new program, tax, or tax reduction: public statements can be based on estimates that only forecast costs out to the sunset date, even if it is expected that the program will eventually be renewed or have its sunset provision repealed.
