Tailhook scandal,  scandal in which U.S. Navy and Marine Corps officers and defense contractors committed sexual harassment and sexual assault at the U.S. Navy’s Tailhook Symposium in Las Vegas, Nevada, on September 5–7, 1991.
The Tailhook Association is a private organization that sponsors the Tailhook Symposium, a reunion of former marine and navy flyers that began in 1956. In 1992 navy Lieut. Paula Coughlin claimed on ABC News that while attending the 1991 Tailhook Symposium, she was forced to pass through a gauntlet of officers who groped her and made questionable comments. Her revelations brought forth other women who indicated that similar indignities had happened to them at Tailhook conventions.
Adm. John W. Snyder, for whom Coughlin was an aide, had acknowledged her report but noted that such behaviour was the natural consequence of getting naval aviators drunk. Coughlin filed charges and, when her case moved slowly, she went public with her allegations. A seven-month investigation by the Naval Criminal Investigative Service and Inspector General uncovered 140 cases of misconduct against 80 to 90 female victims.
Defenders of the Tailhook Association attacked Coughlin’s credibility, but she and other victims maintained that the allegations were true. She and six other victims sued the association, which settled out of court. Coughlin resigned her commission in 1995.
As a result of the investigation, Secretary of the Navy H. Lawrence Garrett III ordered the services to take disciplinary action against 70 individuals. Fifty were participants in the gauntlet, and six had obstructed the investigation. When witnesses placed Garrett and his chief of naval operations (CNO), Frank Kelso, near the gauntlet, the secretary resigned, and the CNO retired early.
As the Tailhook story spread, senior officers retired or had their careers ruined. Admiral Snyder was relieved of duty, and other admirals were censured. After the investigation concluded, the careers of 14 admirals and nearly 300 naval aviators were ended or damaged by the scandal.
The Tailhook scandal brought sexual harassment and sexual crimes in the military from out of the shadows. In the aftermath, military women began speaking out about the abuses that had occurred since the active recruitment of women with the end of the draft in 1973 (see Selective Service Acts), and the military establishment took some of the first steps in correcting sexual harassment and assault within its ranks.
