Terry v. Ohio,  U.S. Supreme Court decision, issued on June 10, 1968, which held that police encounters known as stop-and-frisks, in which members of the public are stopped for questioning and patted down for weapons and drugs without probable cause (a reasonable belief that a crime has been or is about to be committed), do not necessarily violate the Fourth Amendment’s prohibition of unreasonable searches and seizures. The Fourth Amendment states: “The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.”
The case arose following the actions of Martin McFadden, a Cleveland police detective, in conducting a search to prevent a possible armed robbery. On the afternoon of October 31, 1963, McFadden conducted a pat-down search on three men who, he believed, were preparing to rob a store. Two of the men, John Terry and Richard Chilton, were found to be carrying pistols. They were tried and convicted of carrying concealed weapons. They appealed, arguing that evidence used to convict them had been discovered during an illegal search, but the conviction was affirmed by the Ohio Supreme Court.
Terry’s case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court in 1967. Chief Justice Earl Warren wrote the majority opinion, ruling that McFadden had the authority to conduct for officer safety a limited pat-down for weapons because the suspects were observed engaging in suspicious behaviour that warranted inquiry by the police. The Court held that stopping someone for brief questioning and conducting a pat-down search did constitute a search as defined by the Fourth Amendment but that such searches were not always unconstitutional.
The ruling stopped short of creating a separate category of police actions that did not have to meet the constitutional standard of probable cause. The Court’s analysis of whether McFadden violated Terry’s constitutional protections against unreasonable searches and seizures focused on whether the officer’s actions were reasonable at the inception of the search and whether McFadden’s actions were reasonably consistent in scope with the circumstances that provided the justification for the initial search. The purpose of the stop-and-frisk was viewed as detecting concealed weapons on the person (which might constitute an immediate danger to the officer or others) rather than collecting evidence of a crime. The Court rejected the contention that a pat-down is a “petty indignity” for the individual subjected to the search. The Court also noted the potential detrimental impact that the practice of stop-and-frisks may have on police-community relations but held nevertheless that when an officer suspects that a person may be armed, it is reasonable to search for weapons because of the danger to the officer or to others.
The lone dissenter was Justice William O. Douglas, who argued that the Court had provided the police with more legal authority to conduct a search and seizure than a judge has to issue a court order authorizing a search and seizure. Douglas argued that police searches should remain constrained by the standard threshold of probable cause.
