Tort,  in common law, civil law, and the vast majority of legal systems that derive from them, any instance of harmful behaviour, such as physical attack on one’s person or interference with one’s possessions or with the use and enjoyment of one’s land, economic interests (under certain conditions), honour, reputation, and privacy. The term derives from Latin tortum, meaning “something twisted, wrung, or crooked.” The concept encompasses only those civil wrongs independent of contracts.
Other legal systems use different terminology for this wide and amorphous area of the law. Germans, for example, talk of unlawful acts, and French-inspired systems use interchangeably the terms délits (and quasi-délits) and extra-contractual civil responsibility. Despite differences of terminology, however, this area of the law is primarily concerned with liability for behaviour that the legal order regards as socially unacceptable, typically warranting the award of damages to the injured party or, occasionally, an injunction.
It is broadly true to say that most western European and common-law systems tend to regard as actionable the same factual situations. But although the problems encountered are identical and the results reached are often quite similar, the arrangement of the law and the methodology employed often differ significantly between countries, depending on how the law has been conceived and how solutions have been approached in various cultures over time. Thus, the German Civil Code reflects a strong tendency to abstraction and systematization—qualities that betray the code’s university and Roman-law origins and that contrast at least superficially with the more casuistic (case-based) and judge-made law of the common-law systems. By contrast, the 19th-century codifications, which are the products of the natural school of law (see natural law), are marked by their broad sweep and manifesto-like provisions, often making them more readable than their German counterparts but also less precise and accordingly in need of judicial definition. Typical of this approach is the Napoleonic Code of 1804, which became a model for most Romanistic legal systems, including those of Italy and Spain and their derivatives, mainly in Central and South America. Much of the contemporary law in these countries results from the interplay between judicial activity and doctrinal writing.
Tort law, though often viewed as secondary to contract law in the law of civil obligations, spread to many parts of the world after World War II, and its influence was especially notable in continental Europe. At the same time, criticism of it has led to its replacement either partially by specialized schemes or, in rare cases, by complete systems of accident compensation. Criticism has also provoked serious discussion about the impact of the welfare state, modern insurance practices, and the importance of economic analysis in the proper development of the law. For a time it even looked as if these challenges might bring about wholesale reform (such as that adopted in New Zealand in the 1970s) that would threaten rules with very ancient pedigrees. But the 20th century closed with the tort system remaining basically intact, albeit held to a lower status within the entire system of compensation, as the majority of compensation for reparable injuries continued to be paid through social security systems and insurance claims.
Throughout its long history, tort has pursued different aims: punishment, appeasement, deterrence, compensation, and efficient loss spreading of the cost of accidents. None offers a complete justification; all are important, though at different stages one may have been more prominent than the rest.
Originally, tort and criminal law were indistinguishable, and, even when the two branches began to acquire independent identities, the former remained for a very long time in the shadow of the latter. Offenses against the community and the king’s interests increasingly became the subject of criminal law, whereas wrongs against the individual came to be dealt with by the emerging (or, in the case of continental Europe, reemerging Roman-inspired) law of torts. Early tort law, however, was concerned only with the most serious kinds of wrongs—bodily injury, damage to goods, and trespass to land. Not until the 19th century was it extended to cover such conduct as intentional infliction of economic loss. In the 20th century the compensation of negligently inflicted economic loss and other violations of subtler interests (such as psychological injuries and violations of privacy) took centre stage in the wider debate that aimed to set the proper boundaries of tort liability.
The emancipation of tort law from criminal law resulted from the need to buy off private vengeance and to strengthen law and order during the Middle Ages. Most authors would probably agree that punishment and appeasement are no longer major aims of tort law. Nevertheless, some common-law jurisdictions—notably the United States—retain in their damage awards a strong element of punishment for certain types of tortious conduct. These punitive or exemplary damages, as they are sometimes called, are in England limited to three rather narrow instances. The most troublesome and oft-encountered is the case of an activity calculated by the defendant to make a profit (a term not confined to moneymaking in the strict sense). In these instances it is felt that “it is necessary to teach the wrongdoer that tort does not pay” by making him not only compensate the plaintiff for the latter’s loss but also disgorge any gain he may have made from his conduct. That this is right few would doubt. Less defensible, however, is the resulting windfall for the plaintiff and the loss of important procedural safeguards for the defendant in a situation in which “punishment” is meted out by unpredictable and unguided juries. In England the latter objection was partially countered by the courts’ greater willingness, encouraged by modern statutory rules, to control such jury awards and to keep them within reasonable limits. But the same cannot be said of the United States, where punitive awards, often amounting to millions of dollars, had a significant effect on the tort strategies of litigants.
Notwithstanding these doctrinal doubts, the award of punitive damages remains a possibility in some common-law countries, especially the United States. Favourable attitudes toward punitive awards may arise from a multitude of factors, such as a certain dislike for regulation as a means of influencing human conduct (e.g., to prevent accidents), the existence of contingent fees (see legal ethics), and the desire, more keenly felt by juries, to punish wealthy defendants. In the United States these and other factors deeply—yet indirectly—affect tort law in practice and account for some of the major differences from its progenitor, the English law of torts, with which the American progeny otherwise has much conceptual affinity. Civil-law systems have, by contrast, taken a hostile attitude toward penal damages in civil actions, though there are limited instances in the German law of tort (privacy) and the French law of contract (astreinte) in which a penal element has been allowed to creep into the civil award.
In its modern, economic sense, deterrence aims at reducing the number of accidents by imposing a heavy financial cost on unsafe conduct. A distinction is necessary between specific and general deterrence. The former depends largely on the admonitory effect of tort law. This, however, is limited where insurance cushions the defendant from the economic consequences of an adverse judgment (though insurance premiums may subsequently be increased). This deterrent element, however, almost completely evaporates in the case of traffic accidents, where harm is statistically inevitable and in most cases results from momentary inattention, the occurrence of which no tort award can ever prevent. Tort law is, therefore, in some cases the second best means of preventing accidents after criminal law. Its greater (deterrent) influence may be in cases involving damage to property and tortious harm resulting from intentional activities.
Very different was the theory of general deterrence principally argued by the U.S. legal scholar and judge Guido Calabresi in The Cost of Accidents (1970). In Calabresi’s words, general deterrence involves deciding
Calabresi’s approach reflected the belief that the market mechanism not only achieves the optimum allocation of resources but also ensures that most of society’s decisions vis-à-vis accident-causing activities are left to the cumulative choice of individuals rather than to imposition by government.
But is it possible to rely on the degree of rationality in human behaviour seemingly presupposed by economic theories? And is it always possible to identify the activity that causes the accident? For example, a tool defectively manufactured by A injures one of B’s employees who has been supplied with it by B. Whose activity has caused this injury? And, in accidents involving automobiles and pedestrians, can such an economic choice be made? Calabresi treated the motorist as the best cost-avoider on the grounds that he has both better information and the means of reducing such accidents. But are such assumptions truly tenable? Finally, general deterrence so conceived cannot provide all the answers, as Calabresi was well aware. Wider considerations of fairness and justice also obtain, and it would be a mistake to assert that certain antisocial activities can and will be allowed so long as those taking part in them are prepared to pay for them. Moreover, collective judgments are often reached, and an infinite number of calculated risks determined, according to political criteria rather than cost-benefit equations. Thus, although economic analysis has spawned some imaginative writing, in the area of tort law it seems to have left the courts rather indifferent. This is especially true outside the United States.
Compensation is arguably the most important contemporary function of tort law, and modern insurance practice has made it easier to satisfy the injured without financially crushing the injurer. The welfare state, however, is now the main source of accident compensation. But even where tort law plays a major compensatory role—for example, in the most serious cases of personal injury—it does not function with great efficiency. Though tort lawyers rightly regard tort as the compensation system that caters best to the particular victim on the basis of the pre-accident situation and prognosis of his future, it nonetheless remains expensive, capricious, and dilatory. The Royal Commission on Civil Liability and Compensation for Personal Injury (1978) in England once estimated that it cost 85 pence to award £1 of net benefits to the victim. (The administrative cost of the New Zealand Scheme was apparently less than 10 percent.) The tort system is capricious in that compensation may depend on finding a tortfeasor (wrongdoer) and credible witnesses, not to mention a good lawyer. Delay can also produce injustice, especially since it tends to benefit wealthy defendants (usually insurance companies) whose in-house legal advisers can sometimes delay payments in the hope of wearing down a plaintiff so that he accepts a low settlement. Difficulties of this kind have led some authors to refer to the tort law as a “forensic lottery” and have given rise to remedial legislation in areas particularly affected, such as automobile accidents. Most importantly, they have led many jurists to reconsider the utility of modern tort law. Nonetheless, threatened radical overhaul of tort law has not taken place.
Compensation in its crudest form meant that the cost of an accident was shifted from the victim to the tortfeasor. For a long time the only plausible excuse for such a shift was deemed to be the tortfeasor’s fault. Certainly it seemed right to make wrongdoers pay. The corollary, that he who is not at fault need not pay, also appealed to 19th-century judges and jurists, who were often more concerned with shielding nascent industries from the crushing costs of litigation than with compensating the growing number of such industries’ victims. Although the first argument still has its appeal, the second has lost cogency given the modern insurance system. This has revolutionized tort reasoning, for victims can now be compensated without tortfeasors’ being ruined financially. It thus helps erode the requirement of fault, while strict liability correspondingly proliferates (see below Liability without fault). Finally, where liability without fault has not been introduced in an open manner, such notions as fault, foreseeability, and causation become stretched in an attempt to do justice to the victim while allegedly remaining faithful to a fault-based law of torts. It is only since about the 1960s that Anglo-American courts have tended to refer openly to such considerations, and they have been active not only in shifting the loss but also in trying to pin it on the person who is in the best position to spread it.
Although the common law of torts is in many ways wider than the modern European law of delict, in practice it hides a tendency to deal with tort problems under different headings of the law, such as  contract, property, inheritance, or even crimes. For example, in English common law tort has served such modern problems as product liability or liability for negligent statements, whereas French and German law has traditionally relied on contractual solutions. In contrast, the German Civil Code has a basic (tort) provision excluding compensation for negligently inflicted pure economic loss that, along with a narrow rule of vicarious liability, has encouraged the expansion of the law of contract. Defamation also is regarded primarily as a tort in the common law but as a crime in civil-law systems, though in some of the latter it is now seen as a potentially important heading of civil liability. Another difference exists between what the common law describes as trespass to land and the tort of nuisance and what civil lawyers have seen primarily as part of the law of immovable property.
The choice regarding which part of the (wider) law of obligations is to be used as a solution to emerging legal problems will often depend upon historical factors or doctrines, such as the common-law doctrine of consideration, which nonetheless makes the expansion of contract notions impossible to meet new situations. Conversely, there may be obstructive provisions in the law of tort that make recourse to the law of contract inevitable. This is the case with the German Civil Code, which adopts a weak rule of vicarious liability, allowing masters to exculpate themselves from the wrongs committed by their employees if they can show that they selected and supervised them properly. In such circumstances, some systems (such as the German) have found that recourse to contract provisions may make the imposition of liability easier (even though it may give rise to different problems). See also labour law.
