United States v. American Library Association,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 23, 2003, ruled (6–3) that the Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA)—which requires public schools and libraries that receive federal funds or discounts to install Internet-filtering software that blocks indecent material—does not violate the First Amendment’s freedom of speech clause.
The case arose from congressional attempts to shield children from obscene or harmful Internet content. However, Congress’s first such laws—the Communications Decency Act (part of the Telecommunications Act of 1996) and the Child Online Protection Act (1998)—had been struck down by the Supreme Court as too broad and in violation of the First Amendment. CIPA was Congress’s third attempt. When CIPA became law in 2000, schools and libraries receiving funds or discounts under the federal E-rate program were required to operate, for minors,
The same standards were to be in place for adults, although without the “harmful to minors” provision. In addition, under CIPA, libraries could disable the technology-protection measure for adults engaged in research or other lawful activity.
As with the previous legislation, various groups, including the American Library Association, filed suit. A federal district court ruled that CIPA was “facially unconstitutional.” It held that public libraries’ Internet access was a public forum, and, as such, any limitations on content required “strict scrutiny.” Under that standard, speech restrictions must serve a compelling interest and be narrowly tailored to further that interest. Although the court conceded the first point, it found that the limitations of Internet filtering technologies meant that public libraries could not comply with CIPA without “overblocking” speech that was constitutionally protected. Thus, the court also held that in passing the legislation Congress had exceeded its authority under the spending clause of the U.S. Constitution (Article 1, Section 8, clause 1), since compliance with CIPA would result in a violation of the First Amendment.
On March 5, 2003, the case was argued before the Supreme Court. In its opinion, the court held that Internet access in public libraries is not a traditional public forum (such as government-owned sidewalks and parks) or a designated forum (a nontraditional public forum opened for public expression). Thus, public-forum principles were not applicable. The court pointed out that librarians could unblock filtered material or disable Internet filtering software for adults who requested them to do so. In addition, the court noted that Congress “has wide latitude to attach conditions” to federal funding in order to advance its policy objectives, and the court further found that the government had a compelling interest in protecting children from inappropriate material. The Supreme Court therefore held that CIPA was constitutional. The district court’s decision was reversed.
