United States v. Lopez,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on April 26, 1995, ruled (5–4) that the federal Gun-Free School Zones Act of 1990 was unconstitutional because the U.S. Congress, in enacting the legislation, had exceeded its authority under the commerce clause of the Constitution. That clause (Article 1, Section 8) empowers Congress “to regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes.”
In March 1992 Alfonso Lopez, Jr., a 12th-grade student in San Antonio, Texas, took a concealed .38-calibre handgun and five bullets to his high school. School officials, after receiving an anonymous tip, confronted Lopez, and he admitted that he had a gun. Lopez was charged with violating a Texas statute prohibiting the carrying of a firearm on school grounds. The state charge was quickly dropped, however, and Lopez was charged with violating the Gun-Free School Zones Act, which made it unlawful for a person to possess a firearm in a school zone. The maximum penalty was five years of imprisonment. Lopez entered a plea of not guilty, and his attorneys moved to dismiss the charge on the grounds that Congress had exceeded its authority by passing the act.
A federal district court denied the motion to dismiss, stating that the act was a constitutional exercise of the well-defined power of Congress “to regulate activities in and affecting commerce, and the ‘business’ of elementary, middle and high schools…affects interstate commerce.” Lopez, who waived his right to a jury trial, was convicted and sentenced to six months in prison and two years of supervised release. Lopez appealed his conviction to the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, which reversed on the issue of congressional authority. It ruled that the law was invalid because it went beyond the powers of Congress under the commerce clause.
On November 8, 1994, the case was argued before the Supreme Court, which affirmed the order of the Fifth Circuit. Writing for the majority, Chief Justice William Rehnquist argued that, because the Gun-Free School Zones Act was neither a regulation of the channels of interstate commerce nor an attempt to prohibit interstate transportation of a commodity through those channels, it could withstand judicial scrutiny only if it affected interstate commerce in some substantial way.
To this end, the government had argued that possession of the gun in a school zone could result in a violent crime that would affect the national economy. The government also claimed that the significant cost of insurance associated with violent crime affects the economy, because the expense is spread throughout society. In addition, it contended that the economy is harmed when individuals refuse to travel to areas they believe to be unsafe. The government suggested that the presence of guns in the schools presents a serious threat to the learning environment; this in turn could result in a less-educated citizenry, which would have an obvious adverse impact on the country.
The Court, however, rejected the government’s arguments. In his majority opinion, Rehnquist pointed out that “if we were to accept the Government’s arguments, we are hard pressed to posit any activity by an individual that Congress is without power to regulate.” Regardless of how broadly one might seek to construe its terms, the Gun-Free School Zones Act was a criminal statute and had nothing to do with interstate commerce or economic activity. Accordingly, the Court affirmed the ruling of the Fifth Circuit and struck down the act as an impermissible exercise of congressional power under the commerce clause.
