Waldheim affair,  controversy concerning the military record of former Austrian diplomat and statesman Kurt Waldheim (1918–2007) and his knowledge about war crimes committed by Austria during World War II. Waldheim was a member of the Austrian People’s Party (Österreichische Volkspartei, or ÖVP) and served as foreign minister. He was secretary-general of the United Nations (1972–81) and later president of Austria (1986–92).
In 1986 Waldheim ran for the office of Austrian president. 
As he missed an absolute majority of votes in the first round of the  election, it came down to a runoff between him and Social Democratic Party (Sozialdemokratische Partei Österreichs, or SPÖ) candidate Kurt Steyrer. During the campaign, questions about Waldheim’s past as an officer in the German army and his membership in the Sturmabteilung (SA) in World War II arose, as there were some omissions in his, at the time, recently released autobiography (In the Eye of the Storm: A Memoir [1985]). This created suspicions about his possible involvement in war crimes. As a consequence, the election campaign became much more aggressive. Waldheim faced massive critiques both at home and abroad (for instance, by the World Jewish Congress). He was severely attacked by Chancellor Fred Sinowatz from the Social Democratic Party. The People’s Party reacted harshly and defended its candidate, using arguments considered at least partly anti-Semitic (this was stressed by the mass media). It also took advantage of the international critique by appealing to Austrian voters that no one but Austrians themselves would decide who should become the next president. Waldheim himself denied any involvement in war crimes and claimed that he had done nothing but his duty as a soldier. He won the election and became the Austrian president and remained in office until 1992. Consequently, Chancellor Sinowatz retired.
Because of his uncertain role between 1938 and 1945, Waldheim was internationally isolated and added to the U.S. Watch List (prohibiting his entry into the United States). The Austrian government installed an international commission to investigate Waldheim’s past. The commission found that Waldheim must have known about war crimes but could not prove any personal involvement.
The 1986 election campaign and the Waldheim affair became symbols of both Austria’s handling of its own past and the latent anti-Semitism still present in society. The Waldheim affair drew attention to Austria’s relationship with Nazi Germany and the Third Reich. The rise of the Freedom Party (Freiheitliche Partei Österreichs, or FPÖ) in the 1990s under Jörg Haider, who frequently made remarks praising Nazi and anti-Semitic agendas, yet again renewed interest in the Waldheim affair and Austria’s past.
