Wallace v. Jaffree,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 4, 1985, ruled (6–3) that an Alabama statute that authorized a one-minute period of silence in all public schools “for meditation or voluntary prayer” violated the First Amendment’s establishment clause.
The complaint, which did not initially mention any statute, was filed in May 1982 by Ishmael Jaffree on behalf of his three children, all of whom attended public schools in Mobile county, Alabama. He sought a declaratory judgment and an injunction restraining the defendants—members of the county’s school board, various school officials, and the children’s three teachers—from “maintaining or allowing the practice of regular religious prayer services or other forms of religious observances.” The complaint stated that the children had experienced acts of religious indoctrination and that teachers led their classes in saying daily prayers, despite Jaffree’s repeated requests that the religious activities be stopped. The following month, the complaint was amended to include more defendants. In addition, it contested the constitutionality of three state statutes—the first (1978) of which created a minute of silence for meditation; the second (1981), and the one that drew the most legal attention, added the option of voluntary prayer; and the third (1982) authorized teachers to recite a prayer with “willing students.”
During an evidentiary hearing before a federal district court, the prime sponsor of the 1981 statute, State Sen. Donald G. Holmes, openly stated that the bill was meant to return voluntary prayer to public schools in Alabama. Upon reexamining the establishment clause, however, the court found that it did not prohibit the state from establishing a religion. Thus, the 1981 bill, as well as the other two, were ruled constitutional. A court of appeals also found the 1978 bill constitutional. However, it overturned the lower court’s decision concerning the other two statutes, finding them in violation of the First Amendment.
The case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court on December 4, 1984. The Supreme Court stated that the federal district court had mistakenly concluded that the establishment clause did not prohibit state officials from establishing a religion and that the court of appeals had correctly reversed this misinterpretation. In rendering its judgment, the court applied the so-called Lemon test in evaluating whether the statutes violated the establishment clause. In Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971), the court held that, first, a statute must have a secular legislative purpose; second, its principal or primary effect must be one that neither advances nor inhibits religion; and, finally, a statute must not foster “an excessive government entanglement with religion.” If a statute lacks an obvious secular purpose, the second or third points do not need to be reviewed. In applying the Lemon test, the Supreme Court found that the 1981 statute did not have a secular purpose and instead was enacted for the sole purpose of endorsing school prayer at the start of every school day, in violation of the established principle of government neutrality toward religion. Using similar reasoning, the court also struck down the 1982 statute, whereas the 1978 bill was ruled constitutional. The decision upheld the appellate court’s ruling.
