White-collar crime,  crime committed by persons who, often by virtue of their occupations, exploit social, economic, or technological power for personal or corporate gain. The term, coined in 1939 by the American criminologist Edwin Sutherland, drew attention to the typical attire of the perpetrators, who were generally businesspeople, high-ranking professionals, and politicians. Since Sutherland’s time, however, such crimes have ceased to be the exclusive domain of these groups. Moreover, developments in commerce and technology have broadened the scope of white-collar crime to include cybercrime (computer crime), health-care fraud, and intellectual property crimes, in addition to more-traditional crimes involving embezzlement, bribery, conspiracy, obstruction of justice, perjury, money laundering, antitrust violations, tax crimes, and regulatory violations.
Specific examples of activities that constitute white-collar crimes include price collusion (conspiring with other corporations to fix the prices of goods or services as a means of obtaining artificially high profits or driving a competitor out of the market), falsifying reports of tests on pharmaceutical products to obtain manufacturing licenses, and substituting cheap, defective materials for costlier components specified in the construction of roads or buildings but charging the customer for the full cost of the specified materials. At times such activities can be attributed to individual employees or executives acting on their own initiative, but it is often the case that they represent a collective and organized effort by a corporation to increase its profits at any cost.
White-collar crime that is part of a collective and organized effort to serve the economic interests of a corporation is known as corporate crime. In some cases corporate crimes are conducted by bogus entities that pose as legal corporations or partnerships. Although corporations cannot be incarcerated, they can be criminally punished with fines and other sanctions. Criminal liability in these cases is based on the acts or omissions of the company’s employees and executives.
Although white-collar crimes are quite varied, most have several characteristics in common. First, they involve the use of deceit and concealment, rather than the application of force or violence, for the illegitimate gain of money, property, or services. A defendant convicted of making false statements in order to obtain a government contract, for example, is considered a white-collar criminal.
Next, white-collar crimes typically involve abuse of positions of trust and power. Public officials who solicit and accept bribes, or corporate officers who fix prices to drive competitors out of business, are engaging in such abuse of their positions. White-collar crime is also often more difficult to detect than other types of crime, in part because losses may not be immediately apparent to victims but also because the crimes can involve sophisticated schemes and cover-ups. Many white-collar crimes require concerted criminal activity by coconspirators. For example, a case of real-estate fraud may involve the knowing participation of an escrow officer, a buyer, an appraiser, and a bank officer, all of whom were willing to sign false documents to perpetrate a fraud for personal gain.
Fraud, the most common type of white-collar crime, involves obtaining money or services by making false representations or promises. The key question in these cases is ordinarily whether the defendant intended to deceive the victims or merely failed in an honest business venture. One of the most common types of fraud involves telemarketing schemes that misrepresent the value, the terms of sale, or the use of the goods or services being sold.
Perjury, obstruction of justice, false statements, and witness tampering are also considered white-collar crimes. Although the goal is not necessarily to obtain money or services, these crimes are illegal because they interfere with the proper functioning of the justice system. Bribery and extortion are more general, in that they constitute illegal means of influencing persons in power in public or private institutions. Bribery involves the giving of something of value in exchange for an official’s exercise of power. Extortion is a threat made to obtain a benefit from either a public official or a private individual. Money laundering is a relatively new type of white-collar crime that is utilized by criminals wishing to conceal profits gained through illegal activities. Drug dealers and purveyors of counterfeit goods and currencies will create money-laundering schemes to hide the source of their earnings.
A wide variety of regulatory offenses are also considered to be white-collar crimes. These may include violation of tax laws, avoidance of currency-reporting requirements, securities violations, and environmental crimes. In addition to criminal punishment, those convicted of regulatory violations may also be subject to civil and administrative penalties. Such violations, unlike common-law crimes, may not require any criminal intent by the defendant. Instead, they may be seen as “strict liability” crimes for which mere failure to comply with the legal standards is sufficient grounds to establish criminal liability.
Computer crimes represent one means by which white-collar criminals exploit technology. Common examples cover a wide variety of criminal activity, including using a computer as a mechanism for committing securities fraud, credit-card fraud, and identity theft. Computer crimes also may involve illegally accessing and tampering with other users’ computer files.
