Wisconsin v. Yoder,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on May 15, 1972, ruled (7–0) that Wisconsin’s compulsory school attendance law was unconstitutional as applied to the Amish (primarily members of the Old Order Amish Mennonite Church), because it violated their First Amendment right to free exercise of religion.
The case involved three Amish fathers—Jonas Yoder, Wallace Miller, and Adin Yutzy—who, in accordance with their religion, refused to enroll their children, aged 14 and 15, in public or private schools after they had completed the eighth grade. The state of Wisconsin required, pursuant to its compulsory attendance law, that children attend school to at least the age of 16. The fathers were found guilty of violating the law, and each was fined $5. A trial and circuit court upheld the convictions, concluding that the state law was a “reasonable and constitutional” use of government power. The Supreme Court of Wisconsin, however, found that the application of the law to the Amish violated the First Amendment’s free exercise of religion clause.
On May 15, 1972, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court; Justices William Rehnquist and Lewis F. Powell, Jr., did not participate in the consideration or decision. In a comprehensive examination of the Amish, the Court found that their religious beliefs and way of life were “inseparable and interdependent” and had not been “altered in fundamentals for centuries.” The Court went on to conclude that secondary schooling would expose Amish children to attitudes and values that ran counter to their beliefs and would interfere with both their religious development and their integration into the Amish lifestyle. According to the Court, compelling Amish children to enroll in public or private schools past the eighth grade would have forced them to “either abandon belief and be assimilated into society at large or be forced to migrate to some other and more tolerant region.”
The Court rejected Wisconsin’s argument that “its interest in its system of compulsory education is so compelling that even the established religious practices of the Amish must give way,” finding instead that the absence of one or two additional years of education would neither make the children burdens on society nor impair their health or safety. During these years the Amish children were not inactive, and the Court remarked favourably on the Amish “alternative mode of continuing informal vocational education.” On the basis of these findings, the Court ruled that the Wisconsin compulsory school attendance law was not applicable to the Amish under the free-exercise clause. Justice William O. Douglas joined the majority’s judgment with respect to one of the respondents, Yoder, but dissented with respect to the other two.
