Saint Joseph of Volokolamsk, also called Joseph Of Volotsk, Russian Svyatoy Iosef Volokolamsky, or Volotsky, original name Ivan Sanin,  (born 1439, Volokolamsk, Russia—died Sept. 9, 1515, Volokolamsk; canonized 1578; feast day September 9), Russian Orthodox abbot and theologian whose monastic reform emphasized strict community life and social work.
Joseph’s monastic career came into prominence at the monastery at Borovsk, a wealthy religious foundation supported by the grand prince of Moscow. In 1477 Joseph was made abbot of Borovsk; however, his ascetical reforms soon met with the disapproval of Prince Ivan III Vasilyevich, who had provided the monastery with luxurious surroundings and whose sons used the monastery as a stepping stone to various episcopal benefices. Thus, in 1479, Joseph left the royal abbey to found his own monastery at Volokolamsk. His new abbey, which integrated the splendour of ritual devotion with the simple evangelical poverty of monastic life, soon became a centre of monastic reform, popular devotion, and social action.
Joseph and his followers, sometimes called Josephites, were dedicated to the concept of a unified and uniform Christianity in Russia, persecuting dissenters and heretics to the point of advocating the death penalty for the obstinate. They believed that the best guarantee of religious uniformity was a close alliance between the church and the state; thus, they were willing to make many concessions to the state, granting it a significant role in church government and even defending the theory of the divine right of kingship. In return they insisted that monks be allowed to possess property and wealth to use for charitable, social, and educational work. This insistence earned them the nickname “the Possessors.”
The position of the Possessors was contested by another party of Russian Christians, led by Nikolay Maykov (canonized as St. Nil Sorsky) and St. Maxim the Greek, “the Nonpossessors,” as they came to be called, advocated monastic poverty, religious freedom, independence from the state, and loyalty to Constantinople.
