St. Leo IX, original name Bruno, Graf (count) von Egisheim und Dagsburg,  (born June 21, 1002, Egisheim, Alsace, Upper Lorraine [now Eguisheim, France]—died April 19, 1054, Rome [Italy]; feast day April 19), head of the medieval Latin church (1049–54), during whose reign the papacy became the focal point of western Europe and the great East-West Schism of 1054 became inevitable.
Bruno of Egisheim was born into an aristocratic family. He was educated at Toul, where he first became canon and then was consecrated bishop on September 9, 1027, at the early age of 25. Dynamic, purposeful, and zealous in the cause of reform, he began to raise the moral standards of important monasteries in his diocese, as well as those of the secular diocesan clergy, by holding frequent meetings and by constant exhortations. In accordance with prevailing practice, he was appointed pope at the age of 47 by the emperor Henry III. He insisted, however, upon being elected by the people and clergy of Rome, an action that implicitly indicated his opposition to the firmly entrenched lay intervention, especially by the emperors, in purely ecclesiastical matters. After he obtained the approval of the Romans, he was enthroned as pope on February 12, 1049.
Leo IX’s aim was the eradication of what he saw as the chief evils of the time—that is, concubinage (clerical marriage), simony (buying and selling of ecclesiastical offices), and lay investiture (conferment of an ecclesiastical office by a lay ruler). In order to achieve these ends, it was necessary for the Roman church itself to be made the centre of Christian society and life. Leo therefore called to Rome men whom he had known in his capacity as bishop of Toul. They not only were aware of the pressing need for reform but were also first-class scholars and administrators as well as men who realized the difficulties with which they were to be confronted. Among them were Humbert of Moyenmoutier, Frederick of Lorraine (later Pope Stephen IX), and Hugh of Remiremont, all of whom became cardinals. A notable monk at Cluny, Hildebrand, also obeyed the call to Rome, where he was destined to play a historic role as Pope Gregory VII, becoming the consummator of the reform initiated by Leo. These men and their assistants infused new blood into the Roman church. Leo also entertained regular contact with other leading churchmen, such as St. Peter Damian and St. Hugh of Cluny, who by virtue of their reputations exercised great influence upon their immediate surroundings and thus prepared the way for the acceptance of measures to reform Christian society.
These men succeeded in transforming the papacy from a local Roman institution into an international power. This farsighted and able group was determined to make papal ideology a social reality. The pivotal point in this ideology was the primatial position of the pope as so-called successor of St. Peter—an ecclesiastical expression for papal monarchy. The organizational apparatus of the papacy experienced a great expansion at this time, notably the chancery, which became the nerve centre of the papacy in which the universally valid and applicable law and the instructions and mandates to distant ecclesiastical officers were drafted.
Although the effect of these legal measures was not immediately conspicuous, they nevertheless prepared the ground for their subsequent successful implementation. During Leo IX’s pontificate the cardinals became more and more prominent as the most intimate counsellors of the pope, and within a few years they were to form the body known as the Sacred College of Cardinals.
The validity of priestly ordinations administered by simoniac bishops proved a serious problem, because most theologians held that simony prostituted the sacrament of ordination. Leo IX ordered a number of simoniacally ordained priests to be “reordained.” This order called forth a great spate of controversial literature, but the problem was not solved until several decades later. A synod that was under Leo’s presidency condemned as heretical in 1050 the views propounded by Berengar of Tours (died 1088) on the Eucharist (that the bread and wine only symbolically became the body and blood of Christ).
Leo IX was intent on making the primatial position of the pope real by his own physical presence outside Rome. To this end he held more than a dozen councils in Italy, France, Germany, and Sicily, which reenacted the decrees of earlier councils and popes and initiated practical measures to eliminate the worst excesses from which Christian society suffered. The personal attendance of St. Peter’s successor and his chairmanship of these councils were factors that powerfully contributed to the accelerated ascendancy of the papacy. The frequent journeyings enabled the pope to establish direct contact with the higher and lower clergy as well as with leading secular personages.
The most significant event of Leo IX’s pontificate—the actual break with the Eastern church—resulted, at least partially, from an ill-fated military involvement.
After their settlement in Sicily in the second decade of the 11th century, the Normans presented considerable dangers to the existence of the papal state. In their marauding expeditions they plundered and devastated many churches and monasteries. In conjunction with Emperor Henry III, Leo resolved to undertake a military campaign against the Normans, but Henry withdrew, and, with a weak and inexperienced army under his command, Leo had to face the Normans alone. They inflicted a crushing defeat upon the papal army, and on June 18, 1053, they took the pope prisoner. He was nevertheless allowed to maintain contact with the outside world and to receive visitors. After nine months he was released.
The Norman venture, however, brought the papacy into conflict with the Eastern church centred in Constantinople, which, since the 8th century, had exercised jurisdiction over large areas of southern Italy and Sicily. The forcefully enunciated papal theme of primacy in Leo’s pontificate complicated the relations between Rome and Constantinople still further because the patriarch of Constantinople, Michael I Cerularius, considered this sheer provocation.
He closed the Latin (Western) churches in Constantinople and raised serious dogmatic charges against the Roman church, notably in connection with the Eucharist. Cardinal Humbert attacked the patriarch in a vitriolic and passionate manner by arguing the case for Roman primacy and also quoting extensively from the forged “Donation of Constantine” (allegedly bestowing sovereignty in the West on the papacy). A legation under Humbert’s leadership left for Constantinople in April 1054, but, despite several meetings between patriarch, emperor, and legates, no concrete results emerged. On July 16, 1054, in the full view of the congregation, Humbert put the papal bull of excommunication—already prepared before the legation left Rome—on the altar of the church of Hagia Sophia in Constantinople. Thereupon the patriarch excommunicated the legation and its supporters. This marked the final breach between Rome and Constantinople. This schism was to last, with short interruptions, until the modern age.
Whether the excommunication of Michael I Cerularius was valid, because Leo had been dead for three months, is merely a technical problem. The Roman legates were legates of the papacy, and the bull of excommunication had been a measure of the reigning pontiff. In any case, the excommunication merely formalized in a dramatic and spectacular manner a state of affairs that had long existed. Although this occurred after the death of Leo IX, the outbreak of the formal schism correctly belongs to his pontificate, which in several ways therefore marked a caesura in the history of the papacy in medieval times.
