Air racing,  sport of racing airplanes, either over a predetermined course or cross-country up to transcontinental limits. Air racing dates back to 1909, when the first international meet was held at Reims, France.
Sporting aviation dates back to the early days of flying, when aviation pioneers used distance and speed contests as a means of developing and testing airplanes. Early manufacturers also encouraged such events as a forum to demonstrate their most advanced airplane designs. Most of the early aviation meets were held in France and were attended by many famous aviators. The strong competitive rivalry between contestants proved very good for the advancement of flying.
World War I interrupted these sporting events, but during the 1920s and ’30s air racing came to the fore as a result of some now famous events and trophies. For example, the Pulitzer Trophy (1920), the Thompson Trophy (1929), and the Bendix Trophy (1931) in the United States and the Kings Cup (1922) in England attracted some of the best pilots from around the world. The most famous event, though, was the series of races for the Schneider Trophy, a truly international speed contest for seaplanes, which was held at various locations around the world, starting with Monaco (1913). The racing series ended in 1931, following three consecutive victories by the English entrant (in 1927, 1929, and 1931), as under the trophy rules the first country to win three times within five years would permanently retain the trophy.
With the outbreak of World War II in 1939, sporting races halted again, and aeronautic pioneers and manufacturers put their efforts into the development of highly complex military aircraft. By the end of the war, the cost of sport racing with open (unrestricted), or state-of-the-art, airplanes had become prohibitive.
The best option for resuming sport air racing seemed to be in the development of formula racing (competitions organized according to factors such as engine size), using surplus military aircraft, which could be bought quite cheaply, and small, fast planes built specially for racing. Formula races around pylons originated in the United States in 1947, the principle being that aircraft of a similar performance would race round a fixed course defined by pylons, rather like an automobile racetrack. The Air Racing Council of the United States (ARCUS) recognizes several fixed-race classes, including Formula 1, Formula V, Biplane, T-6, T-28, Sport Class, and Unlimited. Formula 1 pylon races are held regularly, mainly at Reno, Nev.
The United Kingdom also runs some Formula 1 races. The Royal Aero Club is almost unique in continuing to organize prewar-type handicap air races, including the famous Kings Cup. Handicap races have a staggered start time, calculated to get theoretically the whole field over the finish line together, which allows aircraft of very different sizes and powers to race fairly together and produces an exciting spectacle. A few Formula 1 races are held in France also, but most European countries instead favour air rallies and precision flying events.
