battleship,   capital ship of the world’s navies from about 1860, when it began to supplant the wooden-hulled, sail-driven ship of the line, to World War II, when its preeminent position was taken over by the aircraft carrier. Battleships combined large size, powerful guns, heavy armour, and underwater protection with fairly high speed, great cruising radius, and general seaworthiness. In their ultimate development they were able to hit targets with great precision at a range of more than 20 miles (30 km) and to absorb heavy damage while remaining afloat and continuing to fight.
The battleship type had its genesis in the Gloire, a French oceangoing ironclad displacing 5,600 tons that was launched in 1859. (The Gloire and similar ships of combined sail and steam propulsion were given various names such as armoured frigate or steam frigate; the term battleship did not become current until some years later.) In 1869 HMS Monarch became the first oceangoing iron-hulled battleship. In place of broadside guns fired through portholes in the hull, this vessel mounted four 12-inch guns in two revolving turrets on the main deck. Over the following decades, battleships dispensed with auxiliary sail power. They adopted a mixed armament of large-calibre turret guns of 10 to 12 inches for long-range battle with other capital ships, medium guns of 6 to 8 inches for close range, and small guns of 2 to 4 inches for beating back torpedo boats.
In 1906 HMS Dreadnought revolutionized battleship design by introducing steam-turbine propulsion and an “all-big-gun” armament of 10 12-inch guns. Thereafter, capital ships were built without medium guns. Speeds of more than 20 knots were attained, and, as guns grew to 16 and 18 inches, fleets of “superdreadnoughts,” displacing 20,000 to 40,000 tons, took to the seas.
The Washington Treaty of 1922 limited new battleships to 35,000 tons. Ships built to this standard were of a new “fast battleship” generation, which combined the heavy armament and armour of dreadnought battleships with the speeds (exceeding 30 knots) of lightly armoured cruisers.
Shortly before World War II the Washington Treaty was abandoned. Displacement rose once more, with Germany building two ships of the Bismarck class of 52,600 tons, the United States four of the Iowa class of 45,000 tons, and Japan two of the Yamato class, which set the all-time record at 72,000 tons. Battleships now bristled with antiaircraft armament, consisting of rapid-fire guns of about 5 inches calibre and dozens of automatic weapons of 20 to 40 mm.
In World War II the extended striking range and power of naval aircraft effectively ended the dominance of the battleship. Battleships served mainly to bombard enemy coastal defenses in preparation for amphibious assault and as part of the air-defense screen protecting carrier task forces.
Construction of battleships stopped with those begun during World War II. In the following decades most of the battleships of the major powers were scrapped, “mothballed” (stripped down and placed in storage), or sold to lesser navies. During the Korean War the United States used its Iowa-class ships for shore bombardment.
By the 1980s only the United States had battleships. These were recommissioned and equipped with cruise missiles. Following service in 1991 during the Persian Gulf War, the last two active ships, the Wisconsin and the Missouri, were decommissioned.
