Chang’e,  a series of lunar probes launched by the China National Space Administration. The satellites are named for a goddess who, according to Chinese legend, flew from Earth to the Moon.
Chang’e 1 was China’s first spacecraft to travel beyond Earth’s orbit. Its mission included stereoscopic imaging of the lunar surface, assaying the chemistry of the surface, and testing technologies that could be used in expanding the Chinese national space program to the Moon. A Long March 3A rocket launched Chang’e 1 into an elliptical Earth orbit on October 24, 2007. An upper stage injected it toward the Moon, and it entered lunar orbit on November 5, 2007. Two days later it settled into a 200-km (120-mile) near polar orbit. After nearly 16 months in lunar orbit, Chang’e 1 was crashed into the Moon on March 1, 2009.
Chang’e 1 carried eight instruments. A stereo camera and a laser altimeter developed a three-dimensional map of the surface with the camera tilting forward, down, and aft to illuminate three charge-coupled device (CCD) arrays. The interferometer spectrometer imager used a special lens system to project light onto an array of CCDs. X-ray and gamma-ray spectrometers measured radiation emitted by naturally decaying heavy elements or produced in response to solar radiation. These spectral data helped quantify the amounts of minerals on the lunar surface. The microwave radiometer detected microwaves emitted by the Moon itself and thus measured the thickness of the debris layer, or regolith, that fills the huge basins called maria. One aim of the regolith investigations was understanding how much helium-3 may be on the Moon. Helium-3 is a trace element in the solar wind, and the lunar surface has absorbed larger quantities of helium-3 than have been found on Earth. If mining on the Moon ever becomes practical, helium-3 would be a valuable fuel for nuclear fusion power. Other instruments monitored the solar wind and the space environment.
Chang’e 2 was launched by a Long March 3C rocket on October 1, 2010. Instead of taking more than 13 days to reach the Moon as Chang’e 1 did, Chang’e 2 entered a 100-km (60-mile) circular lunar orbit 5 days after launch. Chang’e 2 was the backup satellite for Chang’e 1. However, the altimeter and the camera had much higher resolution because of the chief goal of the mission—to choose a landing site for Chang’e 3, which carried both a lunar lander and a rover. For closer inspection of prospective Chang’e 3 landing sites, Chang’e 2 entered an elliptical orbit that took it as close as 15 km (9 miles) from the lunar surface. Images from Chang’e 2 allowed Chinese scientists to pick five possible landing sites for Chang’e 3. Chang’e 2 continued studying the Moon until June 2011, when it left lunar orbit for the second Lagrangian point (L2), where it studied Earth’s magnetic field and the solar wind. In April 2012 Chang’e 2 left L2 for an encounter with the near-Earth asteroid Toutatis that December.
Chang’e 3 launched on December 2, 2013. The spacecraft consisted of a 1,200-kg lander, which carried a 120-kg rover, called Yutu after the rabbit that accompanied the goddess Chang’e to the Moon. The lander touched down in Mare Imbrium in the Moon’s northern hemisphere on December 14. China thus became the first country to land a probe on the Moon after the Soviet Union and the United States, and Chang’e 3 was the first probe to perform a controlled landing on the Moon since the Soviet Luna 24 lander in 1976. The lander carried an ultraviolet telescope for conducting astronomical observations and an ultraviolet camera for studying the plasmapause. Yutu carried spectrometers for studying lunar material and a ground-penetrating radar with a range of up to 100 metres (330 feet) underground. The mission discovered a new type of basalt, unlike those found by the Apollo and Luna missions. The rover stopped operating in August 2016.
Chang’e 4 lifted off on December 8, 2018. Like Chang’e 3, it carried a rover, Yutu-2. On January 3, 2019, Chang’e 4 became the first spacecraft to land on the Moon’s far side, which faces away from Earth. It landed in the Von Kármán crater in the South Pole–Aitken basin. Because Chang’e 4 was on the far side, it communicated with Earth through the Queqiao relay satellite, which had been launched in May 2018 and placed into orbit around L2.
Chang’e 5 launched on November 24, 2020, and landed on the Moon on December 1. It is designed to return a sample of lunar rocks and soil to Earth from the plains of Oceanus Procellarum, which is thought to have the Moon’s youngest surface material. Another lunar sample return mission, Chang’e 6, was scheduled to launch in 2023 and will begin the establishment of a research station at the Moon’s south pole. Two other missions, Chang’e 7 and 8, are planned in the 2020s as part of the south pole research station project.
