Chanute glider of 1896,  biplane hang glider designed and built by American aviation pioneers Octave Chanute, Augustus M. Herring, and William Avery in Chicago during the early summer of 1896. Along with the standard glider flown by Otto Lilienthal of Germany, the Chanute glider, designed by Chanute but also incorporating the ideas of his young employee Herring with regard to automatic stability, was the most influential of all flying machines built before the Wright brothers began designing aircraft. See also history of flight.
The aircraft was conceived in discussions between Chanute and Herring during tests of other glider designs in the sand dunes ringing the southern shore of Lake Michigan from June 22 to July 4, 1896. Constructed in a Chicago workshop by Avery, another Chanute employee, the aircraft was originally designed as a triplane. The lowest set of wings was removed at the time of initial testing in a successful effort to reduce the amount of lift at the front of the glider. Chanute was responsible for the most important feature of the craft, a rigid structure based on railroad trussing that enabled an engineer to calculate the strength of the glider.
Herring and Avery, who shared the piloting duties, made dozens of flights with the elegant little glider in the Indiana Dunes during August and September 1896. On the best of these trials, they covered distances of a little more than 350 feet (109 metres), remaining in the air for 10 to 14 seconds. Herring returned to the dunes on his own, with a new version of the biplane glider, in October 1896, and he went back again the following summer, reporting flights of up to 600 feet (180 metres). Chanute and Herring described their glider designs in several articles from 1896 to 1904, inspiring a significant number of European and American experimenters. Versions of their biplane, based on plans supplied by magazines such as Popular Science, were still being built by amateur enthusiasts as late as 1915.
Wilbur Wright, whom Chanute befriended, understood the importance of the 1896 biplane glider. “The double-deck machine,” Wright remarked, “represented a very great structural advance, as it was the first in which the principles of the modern truss bridge were fully applied to flying machine construction.” Chanute’s rigid, lightweight structure provided the most basic model for all externally based biplanes. It was nothing less than the first modern aircraft structure. See also flight, history of.
