Channel Tunnel, also called Eurotunnel,  rail tunnel between England and France that runs beneath the English Channel. The Channel Tunnel, 50 km (31 miles) long, consists of three tunnels: two for rail traffic and a central tunnel for services and security. The tunnel runs between Folkestone, England, and Sangatte (near Calais), France, and is used for both freight and passenger traffic. Passengers can travel either by ordinary rail coach or within their own motor vehicles, which are loaded onto special railcars. Trains can travel through the tunnel at speeds as high as 160 km (100 miles) per hour; the trip takes about 35 minutes. It has the longest undersea portion of any tunnel in the world (37.8 km [23.5 miles]).
The often-considered idea of constructing a tunnel under the English Channel was revived in 1986 by the United Kingdom and France. A rail tunnel was chosen over proposals for a very long suspension bridge, a bridge-and-tunnel link, and a combined rail-and-road link, and the project was privately financed by a consortium of British and French corporations and banks; the Anglo-French company operating the tunnel is called Eurotunnel. Digging began on both sides of the Strait of Dover in 1987–88 and was completed in 1991. The tunnel was officially opened on May 6, 1994.
In 2007 the Channel Tunnel Rail Link (CTRL), also called High Speed 1, was opened to connect the Channel Tunnel with London, facilitating even greater movement of international passenger traffic between mainland Europe and the United Kingdom. The high-speed railway runs 108 km (67 miles) and crosses under the Thames. Its trains can reach speeds of up to 300 km (186 miles) per hour.
In June–July 2015 the problem of migrants—many of them from eastern Africa—sneaking aboard vehicles on trains in an attempt to immigrate to the United Kingdom reached crisis proportions. During that period at least nine individuals were killed while trying to make their way to England via the tunnel. The United Kingdom and France stepped up security measures to try to deter migrants from attempting the crossing.
