Deep Impact,  a U.S. space probe that in 2005 studied cometary structure by shooting a 370-kg (810-pound) mass into the nucleus of the comet Tempel 1 and then analyzing the debris and crater. In 2007 the Deep Impact flyby spacecraft was assigned a new mission called EPOXI, consisting of two projects: Extrasolar Planet Observation and Characterization (EPOCh) and Deep Impact Extended Investigation (DIXI).
Deep Impact was launched on Jan. 12, 2005, on a solar orbit to rendezvous with Comet Tempel 1. The spacecraft had two primary sections, the impactor and the flyby spacecraft. The impactor was built around a copper and aluminum mass with a small, guided propulsive stage. The comet’s constituents could be identified from the spectral makeup of the vaporized ejecta. The mass and velocity would allow scientists to deduce the structure of the comet from the crater that was formed. The Impactor Targeting Sensor doubled as an experiment camera during final approach. The flyby spacecraft carried two primary instruments, high- and medium-resolution imagers, with the radio system used as a third experiment to measure possible velocity changes due to the comet’s mass or atmospheric drag. The imagers had filters to highlight diatomic carbon and cyanogen molecules in the debris. An infrared spectrometer was designed to detect water, carbon monoxide, and carbon dioxide. The impactor was released on July 3, 2005, and struck the comet 24 hours later at a speed of 37,000 km (23,000 miles) per hour. The flyby spacecraft flew to within 500 km (300 miles) of Comet Tempel 1. The nucleus of Comet Tempel 1 was found to be highly porous. The impact was observed by telescopes on Earth, as well as from satellite observatories such as the Hubble and Spitzer Space Telescopes. The primary mission ended in August 2005.
The extended mission, EPOXI, has cruise and hibernation phases, the latter to conserve propellant and funding (mainly for operations on Earth). In the DIXI portion of the mission, the Deep Impact flyby spacecraft was to fly past Comet Boethin, but this comet had not been seen since 1986, so the spacecraft was retargeted for Comet Hartley 2 and flew by it on Nov. 4, 2010. Retargeting was accomplished by trimming the trajectory during the spacecraft’s flyby of Earth on Dec. 31, 2007. Four more flybys of Earth were scheduled before the encounter with Comet Hartley 2. During the Earth flyby on June 29, 2009, Deep Impact’s infrared spectrometer found the spectral signature of water on the Moon, an observation that confirmed the Indian probe Chandrayaan-1’s finding of water there. Deep Impact’s observations also suggested that the water arose from hydrogen ions in the solar wind interacting with oxygen in minerals on the lunar surface. In the EPOCh part of the EPOXI mission, the high-resolution imager is used to observe the transits of three extrasolar planets and to search for other planets around those stars. Deep Impact continued with the EPOCh project after its flyby of Comet Hartley 2.
