Edsel,  an automobile (1958–60) intended to honour Henry Ford’s son, Edsel (1893–1943), who had been the much loved and appreciated president of the Ford Motor Company from 1919 till his death at age 49. He shared his name with thousands of other American boys and men—but after the new car turned out to be a commercial flop, the name all but vanished from American culture, except as a synonym for failure.
The Edsel wasn’t just a car. It was a whole new division within the Ford Motor Company, created to compete with General Motors’ Oldsmobile. Planned in the mid-1950s’ flash flood of optimistic consumerism, it was developed behind a screen of blinkered hype. Its details were so secret not even official Edsel dealers were allowed to see it in advance; but the pre-launch marketing blitz promised something revolutionary that Ford just could not deliver. Bad timing (the U.S. was entering a recession and had no need for another expensive gas-guzzler), bad marketing, bad design, and bad workmanship invited what business academics call “consumer blowback.” The public had been teased into expecting nothing less than a “plutonium-powered, pancake-making supercar.” What they got looked like an overpriced, regular Ford Mercury with a front “horse collar” grille described by Time magazine as looking “like a midwife’s view of labor and delivery”; others said it resembled a toilet seat.
Disappointment mushroomed in direct proportion to public anticipation, and post-launch incompetence merely compounded the fiasco. In the rush to meet launch deadlines, cars were shipped incompletely or wrongly assembled—and with no customer loyalty to fall back on, the brand was born into its own death spiral of recrimination and closed dealerships. Edsel survived just 26 months and cost the Ford Motor Company upwards of $350 million.
In 1958, Vice President Richard Nixon rode in a convertible Edsel through Lima, Peru.  When his motorcade was pelted with eggs, he quipped, “They were throwing eggs at the car, not me.”
More than a half-century later, retro-chic appeal has muted somewhat the original knee-jerk response to the Edsel name and car.
