Edward J. Smith, in full Edward John Smith,  (born January 27, 1850, Hanley [now in Stoke-on-Trent], Staffordshire, England—died April 15, 1912, at sea, northern Atlantic Ocean), British captain of the passenger liner Titanic, which sank in 1912.
Smith began working on boats while he was a teenager. In 1875 he earned a master’s certificate, which was required to  serve as captain. In 1880 he became a junior officer with the White Star Line, and seven years later he commanded his first ship. Smith subsequently helmed numerous vessels while also enduring a series of mishaps. On several occasions his ships ran aground, and in 1911 he was captain of the Olympic when it collided with the British cruiser Hawke off the Isle of Wight; both ships suffered extensive damage. However, Smith was well liked by both crew members and passengers—he earned the nickname the “Millionaire’s Captain” for his popularity with wealthy travelers—and he became White Star’s senior captain. In 1912 he left command of the Olympic to helm the Titanic on its maiden voyage from Southampton, England, to New York City in April.
Several days into the voyage, the Titanic received iceberg warnings, and Smith altered the ship’s course, though he did not decrease speed. On the night of April 14, he was away from the bridge when the ship struck an iceberg. He immediately ordered a report of the damage, and Thomas Andrews, the Titanic’s designer, determined that the ship would founder. At 2:20 am on April 15 the Titanic sank, killing some 1,500 people. Smith was last seen on the bridge. A report that he saved a drowning child was largely dismissed. Smith’s body was never found.
Smith’s actions during the voyage were later scrutinized to varying conclusions. Some faulted him for refusing to decrease speed, while others claimed, given his past experience, that he had reasonably believed he could turn the ship in time to avoid any collision. Also questioned was his decision not to be on the bridge as the Titanic entered the ice field.
