Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA),  organization dedicated to supporting and promoting recreational aviation around the world. The EAA has members from more than 100 countries and more than 1,000 local chapters. Membership is open to anyone interested in aviation, but chapters must be organized as nonprofits in order to join. The EAA headquarters are located in Oshkosh, Wisconsin.
The first formal EAA meeting was held January 26, 1953, at Curtiss-Wright Airport (later renamed Timmerman Airport) in Milwaukee. The group was the idea of Paul H. Poberezny, a young officer in the Wisconsin Air National Guard who enjoyed building and designing airplanes. He and other local aviation enthusiasts had been meeting at his home on an irregular basis to share information on aircraft construction and restoration when they decided to found a formal organization. Poberezny was elected president of the EAA, a position he held until his retirement in 1989.
The organization grew throughout the 1960s and ’70s to include aviation enthusiasts with a wide range of interests. The EAA now emphasizes efforts in recreational aviation and includes special-interest divisions for enthusiasts of vintage aircraft, warbirds (former military aircraft now privately owned), and aerobatic aircraft. In addition, the EAA has special activities for owners and pilots of ultralight aircraft, home-built airplanes, and other segments of aviation.
Local EAA chapters organize many events at community airports, including airport open houses, introductory flights, and social gatherings. In addition, many EAA members voluntarily participate in various member benefit programs, such as providing advice for those building or restoring an airplane, helping pilots about to fly an unfamiliar aircraft, offering free demonstration flights for youths between the ages of 8 and 17 through the Young Eagles Program, and taking part in advisory groups on aviation legal and medical issues. The EAA also maintains a working relationship with local, state, and federal aviation authorities in the United States on regulatory issues.
The organization’s annual convention is held each summer in Oshkosh. In 1998 the name of the event officially changed from the EAA Fly-In Convention to the EAA AirVenture Oshkosh. Regarded as the world’s largest gathering of general aviation enthusiasts, and one of the largest conventions of any type, EAA AirVenture had an annual attendance in the early 21st century of some 500,000, with more than 10,000 aircraft flown to the weeklong event. Aviation enthusiasts from dozens of countries annually attend, with some flying their own airplanes from home to reach Oshkosh.
The EAA publishes Sport Aviation magazine, which is sent to all EAA members, as well as five titles devoted to specific flying interests: Vintage Airplane, which covers antique aircraft; Warbirds, which focuses on military aircraft; Sport Aerobatics, which features aerobatic safety and competition; Sport Pilot & Light Sport Aircraft, which covers building and restoring aircraft and the design and development of ultralight aircraft; and Mentor, which is a trade journal for professional flight instructors.
The organization produces aviation video programming for various cable television networks and Web sites and for home entertainment use, and it maintains a large library of aviation video footage, photographs, and other archival materials. The EAA also has one of the world’s largest private collections of aircraft, with more than 200 airplanes of historical and technological importance. Many of these aircraft are displayed at the EAA museum in Oshkosh.
