F-117, also called Nighthawk,  single-seat, twin-engine jet fighter-bomber built by the Lockheed Corporation (now part of the Lockheed Martin Corporation) for the U.S. Air Force. It was the first stealth aircraft—i.e., an aircraft designed entirely around the concept of evading detection by radar and other sensors. After a difficult development period, during which several prototypes crashed during testing, the first operational craft was secretly delivered to the Air Force in 1982. The existence of the aircraft was officially acknowledged in 1988, and production ended in 1990 with the 59th plane. There was only one operational variant, known as the F-117A. F-117s saw extensive combat use, from the incursion into Panama in 1989 through the Persian Gulf War of 1990–91 to the Iraq War of 2003–11. The only combat loss took place in 1999, during the Kosovo conflict. The F-117 was retired in stages between 2006 and 2008.
The F-117 had its origins in a request made in 1974 by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) of the U.S. Department of Defense for a military aircraft that would emit or reflect so little radio, infrared, or light energy that it could slip undetected through an enemy’s electronic warning system. As developed by Lockheed’s Advanced Development Projects division (known as the “Skunk Works” for its top-secret work on such aircraft as the U-2 and SR-71 spy planes), the F-117 had a triangular outline, wings swept sharply back from the nose at a 67° angle, and a surface composed of many flat planes oriented in such a manner as to reflect radar waves away from their transmitter. Radar reflection was further reduced by surface coatings of radar-absorbing material. Power was supplied by two General Electric turbofan jet engines, which, having no afterburners, limited the aircraft to subsonic speeds but reduced its infrared emissions. Weaponry, consisting of laser-guided bombs or radar-seeking or infrared-seeking missiles, was carried internally. By using inertial guidance, infrared sensors, digital maps, and radio commands from satellites or other aircraft, the F-117 could navigate without emitting its own telltale radar signals.
