flight recorder, byname black box,  instrument that records the performance and condition of an aircraft in flight. Governmental regulatory agencies require these devices on commercial aircraft to make possible the analysis of crashes or other unusual occurrences. Flight recorders actually consist of two functional devices, the flight data recorder (FDR) and the cockpit voice recorder (CVR), though sometimes these two devices are packaged together in one combined unit. The FDR records many variables, not only basic aircraft conditions such as airspeed, altitude, heading, vertical acceleration, and pitch but hundreds of individual instrument readings and internal environmental conditions. The CVR records verbal communication between crew members within the aircraft’s cockpit as well as voice transmissions by radio. Aircraft sounds audible in the cockpit are also caught on the recorder. Flight recorders are commonly carried in the tail of the aircraft, which is usually the structure that is subject to the least impact in the event of a crash. In spite of the popular name black box, flight recorders are painted a highly visible vermilion colour known as “international orange.”
The voice and instrument data processed by the flight recorder are stored in digital format on solid-state memory boards. Up to 2 hours of cockpit sound and 25 hours of flight data are stored, new data continuously replacing the old. The memory boards are housed within a box or cylinder called the crash-survivable memory unit. This is the only truly survivable component of the flight recorder (the other components, such as the data processor, are not necessary for retrieval of data). Consisting of a heavy stainless steel shell wrapped within layers of insulating material and covered by an aluminum housing, a memory unit is expected to survive impacts of 3,400 g (units of gravitational acceleration), flame temperatures as high as 1,100 °C (2,000 °F), and pressures encountered at 6,000 metres (20,000 feet) underwater. In the event of a crash at sea, flight recorders are equipped with a sonar device that is designed to emit an ultrasonic locator signal for at least 30 days.
Flight recorders of varying levels of sophistication have been in existence almost since the beginning of manned flight. The Wright brothers are said to have installed a device on their first flyer of 1903 that logged such parameters as propeller rotation and airspeed, and Charles Lindbergh, in his epoch-making flight across the Atlantic in 1927, employed a barometric device that sensed changes in air pressure (and therefore altitude) and recorded these changes by tracing lines on a rotating spool.
As civil aviation developed in the years before World War II, “crash-survivable” flight recorders came to be seen as a valuable tool in analyzing aviation disasters and contributing to the design of safer aircraft. However, truly serviceable recorders that had any chance of surviving plane crashes were not produced until several years after the war. In the United States, credit for the first survivable FDR is given to James J. Ryan, an engineer employed by General Mills in the early 1950s. Ryan’s VGA Flight Recorder sensed changes in velocity (V), gravitational forces (G), and altitude (A) and inscribed the measurements on a slowly moving strip of aluminum foil. As released in 1953 and sold by General Mills to the Lockheed Aircraft Company, the entire apparatus was enclosed in a yellow-painted spherical shell. Beginning in 1958, larger civilian passenger aircraft in the United States were required to carry survivable FDRs, and numerous other devices were produced employing various recording media, from metal strips to, eventually, magnetic tape.
Parallel developments occurred elsewhere in the world. A series of disastrous crashes of De Havilland Comet jetliners in 1953–54 spurred David Warren, a scientist at Australia’s Aeronautical Research Laboratory (ARL), to design the first combined FDR and CVR. The recording medium for Warren’s ARL Flight Memory Unit was steel wire of the type then being used in magnetic audio recorders. After a demonstration of the device in Britain in 1958, a journalist is said to have given it the sobriquet black box (the common name for all flight recorders to this day), though Warren’s recorder, as produced commercially by S. Davall & Son beginning in 1960, was housed in an egg-shaped casing that was painted red. Other theories of the origin of the term black box have been offered, including the charred appearance of early flight recorders retrieved from a fiery crash.
During the 1960s, crash-protected FDRs and CVRs became mandatory on airliners around the world. Most flight recorders employed magnetic tape, but during the 1990s a great advancement came with the advent of solid-state memory devices. Memory boards are more survivable than recording tape, and the data stored on them can be retrieved quickly by a computer carrying the proper software. A complete picture can be created of conditions on the aircraft during the recorded period, including a computer-animated diagram of the aircraft’s positions and movements. Verbal exchanges and cockpit sounds retrieved from CVR data are transcribed into documents that are made available to investigators along with the actual recordings. The release of these materials to the public is strictly regulated.
