Gyrocompass,  navigational instrument which makes use of a continuously driven gyroscope to accurately seek the direction of true (geographic) north. It operates by seeking an equilibrium direction under the combined effects of the force of gravity and the daily rotation of Earth. As such, it is immune to magnetic interferences such as those caused by ore deposits, steel structures, or electric circuits. These properties make the gyrocompass a prime navigational device in ships and submarines. It has found extensive use on ore ships on the Great Lakes, as the azimuth reference for gun and torpedo control on warships, and as a reliable compass for navigation of any ship. It is not suitable as an aircraft compass because the speed of several hundred knots associated with such vehicles seriously affects the north-seeking properties of the instrument.
Although the apparent effect of Earth’s rotation on gyroscopes was first shown by Léon Foucault in 1852, the ability to construct sufficiently accurate units did not exist until the first decade of the 20th century. The first seaworthy gyrocompass was produced in 1908 by the firm of Hermann Anschütz-Kaempfe in Germany. It was largely made possible through the efforts of Max Schuler, who developed the principles on which a practical shipborne gyrocompass depends. This compass was a marvel of mechanical ingenuity. In 1911 Elmer Sperry in the United States produced a gyrocompass that was easier to manufacture. In England, Sidney George Brown, working with John Perry along similar lines as Sperry, produced a gyrocompass in 1916. Later the Arma Corporation in the U.S. produced a unit that was a modification of the Anschütz.
All gyrocompasses operate on the same basic principle. They differ in their methods of supporting the gyroscopic element (the spinning wheel) and of applying the pendulosity which is required for the north-seeking property and in the means used to damp out oscillations and thus cause the unit to settle on north.
One form of gyroscope is a spinning wheel mounted so that the direction of its spin axis has universal rotational freedom. The spin allows the mass, or inertial, properties of the material in the wheel to be used continuously and thereby gives rise to a relatively large gyroscopic momentum or inertia in a moderate-sized wheel. The important property of a practical gyroscope is its angular momentum—the product of its spin and its inertia about the spin axis. This quantity is a vector, since it has both direction and magnitude. The angular momentum vector may be conveniently represented by curling the fingers of the right hand in the rotational sense of the spin, the extended thumb of the hand then pointing in the direction of the angular momentum vector. The angular momentum is nearly parallel to the spin axis in a practical gyrocompass.
In the same manner, the moment of a force (torque, or turning effect) is directed along the extended thumb of the right hand when the fingers of the hand curl in the sense of the rotation that the force is trying to produce. The following is the basic law of gyroscopics: when a torque is applied to a gyroscope, it will rotate (or precess) so as to attempt to align its angular momentum with the torque. The precession is with respect to inertial space—that is, a reference space that is nonrotating relative to the “fixed stars.” Note that Earth is not part of inertial space because of its daily rotation. The magnitude of the precession is directly proportional to the magnitude of the torque and inversely proportional to the magnitude of the angular momentum. When no torque is applied, the spin axis remains motionless relative to inertial space; if aimed at a star it remains aimed at the star, and consequently one end of the axis appears to an Earth observer, in the course of a day, to rise in the east and set in the west. When an applied torque attempts to rotate a gyroscope about the vertical axis, the spin axis will rise or dip as it attempts to align its angular momentum with the torque. Similarly, an applied torque about a horizontal axis will cause the spin axis to precess about the vertical axis.
A gyrocompass is a gyroscope having a frame with a mass unbalance giving it a pendulosity at right angles to the spin axis. In normal operation the spin axis will be nearly horizontal and pointed north, while the pendulosity is downward. Consider a gyrocompass started with its spin axis horizontal and pointing a few degrees east of north. Earth’s rotation then causes the spin axis to rise above the horizon as seen by an Earth observer (more accurately, the horizon dips below the spin axis, which initially remains motionless in inertial space). This action produces a horizontal torque directed westward due to the effect of gravity on the pendulosity. The spin axis, obeying the basic law of gyroscopics, precesses about the vertical toward the meridian, continuing to rise because of Earth’s rotation until the meridian is reached. At this point the pendulous torque is maximum and the spin axis continues to precess through the meridian. When the spin axis is west of the meridian Earth’s rotation causes the spin axis to set, thus reducing the pendulous torque. At the same distance west of north as the starting direction was east of north, the spin axis is horizontal again but because of Earth’s rotation continues to set. This causes the spin axis to dip below the horizon and produces an eastward pendulous torque, which causes the spin axis to precess toward the meridian again and eventually precess past the meridian and back to its starting direction, where this whole process is repeated. The spin axis thus traces out an ellipse about the meridian and horizontal. The flatness of the ellipse and the period of the oscillation depend on the strength of the pendulosity.
For a gyrocompass to point north, it is necessary that the oscillation be damped out so that the unit can settle on the meridian and not keep passing through it. Damping an oscillator involves changing its energy state by opposing the velocity of the body. Two principle methods for damping have been used. The first, used in all gyrocompasses except the Sperry, was developed by Schuler. It consists of applying an antipendulous torque caused by the restricted flow of a viscous fluid responding to the tilt of the gyroscopic element. Viscosity and direction of flow through the constriction are combined so that the torque is applied in the proper phase for damping. The torque is horizontal and ideally is directed so as to precess the gyro toward the meridian at all times: it points west when the spin axis is east of the meridian and east when the spin axis is west of the meridian. The combined action of pendulous and damping torques changes the previously mentioned elliptical motion of the undamped regime to a spiraling-in motion toward the meridian. Viscous friction absorbs the energy withdrawn to effect the damping.
The second method of damping is used in the Sperry gyrocompass. The Sperry compass is supported by a wire suspension with a power-driven follow-up system, known as a phantom ring, which is a type of servomechanism. Damping involves applying the pendulous torque in such a manner that its interaction with the phantom ring and follow-up motor produces a torque along the vertical axis. This attempts to reduce the tilt of the gyroscopic element. Since tilt and motion in the horizontal plane are coupled together in a gyrocompass, this method also serves to damp the spin axis toward the meridian. The energy for damping is furnished by the motor that operates the phantom ring. This system has antipendulous action, and damping is obtained by adding energy to the system.
In its steady state a gyrocompass has a slight upward tilt on the north side of its spin axis in the Northern Hemisphere and a downward tilt in the Southern Hemisphere. This produces the torque required to precess the gyrocompass relative to inertial space about the vertical axis at the same rate that the meridian is rotating about that axis because of Earth’s rotation. This rate is zero at the Equator and increases to full Earth rate at the poles. Because of this equilibrium tilt, the damping method used in the Sperry gyrocompass causes the spin axis to settle slightly east of the meridian in the Northern Hemisphere and west in the Southern. This is a small known angle that is readily compensated for in the heading indication.
The Anschütz and Arma compasses are supported by flotation. The pendulous torque is obtained by simply mounting the unit with the centre of gravity below the pivot. Damping is obtained by restricted flow of a viscous fluid in a tube. The Brown compass is supported by a pulsing oil column. The pendulous torque is obtained by the flow of oil between two tanks. Air pressure generated by the spin of the gyro wheel forces the oil uphill to give it pendulosity, since it is naturally antipendulous, or top-heavy. It is damped by restricted flow of a viscous fluid in a tube. The Sperry compass is supported by a wire suspension with a power-driven phantom ring to remove torsion (twisting) from the wires. Surrounding the phantom ring is a frame called the ballistic. The pendulous torque is obtained by the flow of mercury between two tanks (the mercury ballistic). As this action is antipendulous, the equilibrium direction of the gyroscopic angular momentum is south. This combination of two potentially unstable components produces a stable system. It is damped by the follow-up motor, which receives a signal proportional to the displacement of the phantom ring from the wheel-supporting gimbal.
