Illinois Central Railroad (IC),  former U.S. railroad founded in 1851 that expanded service from Illinois to much of the Midwest before merging with the Canadian National Railway Company (CN) in 1999.
With its charter in 1851, the Illinois Central Railroad was the first of many railroads to receive a grant of land upon completion of its line. In 1856 the line from Chicago to Cairo, Illinois, was opened, thereby earning the company 2.5 million acres (1,011,750 hectares). At Cairo passengers and freight transferred to Mississippi River steamers for further travel until a bridge across the Mississippi was opened in 1889. While it was expanding, the IC absorbed more than 100 smaller railroads, including the Waterloo, Cedar Falls, and Northern Railroad in 1956. In 1962 the Illinois Central became a component of parent company IC Industries, a holding company that eventually acquired interests in soft drink bottlers and auto parts companies, among others.
In 1971 all passenger service was assumed by Amtrak, which retained the City of New Orleans train route made famous by folksinger Steve Goodman’s song of the same name. After a merger in 1972 with the Gulf, Mobile and Ohio, the newly renamed Illinois Central Gulf Railroad provided service from Chicago to the Gulf of Mexico and linked 13 states. Its tracks extended from Chicago in the north to New Orleans, Louisiana, and other gulf ports in the south and from Indianapolis, Indiana and Louisville, Kentucky in the east to Omaha, Nebraska, in the west. IC initiated piggyback (truck trailer) service in 1975 as a means of competing with the trucking industry. The railroad, returning to the name Illinois Central in 1988, was eventually spun off from IC Industries and in 1990 continued operations as a public corporation, the Illinois Central Railroad Company, until its 1999 merger with CN. The IC logo was eventually phased out in favour of CN branding, although it remained on much of the former railroad’s rolling stock for a number of years.
