Jacob H. Schiff,  (born Jan. 10, 1847, Frankfurt am Main—died Sept. 25, 1920, New York City), American financier and philanthropist. As head of the investment banking firm of Kuhn, Loeb, and Company he became one of the leading railroad bankers in the United States, playing a pivotal role in the reorganization of several transcontinental lines around the turn of the 20th century.
Schiff was educated in Germany and emigrated to the United States in 1865, settling in New York and becoming a U.S. citizen in 1870. In 1875 he married the daughter of Solomon Loeb, then head of Kuhn, Loeb, and Company, and joined the firm promptly thereafter. Schiff took charge of the company in 1885 upon Loeb’s death.
In 1897 Schiff attained considerable prestige in banking circles when he provided the financial backing that enabled railroad magnate Edward H. Harriman to purchase control of the bankrupt Union Pacific Railroad. Later he was a major figure in the protracted but ultimately inconclusive struggle for control of the Northern Pacific, backing Harriman against James J. Hill and his banker, J.P. Morgan. The struggle brought about the stock market panic of 1901, and the warring factions agreed to a compromise, banding together to form the Northern Securities Company. The legality of the new firm was challenged, however, by President Theodore Roosevelt under the anti-trust laws, and the Supreme Court ordered the company dissolved in 1904. Schiff’s banking firm also arranged numerous other transactions involving major railroads throughout the country, most notably the Pennsylvania Railroad. Through Kuhn, Loeb, and Company he played a central role in securing $200,000,000 in loans for Japan in the United States in 1904 during the Russo-Japanese War, for which he was subsequently decorated by the emperor of Japan.
In his later years Schiff increasingly turned his attention to charity. He was said to have contributed to nearly every Jewish and many nonsectarian charities in New York, as well as to Harvard and Cornell universities and the American Red Cross.
