Jean-Pierre Blanchard, in full Jean-Pierre-François Blanchard,  (born July 4, 1753, Les Andelys, France—died  March 7, 1809, Paris), French balloonist who, with the American physician John Jeffries, made the first aerial crossing of the English Channel. He was also the first to make balloon flights in England, North America, Germany, Belgium, and Poland.
During the 1770s Blanchard worked on the design of heavier-than-air flying machines, notably one based upon a theory of rowing in the air currents with oars and tiller. Following the demonstrations of hot-air-balloon flying by the Montgolfier brothers in Annonay, France, in 1783, Blanchard took up ballooning.
On March 2, 1784, in Paris, Blanchard made his first ascent. On January 7, 1785, he and Jeffries ascended over Dover, England. The two aviators were compelled to heave all cargo overboard except the package of the first international airmail, delivered successfully upon their safe landing in the Felmores Forest, France.
Ever the showman, Blanchard tossed a dog equipped with an experimental parachute over the side of a balloon and later tried parachute jumping himself. He also unsuccessfully tried using sails to add maneuverability and facilitate propulsion in balloons.
After making a number of exhibition flights in Europe, Blanchard made the first balloon flight in North America, on January 9, 1793, when he ascended from the Washington Prison Yard in Philadelphia and landed in Gloucester county, New Jersey. This flight, observed by President George Washington, spurred interest in ballooning in the United States. Blanchard returned to Europe and, with his wife, Marie, who had also learned to fly balloons, performed many other exhibitions.
Blanchard suffered a heart attack on a flight over The Hague in February 1808 and fell more than 50 feet; he never recovered from the fall. His widow continued flying in balloons, but in 1819 she fell to her death when her hydrogen balloon was ignited during a fireworks display in Paris.
