Kaguya,  Japan’s second unmanned mission to the Moon, launched by the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency in September 2007. Its proper name, Selene (Selenological and Engineering Explorer), was derived from the ancient Greek goddess of the Moon. Kaguya, chosen from among many suggestions received from the Japanese public, is the name of a legendary princess who spurns earthly suitors and returns to the Moon. Kaguya comprised three spacecraft launched together and then deployed once in lunar orbit: the Selene orbiter proper, the Ouna (Very Long Baseline Interferometry) Radio (VRAD) satellite, and the Okina radio relay satellite. (Okina and Ouna are the elderly couple who adopt Kaguya in the legend.)
Kaguya was launched into Earth orbit on Sept. 14, 2007, from the Tanegashima Space Center on Tanegashima Island, Kagoshima prefecture. Following two maneuvers, it entered a translunar injection orbit that lasted almost five days. Before Kaguya entered lunar orbit, Okina and then Ouna were released into elliptical polar orbits. The main 1,984-kg (4,374-pound) spacecraft then entered a circular polar orbit roughly 100 km (60 miles) high. Operations started on Oct. 20, 2007. Okina and Ouna were used to ensure continuous communication between Earth and Selene and to help map gravity variations in the Moon as mass variations accelerated and decelerated the craft, thus causing the frequency of Okina and Ouna’s radio signals to shift according to the Doppler effect. Okina crashed into the Moon on Feb. 12, 2009. Selene’s orbit was lowered to 50 km (30 miles) in Februrary 2009 and again to 10 km (6 miles) in April 2009. It was crashed into the Moon on June 10, 2009.
The three spacecraft supported 13 scientific experiments. The most notable was a high-definition television (HDTV) camera with wide-angle and telephoto lenses and 2.2-megapixel imagers. Early in the mission it returned stunning images of Earth rising above the lunar horizon. Selene had three other major scientific imaging experiments that had resolutions as small as 10 metres (33 feet) at the lunar surface and covered wavelengths from the visible through the near-infrared. One of these experiments, the Terrain Camera, had forward- and aft-looking components for stereo imaging. Other instruments measured particles, magnetic fields, and radiation scattered back into space (in order to assay the surface chemistry).
