Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO),  a U.S. spacecraft that mapped the surface of the Moon in order to help select ideal sites for uncrewed and eventually crewed lunar landers. After a series of postponements, the LRO was successfully launched on June 18, 2009, from Cape Canaveral, Florida, on an Atlas rocket that also launched the Lunar Crater Observation and Sensing Satellite (LCROSS), which was designed to seek water at the lunar south pole. After transferring from Earth orbit to lunar orbit, the LRO was placed in an elliptical, polar commissioning orbit for approximately two months before using onboard thrusters to lower its orbit to a height of 50 km (30 miles). In 2015 its orbit was lowered to a height of 20 km (12 miles) above the Moon’s south pole. Its mission is expected to last into the 2020s.
The U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration had given highest priority to characterization of the radiation environment in lunar orbit since this would have been a major health consideration for space crews on future missions of the proposed Constellation program. To that end, the Cosmic Ray Telescope for the Effects of Radiation carried two special silicon and plastic detectors aboard the LRO, one aimed toward the lunar surface and the other spaceward. These detectors were designed to absorb radiation in the same way as human bone and muscle tissue.
The Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera mapped most of the surface (including regions covered by Apollo and other missions) in order to determine crater formation rates and hazards as well as smaller features that may be hazardous to spacecraft landing on the Moon. Sites suitable for in situ resource utilization had the highest importance. The camera also took photos of places visited by previous American and Soviet missions to the Moon, such as the Apollo missions and the Lunokhod rovers, and in 2019 it found the crash sites of the Israeli Beresheet and the Indian Vikram landers. Data from the Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter were used to produce topographic maps with a vertical accuracy of 1 metre (3 feet).
The search for water that can be used by future lunar bases was aided by three instruments. The Lyman-Alpha Mapper looked for the ultraviolet glow specific to hydrogen in permanently shadowed regions. The Diviner Lunar Radiometer charted how surface materials heat and cool during lunar day and night, and the Lunar Exploration Neutron Detector measured neutrons scattered back to space by hydrogen nuclei.
