Nakasone Yasuhiro,  (born May 27, 1918, Takasaki, Japan—died November 29, 2019, Tokyo), Japanese politician who was leader of the Liberal-Democratic Party (LDP; 1982–89) and prime minister of Japan (1982–87).
The son of a wealthy lumber dealer, Nakasone graduated (1941) from Tokyo Imperial University (now University of Tokyo) and served as a lieutenant in the imperial navy during World War II. At war’s end he was a distant witness of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima. In 1947 Nakasone was elected to the lower house of the Diet (parliament), becoming one of the youngest persons ever to hold a seat in that body. He retained his seat in subsequent elections and successively held several cabinet posts, including that of transport (1967–68), defense (1970–71), and international trade and industry (1972–74).
After Prime Minister Suzuki Zenko resigned (October 1982), Nakasone, an ally of the powerful Tanaka Kakuei, won a four-way contest to become the president of the LDP and thus, by reason of that party’s dominance, prime minister of Japan. He was formally elected prime minister by the Japanese Diet in November 1982. The political opposition was able to force early parliamentary elections in December 1983. The LDP lost its absolute majority, but Nakasone kept his office by forming a coalition cabinet.
As prime minister, Nakasone sought to strengthen Japan’s ties with the United States by increasing Japan’s contribution to its own defense and by lowering Japanese trade barriers to American goods. His efforts to increase defense spending aroused considerable controversy in Japan. Outspokenly patriotic, Nakasone tried to enhance Japan’s reputation as one of the world’s leading economic powers by making frequent overseas trips to confer with Japan’s allies. On the domestic scene, he sponsored a program of government austerity measures in an effort to reduce Japan’s public debt.
In October 1984 Nakasone was reaffirmed as president of the LDP, thus gaining a second term as prime minister. The Japanese economy continued its sustained growth under his administration, and by the end of Nakasone’s second term Japan had become the world’s largest creditor nation and had begun to rival the power of the United States in the world economy.
Though the LDP remained in power, Nakasone was not granted a third term. Infighting led him to choose his own successor: Takeshita Noboru, who took office in 1987. Because he continued to wield great power within the party, Nakasone in May 1989 was forced to resign formally from the LDP—though he remained in the Diet—after Prime Minister Takeshita and others in the LDP were implicated in an influence-peddling scandal. He rejoined the LDP in April 1991. Nakasone continued to serve in the Diet until his resignation in 2003.
In 1988 he founded the Nakasone Peace Institute and served as its chairman.
