National Maritime Museum,  national museum concerned with the maritime history of Great Britain. It is situated near the River Thames in Greenwich Park, Greenwich, southeast London.
The National Maritime Museum actually occupies three buildings. The principal building, known as the Queen’s House, was designed by Inigo Jones and was completed in 1635 for Henrietta Maria, wife of Charles I. It was built on the grounds of the former Tudor royal palace where Elizabeth I was born. During the 19th century, two wings were added after the complex became a school for the orphans of sailors. The building was further enlarged for use as the Royal Naval College. The museum was established by act of Parliament in 1934, and, following renovation of the buildings left vacant by the school (1933–35), it occupied the complex. The Royal Observatory Greenwich, also located in the park, is administered by the museum. The observatory was founded by Charles II in 1675 and marks the 0° longitude meridian.
The collections of the museum are diverse and extensive. The holdings of ship models and ship plans date from the 17th century, and there is also a significant collection of boats that date from prehistoric times but that are mainly from the 19th century and later. A fine collection of navigational and astronomical instruments includes outstanding globes and chronometers. The museum has a particularly fine group of Dutch and British marine artworks, including 1,400 drawings by the 17th-century artists Willem van de Veldes the Elder and Willem the Younger.  There are also much decorative art (often of a commemorative nature), other memorabilia, and an extensive archive that includes film and photographs.
Some of the finest paintings are exhibited in the Queen’s House and include works by Sir Peter Lely, Sir Anthony Van Dyck, William Hogarth, Sir Joshua Reynolds, George Romney, and J.M.W. Turner. There is a broadly chronological approach to the main museum displays, which pay special attention to such mariners as Lord Nelson and James Cook. The Royal Observatory Greenwich contains much historical material relating to the site and also houses a planetarium.
