Navigation,  science of directing a craft by determining its position, course, and distance traveled. Navigation is concerned with finding the way to the desired destination, avoiding collisions, conserving fuel, and meeting schedules.
Navigation is derived from the Latin navis (“ship”) and agere (“to drive”). Early mariners who embarked on voyages of exploration gradually developed systematic methods of observing and recording their position, the distances and directions they traveled, the currents of wind and water, and the hazards and havens they encountered. The facts accumulated in their journals made it possible for them to find their way home and for them or their successors to repeat and extend their exploits. Each successful landfall became a signpost along a route that could be retraced and integrated into a growing body of reliable information.
For these pathfinders, the danger of running into another vessel was negligible, but, as traffic expanded along established routes, collision avoidance became a concern. Emphasis shifted from finding the way to maintaining safe distances between craft moving in various directions at different speeds. Larger ships are easier to see but require more time to change speed or direction. When many ships are in a small area, an evasive action taken to avoid a collision may endanger other ships. This problem has been alleviated near busy seaports by confining incoming and outgoing ships to separate lanes, which are clearly marked and divided by the greatest practical distance. Airplanes travel so fast that, even though two pilots may see one another in time to initiate evasive action, their maneuvers may be nullified if either one incorrectly predicts the other’s move. Ground-based air traffic controllers are charged with the responsibility for assigning aircraft to selected paths that minimize the likelihood of collision. Civil air navigation is profoundly influenced by the requirements of following the instructions of these controllers.
The advent of steam-powered ships during the first half of the 19th century added the problem of minimizing fuel consumption to the navigator’s duties. In particular, beyond a certain safety factor, carrying excess fuel needlessly reduces cargo capacity.
Adherence to a predetermined schedule, a matter of vital importance in space navigation in connection with fuel consumption, has become important in sea and air navigation for a different reason. Today each voyage or flight is a single link in a coordinated network of transport that carries people and goods from any starting place to any chosen destination. The efficient operation of the whole system depends upon assurance that each journey will begin and end at the specified times.
Modern navigation, in short, has to do with a globally integrated transportation system in which each voyage from start to finish is concerned with four basic objectives: staying on course, avoiding collisions, minimizing fuel consumption, and conforming to an established timetable.
The earliest navigators probably learned to steer their ships between distant ports by familiarizing themselves with the sequences of intervening landmarks. This everyday visual approach to navigation is called piloting. Keeping these reference points in view required that they stay quite close to shore, but they made the transition to ocean voyages well out of sight of land thousands of years ago in various parts of the world. Regular trade was carried on between the island of Crete and Egypt, a distance of approximately 300 miles (500 km), more than 25 centuries before the Christian era. A passage in the Odyssey describes such a voyage from Crete: running before a north wind, sailing ships reached the mouth of the Nile in five days. Longer and longer routes became established by later sailors. By 600 bc the Phoenicians were routinely importing tin from Cornwall in the British Isles. Well before the 10th century ad, Irish seafarers successively reached the Shetland Islands, the Faeroe Islands, and Iceland, crossing 200 to 300 miles (300 to 500 km) of the North Atlantic at each stage. The Vikings repeated those passages and ventured even farther, settling Greenland and visiting North America. By about ad 400, Polynesian navigators had reached Hawaii from the Marquesas Islands, 2,300 miles (3,700 km) across the open Pacific.
The details of how these voyagers found their way are not known, but the use of the Sun and stars as guides is mentioned in many sources, including the works of Homer and Herodotus, the Bible, and the Norse sagas.
East and west are traditionally synonymous with the directions of sunrise and sunset; north and south are determined by the directions of shadows cast by the noonday Sun. By night the stars rise in the east and set in the west, and in the Northern Hemisphere their apparent rotation around the Pole Star due to the Earth’s rotation has long been a fact of the navigator’s life.
For many centuries practical navigators oriented themselves by relying just as strongly on meteorological clues (the directions from which steady winds blew) as on astronomical ones (the positions and apparent motions of the Sun and stars). The Mediterranean sailor could confidently distinguish the cold north wind from the warm south wind. Names were assigned to eight principal winds, and the directions of these winds became the eight equally spaced points of the wind rose (rosa ventorum) of the Classical mariner. The wind rose may have been devised by the Etruscans, whose power reached its peak around the 6th century bc; it certainly antedates the octagonal Tower of the Winds built in Athens by Andronicus of Cyrrhus about 100 bc. From Roman times through the Middle Ages, an alternative 12-point wind rose was used by some navigators, but it was discarded in the 15th century when the Portuguese, at the opening of the great age of discovery, subdivided the eight points of the ancients and introduced a 16-point system.
The first written aid to coastal navigation was the pilot book, or periplus, in which the courses to be steered between ports were set forth in terms of wind directions. These books, of which examples survive from the 4th century bc, described routes, headlands, landmarks, anchorages, currents, and port entrances. No doubt the same information had formerly been passed along by word of mouth, as it still is in some parts of the world. It seems improbable that any sort of sea chart was used with these sailing guides, even though Herodotus’s map of the known world, drawn in the 5th century bc, delineated the Mediterranean shoreline quite accurately. Reliable sea charts were not introduced until the advent of the magnetic compass and of methods for determining latitude and longitude.
Distances were cited in the early pilot books in units of a day’s sail. Later, distances were deduced from estimates of the ship’s speed and the lengths of time over which these speeds were maintained. Probably the oldest method of determining the speed is the so-called Dutchman’s log, in which a floating object, the log, was dropped overboard from the bow of the ship; the time elapsing before it passed the stern was counted off by the navigator, who kept it in sight while walking the length of the vessel. This technique was eventually replaced by that in which the log, attached to a reel of light line, was dropped from the stern; as the ship moved away from the log, the length of line paid out during the emptying of a sandglass was the measure of the speed.
In Seaman’s Practice (1637) the English navigator Richard Norwood recommended the use of a line knotted at intervals of 50 feet (15 metres) and a 30-second sandglass; knotted intervals of 47 to 48 feet (14.3 to 14.6 metres) and a 28-second sandglass were later adopted to accord with nautical miles of slightly different lengths. In the United Kingdom a nautical mile is defined as 6,080 feet (1,853 metres). In 1953 the United States switched from the English standard to the metric, or international, standard of 1,852 metres (6,076 feet). With the international standard nautical mile, knots were spaced about 14.4 metres (approximately 47.25 feet) along the rope. If the first knot appeared as the sand ran out, the ship’s speed was 1,852 metres per hour—one nautical mile per hour, or one knot.
As early as 1688 an English instrument maker, Humphry Cole, invented the so-called patent log, in which a vaned rotor was towed from the stern, and its revolutions were counted on a register. Logs of this kind did not become common until the mid-19th century, when the register was mounted on the aft rail, where it could be read at any time; another Englishman, Thomas Walker, introduced successive refinements of the patent log beginning in 1861. This form of log is still in use.
