Pancho Barnes, original name Florence Lowe,  (born July 14, 1901, Pasadena, Calif., U.S.—died March 1975, Boron, Calif.), aviator and movie stunt pilot, one of the first American women to establish a reputation and a business in the field of aviation.
Florence Lowe was reared in an atmosphere of wealth and privilege on an estate in San Marino, California. As the granddaughter of Thaddeus Lowe, who had established the balloon corps for the Army of the Potomac during the American Civil War, she inherited a zeal for aviation. When she was 18 years old, she married C. Rankin Barnes, an Episcopal priest, and she gave birth to a son several years later. Her personality was not well suited to life as a clergyman’s wife, however, and in 1928 she left her husband and son for a time. Donning men’s clothing, she traveled to Mexico aboard a freighter and then roamed through the Mexican countryside for four months. During this adventure she acquired the nickname “Pancho,” a moniker she kept for the rest of her life.
Pancho Barnes returned to San Marino later in 1928. She soon purchased her first airplane, a Travelair biplane, and hired a flight instructor; she made her first solo flight after only six hours of lessons. Well known for her mischievous aerial antics, she nevertheless put great effort into becoming an expert pilot. In August 1929 she participated in the first Women’s Air Derby, a cross-country race from Santa Monica, California, to Cleveland, Ohio. She was in the lead in the second stage of the race but was forced to withdraw after colliding with a truck on a runway. She competed in the race again the next year, when her average speed of 196.19 miles per hour set a new world speed record for women, surpassing Amelia Earhart’s record from the previous year.
In 1929 Barnes performed air stunts for Howard Hughes’s film Hell’s Angels, thus becoming the first woman stunt pilot in the motion picture industry. Soon thereafter she created a company that provided stunt pilots to film studios. In 1930 she became the first woman to pilot an airplane from Los Angeles to Mexico City, making the trip in comfortable stages. She organized another cross-country race for female pilots the following year. In 1934 she joined other female pilots in organizing an aviator group designed to provide emergency assistance during times of disaster.
Barnes’s inheritance began to disintegrate during the early years of the Great Depression, and she used most of her remaining money to purchase a ranch in the Mojave Desert in southeastern California in 1933. She moved there with her 12-year-old son and soon began to sell provisions to a nearby military encampment. When the encampment became Muroc Army Air Field, Barnes opened the doors of her ranch to off-duty pilots. She expanded her property into a resort, complete with bars, a restaurant, a dance hall, and a motel. After World War II, when the airfield became Edwards Air Force Base, the foremost U.S. experimental flight testing centre, the resort retained its popularity with the test pilots. The growth of the air force base and a fire brought Barnes’s ranch to an end in the 1950s.
Over the years Barnes married and divorced four times. She spent her later years racing horses and raising dogs.
