Prairie schooner,  19th-century covered wagon popularly used by emigrants traveling to the American West. In particular, it was the vehicle of choice on the Oregon Trail. The name prairie schooner was derived from the wagon’s white canvas cover, or bonnet, which gave it the appearance, from a distance, of the sailing ship known as a schooner.
The prairie schooner was smaller and lighter than the Conestoga wagon—which at the time was popular in the eastern United States for hauling freight—and therefore was more suitable for long-distance travel. Unlike the Conestoga, which had a body that angled up at each end and prevented cargo from tipping or falling out, the prairie schooner had a flat horizontal body. The typical box, the sides of which were lower than those of the Conestoga, was about 4 feet (1.2 metres) wide, 9 to 11 feet (2.7 to 3.4 metres) long, and 2 to 3 feet (0.6 to 0.9 metre) deep. With the bonnet, the wagon stood about 10 feet (3 metres) tall, and the total length of the wagon from front tongue and yoke to rear measured some 23 feet (7 metres). The box sat on two sets of wheels of different sizes: the rear wheels were about 50 inches (125 cm) in diameter, and the front wheels (made smaller to facilitate turning) were about 44 inches (112 cm). The wheels were made of wood, with iron bands fastened to the outside of the rims; at times, when the wood would shrink, these “tires” would separate from the rim.
The cotton canvas cover was of a double thickness, and the bonnet was often cantilevered out from the front and rear of the wagon bed for better protection of the interior during storms. The ends of the cover could also be tied for greater privacy and still more protection from rain or dust. The wagon was waterproofed by painting or oiling it. Storage chests were often built to fit snugly against the inside of the wagon box, and others could be lashed outside. Extra storage space was often created by partitioning an area under a false floor and by sewing pockets onto the inside of the cover.
A typical prairie schooner weighed about 1,300 pounds (590 kg) when empty, and the general goal was to keep the weight of the added cargo to no more than 2,000 pounds (900 kg). Teams of 10 to 12 horses or mules or six yoked oxen typically were used to pull one of these wagons, with mules and oxen generally preferred. Ideally, several more animals would be kept in reserve to replace those that became lame or worn-out along the route.
Since prairie schooners had no suspension and the roads and trails at the time were rough, most people on long treks preferred to walk alongside the wagon or ride a horse (if they had one) rather than endure the wagon’s constant jolting and lurching. Ox teams were not controlled with reins, so the driver walked alongside the animals, using a whip and spoken commands to guide them. The usual average rate of travel with such wagons on the Oregon Trail was about 2 miles (3.2 km) per hour, and the average distance covered each day was about 15 to 20 miles (24 to 32 km). This was an easy pace for both the pioneers and their animals.
