Seaplane,  any of a class of aircraft that can land, float, and take off on water. Seaplanes with boatlike hulls are also known as flying boats, those with separate pontoons or floats as floatplanes. The first practical seaplanes were built and flown in the United States by Glenn H. Curtiss, in 1911 and 1912. Curtiss’ inventions led to the British F-boats of World War I, which originated such naval air missions as over-ocean patrol, antisubmarine warfare, mine laying, and air–sea rescue. After the war, commercial versions of the same seaplanes set the range and endurance records of the time. In 1919 the U.S. Navy’s water-based NC-4 made the first crossing of the North Atlantic, via the Azores. By the late 1920s the largest and fastest aircraft in the world were seaplanes. Their utility and versatility were dramatized by a Soviet flight of an ANT-4 fitted with floats from Moscow to New York City in 1929 via Siberia and by fleets of Italian planes that flew from Rome to Rio de Janeiro and from Rome to Chicago in the 1930s. After the outbreak of World War II, the military and commercial significance of seaplanes gradually diminished, partly because of increased range of land-based planes and partly because of the construction of land bases and aircraft carriers. Following World War II, development of water-based aircraft continued, but only on a small scale.
A seaplane must have sufficient buoyancy to float on water and must also have some means for supporting its weight while moving along the water surface at speeds up to flying speeds. It must be able to take off and land with a margin of stability and control on the part of the pilot; its structure must be strong enough to withstand the shock of landing; and its water resistance must be low enough to permit reasonably short takeoff runs.
Ways of meeting these requirements were provided by Curtiss in two forms. He developed the float seaplane, which is essentially a land plane with buoyant floats or pontoons substituted for the landing wheels, and the flying boat, in which the main float and the fuselage are combined in a single boatlike body. In either case float design includes a stepped bottom to facilitate takeoff. As speed and lift increase, the seaplane lifts onto its step so that it is barely skimming the water with friction at a minimum. Single-float seaplanes and single-hull flying boats require side floats or wing-tip floats to keep them upright. Twin-float seaplanes do not require the auxiliary floats, nor do twin hull flying boats and single hull boats with stub wings, or sponsons, located at the waterline.
The addition of a retractable landing wheel gear to a float seaplane or flying boat, also accomplished by Curtiss, created the amphibian aircraft capable of operating from land runways or water. A post-World War II development was the pantobase, or all-base, airplane incorporating devices for operating from water or from a variety of unprepared surfaces such as snow, ice, mud, and sod.
