Shipping route,   any of the lines of travel followed by merchant sea vessels. Early routes usually kept within sight of coastal landmarks, but, as navigators learned to determine latitude from the heavenly bodies, they ventured onto the high seas more freely. When exact positions could be fixed, the effects of prevailing winds and currents began to be taken into consideration in determining routes.
The first systematic study of ship routes was undertaken in the 19th century with the aid of shipmasters’ logbooks by Lieutenant Matthew Fontaine Maury of the U.S. Navy. Maury’s Pilot Charts, containing recommended routes, earned him the title of “Pathfinder of the Seas.” Within a few years, as steam propulsion was introduced and wind ceased to be a navigational consideration, modern shipping lanes were gradually adopted. They are based simply on the fact that a great circle on the Earth’s surface is the shortest distance between two ports. Deviations are made only to avoid land or ice masses and unfavourable meteorological conditions. The hydrographic offices of the world have published volumes of sailing directions with advice on routes. Definite lanes have been recognized in the North Atlantic between the United States and Europe.
As early as 1855 Maury recognized the danger of collision in the North Atlantic because of the fog, high travel density, and annual incursions of icebergs. In his Sailing Directions (1855), he included “Steamer Lanes Across the Atlantic,” with recommended separate lanes for eastbound and westbound steamers. In 1898, at the instigation of the U.S. Navy Hydrographic Office, the five principal transatlantic steamship companies of the day concluded the voluntary North Atlantic Track agreement to adopt regular steamer lanes. These lanes remained unchanged until 1924, when the seasonal tracks still in use in the late 20th century were adopted.
The first International Convention for Safety of Life at Sea was convened at London in 1913 as a result of the sinking of the British steamer Titanic. At the convention, companies were obliged to give public notice of the routes their vessels would follow, and owners were urged to follow routes adopted by the principal companies. The convention also established an international ice patrol to warn ships of dangerous ice and recommend safe tracks. Since the patrol’s inception, no lives have been lost or vessels sunk on the U.S.–European lanes because of icebergs. 
