Solar wind power satellite,  large hypothetical satellite that would harvest energy from solar wind. A stream of energized charged particles from the Sun, solar wind has the potential to be a major source of energy for human civilizations. In 2010 American scientists Brooks L. Harrop and Dirk Schulze-Makuch proposed the satellite as a feasible alternative to the construction of a Dyson sphere, a gigantic sphere conceived in 1960 by British-born American physicist Freeman Dyson as enclosing the parent star of a planet and drawing on the star’s energy to power the planet’s civilization.
To capture energy from solar wind, a solar wind power satellite would rely on a long straight current-carrying copper wire directed toward the Sun. The current would create a magnetic field in concentric circles around the wire. That magnetic field would exert a force, known as a Lorentz force, on moving charged particles, which in turn would attract electrons toward a metal receiver situated on the wire. The channeling of electrons through the receiver would produce current, some of which would be transferred back to the copper wire to create a self-sustaining magnetic field. The remainder of the current would flow through a resistor on the wire and be transformed into a laser beam for long-distance transport to Earth. A large sail would help stabilize the satellite.
Solar wind power satellite technology has the potential to generate a vast amount of power. Harrop claimed that a satellite with a wire 1 km (0.62 mile) in length and a sail 8,400 km (5,220 miles) in width would generate 100 billion times the power needed by humanity annually. In addition, the materials needed to construct the satellite would be relatively inexpensive, because the satellite would be made mostly of copper. Furthermore, while the magnetic field would attract electrons, it would repel positively charged particles, thereby protecting the satellite from other destructive particles that make up solar wind.
The major limitation of the technology centres on the transport of energy back to Earth. The planet’s magnetic field, particularly the Van Allen radiation belt, acts as a shield to solar wind. Therefore, in order for the satellite to have access to electrons from solar wind, it would have to be placed at least 65,000 km (about 40,390 miles) away from Earth. Existing laser technology would not be able to focus a laser beam through that distance, especially after taking into account that the satellite may not be stationary. Hence, the beam would widen and disperse, and its energy would be lost.
