Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO),  satellite managed jointly by the European Space Agency (ESA) and the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) that is equipped with a battery of novel instruments to study the Sun.
SOHO was launched by NASA on an Atlas rocket on Dec. 2, 1995. In order to provide continuous observations, it was maneuvered to orbit the first Lagrangian point (L1), a point some 1.5 million km (900,000 miles) from Earth toward the Sun where the gravitational attraction of Earth and the Sun combine in such a way that a small body remains approximately at rest relative to both. SOHO’s suite of 11 instruments included three to conduct helioseismological investigations of the structure and dynamics of the solar interior, from the core out to the surface; five to study the means by which the corona is heated; and three to study where and how the solar wind is accelerated away from the Sun. The goal was to start observations near the minimum of the solar cycle in order to monitor the buildup to the next maximum.
In monitoring the corona, SOHO caught a surprisingly large number of comets (one every few weeks) diving into the Sun. More than 2,000 comets have been found in SOHO images, making it the top “discoverer” of comets of all time.
After an incorrect command on June 25, 1998, caused SOHO to spin out of control, the spacecraft was slowly nursed back to life. In December 2000, when the Sun was at its most active, SOHO undertook solar wind studies in coordination with Ulysses, which was then flying high in solar orbit over the Sun’s southern polar region, in order to construct three-dimensional maps.
Among its many achievements, SOHO found that sunspots are shallow and that a hurricane-like structure at their base keeps them stable. Helioseismological data were used to make images of the far side of the Sun. Sunspot activity on the far side of the Sun could also be monitored by observing how the ultraviolet light emitted by the sunspots interacts with nearby hydrogen gas. SOHO also determined that the solar wind flows outward by waves in vibrating magnetic field lines.
