William James Pirrie, Viscount Pirrie, in full William James Pirrie, Viscount Pirrie of Belfast, also called (1906–21) Baron Pirrie of Belfast,  (born May 31, 1847, Quebec, Canada East [now Quebec province, Canada]—died June 7, 1924, at sea), Irish shipbuilder who controlled Harland and Wolff, the largest ship-construction firm in the world and the builder of the passenger liner Titanic.
Pirrie was born in Canada to Irish parents, and after his father’s death in 1849 the family moved back to Ireland. In 1862 Pirrie became apprentice to the Belfast shipbuilding firm of Harland and Wolff. By the time he was 27 years old he had been made a partner and was soon left in almost exclusive control. He traveled widely to gain experience in ship design and to study practical shipping requirements. Pirrie contributed much to the burgeoning steel shipbuilding industry and was prominent in the development of the diesel engine for marine propulsion. In 1902 he worked with John Pierpont Morgan to create the International Mercantile Marine, an amalgamation of transatlantic shipping lines, notably the White Star Line, which was a customer of Harland and Wolff. In 1907 Pirrie and the line’s chairman, J. Bruce Ismay, reportedly met to devise a plan to build a class of immense luxury passenger ships. Harland and Wolff subsequently built the Olympic, the Titanic, and the Britannic, which were the largest ships at the time. The sinking of the Titanic in 1912 had little adverse impact on Harland and Wolff.
Created a baron in 1906, Pirrie became a viscount in 1921. As comptroller general of merchant shipbuilding in 1918, he helped replace British shipping lost to submarine warfare. He was also mainly responsible for introducing the idea of standardizing ships, a principle that was adopted in Britain and the United States during World War II. In addition to his shipbuilding work, Pirrie was involved in Irish politics, and he largely supported unionism. In 1921 he became a member of Northern Ireland’s Senate.
Pirrie’s marriage was childless, and his title became extinct in 1924, when he died aboard the liner Ebro while returning to New York City following a business trip to South America. His body was returned to Belfast on the Olympic.
