William George Fargo,  (born May 20, 1818, Pompey, New York, U.S.—died August 3, 1881, Buffalo), American businessman who was one of the pioneering founders of Wells, Fargo & Company.
Fargo was born into the farming family of William C. and Tracy Strong Fargo and would ultimately employ most of his 11 siblings. At age 13 he subcontracted to deliver the mail on a 43-mile (69-km) route around his hometown of Pompey, New York, which ultimately influenced his life.  As a young adult he tried several occupations, and in 1840 he married local girl Anna H. Williams. Only three of their eight children lived to adulthood.
In 1841 Fargo became the first freight agent at Auburn for the Auburn & Syracuse Railroad, and his excellent performance led Henry Wells to employ him as an express messenger the next year. On April 1, 1845, Fargo became a partner in Wells & Co. and the Buffalo agent for express to and from Detroit and Chicago. When Wells moved to New York City the next year, the firm Livingston & Fargo handled his business in the western United States.
On March 18, 1850, American Express Company came into being after a bruising fight. It comprised two autonomous divisions: Livingston, Fargo & Company ran the west, while Wells, Butterfield & Company—under its vice president, John Butterfield, the largest stockholder in American Express—concentrated on the east. Butterfield constantly feuded with Fargo; the two directors united only to fight rivals and establish affiliates such as Wells, Fargo & Co., United States Express Company, and National Express Company in new territories. Under joint stock associations, directors were liable for losses, so they diversified geographically.
After Butterfield blocked American Express from participating in the California gold rush that began in 1848, Wells, Fargo & Co. came into being on March 18, 1852, to handle the Pacific Coast and ultimately all business in the Far West. Through interlocking express company directorships, Fargo took special interest in transcontinental service. Butterfield’s Overland Mail Company was a success from its beginning in September 1858, but Wells Fargo and American Express fought for control of its board. Butterfield lost. As Wells recalled about Butterfield and his actions at a directors’ meeting in 1860, “All of the profanity that one head could hold, or one tongue utter, was used to express his friendship toward me and Fargo.”
With the outbreak of the Civil War, overland mail and express services were concentrated by the government in the so-called Central Route (a southern route had been closed because of the Southern secession). In accordance with a $1 million government contract in early 1861, Overland Mail, now operated by Wells Fargo, would run the western portion of the Pony Express route from Salt Lake City to San Francisco, while Russell, Majors & Waddell (creators of the Pony Express) would continue to operate the eastern portion from Salt Lake City to St. Joseph, Missouri. When the completion of the transcontinental telegraph lines in late 1861 brought an end to the Pony Express, stagecoach king Ben Holladay—Wells Fargo’s chief competitor—stepped in and acquired that eastern leg from Russell, Majors & Waddell. That splintered competition continued for several years until the “grand consolidation” of 1866, when Wells Fargo gained control of all Holladay and Overland Mail routes, making it the undisputed stagecoach leader in the world.
Back in New York in 1866, a new rival threatened the American Express monopoly. The Merchants Union Express won the best service territory in a division that saw both companies suspending dividends amid growing losses. A stroke then disabled Butterfield, and Wells retired, whereupon Fargo (who, by that time, had served two terms as Democratic mayor of Buffalo, from 1862 to 1866) became president of American Express. After two years of cutthroat competition and on the verge of financial ruin, the two companies finally merged in 1868 to form the American Merchants Union Express Company, with Fargo as president. The company’s name was changed back to American Express in 1873.
Fargo proved as equally at ease with railroads as he was with the stagecoach express; after all, the wood-burning iron horse beat the hay-burning horse for speed anytime. He was vice president of the New York Central Railroad, the lifeline of American Express, and an active director of the Northern Pacific Railroad. The latter’s outfitting post for settlers on the Red River of the North in North Dakota was founded and named after him in 1871. Called Fargo, it grew to become the state’s largest city. Also in 1871 Fargo campaigned for a seat in the New York Senate but lost. The financial Panic of 1873 then ruined his transcontinental operations.
Meantime, Fargo, aided increasingly by his brother James, ran American Express, made a fortune, and built a huge mansion in Buffalo covering two blocks. Upon his death in 1881, he left his heirs $20 million, a home so expensive to maintain that it was razed, and his autocratic brother in charge of the company. Under James, American Express expanded its operations, famously developing money orders and traveler’s checks.
