Wright military flyer of 1909,   airplane built by Wilbur and Orville Wright and sold to the U.S. Army Signal Corps in July 1909. It was the world’s first military airplane. For the Wright brothers, it represented a first step in their efforts to produce marketable aircraft incorporating the principles that they had employed six years earlier in achieving the first powered heavier-than-air flight.
The 1909 flyer was similar to a series of aircraft that were produced by the Wrights in Dayton, Ohio, from 1907 to 1909 and are now known by the designation “Model A.” Like the other Wright machines, it was a biplane design employing the “wing-warping” control system and stabilized in the pitch axis by a horizontal stabilizer positioned forward of the wings. Twin pusher propellers were turned through a chain drive by a four-cylinder engine that generated up to 32 horsepower. The airplane was launched into the air by a weight falling from the top of a derrick.
The Army’s performance specifications called for an observation craft that would keep a pilot and passenger aloft for more than one hour and fly at an average speed of 40 miles (65 km) per hour. A throng of 10,000 people, including President William Howard Taft, gathered at Fort Myer, Va., on July 27, 1909, to watch Orville complete one of the final qualifying flights for the sale. Lieutenant Frank Purdy Lahm joined Orville for a flight of 1 hour 12 min. 374/5 sec., setting a new world’s duration record for flight with a passenger. (Portions of this trial flight are shown in the film footage.)
President Taft and 7,000 other spectators returned on July 30 to watch Orville take another passenger, Lieutenant Benjamin D. Foulois (shown standing at the wingtip at one point in the film), on a 10-mile cross-country flight to Alexandria, Va., and back, during which the machine averaged 42.583 miles per hour. With that flight the Wright brothers completed all the terms of the sale. The purchase price, including a bonus for exceeding the required speed, was $30,000.
The 1909 Wright military flyer was the machine on which the first U.S. Army aviators learned to fly (at College Park, Md., in October–November 1909). Lieutenant Foulois accompanied the airplane to Fort Sam Houston, near San Antonio, Texas, where the machine was thoroughly tested and extensively modified. After it was shipped back to the Wright factory in Dayton for rebuilding in 1911, company officials advised the Army that it could not be restored to safe flying condition. The aircraft was then donated to the Smithsonian Institution. It remains on display at the National Air and Space Museum, Washington, D.C.

