Baltimore Ravens,  American professional gridiron football team based in Baltimore, Maryland, that plays in the American Football Conference (AFC) of the National Football League (NFL). A relatively young franchise, having played their first game in 1996, the Ravens nevertheless won Super Bowl titles in 2001 and 2013.
The Ravens originated when Cleveland Browns owner Art Modell decided to relocate his historic franchise, and he reached a deal with the city of Baltimore to move his team in 1996. As part of the agreement, Cleveland kept the Browns’ name, history, and colours for a future replacement team, so the newly renamed Ravens—the moniker stems from the famous poem by Baltimorean Edgar Allan Poe—were technically an expansion team. The franchise’s first draft selection was linebacker Ray Lewis, who quickly became one of the most dominant players in the NFL and helped forge the Ravens’ reputation as a team known for its ferocious defense.
After four years without a winning record, the Ravens broke through in 2000. Led by the league’s top-ranked defense, the team won 12 games during the regular season and swept through the AFC playoffs, allowing an average of fewer than 6 points per game in the postseason. The Ravens easily defeated the New York Giants in Super Bowl XXXV the following January, and Lewis was named Most Valuable Player of the game. In addition to Lewis, the Super Bowl-winning Ravens squad featured standouts such as offensive lineman Jonathan Ogden, tight end Shannon Sharpe, and cornerback Rod Woodson. Over the remainder of the decade, the Ravens remained competitive, qualifying for the playoffs in six of the 10 seasons from 2001 to 2010—which included a loss to the rival Pittsburgh Steelers in the AFC championship game following the 2008 season—and featuring a defense ranked in the top five for total yardage allowed in six of those years.
The team continued its strong play in 2011, when the Ravens won a division title and advanced to another AFC championship game, a close loss to the New England Patriots. The following season the Ravens defeated the Patriots in an AFC title game rematch, and, with a win over the San Francisco 49ers, Baltimore claimed the franchise’s second Super Bowl. In 2013 the team’s five-year streak of playoff appearances came to an end as the Ravens finished the season with an 8–8 record. The team returned to the postseason the following year and upset the Steelers in its first playoff game before being eliminated in the divisional round. The Ravens were beset by injuries over the course of the 2015 season, which resulted in Baltimore’s falling off to a 5–11 record. The Ravens rebounded to a degree in 2016 by going 8–8 and just missing out on a division title. The team slowly improved, returning to the playoffs after capturing a division title during the 2018 season. Behind second-year quarterback Lamar Jackson, the Ravens took the league by storm in 2019, using a dynamic offensive scheme to set an NFL record with 3,296 team rushing yards and posting a franchise-best 14–2 record. However, Baltimore suffered a stunning playoff defeat in its opening game, losing to a Tennessee Titans squad that went 9–7 during the regular season.
