Brian Urlacher, in full Brian Keith Urlacher,  (born May 25, 1978, Pasco, Washington, U.S.), American professional gridiron football player known for his aggressive play and hard-hitting tackling.
In his senior year of high school, in Lovington, New Mexico, Urlacher played both wide receiver and safety on a team that went 14–0 and won the state football championship. His success in high school led to a football scholarship at the University of New Mexico. As a senior there, he played safety, linebacker, and receiver—he even returned punts—and he gained the attention of National Football League (NFL) scouts. He was selected by the Chicago Bears with the ninth pick of the 2000 NFL draft.
As the Bears’ middle linebacker, Urlacher occupied one of the NFL’s most storied positions—one played previously by Hall-of-Famers Bill George, Dick Butkus, and Mike Singletary. Urlacher made an immediate impact for the Bears, recording 124 tackles, 8 sacks, and 2 interceptions in his rookie season on his way to earning the first of his eight career Pro Bowl invitations as well as NFL Defensive Rookie of the Year honours. Although he was an excellent run defender, it was his skill against the passing game that set Urlacher apart from other middle linebackers. Measuring 6 feet 4 inches (1.93 metres) tall and weighing 258 pounds (117 kg), Urlacher was big enough to take on and shed blockers, while his speed, exceptional for a man his size, and innate instincts for reading offenses made him outstanding in dropping back into coverage or rushing the quarterback.
He was named the league’s Defensive Player of the Year in 2005, while leading one of the most dominant defenses in the NFL. In 2006 Urlacher and the Bears’ defense were the key to the team’s first Super Bowl appearance since 1986. His play fell off somewhat in the following seasons, mirroring the overall struggles of the Bears. Urlacher dislocated his wrist in the first game of the 2009 season, which caused him to miss the remainder of that year. He returned to play three more seasons with Chicago and retired from professional football in 2013. After his retirement he became a football analyst for television. He was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2018.
