Cincinnati Bengals,  American professional gridiron football team that plays in the American Football Conference (AFC) of the National Football League (NFL). The Bengals are based in Cincinnati, Ohio, and have appeared in two Super Bowls (1982 and 1989).
The Bengals joined the American Football League (AFL) as an expansion team in 1968. Paul Brown, who had become one of the most respected coaches in the game at the helm of the Cleveland Browns, was one of the franchise’s founders and its first head coach. Cincinnati was a member of the AFL for just two seasons before the league merged with the NFL in 1970.
The Bengals’ maiden year in the NFL saw the team post its first winning record and earn a playoff spot as the AFC Central champion. That same year, the team began to play in Riverfront Stadium, a multipurpose venue they would share with baseball’s Cincinnati Reds for the following 30 years. In 1972 the Bengals turned their offense over to second-year quarterback Ken Anderson (from tiny Augustana College in Rock Island, Illinois), who would go on to lead the team for over a decade and set numerous franchise passing records. The Bengals made two more playoff appearances in the 1970s, but they failed to win their first contest on each occasion.
Brown resigned as head coach after the 1975 season, but he stayed on as team president until his death in 1991. One of Brown’s most important personnel moves came in 1980 when he drafted tackle Anthony Muñoz, who is considered one of the greatest offensive linemen in football history; Muñoz anchored the Bengals’ line for 13 seasons. In 1981 the Bengals won a conference-best 12 regular-season games and had their first two postseason wins to advance to Super Bowl XVI the following January, where they lost to the San Francisco 49ers. Cincinnati returned to the playoffs after the strike-shortened 1982 season but lost in their opening-round postseason game.
In 1984 Sam Wyche became the Bengals’ head coach, and a year later Anderson ceded Cincinnati’s starting quarterback role to Boomer Esiason. In 1988 an Esiason-led Bengals team tied the Buffalo Bills for the best record in the AFC by going 12–4. After defeating the Bills in the AFC championship game, the Bengals squared off against the 49ers in the Super Bowl for a second time and were again denied a championship; San Francisco quarterback Joe Montana led his team to a last-minute 20–16 victory.
Throughout the 1990s the Bengals were widely regarded as one of the worst franchises in the four major North American professional sports leagues. They lost more games than any other NFL team during that decade and were plagued by a series of poor draft choices. The team did not have a winning record for 14 consecutive seasons beginning in 1991 (Wyche’s last year as coach). A high point of this period was the play of Pro Bowl running back Corey Dillon, but his presence was not enough to prevent the Bengals from losing at least 10 games in each season between 1998 and 2002. In 2000 the Bengals moved into a football-only venue, Paul Brown Stadium.
Cincinnati broke out of its 14-year postseason drought in 2005 as a team featuring quarterback Carson Palmer and wide receiver Chad Johnson won a divisional title before losing to the eventual champion Pittsburgh Steelers in the playoffs. The Bengals captured a division championship in 2009 and qualified for the playoffs for five straight years, a first in franchise history, from 2011 to 2015, but the team lost its opening game in each postseason—extending the NFL’s longest active streak without a playoff victory, which began in 1991. Cincinnati then began a stretch of losing seasons that reached a nadir in 2019, when the team tied a franchise-worst record by finishing the season 2–14.
