Deion Sanders, in full Deion Luwynn Sanders, bynames Prime Time and Neon Deion,  (born August 9, 1967, Fort Myers, Florida, U.S.), American gridiron football player and baseball player who is the only person to have played in both a Super Bowl and a World Series. Known for his flashy personality and outspokenness, Sanders was a middling professional baseball player but is widely considered the best man-to-man cover cornerback in National Football League (NFL) history.
Sanders was a multisport star in high school and earned a scholarship to Florida State University, where he was a member of the school’s football, baseball, and track teams. He first brought his brash attitude to national attention as a two-time All-American in football. Sanders quickly became a sports media favourite, and his tremendous on-field achievements were sometimes overshadowed by his braggadocio, his penchant for gaudy jewelry, and his self-promotion, which included his tuxedo-attired arrival in a white stretch limousine at a 1988 game against the rival University of Florida. NFL teams were not put off by his cocky persona, however, and Sanders was selected by the Atlanta Falcons with the fifth selection of the 1989 NFL draft.
Sanders played primarily in the New York Yankees’ minor league system in 1989 but was called up for 14 games in the majors that summer. After posting a .158 batting average in 57 games with the Yankees in 1990, he was released and then signed by the Atlanta Braves. The speedy outfielder had the best season of his baseball career in 1992, batting .304 with a league-leading 14 triples as he helped the Braves reach the World Series (a six-game loss to the Toronto Blue Jays). He was traded to the Cincinnati Reds during the 1994 season and then to the San Francisco Giants during the 1995 season. After not playing in 1996, Sanders had one-year stints with the Reds in 1997 and 2001 before retiring from baseball.
In his much more successful professional football career, Sanders made an immediate impact: he intercepted five passes in his rookie season, was a full-time starter in his second, and was named to his first of eight Pro Bowls in his third. He signed a one-year contract with the San Francisco 49ers for the 1994 season, during which he was named NFL Defensive Player of the Year after making six interceptions (returning three for touchdowns) and helped the team to a decisive victory in Super Bowl XXIX. In 1995–96 he won another Super Bowl title in his first season with the Dallas Cowboys, with whom he played for four more seasons before moving to the Washington Redskins for the 2000 season. Sanders then retired for three years only to return for a two-season stint with the Baltimore Ravens before permanently leaving the sport in 2006.
That his interception totals were lower than those of most other elite cornerbacks is attributable to the fact that opposing teams often simply avoided throwing the ball in his vicinity. On the other hand, noting that Sanders’s tackling and run-stopping abilities were often lacking, some have said that he was not a complete cornerback. Sanders’s speed and elusiveness made him one of the best kickoff and punt returners of all time, as well as an effective occasional receiving option on offense, with 60 career receptions (three for touchdowns) to his credit. The 19 non-offensive touchdowns (combining kickoff, punt, interception, and fumble returns) he scored over the course of his career were an NFL record at the time of his retirement. (His record was broken in 2014 by kick returner Devin Hester.)
After his playing days ended, Sanders spent time as a television football analyst and starred in a short-lived reality television series. His eventual alienation from his freewheeling lifestyle was documented in Power, Money & Sex: How Success Almost Ruined My Life (1998; cowritten with Jim Nelson Black). He was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2011.
