Denver Broncos,  American professional gridiron football team based in Denver that plays in the National Football League (NFL). The Broncos have won eight American Football Conference (AFC) championships and three Super Bowls (1998, 1999, and 2016).
The Broncos were founded in 1960 as one of the original members of the American Football League (AFL). During the league’s 10 years of existence, the Broncos never posted a winning record, and they finished last in their division on six occasions. The team did have a few standout players at this time, however, including wide receiver Lionel Taylor, who led the AFL in receptions five times, and running back Floyd Little. After the 1970 NFL-AFL merger, the Broncos continued to dwell in the divisional cellar before having their first winning season in 1973.
The Broncos finally broke through to gain a play-off berth in 1977. Led by linebackers Randy Gradishar and Tom Jackson, as well as the rest of the so-called “Orange Crush” defense—whose name derived from the team’s bright orange home jerseys at the time—the Broncos went 12–2 and claimed the best record in the conference. They won their first two postseason games to advance to the Super Bowl, which they lost to the Dallas Cowboys. Denver returned to the play-offs the following two seasons but lost their first game on both occasions. The team’s sudden ascent to the upper echelon of the AFC led to heightened expectations, and, after the Broncos finished 8–8 in 1980 after their three-game postseason streak, head coach Red Miller was fired and replaced by Dan Reeves. In 1983 Reeves oversaw the trade for disgruntled Baltimore Colts draftee John Elway, who would go on to star as the Broncos’ quarterback for 16 seasons and become the most iconic player in franchise history.
With Elway leading the offense and Pro Bowl linebacker Karl Mecklenburg anchoring the defense, the Broncos became one of the most successful NFL teams of the 1980s. Denver advanced to three Super Bowls in the decade, and their consecutive AFC championship games against the Cleveland Browns in 1987 and 1988 were two of the most memorable contests of the time. The former game featured Elway leading the Broncos 98 yards in the fourth quarter to tie the score and eventually win in overtime (which became known as “The Drive”), and the latter was decided when Browns running back Earnest Byner lost the ball on Denver’s 3-yard line with just over a minute remaining as he attempted to score a tying touchdown (“The Fumble”). However, the Broncos were not able to capitalize on these thrilling championship game victories and were soundly beaten (by the New York Giants and the Washington Redskins, respectively) in each season’s subsequent Super Bowl. The Broncos returned to the Super Bowl in 1990, but they were defeated by the San Francisco 49ers by a score of 55–10, the worst loss in Super Bowl history. Reeves’s failure to win a Super Bowl—compounded by his years of feuding with Elway—led to his dismissal after the 1992 season.
Denver’s former offensive coordinator Mike Shanahan was hired as the team’s head coach in 1995. With a talented roster including running back Terrell Davis, wide receiver Rod Smith, and tight end Shannon Sharpe, the Broncos were one of the premier offenses in the NFL during Shanahan’s first seasons with the team, and in 1998 they again were the AFC’s representative in the Super Bowl. This time the well-balanced Broncos squad upset the Green Bay Packers to capture the franchise’s first title. Denver won a team-record 14 games the next season, which it followed with a second Super Bowl victory (over the Atlanta Falcons). Elway then retired, and Denver finished last in their division the following season. The team went to the postseason in four of the six years between 2000 and 2005 but advanced past the first round only once and lost in the AFC championship that season (2005).
After three consecutive years of missing the play-offs, Shanahan was fired after the 2008 season, and the Broncos began a thorough rebuilding effort. In 2011 Elway became Denver’s executive vice president of football operations. The team returned to the postseason after winning the 2011 AFC West title behind the late-game heroics of quarterback Tim Tebow, who led the team to four overtime victories that season, including an opening-round play-off win over the Pittsburgh Steelers. However, Tebow’s poor traditional quarterback skills and unorthodox passing mechanics failed to inspire confidence in Elway, and the team signed former All-Pro quarterback Peyton Manning in March 2012. Manning led the Broncos to the best record in the AFC (13–3) in 2012, but the team was upset in its opening postseason game. In 2013 the Broncos set a new NFL record for most points scored in a season (606) while again winning 13 games to claim the best record in the conference. After winning two home play-off games, Denver’s record-setting offense was shut down by the Seattle Seahawks in a 43–8 Super Bowl loss. The Broncos were less dominant in 2014 but still won a third straight division title with Manning under centre. The team followed that season with yet another upset loss in its first play-off game. While an aging Manning grew less effective on the field, the Broncos defense developed into one of the best in the NFL, and the revamped team won another AFC championship following the 2015 regular season. The Broncos’ stifling defense then shut down the Carolina Panthers in Super Bowl 50 to capture the third title in franchise history. Manning retired in the off-season, and the Broncos struggled to find a sound replacement in 2016, resulting in a 9–7 record and an end to the team’s five-year postseason streak.
