Dick Butkus, byname of Richard Marvin Butkus,  (born December 9, 1942, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.), American professional gridiron football player who, as middle linebacker for the Chicago Bears of the National Football League (NFL), was the dominant defensive player of his era. He was exceptionally large for a linebacker playing in the 1960s (6 feet 3 inches [1.9 metres] and 245 pounds [111 kg]) and had a reputation for relentless pursuit and ferocious tackling.
Butkus played both fullback and linebacker at Chicago Vocational High School. As a middle linebacker at the University of Illinois (1962–64),  he earned consensus All-America honours in 1963 and 1964, his senior season, when he also finished third in the voting for the Heisman Trophy (an exceptional result for a defensive player).
Butkus was selected by the Bears and by the Denver Broncos in the first round of the NFL and the American Football League draft, respectively. He signed with his hometown team, and in his first year with the Bears (1965) he intercepted five passes and was selected for the first of eight consecutive Pro Bowls. Butkus, who led the Bears in tackles in each of his first eight seasons in the league, was famous for his ability to strip the ball during a tackle. In a career shortened by injuries, he accumulated 1,020 tackles, 22 interceptions, and 27 fumble recoveries, the last an NFL record for a defensive player at the time of his retirement.
After retiring in 1973, Butkus acted on television and in films. A five-time first-team All-Pro selection, he was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1979 and in 1994 was named to the NFL’s 75th Anniversary All-Time Team. In 1985 the Downtown Athletic Club of Orlando (Florida) began presenting the Butkus Award to the outstanding collegiate linebacker of the year. The Butkus Foundation assumed control of the award in 2008, and that year it was broadened to honour players at the high school and professional level. The foundation was also involved in various charities and notably sought to discourage steroid use among teenagers.
