Doug Flutie, in full Douglas Richard Flutie,  (born October 23, 1962, Manchester, Maryland, U.S.), American gridiron football quarterback who won the Heisman Trophy in 1984 as the best player in college football and who had a 21-year professional football career in the United States and Canada.
Flutie was a standout player at Natick (Massachusetts) High School, but Boston College was the only National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I-A (now the Football Bowl Subdivision) school to offer him a scholarship. He became that school’s starting quarterback during his freshman season, and in his sophomore year he guided it to its first postseason bowl appearance in 40 years. His senior season was highlighted by an iconic 48-yard “Hail Mary” touchdown pass that Flutie threw as time was running out to beat the University of Miami in a key late-season game. His 3,454 passing yards and 27 touchdowns that year earned him All-America honours and the first Heisman Trophy in Boston College history. By the end of his collegiate career, Flutie had set all-time NCAA Division I-A records (since broken) for passing yards and total yards of offense.
Aware that his 5-foot 10-inch (1.78-metre) height would prevent him from being considered a suitable candidate to play in the National Football League (NFL), Flutie signed a contract with the New Jersey Generals of the upstart United States Football League (USFL) instead. The USFL folded after his first season, and his NFL rights (he had been selected as an 11th-round draft pick by the Los Angeles Rams in 1985 after signing with the Generals) were traded to the Chicago Bears. In 1986 he made his NFL debut with the Bears but played in only five games before being traded to the New England Patriots the following year. After the 1989 season he was released by the Patriots, and in 1990 he signed with the British Columbia Lions of the Canadian Football League (CFL). The CFL, with its wider field and strong emphasis on passing, was a perfect fit for Flutie and his freewheeling scrambling style of play. During an eight-year CFL career, he was named the league’s Most Outstanding Player an unprecedented six times, and three of the teams for which he played won the Grey Cup.
With more than 40,000 yards, 270 passing touchdowns, and 70 rushing touchdowns to his credit in the CFL, Flutie was signed by the NFL’s Buffalo Bills to serve as a backup quarterback at the start of the 1998 season. When the starter went down with a rib injury five games into the season, Flutie seized his chance and threw for 2,711 yards and 20 touchdowns while leading the Bills to a 7–3 record in 10 starts. The Bills advanced to the play-offs, and Flutie was named to the Pro Bowl. He remained the team’s starting quarterback in 1999—when he again guided the Bills to the postseason—but was relegated to backup duty in 2000. In 2001 Flutie left the Bills and signed with the San Diego Chargers. After seeing the Chargers post a 5–11 record in his first season with the team, Flutie was again demoted to backup status. He rejoined New England in 2005 but retired the following year. Flutie subsequently served as a television college football analyst. In 2007 he was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame.
