Earl Campbell, in full Earl Christian Campbell,  (born March 29, 1955, Tyler, Texas, U.S.), American gridiron football running back whose bruising style made him one of the most dominant rushers in the history of the sport despite his relatively short career.
Campbell was raised in poverty alongside 10 siblings in rural Texas. He was a hotly recruited high school football player and ended up at the University of Texas (Austin). He was a four-year starter in college, earning all-conference honours in each season and consensus All-American honours in 1977, and he won the Heisman Trophy as the best player in college football after his senior season. The Houston Oilers traded for the first overall selection in the 1978 National Football League (NFL) draft, which they used to pick Campbell, who was already popular with much of the team’s fan base following his collegiate exploits in nearby Austin.
Weighing 230 pounds (104 kg) and having massive 36-inch (91-cm) thighs, Campbell was a punishing runner who often needed to be tackled by multiple defenders to be brought down. He was named the NFL’s Offensive Rookie of the Year after rushing for a league-high 1,450 yards and helping the Oilers reach the conference championship game in his first season with the team. Campbell led the NFL in rushing yards and rushing touchdowns in 1979 and 1980, and he was named the league’s Most Valuable Player in 1979. He was voted first-team All-Pro in each of his first three seasons and was named to the Pro Bowl in five of his first six seasons. Campbell’s high number of carries (his 373 in 1980 was an NFL record at the time), however, took their toll, and his play began to fall off soon before his mid-season trade to the New Orleans Saints in 1984. He retired from professional football following the 1985 season.
Campbell’s career lasted just eight seasons. The serious health issues he experienced, due to the years of abuse he subjected his body to on the gridiron, were well publicized after his retirement. He was afflicted by a number of chronic conditions, including severe arthritis and a bad back, and was forced to use a cane to walk beginning in his late 40s. He was nevertheless able to run a successful meat products company and serve as a special assistant to the athletic director at the University of Texas in the years after he left the NFL. Campbell was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1991.
