Gary Barnett,  (born May 23, 1946, Lakeland, Fla., U.S.), American collegiate gridiron football coach whose on-field successes were marred by off-field controversies.
Barnett attended the University of Missouri at Columbia, where he played wide receiver on the football team; he earned a bachelor’s degree in 1969. He remained at Missouri, taking a master’s degree in education in 1971 and working as a graduate assistant coach for the football team. After a decade as a successful high-school coach, Barnett became head coach at Fort Lewis College, Durango, Colo., in 1982. He moved in 1984 to the University of Colorado at Boulder, where he served as an assistant coach and was offensive coordinator of the 1990 national championship team; Colorado shared the title with the Georgia Institute of Technology.
In 1992 Barnett became head coach at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill. At that time the school’s football team had consistently finished at or near the bottom of the Big Ten Conference and had not had a winning season since 1971. During Barnett’s first three seasons, the Wildcats posted a dismal 8–24–1 record. Barnett’s recruiting during those years, as well as his work with his coaching staff, paid off in 1995 when Northwestern finished the Big Ten schedule without a loss to win the conference title and earn a trip to the Rose Bowl. It was the school’s first bowl appearance since 1949. Northwestern, however, was defeated by the University of Southern California. The following season the school won a share of the Big Ten title but lost to the University of Tennessee in the Florida Citrus Bowl.
After two losing seasons, Barnett left Northwestern in 1999 to become coach at the University of Colorado of the Big 12 Conference. In 2001 Colorado won the Big 12 title and earned a trip to the Fiesta Bowl. Although they lost, the Buffaloes finished the season ranked ninth nationally.
Off-field, Barnett faced a growing scandal as several women claimed to have been raped by football players and recruits. In addition, it was alleged that sex and alcohol were being used as recruitment tools. Barnett’s remarks during the controversy resulted in his being placed on paid administrative leave in 2004, but a subsequent investigation found no evidence of wrongdoing by him. That season Colorado posted a regular-season record of eight wins and five losses and defeated the University of Texas at El Paso in the Houston Bowl. In 2005 the Buffaloes started the season 7–2 but faltered at the end. In the conference championship game, Colorado was routed by the University of Texas 70–3. Several days later Barnett was forced out as coach.
Barnett subsequently worked as a radio and television analyst. In 2004 he founded the Gary Barnett Foundation, a nonprofit organization that supported various programs for economically disadvantaged and at-risk youths.
