Gene Lipscomb, byname of Eugene Allen Lipscomb,  (born August 9, 1931, Detroit, Michigan, U.S.—died May 10, 1963, Baltimore, Maryland), American gridiron football player and larger-than-life “character” whose exploits helped make professional football the most popular sport in the United States during the late 1950s. A 6-foot 6-inch (2-metre), 284-pound (129-kg) defensive tackle, Lipscomb joked that he gathered up all the opponent’s players and “peeled them off” until he found the ball carrier. His quickness in pursuing ball carriers across the field and rushing quarterbacks proved that a big defensive lineman could do more than defend a small area. His habit of calling teammates “little daddy” when he could not remember their names earned him the nickname “Big Daddy.”
Unlike most National Football League (NFL) players, Lipscomb did not attend college. He never knew his father, and, when he was 11, his mother was stabbed to death while on her way to work. After a troubled youth, he entered the U.S. Marine Corps and played football at Camp Pendleton, California. Upon his discharge in 1953, he signed with the Los Angeles Rams for $4,800 and a beefsteak breakfast. His lack of technique limited his playing time. He was known as an amiable gentle giant off the field but one filled with insecurities over his lack of education, his unusual size for his day, and his role as a highly visible African American.
In 1956 he was let go by the Rams and was picked up by the Baltimore Colts. As he became a more polished player, his size, agility, and quickness gained him a regular tackle position alongside future Pro Football Hall of Fame players Gino Marchetti and Art Donovan. The defense was a major factor as Baltimore won NFL championships in 1958–59. Honoured as one of the premier players of his day, Lipscomb was named all-NFL in both title years but sometimes was criticized for not always playing at full speed.
Lipscomb was traded to the Pittsburgh Steelers in 1961, where he helped make that team a title contender and was named all-NFL for the fourth year in a row. In the spring of 1963, he was found dead in his apartment from an overdose of heroin.
