Jack Kemp, in full Jack French Kemp,  (born July 13, 1935, Los Angeles, California, U.S.—died May 2, 2009, Bethesda, Maryland), American gridiron football player and Republican politician who served as a congressman from New York in the U.S. House of Representatives (1971–89) and later was secretary of Housing and Urban Development (1989–93) in the administration of Pres. George H.W. Bush. Kemp was selected by Bob Dole to be his vice presidential running mate in the 1996 presidential election.
Kemp’s father owned a small trucking firm, and his mother was a public school teacher and social worker. Kemp attended Occidental College in Los Angeles (B.A., 1957), where he excelled as a football quarterback. He was selected by the Detroit Lions in the 1957 National Football League (NFL) draft but was released during the preseason. He had brief stints with various professional teams, and during this time Kemp was also in the U.S. Army Reserve (1958–62). In 1961 his unit was called up, but he was granted a medical exemption because of a shoulder injury. The following year Kemp joined the Buffalo Bills of the American Football League (AFL). Despite his relatively small stature, he proved an effective quarterback and a strong team leader. He led the team to its first winning season (1963) and to the AFL championships in 1964 and 1965. He also earned the AFL’s Player of the Year Award in 1965 and was Most Valuable Player of that year’s championship game. Kemp retired from the game in 1969 as the AFL’s all-time leader in passing yards with 21,130.
Kemp’s football career made him a public figure in Buffalo, New York, and a popular Republican choice for a seat in Congress. In 1970 he was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives, representing suburban Buffalo, and took office the following year. During his nine terms he became known as an articulate and passionate defender of conservative causes. He supported the Vietnam War, advocated high levels of defense spending, championed low tax rates, and opposed abortion rights. At the same time, he was a strong supporter of civil rights legislation and sought to use tax incentives to encourage economic development in poor urban areas, calling himself a “bleeding-heart conservative.” During the mid-1970s he was heavily influenced by the supply-side economist Arthur Laffer. Kemp later played a prominent role in Ronald Reagan’s successful 1980 presidential campaign, and he cosponsored the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, which sharply reduced taxes on individuals and businesses.
After a failed presidential bid in 1988, Kemp was appointed secretary of Housing and Urban Development in the administration of Pres. George H.W. Bush. He restored public trust to the scandal-tainted department and continued to work for urban revitalization through targeted tax reductions, but he largely failed in his efforts to implement his ambitious initiatives. After Bush was defeated in the 1992 presidential election, Kemp left government and became a sought-after speaker on the lecture circuit. In 1996 he was Republican presidential candidate Bob Dole’s running mate, but the ticket lost the election by a decisive margin, giving Pres. Bill Clinton and Vice Pres. Al Gore a second term in office.
Kemp subsequently served on the board of directors at Oracle, a database technology firm, and he also founded his own consulting firm, Kemp Partners. In addition, he continued to work with Empower America, a conservative think tank that he had established with Steve Forbes in 1993; it advocated low taxes and deregulation as a means of stimulating economic growth. In 2005–06 Kemp served as cochair of the Council on Foreign Relations task force on U.S.-Russian relations. In 2009 he was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
