Jacksonville Jaguars,  American professional gridiron football team based in Jacksonville, Florida, that plays in the American Football Conference (AFC) of the National Football League (NFL).
The Jaguars began play in 1995 as an expansion team alongside the Carolina Panthers of the National Football Conference (NFC). The Jaguars’ first college draft pick was future All-Pro tackle Tony Boselli, who would serve as the anchor of a productive offense that helped the Jaguars quickly become a winning franchise. After posting a 4–12 record in their inaugural season, the Jaguars went 9–7 and earned a spot in the AFC playoffs the following season behind the standout play of quarterback Mark Brunell and wide receiver Jimmy Smith. The team then proceeded to win two postseason games on the road before losing to the New England Patriots in the AFC championship game. After again qualifying for the playoffs in 1997, the Jaguars added running back Fred Taylor to their dynamic offense in 1998 and won their first division title that season. The following year the team’s 14–2 record was the best in the NFL, but Jacksonville was upset by their division rival Tennessee Titans in the AFC championship game.
The phenomenal start of the Jaguars franchise was slowed in 2000–03, during which the team won no more than seven games in any season. In 2005 and 2007 the Jaguars returned to the postseason but were eliminated by the Patriots on each occasion. Beginning in 2008, the Jaguars’ play fell off further, and in 2012 they registered an NFL-worst 2–14 record. Beginning in 2013, the Jaguars sacrificed one regular-season home game per season to “host” that contest in London in an effort to build up the team’s international appeal. While the team gained a larger fan base abroad, Jacksonville’s poor on-field play continued, with the Jaguars tallying a franchise-worst sixth straight season with double-digit losses in 2016.
The Jaguars broke out in 2017 behind a young star-studded defense that propelled the team to a 10-win season and a division title. Jacksonville won its first two playoff games and had a 10-point lead in the fourth quarter of the AFC championship game before being denied its first Super Bowl appearance by a Patriots’ comeback. The Jaguars plummeted back down the standings in 2018, finishing the season with a 5–11 record.
