Joe Namath, byname of Joseph William Namath, also called Joe Willie or Broadway Joe,  (born May 31, 1943, Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania, U.S.), American collegiate and professional gridiron football quarterback who was one of the best passers in football and a cultural sports icon of the 1960s.
Namath excelled in several sports as a youth in the steel-mill town of Beaver Falls, near Pittsburgh. He played football at the University of Alabama (1962–64) under coach Bear Bryant, a famous developer of quarterbacks. While playing in college, he sustained the first of many knee injuries that ultimately shortened his career. The National Football League (NFL) and the American Football League (AFL) competed for him as a first-round draft choice, and he went to the AFL New York Jets with an unprecedented three-year contract for more than $400,000. He became the Jets’ starting quarterback midway through his first season, and in 1967 he threw for a record 4,007 yards.
Like the boxer Muhammad Ali, Namath represented a transformation of the American sports hero in the 1960s. Namath was known as much for his late-night carousing with beautiful women as for his performances on the field. He was the new kind of ideal male, defined by his countercultural style, which included modish long hair that hung below his helmet and white football shoes (when everyone else wore black). His masculinity was so unquestionable that he posed in panty hose for a magazine advertisement. And at a time when athletes were expected to be modest and self-deprecating, Namath “guaranteed” that the Jets would defeat the favoured NFL Baltimore Colts in the 1969 Super Bowl; they did, 16–7.
In 1969 Namath retired briefly over the issue of his ownership of a New York City nightclub (hence his nickname “Broadway Joe”), but he sold it and returned to the Jets. In the same year, he was chosen for the all-time AFL team (the AFL and the NFL merged in 1970). As players throughout the league adopted Namath’s personal style, his own career played out anticlimactically. He played with the Jets through the 1976 season, sustaining further injuries, but he had by then set seasonal and career records for most games with 300 yards or more gained by passing. In 1977–78 he was a backup quarterback for the Los Angeles Rams, after which he retired. He was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1985.
Namath remained in the public eye through television commercials and film, television, and theatre appearances. His memoir, All the Way: My Life in Four Quarters (cowritten with Sean Mortimer and Don Yaeger), was published in 2019.
