Johnny Unitas, byname of John Constantine Unitas, also called Johnny U,  (born May 7, 1933, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, U.S.—died September 11, 2002, Timonium, Maryland), American professional gridiron football player who is considered to be one of the all-time greatest National Football League (NFL) quarterbacks.
Unitas excelled in football at St. Justin’s High School in Pittsburgh, but his slight stature (he weighed only 145 pounds [66 kg]) prevented him from earning an athletic scholarship to the University of Notre Dame. He instead played for the University of Louisville (Kentucky), where he grew to 6 feet 1 inch (1.85 metres) and 190 pounds (86 kg). Unitas became Louisville’s starting quarterback during his freshman season, but he played on mediocre teams throughout his collegiate career and was not considered a great pro prospect upon his graduation. He was selected by the NFL’s Pittsburgh Steelers in the ninth round of the 1955 draft but was released before the regular season began. He worked at construction jobs and played for a semiprofessional team in the Pittsburgh area for $6 a game until he was signed by the Baltimore Colts in 1956.
Unitas was thrust into the starting role after the Colt’s quarterback broke his leg during the fourth game of Unitas’s rookie season. In his second year he led the NFL in passing yards and touchdowns and was selected for the first of 10 career Pro Bowls. Unitas’s rise to stardom from such lowly beginnings made him the quintessential rags-to-riches hero as professional football emerged as the top spectator sport in the United States in the 1960s. His legendary status was cemented by his performance in the 1958 championship game, in which he led the Colts to a 23–17 overtime victory over the New York Giants. The dramatic game, viewed by a national television audience, is regarded as a key step in the NFL’s rise in popularity. Unitas and the Colts also took part in what is arguably the other most significant game in the ascent of the NFL: an upset loss to the American Football League’s New York Jets in the 1969 Super Bowl.
Unitas, whose black high-top shoes and distinctive backpedal became his signature, led the Colts to three NFL championships (1958, 1959, 1968) and one Super Bowl victory (1971). He led the league four times each in passing yards and in touchdown passes and retired with career NFL records for passing yards, touchdowns, and completions (all of which have since been broken). Unitas was traded to the San Diego Chargers in 1973, his last season. He was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1979.
