John Madden, in full John Earl Madden,  (born April 10, 1936, Austin, Minnesota, U.S.), American gridiron football coach and television commentator who was one of the best-known personalities in National Football League (NFL) history. In addition to his accomplishments in the NFL, Madden lent his name to a series of video games, Madden NFL, that became a cultural sensation.
Madden was raised in Daly City, California, where he was a standout high school football player. He played on both the offensive and the defensive line at California Polytechnic State University (at San Luis Obispo) and was drafted by the Philadelphia Eagles in 1958. However, a knee injury he suffered during his first training camp prevented him from launching a playing career in the NFL. He coached at Hancock Junior College in Santa Maria, California, from 1960 to 1963, and was the defensive coordinator at San Diego State University from 1964 to 1966. In 1967 Madden was hired by Al Davis as the Oakland Raiders’ linebackers coach. Madden was promoted to head coach in February 1969 at just age 32.
In Madden’s first season at the helm, the Raiders posted a 12–1–1 record and lost to the Kansas City Chiefs in the American Football League (AFL) championship game. After the 1970 AFL-NFL merger, the Raiders appeared in four American Football Conference (AFC) championship games over the course of six seasons but lost on each occasion. Just as criticism that Madden could not win the big game reached its peak, he led the Raiders to a one-loss season in 1976, which the team followed with victories over the rival Pittsburgh Steelers in the AFC championship game and over the Minnesota Vikings in Super Bowl XI. Madden stepped away from the Raiders following the 1978 season having never had a losing record in his 10 seasons as head coach. He was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2006.
Though his coaching success had brought him fame, it was in his next career—as a football analyst for television—that Madden became an icon inextricably linked to the NFL. His first position as a colour commentator came in 1979 at CBS. In 1981 he was paired with play-by-play announcer Pat Summerall, with whom Madden would form a 21-year partnership that made the pair arguably the most famous sports broadcasting duo of all time; the two moved to the Fox Broadcasting Company in 1994. Madden’s idiosyncratic commentary—which included a willingness to explicate the most complicated or obscure details of a football game; his frequent use of, and subsequent popularization of, the Telestrator, a device that allows its user to draw on top of an image from a broadcast; and his penchant for sudden outbursts (most notably “Boom!”) while analyzing a play—endeared him to many viewers (while alienating some others) and helped Madden garner a record 16 Emmy Awards for outstanding sports analyst/personality. He was famous for a fear of flying that resulted in his traveling to all of his broadcast locations in a customized bus nicknamed the “Madden Cruiser,” which became something of a minor NFL icon itself. Madden was also known for selecting an annual “All-Madden” team made up of players he believed were the toughest and smartest in the game. After working for all four of the major American broadcasting networks over the course of his career, he retired in 2009.
Madden’s outsized personality made him an ideal pitchman for a vast number of products, from beer to hardware stores. In 1989 he gave his name to the computer game John Madden Football. The subsequent Madden NFL series expanded onto multiple gaming consoles and grew into the most popular sports title on the market by the early 2000s, with the annual release of an increasingly detailed and realistic new edition becoming a highly anticipated event among both football fans and NFL players. As a result of its massive popularity, the video game helped to increase football’s global audience and, in turn, Madden’s fame.
Madden authored (with cowriter Dave Anderson) a number of best-selling books, including Hey, Wait a Minute, I Wrote a Book (1984), One Size Doesn’t Fit All (1988), and All Madden: Hey, I’m Talking Pro Football! (1996).
