Jon Gruden, in full Jon David Gruden,  (born August 17, 1963, Sandusky, Ohio, U.S.), American gridiron football coach and television broadcaster who led the Tampa Bay Buccaneers to a Super Bowl championship in 2003.
Gruden was raised around football: his father, Jim, was an assistant coach at Indiana University (1973–77) and at the University of Notre Dame (1978–80). Jon played baseball, basketball, and football in high school and then moved on to the University of Dayton, Ohio, where he played quarterback for three years. He began his coaching career as a graduate assistant at the University of Tennessee (1986–87), and he was an offensive assistant for other collegiate football programs before joining the staff of the San Francisco 49ers of the National Football League (NFL) in 1990. In 1991 Gruden returned to the collegiate level at the University of Pittsburgh, but in 1992 the NFL’s Green Bay Packers hired him as their wide receivers coach. Three years later he became the offensive coordinator for the Philadelphia Eagles. Gruden’s rapid ascent up the coaching ladder culminated in 1998, when he was named head coach of the Oakland Raiders.
The animated Gruden became a favourite target for television cameras as he stalked the Raiders’ sideline, and his frequent angry outbursts combined with his still-boyish good looks earned him the nickname “Chucky,” after a devilish, homicidal doll featured in the Child’s Play series of horror movies. In 2000 and 2001 Gruden guided Oakland to division titles, and he compiled a record of 40–28 in his first four years as a head coach. Despite his achievements on the field, Gruden felt that he was underappreciated and underpaid by Raiders’ owner Al Davis, and he let it be known after his contract expired at the end of the 2002 season. At the same time, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers fired coach Tony Dungy, and the two clubs made an unusual trade in February 2002 that saw the Buccaneers obtain Gruden from the Raiders for $8 million and four draft picks.
While some observers questioned the decision of bringing in the offensive-minded Gruden to take over a Buccaneers team known for its dominating defense, the transition was seamless: Tampa Bay won 12 games in Gruden’s first year and advanced to the franchise’s first Super Bowl. In Super Bowl XXXVII, the Buccaneers faced the Raiders, and Gruden guided Tampa Bay to a commanding 48–21 victory. He experienced his first losing seasons as head coach the following two years, but Tampa Bay rebounded in 2005 to win a division title. The Buccaneers lost their first-round play-off game at home that postseason, an ignoble feat they repeated after the 2007 season, which increased criticism of Gruden’s coaching style in the Tampa media. The Buccaneers’ 2008 campaign was an early success, with the team winning 9 of its first 12 games. However, a late-season collapse that saw the Buccaneers lose their final four games—including a home loss to the Raiders in the last week of the season when a play-off berth was on the line—led to Gruden’s firing in January 2009. In May of that year, Gruden was announced as part of the television broadcast team for the program Monday Night Football.
Gruden was the subject of coaching rumours during nearly every off-season of his broadcasting career. He was finally lured back to the sidelines in January 2018 when he was given a 10-year $100 million contract—the longest and richest coaching contract in NFL history—to again become the head coach of the Raiders.
