Kansas City Chiefs,  American professional gridiron football team that is based in Kansas City, Missouri, and plays in the American Football Conference (AFC) of the National Football League (NFL). As a member of the now-defunct American Football League (AFL), the franchise won three league championships (1962, 1966, and 1969) and Super Bowls IV (1970) and LIV (2020).
The team, originally based in Dallas and known as the Texans, was one of eight founding franchises when the AFL came into existence in 1960. The Texans were owned by Lamar Hunt, who—after having been rebuked in his earlier attempt to purchase the NFL’s Chicago Cardinals—initiated the founding of the AFL by organizing other prospective NFL owners who had been turned down by the established league. Hunt hired Hank Stram to serve as the Texans’ first head coach, and Stram led the team to two middle-of-the-road finishes in its first two seasons. The Texans brought in quarterback Len Dawson (like Stram a future Hall of Famer) before the 1962 season, and Dallas went 11–3 that year, defeating the Houston Oilers in the AFL championship game. Despite the team’s success, the Dallas market was not able to sustain two football franchises (the other being the NFL’s Dallas Cowboys), and Hunt decided to relocate the Texans to Kansas City in 1963.
The newly renamed Chiefs returned to the middle of the AFL West standings until 1966. That season they again won 11 games and captured the AFL title. The Chiefs were then a part of one of the most historic moments in gridiron football history when they faced off against the Green Bay Packers in the first annual AFL-NFL World Championship Game (which would later be renamed the “Super Bowl” by Hunt), which they lost 35–10. In 1969 the Chiefs featured the league’s leading defense—which starred future Hall of Famers Willie Lanier, Bobby Bell, and Buck Buchanan—and they once again won an AFL championship and earned a berth into the Super Bowl. At the Super Bowl the Chiefs defeated the Minnesota Vikings in what was the final game ever played by an AFL franchise, as the two leagues merged in 1970. Kansas City made another playoff appearance in 1971 but then entered a period that saw the team post losing records in 9 of the 14 seasons between 1972 and 1985 and miss the postseason in each of those years.
In 1989 the Chiefs hired head coach Marty Schottenheimer and drafted linebacker Derrick Thomas. Schottenheimer guided Kansas City to a playoff berth in his second season with the team, and in 1993, led by quarterback Joe Montana, the Chiefs advanced to the AFC championship game, which they lost to the Buffalo Bills. With Thomas and defensive end Neil Smith anchoring a stout defense, the Chiefs won an NFL-best 13 games in 1995, but they were upset in their opening playoff contest by the Indianapolis Colts. The Chiefs tied for the best record in the league in 1997 but were again defeated in their first playoff game, this time by the division rival Denver Broncos.
After a five-year postseason drought, Kansas City—with a high-scoring offense featuring running back Priest Holmes and tight end Tony Gonzalez—again won 13 games and a division crown in 2003. Once again, a stellar regular season was followed by playoff disappointment as the Chiefs were again upset at home by the Colts. The team then had a series of moderately successful years, including another postseason berth (and first-round loss) in 2006, before an abrupt slide resulted in a franchise-worst 2–14 record in 2008 and the hiring of a new front office and coaching staff, which helped guide Kansas City back to the playoffs after the 2010 season. However, that turnaround was short-lived, and the team underwent another coaching change late in Kansas City’s disappointing 2011 season, which was followed by yet one more after the 2012 campaign.
Under new coach Andy Reid, the talent-laden Chiefs rapidly improved in 2013, winning 11 games and earning a playoff berth. The team then lost its opening playoff game, extending the franchise’s postseason victory drought to 20 years. Kansas City finally snapped its streak following the 2015 season when the Chiefs beat the Houston Texans 30–0 before being eliminated by the defending champion New England Patriots in the next round of the playoffs. In 2016 the Chiefs won 12 games—the team’s best season in more than a decade—to capture a division title but once more lost in their opening playoff game. Kansas City again won a division title only to get upset in their first postseason game in 2017. Behind the play of second-year phenom quarterback Patrick Mahomes, the Chiefs featured the most explosive offense in the NFL in 2018 en route to posting a 12–4 record that was tied for the best in the conference. Kansas City won their first postseason contest but lost a dramatic AFC championship game to the Patriots in overtime. Mahomes was limited by injuries in 2019, and the Chiefs’ offense was subsequently not as dominant that season, but the team still won 12 games and hosted the AFC championship for a second consecutive year. This time, Mahomes led Kansas City to victory, sending the Chiefs to their first Super Bowl appearance in 50 years. There they came from behind in the fourth quarter to defeat the San Francisco 49ers, 31–20. The Chiefs continued to dominate the league in 2020, winning an NFL-best 14 regular-season games. In the postseason the Chiefs narrowly beat the Cleveland Browns and then defeated the Buffalo Bills in the AFC championship game to advance to a second consecutive Super Bowl, where the Chiefs were defeated by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
