Knute Rockne, in full Knute Kenneth Rockne,  (born March 4, 1888, Voss, Norway—died March 31, 1931, Chase county, Kansas, U.S.), Norwegian-born American gridiron football coach who built the University of Notre Dame in Indiana into a major power in college football and became the intercollegiate sport’s first true celebrity coach.
In 1893 Rockne moved to Chicago with his family, and in 1910 he entered Notre Dame, where he played end on the football team and was also a track star. The 1913 game with Army, in which passes from Charles (“Gus”) Dorais to Rockne led to an upset victory by Notre Dame, is generally credited with popularizing the forward pass, legal since 1906 but not yet widely adopted. Following his graduation in 1914, Rockne taught chemistry and served as assistant football coach at Notre Dame under Jess Harper, becoming head coach in 1918 as well as athletic director.
Under Rockne, Notre Dame teams won 105 games, lost 12, and tied 5 from 1918 through 1931 and were declared national champions in 1924, 1929, and 1930 (there was no official poll in these years). Rockne’s most famous player was George Gipp, a devil-may-care star who died in 1920 at the end of his senior season. Following Notre Dame’s upset of Army in 1928, sportswriters spread the story that Rockne had inspired his players at halftime to “win one for the Gipper,” a request the dying Gipp supposedly whispered to Rockne. However, it was Rockne’s undefeated 1924 team, featuring the Four Horsemen backfield of star players, that marked Notre Dame’s arrival at the pinnacle of intercollegiate football, where it remained under Rockne’s many successors.
Notre Dame gained national recognition not just through the excellence of its teams but also through Rockne’s tireless promoting and cultivation of prominent sportswriters. Rockne gave his name to a ghostwritten syndicated newspaper column and numerous magazine articles, was a celebrated off-season banquet speaker, and became a spokesmen for several businesses and products, most conspicuously Studebaker automobiles, whose “Rockne” model appeared just after he died. Rockne’s death in a plane crash in a Kansas cornfield in March 1931 shocked the nation and prompted tributes from President Herbert Hoover and the king of Norway. An outpouring of popular biographies and testimonials to Rockne’s genius, culminating in the 1940 film, Knute Rockne—All-American (with Ronald Reagan playing George Gipp), guaranteed his immortality as the most famous of American football coaches.
