Las Vegas Raiders,  American professional gridiron football team based in Las Vegas, Nevada, that plays in the National Football League (NFL). The Raiders have won three Super Bowl championships (1977, 1981, and 1984), one American Football League (AFL) championship (1967), and four American Football Conference (AFC) titles. Viewed by many as the “villains” of the NFL because of their historic tendency for rough play, the Raiders embody the motto coined by longtime owner Al Davis: “Just win, baby.”
The Raiders were founded in 1960 as one of the eight original teams of the AFL. After three losing seasons, the franchise hired Davis in 1963 to serve as the team’s head coach and general manager. He implemented a “vertical” passing attack, which relied on long throws downfield to stretch the opposing defense, and quickly turned the team into a contender. After a three-month stint as AFL commissioner in 1966, Davis became a part-owner of the Raiders and began buying out (and, in some cases, forcing out) the other owners, ultimately gaining complete control of the team in 1976.
With an offense starring quarterback Daryle Lamonica and centre Jim Otto, the Raiders won the AFL championship in December 1967, a victory that sent the team to its first Super Bowl the following January (a loss to the Green Bay Packers). John Madden was hired as head coach in 1969, and under his guidance the Raiders became an elite team, posting consecutive winning seasons during Madden’s 10-year tenure with the team and taking the franchise’s first Super Bowl (1977). It was during this period that the Raiders forged an image as a team of tough, take-no-prisoners players—such as future Hall of Fame offensive linemen Jim Otto, Gene Upshaw, and Art Shell; linebacker Ted (“the Stork”) Hendricks; defensive end Ben Davidson; and cornerback Willie Brown—who would occasionally cross the line into dirty play. Those teams also featured an additional trio of future Hall of Fame players in tight end Dave Casper, kicker George Blanda, and wide receiver Fred Biletnikoff, as well as fiery quarterback Ken (“the Snake”) Stabler. Madden’s successor, Tom Flores (who was the Raiders’ first starting quarterback), shepherded the team to another Super Bowl victory in 1981.
Davis had been long upset about the conditions of the Raiders’ home stadium when, in 1980, he signed a memorandum of agreement promising to move the franchise to Los Angeles. The NFL blocked the move, but Davis won a landmark antitrust lawsuit against the league in 1982, and the Raiders immediately relocated. The team qualified for the playoffs in each of their first four seasons in Los Angeles, which included another Super Bowl title in 1984. The teams of the 1980s featured three future Hall of Famers—running back Marcus Allen, defensive lineman Howie Long, and cornerback Mike Haynes—and multisport sensation Bo Jackson, who excelled in both Major League Baseball and the NFL.
Davis soured on the stadium in Los Angeles over the years, and he moved the franchise back to Oakland in 1995. The Raiders struggled in the years after their second move, but, behind a high-powered offense led by quarterback Rich Gannon and wide receivers Tim Brown and Jerry Rice, they advanced to the Super Bowl in 2003, which they lost to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. From 2003 to 2015 the franchise was marked by a lack of success on the field, poor personnel decisions, and a fractious front office, all of which considerably damaged the famed Raiders’ mystique.
In 2016 Oakland suddenly turned the corner, winning 12 games and qualifying for a playoff spot, but it was a short-lived turnaround, and the Raiders fell back to 10 losses the following year. In 2018 the Raiders rehired head coach Jon Gruden (who had previously coached the team from 1998 to 2001), giving him the longest and richest coaching contract in NFL history, but the team posted a 4–12 record in his first season back at the helm. After years of failed negotiations over potential stadium upgrades or building a new venue with the city of Oakland, the franchise relocated to Las Vegas in 2020.
