Michael Strahan, in full Michael Anthony Strahan,  (born November 21, 1971, Houston, Texas, U.S.), American professional gridiron football player and television personality who, playing defensive end for the New York Giants, established himself as one of the premier pass rushers in the history of the National Football League (NFL). He later had a successful career as a TV host.
At age nine Strahan moved to Germany when his father, a major in the U.S. Army, was stationed there. As a result, the young Strahan played very little organized football growing up. An ardent weightlifter, he became strong enough that his father believed he could earn a college football scholarship, so Strahan was sent to live with his uncle—a former NFL player—in Houston before his senior year of high school. He played well enough to obtain a scholarship to Texas Southern University, which competed in lower-division college football. Strahan set a school record with 41.5 sacks in his four years at Texas Southern and was selected by the Giants in the 1993 NFL draft.
After the 2000 regular season, Strahan helped the Giants reach Super Bowl XXXV, which the team lost to the Baltimore Ravens. In 2001 he recorded 22.5 sacks, an NFL single-season record, and was named the NFL’s Defensive Player of the Year. He again led the league in sacks in 2003, totaling 18.5 over the course of the season. Strahan and the Giants advanced to another Super Bowl in February 2008, where they upset the previously undefeated New England Patriots. He retired months after that surprise victory, ending his career with seven Pro Bowl selections and four first-team All-Pro honours. In 2014 he was elected into the Pro Football Hall of Fame.
The gregarious Strahan had long been a popular commercial spokesman, and his signature gap-toothed smile became well known to American television audiences. His profitable endorsement sideline career continued after his retirement, and he also acted on a number of television shows and in several movies. In 2012 he became the cohost (with Kelly Ripa) of the syndicated talk show Live! With Kelly and Michael; with Ripa, he later won two Daytime Emmy Awards for outstanding entertainment talk show host (2015 and 2016). He left the program in 2016 to cohost Good Morning America, where he had occasionally appeared since 2014. Also in 2016 he began hosting the TV game show The $100,000 Pyramid. In addition, Strahan wrote (with Veronica Chambers) the self-help book Wake Up Happy: The Dream Big, Win Big Guide to Transforming Your Life (2015).
