New England Patriots,  American professional gridiron football team based in Foxborough, Massachusetts, that plays in the National Football League (NFL). The Patriots have won six Super Bowl titles (2002, 2004, 2005, 2015, 2017, and 2019) and 11 American Football Conference (AFC) championships.
The franchise joined the American Football League (AFL) in 1960 as the Boston Patriots and quickly fielded a competitive team that featured quarterback Vito (“Babe”) Parilli, linebacker Nick Buoniconti, and wide receiver Gino Cappelletti. The Patriots posted a winning record in their second season and advanced to the AFL championship game in their fourth. However, after a second place divisional finish in 1966, the team recorded seven consecutive losing seasons. The Patriots also struggled to find a permanent home stadium, playing at four different Boston-area locations in 10 years. In 1971 the team—a member of the NFL following the 1970 AFL-NFL merger—relocated to Foxborough and was renamed the New England Patriots.
Led by John Hannah, considered one of the greatest offensive linemen in NFL history, future Hall of Fame cornerback Mike Haynes, and quarterback Steve Grogan, the Patriots experienced sporadic success in the 1970s and ’80s. They advanced to their first Super Bowl in 1986 but lost to a dominant Chicago Bears team, 46–10. Eleven years would pass before the Patriots would return to the Super Bowl, this time under the direction of coach Bill Parcells and led by quarterback Drew Bledsoe. New England lost Super Bowl XXXI to the Green Bay Packers, but their postseason appearance marked the beginning of three straight years of playoff football for the team, then a franchise record.
The Patriots made one of the most significant moves in franchise history with the hiring of Bill Belichick as head coach in 2000. A noted defensive assistant coach through most of his career (he also had a stint as the head coach of the Cleveland Browns, 1991–95), Belichick quickly built a powerful team around unheralded veteran free agents (such as linebacker Mike Vrabel and running back Corey Dillon) and savvy draft picks (including linebacker Tedy Bruschi and cornerback Ty Law). In 2001 a serious injury to Bledsoe paved the way for Tom Brady, a relatively unknown sixth-round draft choice, to take over the Patriots’ offense and lead the team to a surprising Super Bowl win the following February. Brady would become an elite passer and guide the Patriots to four more Super Bowl victories—in 2004, 2005, 2015, and 2017.
New England traded for All-Pro wide receiver Randy Moss before the 2007 season and went on to shatter numerous offensive records and post the only 16–0 regular-season record in NFL history, only to lose to the underdog New York Giants in Super Bowl XLII. Moss was traded away during the 2010 season, but the Patriots remained one of the highest-scoring teams in the NFL behind an efficient passing attack led by Brady, wide receiver Wes Welker, and versatile tight end Rob Gronkowski. New England posted the AFC’s best record in both 2010 and 2011, and the team advanced to a Super Bowl rematch with the Giants following the 2011 campaign, which it again lost.
The team continued its predominantly stellar play well into a second decade as it finished each of the following two seasons with a 12–4 record and an appearance in the AFC championship game (both of which ended in New England losses). In 2014 the Patriots again won 12 games and posted the best record in the AFC en route to winning a conference championship and qualifying for the sixth Super Bowl of the Brady-Belichick era. The Patriots went on to win the Super Bowl, beating the Seattle Seahawks. In 2015 the Patriots won their 12th division title in 13 years and advanced to the AFC championship game, a loss to the Denver Broncos. The following year, New England went an NFL-best 14–2 and cruised through the postseason en route to another AFC championship. In the Super Bowl, the Patriots overcame a 25-point third-quarter deficit to the Atlanta Falcons in overtime—the largest comeback in Super Bowl history—to win a fifth championship.
In 2017 the Patriots went 13–3 to win another division title en route to an NFL-record 10th Super Bowl appearance for the franchise. There the team lost a close contest to the Philadelphia Eagles, which gave New England five Super Bowl losses, the most in league history. The Patriots juggernaut continued its dominance in 2018, easily winning another division title and earning the second seed in the AFC playoffs. After a convincing victory in the divisional round, the Patriots won a roller-coaster AFC championship game over the Kansas City Chiefs to qualify for a third straight Super Bowl. In that game, the lowest-scoring in Super Bowl history, New England defeated the Los Angeles Rams, 13–3, to claim their sixth title, tying the Pittsburgh Steelers for most Super Bowl wins. In 2019 the Patriots extended their NFL-record streak of consecutive division championships with their 11th straight AFC East title, but the team failed to earn a first-round postseason bye for the first time in 10 years, and New England lost its opening playoff game.
