Philadelphia Eagles,  American professional gridiron football franchise based in Philadelphia that plays in the National Football Conference (NFC) of the National Football League (NFL). The Eagles have won three NFL championships (1948, 1949, and 1960) and have won one Super Bowl (2018).
The Eagles were founded in 1933 when the remains of the defunct Frankford Yellow Jackets franchise was sold to a syndicate of Philadelphia-based businessmen. The team was not an early success, as it posted either one or two victories in seven of its first 10 seasons, but the hiring of head coach Earle (“Greasy”) Neale in 1941 marked the beginning of a turnaround in Philadelphia. Neale guided teams featuring star running back Steve Van Buren to an NFL championship game appearance in 1947 and NFL titles in 1948 and 1949. The Eagles slowly regressed in the wake of their consecutive championships, and by the mid-1950s they routinely finished in the bottom half of the league. In 1960 the Eagles, led by quarterback Norm Van Brocklin and diminutive flanker Tommy McDonald on offense and linebacker Chuck Bednarik on defense, rebounded to win the franchise’s third NFL championship, a 17–13 victory over the Green Bay Packers.
The Eagles’ renaissance proved to be short-lived, as the team entered into an 18-year playoff drought immediately after its championship season. Head coach Dick Vermeil was hired in 1976, and his emotional coaching style energized the Eagles (as well as their fans), resulting in four straight playoff berths from 1978 to 1981 with teams that featured the passing duo of quarterback Ron Jaworski and the towering (6 feet 8 inches [2.03 metres] tall) wide receiver Harold Carmichael. This span was highlighted by Philadelphia’s first Super Bowl berth in 1981, though it lost to the Oakland Raiders, 27–10. Before the 1985 season, the Eagles made two significant additions: Randall Cunningham, a fleet-footed quarterback who would set the career record for rushing yards from his position, and Reggie White, a dominant defensive end who would retire as the NFL’s all-time sack leader. However, their stellar individual play never translated to team postseason success, as the Eagles won only one of the five playoff games in which the pair played between 1988 and 1992.
In 1999 the team hired head coach Andy Reid, who with his first draft choice selected quarterback Donovan McNabb. Reid and McNabb guided the Eagles to eight playoff berths in 10 years from their second season in Philadelphia, which included five trips to the NFC championship game and a Super Bowl appearance in 2005 but no titles. The pair had a tumultuous relationship on and off the field, and in 2010 McNabb was traded away. Michael Vick eventually took over as the Eagles’ starting quarterback that year and helped a young team win a division title. The team signed a bevy of high-profile free agents—notably cornerback Nnamdi Asomugha—the following off-season, which raised the Eagles’ championship expectations. However, Philadelphia struggled to an 8–8 record and missed the playoffs in 2011. The team followed with an injury-plagued 4–12 campaign in 2012, which led to Reid’s firing at season’s end. In 2013 a revamped Eagles team won 10 games and captured a divisional title but lost in its opening playoff contest. After again winning 10 games but failing to make the postseason in 2014, the Eagles fell back to mediocrity in the following two seasons.
The Eagles hired Doug Pederson as head coach in 2016. Pederson, a former Reid assistant coach, instituted an innovative offense that took the NFL by storm behind the play of breakout quarterback Carson Wentz during the 2017 season. The Eagles won a division title and advanced to the Super Bowl despite Wentz suffering a season-ending injury during the 13th game of the regular season. Backup quarterback Nick Foles then led the Eagles to a surprising upset of the New England Patriots to give Philadelphia their first Super Bowl championship in franchise history. The team struggled early in the 2018 season, but another Wentz injury opened the door for Foles to rally the team to three straight regular-season wins to sneak into the playoffs, where the Eagles won their first game before being eliminated in the divisional round. Wentz stayed healthy for the 2019 regular season, but the rest of the Eagles roster was decimated by injuries that year. The team nevertheless won nine games to win a division title, but Philadelphia lost its opening playoff game.
