Roger Goodell, in full Roger Stokoe Goodell,  (born February 19, 1959, Jamestown, New York, U.S.), American sports executive who served as commissioner (2006– ) of the National Football League (NFL).
Goodell was born into a prominent New York family—his father, Charles Ellsworth Goodell, was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives (1959–68) and served two years (1968–71) in the U.S. Senate after the assassination in 1968 of Sen. Robert F. Kennedy. The younger Goodell graduated (1981) from Washington and Jefferson College in Pennsylvania with an economics degree and then became an administrative intern at the NFL’s New York City headquarters. He briefly interned for the New York Jets franchise before returning (1984) to the NFL as an assistant in the league’s public-relations office. Goodell worked his way up the ranks of the NFL administration over the years, becoming in 2001 the corporation’s executive vice president and chief operating officer—effectively serving as then commissioner Paul Tagliabue’s right-hand man.
In this executive position, Goodell played an integral role in most of the league’s major business decisions, including stadium development, league expansion and realignment, and the NFL’s numerous lucrative television deals. Following Tagliabue’s retirement in 2006, NFL team owners elected Goodell to assume the commissionership. He made his highest priority “protecting the shield” (a reference to safeguarding the integrity of the NFL as represented by the league’s shield logo).
One of his earliest acts was the implementation in 2007 of a personal conduct policy, which he enacted in the wake of a number of arrests of NFL players. The policy made Goodell the arbiter of the punishment to be handed out to players for their illegal or simply unsavory on- and off-field conduct. Although the new scheme was originally applauded by the public, the apparent capriciousness of Goodell’s punishments led to increased criticism of the policy over the years. In 2014 Ray Rice of the Baltimore Ravens was charged with assault after punching his girlfriend in a casino elevator. Goodell initially suspended him for two games (which was criticized for being too lenient), but, after security footage of the punch was leaked, Goodell suspended Rice indefinitely, leading to charges that he was acting not on principle but in an effort to save face amid the outcry over the graphic tape. (Rice’s indefinite suspension was later overturned by an arbitrator, but he never again played in the NFL.) Public negative reaction to the personal conduct policy reached a pitch following the 2015 incident that became known as “Deflategate,” in which the New England Patriots, led by star quarterback Tom Brady, were accused of having tampered with the balls (by partially deflating them) during the AFC Championship game on January 18; the Patriots went on to win the Super Bowl on February 1. Three months later Goodell suspended Brady for not fully cooperating in the league’s investigation only to have the punishment overturned later in the year by a U.S. federal judge on appeal. The judge cited collective-bargaining circumvention and overreach on Goodell’s part.
In addition to managing the fallout related to the conduct policy, Goodell also had to oversee the NFL’s response to the growing evidence of concussion-induced brain damage in football players. The first posthumous diagnosis of chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) in a former NFL player, Hall of Fame centre Mike Webster, had come a few years before Goodell became commissioner, and more high-profile diagnoses followed during his tenure. Moreover, during this time an increasing number of players began to retire during their peak years, often citing fears of concussion-induced CTE as a reason for doing so. In 2013 the NFL settled a $765 million lawsuit with 4,500 retired players who claimed that the league failed to communicate the long-term risks of concussions to players and profited from its portrayal of the sport as violent. With Goodell’s encouragement, the league instituted a number of rule changes, including increased punishments for hits to defenseless players, in an effort to lessen on-field concussions in NFL play.
