Ronnie Lott, in full Ronald Mandel Lott,  (born May 8, 1959, Albuquerque, N.M., U.S.), American gridiron football player who earned first-team All-Pro honours at all three defensive backfield positions during his standout 14-year National Football League (NFL) career. The preternaturally tough Lott is regarded as one of the hardest hitters in NFL history.
Lott attended the University of Southern California, where he was a consensus All-American safety in his senior year. He was selected by the San Francisco 49ers with the eighth selection of the 1981 NFL draft. Shifting from safety to cornerback, Lott started for the 49ers from the first game of his rookie year. He was named to both the Pro Bowl and All-Pro teams in his first year in the league as he helped the 49ers to their first Super Bowl title. Lott and San Francisco won a second Super Bowl in 1985, following a 15–1 regular season in which the 49ers’ defense allowed the fewest points in the league. During the 1985 regular season Lott switched to free safety, where his aggressive tackling and nose for the ball were put to better use. At the end of that year he endured an injury that became a part of NFL lore and established his tough-guy reputation: after crushing a finger while making a tackle, he opted to have the top of the digit amputated rather than miss playing time in order to have reconstructive surgery.
In his five seasons as a full-time free safety in San Francisco (1986–90) he earned first-team All-Pro honours four times, and he anchored a 49ers defense that helped the team win two additional Super Bowls (1989–90). In 1991 he signed with the Los Angeles Raiders. In his first year with the franchise, after switching to strong safety, he led the league in interceptions and was named All-Pro at a third position. Lott joined the New York Jets in 1993 for two seasons before injuries forced him to leave the sport in 1995. At the time of his retirement, Lott had the fifth highest career interception total in league history. He became a successful businessman after his playing days ended, and he was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2000.
