Terry Bradshaw, in full Terry Paxton Bradshaw,  (born September 2, 1948, Shreveport, Louisiana, U.S.), American professional gridiron football quarterback who led the Pittsburgh Steelers to four Super Bowl championships (1975, 1976, 1979, and 1980).
A highly prized collegiate football recruit coming out of high school, Bradshaw shunned traditional powerhouse Louisiana State University to attend the smaller Louisiana Tech University in Ruston, which was only about 70 miles (113 km) from his hometown. He broke all of the major school passing records in his four years at Louisiana Tech and was selected by the Steelers with the first overall selection of the 1970 National Football League (NFL) draft. Bradshaw became the team’s full-time starting quarterback in his second season in Pittsburgh, and in 1972 he led the team to the first of eight consecutive play-off appearances. While the well-balanced team was one of the most successful in the league, Bradshaw struggled with his passing accuracy and was demoted to backup quarterback early in the 1974 season. He played his way back into the starting lineup over the course of the season and led the Steelers to their first Super Bowl title the following January.
Entrenched as the Steelers’ quarterback, Bradshaw guided the team to a second consecutive championship in 1976. In 1978 he threw a league-high 28 touchdown passes and was named the NFL’s Most Valuable Player (MVP). In the subsequent postseason, he ran an efficient offense that averaged 34 points per game, and the Steelers garnered another Super Bowl victory (with Bradshaw earning game MVP honours). The team again repeated as champions in 1980, and Bradshaw was once more named Super Bowl MVP for his efforts. He retired after the 1983 season and was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1989.
After retiring as a player, Bradshaw became a prominent television football analyst. In addition, he acted in a number of telelvision programs and films, and he had some success as a gospel and country music singer. His book It’s Only a Game (2001; cowritten with David Fisher) chronicles his life from his early years to his postfootball exploits.
