Tom Brady, in full Thomas Edward Patrick Brady, Jr.,  (born August 3, 1977, San Mateo, California, U.S.), American gridiron football quarterback who led his teams to a record seven Super Bowl victories (2002, 2004, 2005, 2015, 2017, 2019, and 2021) and was named the game’s Most Valuable Player (MVP) five times (2002, 2004, 2015, 2017, and 2021).
While growing up, Brady often attended San Francisco 49ers games to watch the legendary quarterback Joe Montana—Brady’s idol and the man to whom he would eventually be compared—play during the 1980s. In high school Brady excelled in both football and baseball. He entered the Major League Baseball draft in 1995 and was picked by the Montreal Expos, but he decided instead to attend the University of Michigan and play football. Brady, who did not start until his junior year, led Michigan to victory in the 1999 Orange Bowl and gained a reputation as a determined and intelligent player but one who lacked any exceptional physical skills. In 2000 he was chosen in the sixth round of the NFL draft by the New England Patriots, and he worked diligently during his first season to bulk up physically and improve his strength and technique.
In the second game of the 2001 season, the Patriots’ starting quarterback, Drew Bledsoe, was injured, and Brady was chosen to fill the position. His play was not spectacular, but he was consistent, making simple plays and minimizing mistakes. With Brady as their starting quarterback, the Patriots went on to post an 11–3 record in the regular season and to upset the St. Louis Rams in Super Bowl XXXVI; Brady was named the Super Bowl MVP. The Patriots became one of the NFL’s elite teams, posting an incredible 40–12 record during Brady’s first three seasons. In 2004 the team returned to the Super Bowl, defeating the Carolina Panthers and earning Brady another Super Bowl MVP award. The momentum carried through to the next season, as the Patriots extended their consecutive win streak to 21, breaking the record of 18 set by the Miami Dolphins in 1972–73. Brady and the Patriots capped off the season with their third Super Bowl in four years, this time against the Philadelphia Eagles.
In the 2007 season Brady threw an unprecedented 50 touchdown passes (the record was broken by Brady’s longtime rival Peyton Manning in 2013), and he led New England to the first 16–0 regular season in NFL history, earning NFL MVP honours in the process. However, the Patriots lost to the underdog New York Giants in Super Bowl XLII. In the first game of the 2008 NFL schedule, Brady suffered a severe knee injury that required season-ending surgery. He returned to form the next season, earning a Pro Bowl selection after guiding the Patriots to another playoff berth. Brady led the NFL with 36 touchdown passes in 2010 and helped the Patriots to a league-best 14–2 record. Despite the Patriots getting upset in their first playoff game the following postseason, he was named league MVP a second time, becoming the first player to capture the award unanimously.
During the 2011 season Brady passed for 5,235 yards to become—along with new record holder Drew Brees—one of two quarterbacks to surpass Dan Marino’s single-season passing yardage record (which was also broken by Manning in 2013), and he led the Patriots to another Super Bowl loss to the Giants in February 2012. Brady continued playing at a Pro-Bowl level in 2012 and 2013, guiding the Patriots to losses in the AFC championship game in each season. Following the 2014 regular season, he helped the team get over its recent hump as New England routed the Indianapolis Colts in the AFC championship game to earn Brady his record sixth Super Bowl start. However, that victory was soon awash in controversy, as it was found that 11 of the 12 footballs that the Patriots had used in the game were markedly underinflated, which can make them easier to grip and travel farther when thrown. The NFL looked into the incident, but no action was taken before the Super Bowl, where Brady led a fourth-quarter rally in a 28–24 win over the Seattle Seahawks. Brady passed for 328 yards and four touchdowns in the contest to earn his third Super Bowl MVP trophy.
In May 2015 Brady was suspended for four games of the upcoming season for his role in the ball deflations during the AFC championship game and for not fully cooperating with the NFL’s investigation into the matter. Brady and his lawyers appealed the suspension, arguing that NFL commissioner Roger Goodell had overstepped the bounds of the collective-bargaining agreement between the league and the players’ union in handing down the punishment, and the suspension was overturned by a U.S. federal judge shortly before the start of the 2015 NFL season. The affair seemed to motivate Brady, as he led the Patriots to a blistering 10–0 start to the 2015 season that ultimately ended with yet another division title for New England. He passed for 4,770 yards and an NFL-high 36 touchdowns that year, but his team’s season ended in the AFC championship game with a loss to Manning and the Denver Broncos. During the off-season, however, his suspension from the previous year was reinstated by the U.S. Court of Appeals and applied to the first four games of the 2016 season. On December 4 of that year, Brady set a new NFL record for wins as a starting quarterback when he led the Patriots to the 201st win of his tenure. His strong postsuspension play (including a career-low two interceptions over the season) helped the Patriots win a league-best 14 games and capture another AFC title. In the following Super Bowl Brady tallied a then-record 466 passing yards as well as two touchdowns as he led the Patriots to the largest comeback ever in that game (overcoming a 25-point third-quarter deficit in overtime) to win an unprecedented fifth title as an NFL starting quarterback.
In 2017 Brady led the NFL with 4,577 passing yards and also threw 32 touchdown passes and just eight interceptions, earning him a third league MVP award. The Patriots again had the best record in the AFC that season and advanced to the Super Bowl for the eighth time in Brady’s career. There, despite Brady breaking his own Super Bowl record with 505 passing yards, the Patriots were upset by the Eagles. In 2018 Brady passed for 4,355 yards and 29 touchdowns while leading the Patriots to a 10th consecutive division title and a third straight Super Bowl appearance. In the championship game, the lowest-scoring in NFL history, Brady helped the Patriots defeat the Los Angeles Rams, 13–3. It was his sixth title, and he became, at age 41, the oldest quarterback to win the Super Bowl. He had one of his worst seasons in 2019, throwing just 24 touchdown passes, his lowest full-season total since 2006. The Patriots still won an 11th straight division championship that year, but the team lost its opening postseason game. In March 2020 Brady shocked the sporting world by leaving the Patriots in free agency and signing a two-year contract with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. His first season with the Buccaneers was a major success, as Tampa Bay won 11 games and earned a playoff spot. (Brady also established a new NFL record for touchdown passes that year, finishing the season with 581 career touchdown passes.) In the postseason Brady led his team to three straight road victories to advance to the Super Bowl. There the Buccaneers’ standout defense and Brady’s solid play led Tampa Bay to a decisive victory over the Kansas City Chiefs to capture the team’s second (and Brady’s seventh) championship.
While not the strongest or quickest quarterback in the NFL, Brady established himself among the game’s greats for his tenacity, his intelligent playmaking abilities, and the remarkable leadership he provided under pressure. He was also known for his approach to fitness, which he wrote about in The TB12 Method: How to Achieve a Lifetime of Sustained Peak Performance (2017). In 2009 he married fashion model Gisele Bündchen.
