Troy Aikman, in full Troy Kenneth Aikman,  (born November 21, 1966, West Covina, California, U.S.), American gridiron football quarterback who led the Dallas Cowboys of the National Football League (NFL) to three Super Bowl victories (1993, 1994, and 1996).
Aikman was raised in Cerritos, a suburb of Los Angeles, before moving with his family to the small town of Henryetta, Oklahoma, where he was an all-state high school standout. He was recruited by coaches Barry Switzer of the University of Oklahoma and Jimmy Johnson of Oklahoma State University; both later went on to coach him as a professional with the Cowboys. Aikman chose the University of Oklahoma, but he left the school after Switzer introduced the wishbone formation to the Oklahoma offense, emphasizing a running game at the expense of Aikman’s strong passing skills. Aikman subsequently attended the University of California, Los Angeles, where, as a transfer student, he had to sit out the 1986 season. He excelled in his remaining two years at UCLA, leading his squad to a 20–4 record, with postseason victories in the Aloha Bowl (December 1987) and the Cotton Bowl (January 1989). He was named All-American in his senior year and placed third in the polling for the Heisman Trophy, college football’s most prestigious award.
The Cowboys, one of the most dominant and popular teams in the 1970s, had fallen on lean times by 1989, when the team made Aikman the overall number one draft selection. He fared poorly in his first few seasons, throwing more interceptions than touchdown passes and missing games because of injuries. In 1992–93, however, his first season without injuries, Aikman led the team—which included running back Emmitt Smith and receiver Michael Irvin—to a Super Bowl victory as the Cowboys defeated the Buffalo Bills. Aikman was named the game’s Most Valuable Player. In 1994 the Cowboys again played the Bills in the Super Bowl and defended their title. Two years later Aikman guided Dallas to victory over the Pittsburgh Steelers for another Super Bowl championship. In 1996 he also appeared in his sixth consecutive Pro Bowl. The following year he threw for more than 3,000 passing yards—the fourth time he had accomplished the feat during his career—but the Cowboys failed to make the play-offs. Various injuries, notably concussions, limited his play over the next several seasons, and in April 2001 he retired. Aikman subsequently became a television football analyst. In 2006 he was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame.
