Australia Group,  informal association of 42 nations formed in 1985 that works to prevent the exportation of chemical and biological weapons and the materials used to produce them.
In April 1984 many Western nations became increasingly alarmed by reports that Iraq was extensively using chemical weapons in the Iran-Iraq War. A special commission established by the UN secretary-general subsequently discovered that Iraq had purchased both the ingredients and the manufacturing equipment for its chemical weapons from corporations based in countries such as West Germany, Great Britain, France, and the United States.
The lack of uniform export controls in developed Western nations had quietly but steadily led to the proliferation of chemical weapons among less-developed nations such as Iraq, Libya, and North Korea. Some nations, such as West Germany, possessed very soft export laws. Indeed, several West German corporations had served as Iraq’s primary suppliers because the West German government cursorily oversaw their shipments. However, even nations with much stricter export controls, such as the United States, had allowed chemical-weapons components to be shipped to Iraq because of poor enforcement of existing laws, an insufficient number of customs inspectors, and confusion over the legality of shipping materials that could be used for alternative purposes such as agriculture.
In June 1985, therefore, Australia initiated a meeting among Western industrialized nations and proposed that those nations institute uniform export controls over the materials used to produce chemical weapons to stem their proliferation. At a meeting at the Australian embassy in Brussels, Australia, the 12 members of the European Community, Canada, New Zealand, Japan, Norway, Austria, Switzerland, Finland, and the United States formed an unofficial organization known as the Australia Group. Although the members were not bound by any international law, they agreed to share confidential information and improve their individual controls on chemical exports.
Initially the members could not agree on which materials should be universally prohibited. The United States, for example, wanted to ban the exportation of eight key chemicals, whereas many of the European nations placed the limit at five. However, when the group learned in 1989 that Libya had constructed a major chemical plant with the assistance of several German firms and supplies from various group members, they devised an expanded list of chemicals that they would refuse to distribute. By 1990 the list included 14 core chemicals and 50 precursor chemicals that could be altered into weapons. The group also engaged in lengthy discussions with the newly liberated eastern European nations, hoping to deter them from selling their chemical-weapon stockpiles to stabilize their economies. In 1992 the Australia Group agreed to control the export of biological agents that could be converted into biological weapons. Its 2013 export-control list for chemical and biological weapons featured 63 chemicals, 39 viruses, 20 species of bacteria, 19 toxins, 2 fungi, and a variety of plant and animal pathogens.
By 2013 the Australia Group had expanded to 42 members. Although the group retains its unofficial status, all members are required to sign the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons Convention. By sharing intelligence and discussing how to institute multilateral export controls, the Australia Group has stunted the proliferation of chemical weapons.
The group’s success, however, has been limited. As an unofficial organization, the Australia Group cannot levy sanctions or other punitive measures against nations that acquire chemical weapons or against group members that choose to ignore the organization’s controls but must rely on larger international bodies and the strength of individual members. Additionally, many Third World nations, in an effort to boost their economies, have begun supplying the raw ingredients to nations seeking chemical weapons, and the Australia Group lacks the means to intercede in those transactions.
