Caritas Internationalis, (Latin: “Love Between Nations”) formerly Caritas and Caritas Catholica,  international confederation of Roman Catholic charitable organizations and international groups dedicated to promoting peace, economic justice, and human welfare. In the early 21st century its membership included more than 160 organizations active in more than 200 countries. Headquarters are in Vatican City.
Originally known as Caritas, the organization was founded in Germany in 1897 by a young Roman Catholic priest, Lorenz Werthmann, to provide social welfare services to the poor and disadvantaged. Similar groups soon formed in other countries. International coordination efforts led in 1924 to the creation of a regular conference of national Roman Catholic social welfare organizations, which was given the name Caritas Catholica in 1928. In 1947 Caritas Catholica became the official relief organization of the Vatican, and in 1954 it was renamed Caritas Internationalis to reflect its global mission.
The work of Caritas Internationalis is inspired by the principles of Catholic social teaching, which were developed in the 19th century in response to the social and economic changes brought about by the Industrial Revolution. Its activities are focused on six main areas: peace and reconciliation, with an emphasis on interreligious understanding; emergencies, including natural and human-made disasters; economic justice; climate change and its impact on the poor; HIV and AIDS; and the rights of women and immigrants. Its membership includes national charitable organizations that work within the structure of the Roman Catholic Church and international charities and other organizations that have been recognized by the Vatican as dedicated to human advancement and development.
Caritas Internationalis is headed by a president, who is elected by a general assembly that convenes once every four years in Vatican City. The general assembly also elects a secretary general, a treasurer, an executive committee, and the presidents of each of the organization’s seven administrative regions: Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean, the Middle East and North Africa, North America, and Oceania. 
