Caribbean Community (CARICOM), formerly (1973–2001) Caribbean Community and Commons Market,  organization of Caribbean countries and dependencies originally established as the Caribbean Community and Commons Market in 1973 by the Treaty of Chaguaramas. It replaced the former Caribbean Free Trade Association (CARIFTA), which had become effective in 1968. The treaty spurred the development of associate institutions, including the Caribbean Development Bank and the Organization of East Caribbean States, both of which promote economic growth and cooperation. Members include Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago. Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, and the Turks and Caicos Islands have associate member status, and Aruba, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Puerto Rico, and Venezuela maintain observer status. The permanent secretariat has its headquarters in Georgetown, Guyana.
CARICOM’s main purposes are to promote economic integration and cooperation among its members, to ensure that the benefits of integration are equitably shared, and to coordinate foreign policy. Its major activities have centred on coordinating economic policies and development planning; it also devises and institutes special projects for the less-developed countries within its jurisdiction. In the late 1980s, CARICOM’s heads of government declared their support for the creation of a regional common market, and, in 1990, members agreed to develop common protectionist policies for trade with countries outside the organization, though many members were slow to implement these and other decisions. In July 2001 the heads of government revised the Treaty of Chaguaramas, establishing the Caribbean Community and the CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME), which would harmonize economic policy and create a single currency. Movement toward a single market and economy was delayed over disagreements about the division of benefits, but in January 2006 the Caricom Single Market (CSM)—which removed barriers to goods, services, trade, and several categories of labour—was implemented by all member states except The Bahamas and Haiti. A year earlier, CARICOM had officially inaugurated the Caribbean Court of Justice (CCJ), which replaced the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London. CCJ serves as the final court of appeal for CARICOM members and also handles regional trade disputes.
