Central America–Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR),  trade agreement signed in 2004 to gradually eliminate most tariffs, customs duties, and other trade barriers on products and services passing between the countries of Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and the United States. It was the first free trade agreement between the United States and a group of developing countries. Essentially, the pact was meant to provide the United States with improved market access and to foster economic growth in Central American countries and the Dominican Republic through increased direct investment and export diversification.
Free trade negotiations between the United States and the five Central American countries began in 2002. The Dominican Republic joined the discussions in 2003. CAFTA-DR was signed by all the countries on Aug. 5, 2004. The agreement was approved by the U.S. Congress in July 2005, and it was signed into law by Pres. George W. Bush on Aug. 2, 2005. By 2007 all the signatories except Costa Rica had promulgated the agreement. Approval lagged in Costa Rica because of strong opposition from a wide range of civil society organizations and trade unions. Costa Rican voters approved the agreement in a national referendum in 2007; it went into effect there in January 2009. In general, CAFTA-DR divided Central Americans into two camps: peasant, labour, and indigenous groups staunchly opposed it, while businesses and governments believed it would attract more foreign investment and promote economic growth.
CAFTA-DR’s main provision called for some tariffs to be removed immediately and others over periods as long as 15 to 20 years. Duties on more than half of U.S. agricultural exports were eliminated upon the agreement’s entry into force. Key U.S. exports sent to CAFTA-DR countries have been petroleum products, machinery, grains, plastics, and medical instruments. Significant U.S. imports have included coffee, sugar, fruits and vegetables, cigars, and petroleum products. Other provisions of CAFTA-DR were designed to give the United States greater access to Central American markets in banking, telecommunications, media, insurance, and other service sectors, as well as to Central American and Dominican government purchases. The trade agreement included measures to ensure transparency and efficiency in all transactions and to protect workers’ rights and the environment.
