Dollar Diplomacy,  foreign policy created by U.S. Pres. William Howard Taft (served 1909–13) and his secretary of state, Philander C. Knox, to ensure the financial stability of a region while protecting and extending U.S. commercial and financial interests there. It grew out of Pres. Theodore Roosevelt’s peaceful intervention in the Dominican Republic, where U.S. loans had been exchanged for the right to choose the Dominican head of customs (the country’s major revenue source).
In his message to Congress on December 3, 1912, in the course of a review of his foreign policy actions of the preceding year, Taft characterized his program as “substituting dollars for bullets.”
The phrase was picked up by his critics and converted into “dollar diplomacy,” a highly uncomplimentary term to describe Taft’s dealings with other countries. Taft’s encouragement of U.S. business, especially in the Caribbean, where he felt that investors would have a stabilizing effect on the shaky governments of the region, came in for the sharpest criticism.
Under the name of Dollar Diplomacy, the Taft administration engineered such a policy in Nicaragua. It supported the overthrow of José Santos Zelaya and set up Adolfo Díaz in his place; it established a collector of customs; and it guaranteed loans to the Nicaraguan government. The resentment of the Nicaraguan people, however, eventually resulted in U.S. military intervention as well.
Taft and Knox also attempted to promulgate Dollar Diplomacy in China, where it was even less successful, both in terms of U.S. ability to supply loans and in terms of world reaction. The dismal failure of Dollar Diplomacy—from its simplistic assessment of social unrest to its formulaic application—caused the Taft administration to finally abandon the policy in 1912. The following year Pres. Woodrow Wilson publicly repudiated Dollar Diplomacy, though he acted as vigorously as had his predecessors to maintain U.S. supremacy in Central America and the Caribbean.
Dollar diplomacy has come to refer in a disparaging way to the heedless manipulation of foreign affairs for strictly monetary ends.
