Donation of Pippin,  traditional name of the oral or written promise made by the Carolingian king Pippin III to Pope Stephen II (or III) granting the pope rights over large territories in central Italy. The Donation was an important step in the development of the Papal States and helped to solidify the alliance between the papacy and the Frankish monarchy.
The Donation of Pippin came into being as part of the restructuring of political alliances on the Italian peninsula in the mid-8th century. The papacy, still nominally subject to the Byzantine emperor in Constantinople, was plagued by encroachments on its territories from the Lombards, especially under their militaristic king Aistulf. For protection, Stephen could no longer depend on the emperor, who had lost control of the imperial capital of Ravenna when Aistulf seized it. Stephen, therefore, turned his attention northward to the new king of the Franks, Pippin, who had deposed the last Merovingian king in 750 after gaining approval from Stephen’s predecessor, Zacharias (741–752). In January 754 Pippin welcomed Stephen to the Carolingian royal palace at Ponthion, and the pope remained in the Frankish kingdom throughout the winter.
Stephen’s visit to Pippin bore important fruit for both pope and king. In a meeting in April at Quierzy, Pippin promised to restore papal lands taken by Aistulf in central Italy. Much of what Pippin granted to the pope had been imperial territory, to which the king had no legal claim. Papal accounts of the promise maintain that Pippin granted the pope the exarchate, including Ravenna, and the Roman duchy. The promise made at Quierzy was long identified as the Donation, though there is no surviving record of it. In any event, Stephen and Pippin forged an alliance in 754 that was strengthened when Stephen crowned and anointed Pippin and his sons Charlemagne and Carloman.
What may be better identified as the official Donation of Pippin is the so-called Confession of St. Peter, which was compiled following Pippin’s second invasion of Italy to assist the pope. Aistulf’s continued aggression required the Frankish king to use force to protect Stephen and papal territory. In 755 and 756 Pippin entered Italy to stop the Lombard king, and in 756 he defeated Aistulf and imposed a peace on him. At Pippin’s direction, the keys to a number of cities and territories in central Italy that had submitted to papal authority were collected. The keys and a list of the cities involved, the Confession of St. Peter, were placed on the altar of Old St. Peter’s Basilica in Rome in 756.
The Donation of Pippin was confirmed by Pippin’s successors, Charlemagne and Louis the Pious, in 778 and 817 respectively. It was later offered as proof of the authenticity of the Donation of Constantine, whereby the Roman emperor supposedly granted Pope Sylvester I spiritual and temporal primacy in the Western Empire.
