East African Community (EAC),  organization that provides for cooperation, including the maintenance of a common market and the operation of common services, between the republics of Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda. Its headquarters are in Arusha, Tanzania.
The first EAC, which succeeded the East African
Common Services Organization on December 1, 1967, was established by the Treaty for East African Co-operation, signed in June 1967 by the presidents of Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda. This organization was dissolved in 1977, but links between the three governments were reaffirmed with the establishment of the Permanent Tripartite Commission for East African Co-operation in November 1993. That body continued the mission of the EAC until July 2000, when the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community entered into force. The second incarnation of the EAC was intended to integrate its members much more deeply, with the ultimate goal of establishing a regional political federation akin to the European Union. Rwanda and Burundi joined the EAC in 2007 and South Sudan became a member in 2016.
The main services administered by the EAC include oversight of civil aviation, coordination of public health policy, promotion of Swahili as a regional language, funding sustainable development initiatives, and directing various research organizations. With the creation of the EAC Customs Union in 2005, the countries of the community pledged to maintain common
customs and excise tariffs. They also agreed to allow freedom
of movement within East Africa for goods originating in any of the
partner states and to adopt mutually beneficial trade practices.
Among the chief executive organs of the EAC are the Summit (the heads of government of partner countries), the Council of Ministers (the EAC’s governing body), the Secretariat (tasked with ensuring compliance with EAC directives among members), the East African Court of Justice, and the East African Legislative Assembly.
