East Asian Economic Group (EAEG),  proposed regional bloc of East Asian and Southeast Asian countries. Suggested in 1990 by Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir bin Mohamad, the EAEG represented the idea of an exclusivist East Asian regionalism. As conceived by Mahathir, the EAEG would be led by Japan and would serve as a much needed counterweight to emerging regional blocs in Europe and North America. In addition to Japan, the proposed group would include the 10 Southeast Asian states, China, and Korea but would notably exclude both the United States and Australia. The creation of the European Union (EU) under the 1992 Maastricht Treaty and the signing of the 1992 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) were important factors in Mahathir’s argument that East Asia needed its own bloc.
The EAEG encountered strong opposition from the United States and Australia. Under President George H.W. Bush the United States successfully pressured key Asian allies, especially South Korea and Japan, not to support the EAEG. Fear of U.S. protectionism or a U.S. backlash was enough to persuade most East Asian states, whose economic and political survival depended on access to the U.S. market, to withhold their support for the EAEG. East Asian states subsequently rejected the EAEG proposal in favour of an East Asian Economic Caucus (EAEC) within the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum. Under President Bill Clinton the United States continued to oppose the EAEG but did so mainly by giving new support to APEC. U.S. support for APEC is widely seen as a successful preemptive move against the EAEG and any other East Asia-type arrangements. The EAEG and APEC are often perceived as rivals.
The Asian financial crisis of 1997–1998 gave new life to Mahathir’s East Asia ideas. Regional resentment toward the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and U.S. handling of the crisis intensified interest in an East Asian group, which took the form of the ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations) Plus Three (APT) framework. Though the APT framework preceded the Asian financial crisis (it emerged from the Asia-Europe meetings), most consider the APT framework “the EAEG by another name.”
The EAEG was considered significant as an early signal of what many saw as a reascendant East Asia. It was additionally significant in the context of literature on the new regionalism, in which the new regionalism is characterized by its rejection of protectionist forms of regionalism in favour of a nondiscriminatory open regionalism, best represented in Asia by APEC. The EAEG’s exclusivist and racially defined regionalism provided contrast and challenge to the dominant rhetoric of open regionalism.
