Elan Vital,  international religious organization that teaches spiritual enlightenment through the practice of yoga and chanting. Although beset by court battles and schism, it remains active in the United States and many other countries.
Elan Vital is the successor organization of the Divine Light Mission, which was founded in Delhi in 1930 by Hans Ram Singh Rawat, known to his followers as Shri Hans Maharaj Ji. The mission was part of the Sant Mat (“Holy Path”) tradition, which promotes a mystical path to God through meditation on inner light and sound. Upon his death in 1966, Maharaj Ji was succeeded as head of the mission by his eight-year-old son Prem Pal Singh Rawat, who assumed the name Maharaj Ji, along with his father’s title, Perfect Master. A child prodigy, Rawat had been initiated into the mission at the age of six. He visited the West for the first time in 1971 and attracted many youthful followers. Within two years the mission had opened several hundred centres in the United States.
Because of its prominence, the Divine Light Mission became one of the chief targets of the anticult movement, which arose in the United States in the 1960s as a reaction to the increased popularity of new religious movements among young Americans. The organization also suffered internal difficulties during this period. In 1975 Maharaj Ji, though still a minor, broke with his family (who administered the affairs of the expanding mission) because they opposed his marriage to his American secretary. After the courts awarded him control of the mission everywhere but India, he Westernized the organization. In the early 1980s he formally disbanded the Divine Light Mission and formed Elan Vital to disseminate his teachings worldwide.
While the teachings and practices of the new organization remained essentially the same as those of the Divine Light Mission, Elan Vital created a public image that contained no hint of the organization’s Indian background. Maharaj Ji also renounced his role as a Perfect Master. Shortening his byname to Maharaji, he presented himself instead as a teacher of universal spiritual and philosophical concerns.
Like the Divine Light Mission, Elan Vital teaches a spiritual discipline called the yoga of the sound current. According to Elan Vital, human individuals are essentially divine beings who exist as a result of the creative sound flowing from the divine realm. By chanting the names of God they immerse themselves in the sound current and thereby reconnect to the divine. Maharaji teaches his followers specific techniques of chanting, which they practice daily.
