Foreign service, also called Diplomatic Service,  the field force of a foreign office, comprising diplomatic and consular personnel engaged in representing the home government’s interests abroad and providing the necessary information on which foreign policy is based. There is a marked similarity in the foreign service organizations of most countries. Diplomatic and consular functions are generally performed by a single service, which is expected to serve at home or abroad, enabling interchangeability of consular and diplomatic officers. The merger of the two functions came about when many European countries, beginning with France in 1880, recognized that the consular service, although less dependent on ceremony and prestige, could not be entirely separated from diplomatic affairs.
Originally, diplomatic officials were members of royal or noble families and served as the personal representatives of sovereign rulers. When governmental authority came to reside in institutions other than monarchs, diplomats became the representatives of the government in power. As such, they were for a long time drawn primarily from wealthy governing and aristocratic classes. Prior to World War I, candidates for the British diplomatic service, for example, had to show that they had an independent income. In the United States, despite the absence of an aristocracy or governing class, wealth and political connections were once important prerequisites because of low salaries and meagre representation (entertainment) allowances. In France under the Third Republic, the diplomatic service remained largely in the hands of prosperous upper-middle-class citizens and those members of the aristocracy whose wealth remained intact. In imperial Germany and Russia the diplomatic services were almost exclusively in the hands of the aristocracy and high reserve officers of the army and navy.
Great Britain in 1871 instituted the first competitive entrance examinations for the foreign service. In the 20th century, education and intellectual ability became the chief criteria of selection in most countries. The competitive entrance examination, merit system of advancement, and mandatory retirement at specified ages through a rigorous “selection up or selection out” procedure have been widely instituted.
Foreign service officers adhere to rules and customs that are of long standing and have proved indispensable to governments in conducting their international relations. Under international law and usage, personnel in missions abroad (usually embassies, legations, and consulates), including members of their households, are immune from the jurisdiction of the government to which they are accredited, and the mission itself has the status of extraterritoriality and, as such, is considered legally a part of the home country. Personnel may not be sued in civil action or compelled to testify as witnesses or compelled to pay taxes to the host country. Their official position does not sanction the evasion of private debts, however, and their private property is subject to local municipal law. An officer or staff member who does not conform to local regulations or who is otherwise unacceptable to the government to which he is accredited may be declared unacceptable (persona non grata) and his recall requested, a demand that is invariably obeyed. Accreditation of ambassadors or other chiefs of mission is handled in accordance with internationally accepted procedures, but appointment of both ambassadors and other officers follows the constitutional practice of individual states. See also diplomacy.
