Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA),  proposed free-trade zone encompassing all of the Americas. Negotiations to establish the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) ended in failure, however, the state parties having been unable to reach an agreement by the 2005 deadline they had set. The FTAA was to include all countries of North America and South America and of the Caribbean with the exception of Cuba.
The proposal for the FTAA had its roots in the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative, announced by U.S. President George H.W. Bush in 1990. Following the signing of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in 1992, the earlier proposal was renewed under the aegis of the President Bill Clinton administration at the 1994 Summit of the Americas in Miami. By 1998 the preparatory work had been completed and the formal negotiations begun. The FTAA negotiations were carried out under an agreed structure and timetable. Earlier phases of the FTAA negotiations took place in seven ministerial meetings between 1998 and 2002 and produced three draft proposals. The last proposal contained provisions regarding market access, agricultural subsidies, investment, antidumping measures, competition policy, intellectual property, dispute settlement, government procurement, and services. The final anticipated phase of the negotiations was placed under the cochairmanship of Brazil and the United States in November 2002, with a view to concluding all negotiations by January 1, 2005, and implementing the agreement no later than December 2005.
However, the January deadline passed with no completion of the agreement. A major stumbling block in the negotiations was the Latin American countries’ disapproval of domestic subsidies by the U.S. government, particularly in the agricultural sector. Also, the Latin American countries were less willing than the United States to extend the agreement beyond issues of market access to include rules regarding trade in services and intellectual property. After 2002, centre-left governments in Brazil and Argentina, among others, increased resistance to the United States during the negotiations and further contributed to the impasse.
