Ili crisis,  (1879–81), dispute between Russia and China over the Chinese region centred on the Ili (Yili) River, an area in the northern part of Chinese Turkistan (East Turkistan), near Russian Turkistan (West Turkistan).
Ili was the scene of increasing Russian penetration throughout the 19th century; after the signing of the Treaty of Kuldja (1851), the Russians were granted permission to establish two consulates in the area. In 1864, while the Chinese government was absorbed with the great Taiping Rebellion in South China, several independent revolts broke out among the Muslims of southern Chinese Turkistan and the northwestern Chinese provinces of Shaanxi and Gansu. Taking advantage of this confusion, an invader from Kokand, Yakub Beg, established his own kingdom in northern Turkistan. The Russians used these disorders as an excuse to occupy the territory in July 1871, claiming that they were attempting to protect their citizens from Muslim raids and would withdraw as soon as the Chinese reestablished order.
In 1866 the Chinese, having quelled the Taipings, dispatched Zuo Zongtang to be the governor-general of northwestern China in order to end the Muslim uprisings. By 1873 Zuo had crushed the rebellion in Shaanxi and Gansu and began to move against Yakub Beg. Four years later the area was secured, and Yakub Beg committed suicide.
In 1879 China sent a delegation to St. Petersburg to ask the Russians to evacuate the territory. The mission head, Chonghou, had no knowledge of the geography of the region, and he was duped into signing the Treaty of Livadia (October 1879), which returned Ili in name but actually allowed almost three-quarters of it to remain in Russian hands. In addition, the Russians were given the right to establish consulates in seven key places and were promised an indemnity of 5,000,000 rubles.
Upon learning of the treaty, the astonished Chinese government immediately imprisoned Chonghou and sentenced him to decapitation. Zuo poised his troops for attack while the Russian fleet demonstrated off the Chinese coast, and the situation became very tense. Neither country really wanted war. Chonghou’s life was spared after the intervention of a group of Western diplomats, and a second mission was sent to St. Petersburg to negotiate. Under the Treaty of St. Petersburg (February 1881), almost all of Ili was returned to China, and the Russian consulates in the area were reduced to two, but China was made to pay an indemnity of 9,000,000 rubles.
Following the settlement, the whole area of Chinese Turkistan was in 1884 incorporated into China as the province of Xinjiang (now the Uygur Autonomous Region of Xinjiang). Of more immediate importance, the victory encouraged the rise of a militant faction within the Chinese government, which was partially responsible for China’s embroilment in the Sino-French War (1883–85) over Vietnam.
