International Finance Corporation (IFC),  United Nations (UN) specialized agency affiliated with but legally separate from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank). Founded in 1956 to stimulate the economic development of its members by providing capital for private enterprises, the IFC has targeted its aid toward less-developed countries and has been their largest multilateral source of private-sector equity financing and loans. The IFC is headed by a president, who also serves as president of the World Bank; governors and executive directors of the World Bank also serve at the IFC, though it has its own operational and legal staff. Headquartered in Washington, D.C., its original membership of 31 had grown to about 175 by the beginning of the 21st century.
In financing private enterprises, the IFC makes loans without government guarantee of repayment. Unlike most other organizations of its kind, the IFC cannot stipulate how the proceeds of its loans will be spent. The IFC seeks to diversify its investments, having funded projects in the fields of tourism development, animal feeds, iron and steel, fertilizers, and textiles. Its primary activities include providing direct project financing and technical advice and assistance, mobilizing resources by acting as a catalyst for private investment, and underwriting investment funds.
The IFC operates on a weighted-voting system based on members’ subscription shares, with the United States exercising about 25 percent of the total votes—quadruple that of Japan, the second largest shareholder. After the end of the Cold War, demand for IFC loans increased among countries in eastern Europe and among the former republics of the Soviet Union. In the late 1990s the IFC began considering institutional and procedural reforms, including public disclosure, and devoted more attention to the environmental and social impact of its aid.
Between 1956 and the beginning of the 21st century, the IFC provided more than $25 billion to fund projects in nearly 125 countries and arranged for nearly $18 billion in additional financing. In 2000 alone the IFC invested more than $4 billion for 250 projects in nearly 80 countries.
