The 20th century was a time of great triumph and great tragedy. I draw hope and inspiration from the countless advances that have taken place over the past hundred years, but I also recognize that a fundamental change in values will be necessary in order to ensure that the new millennium will be a time of peace, justice, and equality.
There is certainly much to celebrate in the history of the past hundred years. We have seen the defeat of fascism and the collapse of communism. We have seen the triumph of democracy in Latin America, Eastern Europe, South Africa, and many other parts of the world.
We have watched as the people of the developing world gained their independence from colonial powers and began to shape their own destinies. We have also seen the development of international organizations that seek to promote peace and to define and defend universal human rights.
Furthermore, our scientific and technological knowledge has increased exponentially. The past hundred years have witnessed the development of the computer, automobile, and airplane. Progress has been rapid. Less than 70 years after the Wright brothers took to the skies, man set foot on the Moon.
Moreover, lifesaving drugs and medical procedures have helped people to live longer, healthier lives. Deadly diseases like smallpox have been eradicated, and others like polio have very nearly been wiped out. Just since 1950, life expectancies have increased from 46 years to 66 years. Great progress has been made against illiteracy and poverty as well. In short, the century has been a time of many inspiring advances.
All too often, however, it has also been a time of cruelty, deprivation, and misery. Millions died during two world wars and countless smaller conflicts. Millions more perished as a result of genocidal campaigns directed by brutal dictators such as Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, Pol Pot, and Saddam Hussein. Terrible weapons—in forms nuclear, chemical, and biological—have been unleashed both on the battlefield and against innocent civilians.
Even in times when the guns of war have been silent, this century has seen much suffering and injustice. Today, more than 1.3 billion people live on an income of less than one dollar per day, and almost as many lack access to safe drinking water. Some 840 million people are malnourished, and nearly one billion are illiterate.
Rapid population growth has made the challenge of poverty reduction all the more acute. Since 1900 the world population has quadrupled to six billion, and resources are scarce and distributed unequally. At the same time environmental degradation threatens the health and safety of everyone on earth.
To confront these difficulties in the new millennium, a change in values will have to occur. The tragedies of the past century have taken place when people have allowed greed and cynicism to prevail over compassion and concern. Apathy and indifference must be vanquished, and we must build a collective sense of purpose and commitment.
A change in values will only be possible if brave leaders tell their people what they need to know rather than what they want to hear. Our leaders must not avoid the complicated problems of our day. Instead, they must make clear that action is essential to the well-being of future generations, and they must provide the people with the hope that positive change can occur. This hope will allow people to join together in movements that will change the world.
