Peace of the Pyrenees, also called Treaty Of The Pyrenees,  (Nov. 7, 1659), peace treaty between Louis XIV of France and Philip IV of Spain that ended the Franco-Spanish War of 1648–59. It is often taken to mark the beginning of French hegemony in Europe.
During the years from the end of the Thirty Years’ War until 1659 Spain and France engaged in almost continuous warfare. During the struggle Spain found itself also involved in hostilities with England, and the real decay of the Spanish monarchy became rapidly apparent. Any assistance that might have been hoped for from the Holy Roman emperor was prevented by the formation of leagues of German princes—lay and ecclesiastical—in 1657 and 1658, which had the full support of France. The effect of the formation of the second league (the Rheinbund) was at once apparent: all hope of assistance to Spain from the emperor was seen to have disappeared; and, after Spain’s defeat at the Battle of the Dunes (June 1658), progress toward the conclusion of a pacific settlement between France and Spain was accelerated.
According to the treaty, Roussillon and Artois, with a line of strongholds constituting a formidable northern frontier, were ceded to France; and the French acquisition of Alsace and Lorraine under certain conditions was ratified. All French conquests in Catalonia were restored to Spain, and the Great Condé, who had been siding with the Spanish, was pardoned and taken into favour. Finally, the treaty involved a great marriage compact between Louis XIV and the Spanish infanta Maria Teresa de Austria. The actual marriage, which took place the next year, was garnished with a dowry (never paid) and with a renunciation by the infanta of all her rights to the Spanish crown or Spanish possessions. This latter proviso was ignored in 1667, when Louis XIV desired to get hold of the Spanish Netherlands, and 40 years later, when he sought the crown of Spain for his young grandson Philip. The Peace of the Pyrenees and this Spanish marriage firmly established Louis XIV on his throne as the most powerful of European monarchs.
