San Francisco Conference, formally United Nations Conference on International Organization,  international meeting (April 25–June 26, 1945) that established the United Nations. The basic principles of a worldwide organization that would embrace the political objectives of the Allies had been proposed at the Dumbarton Oaks Conference  in 1944 and reaffirmed at the Yalta Conference in early 1945.
The conference was attended by delegations from 46 nations—26 of which had signed the 1942 Declaration of the United Nations, which set forth the Allied aims in World War II—but the leading roles were taken by the foreign ministers of the so-called Big Four nations: U.S. Secretary of State Edward Reilly Stettinius, Jr., Anthony Eden of Great Britain, Vyacheslav Mikhaylovich Molotov of the U.S.S.R., and T.V. Soong of China. Five more members were proposed. The Ukrainian and Belorussian Soviet Socialist Republics were accepted—despite some Western objections that they were not independent countries—as were Argentina and Denmark. The Soviet-backed Lublin government in Poland was rejected because its legitimacy was not recognized by the other Allies. (Later, Poland was admitted and allowed to be considered an original member, bringing the total to 51.)
Substantive work in drawing up the United Nations’ charter was carried out by four commissions with representatives from all participating states, each assisted by two or more technical committees. The conference was dominated by discussions of the extent of the Big Four’s powers as permanent members of the United Nations’ Security Council. All of the Security Council’s decisions in non-procedural matters (such as enforcing measures against breaches of the peace, admitting new members, and so on) could be vetoed by any of the council’s four permanent members. The smaller or less powerful nations at the conference accordingly sought to whittle down the Big Four’s powers on the council. They sought to restrict the veto powers of the council; to increase the powers of the General Assembly; and to give the General Assembly the power to interpret the United Nations’ charter. The smaller nations were generally unsuccessful in all these aims, and the Big Four (subsequently the Big Five, with France’s inclusion on the Security Council) retained their supremacy in the United Nations.
The San Francisco Conference concluded with the signing of the Charter of the United Nations by 50 nations on June 26.
