Secretariat of the Pacific Community,  formerly (1947–98) South Pacific Commission,  organization founded in 1947 by the governments of Australia, France, New Zealand, the Netherlands, Great Britain, and the United States to advise them on economic, social, and health matters affecting the South Pacific island territories they administered. It is the oldest regional organization in the Pacific and is headquartered in Nouméa, New Caledonia. Guam and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands joined the SPC in 1951, extending the organization’s membership to the North Pacific, but the Netherlands withdrew after it transferred administration of Netherlands New Guinea (Irian Jaya) to Indonesia in 1962. Britain withdrew its membership in 1996 over concerns about the direction of the organization but rejoined two years later. By the beginning of the 21st century the SPC had 27 members. As most of the territories gained independence, the organization was transformed into an agency for providing technical advice, assistance, training, and research to address economic, biological, medical, educational, and social problems.
Originally, all founding members of the SPC were entitled to one vote each. However, with the admission of the newly independent Western Samoa in 1965, voting rules were changed to give Australia five votes; France, Britain, New Zealand, and the United States four; and Western Samoa one. Membership rules also were altered to allow other independent states, as well as nonindependent territories, to apply for membership, resulting in the admission of Nauru in 1969 and Fiji in 1971. The SPC revised its rules again in 1983, granting each member—regardless of its status—equal voting rights. The annual South Pacific Conference, attended by two delegates from each member country, approves the organization’s budget and determines its Work Programme of technical assistance through local and regional seminars and workshops. About 90 percent of the SPC’s budget is contributed by Australia, France, Britain, New Zealand, and the United States.
