Skåne question, Skåne also called Scania,  in medieval and modern Baltic and Scandinavian history, international problem involving control of the southern Scandinavian Peninsula province of Skåne, which affected the political and economic power relationships of the northern European maritime powers.
Although contiguous with the Swedish polity, Skåne belonged to Denmark when the Middle Ages began (c. 500). The Danes thus controlled the Baltic–North Sea passageway, and this accounted in large part for Denmark’s great power status. Skåne was coveted by other Baltic powers at least since the 14th century, when the Danes lost complete control of it for brief periods. It became a serious “question” in the 17th century when the ascendant Swedish state wrested it from the Danes (1658).
The population of Skåne was not receptive to Swedish rule, a fact that helped the Danes win the Scanian War (1675–79) against the Swedes. Victory, however, did not result in a return of the province; France vetoed the move. Further Danish attempts at recovery in the 18th century were likewise foiled by the maritime powers, which did not want any one power to control the Baltic–North Sea passage. In the meantime, attempts by Swedish authorities to politically and culturally assimilate the Scanian population mitigated Danish influence in the region, but instead of a resulting thorough “Swedification” of Skåne, a seemingly unique Scanian culture began to emerge that borrowed from both Swedish and Danish traditions. 
For most of the 19th century, with both Sweden and Denmark reduced to lesser power status, the Skåne question disappeared. By the end of the century, however, a Scanian cultural revival was under way that took on an increasingly political and (by the 1970s) nationalist dimension. Nationalist organizations (such as the Scanian Future Foundation) that began forming in the late 1980s called for various degrees of autonomy. The Swedish government, having divided the historical region of Skåne into three administrative units in 1809, merged the counties of Kristianstad and Malmöhus in 1997 to form Skåne, a county with special regional status. That year a regional board was created for Skåne (though initially it had limited political power); later a regional assembly was established. Although the Swedish government continues not to officially recognize the Scanian language—which most Swedish linguists consider to be a dialect of Swedish—in 2009 it was added to UNESCO’s list of threatened languages.
