Treaties of Fort Stanwix,  (1768, 1784), cessions by the Iroquois Confederacy of land in what are now western Pennsylvania, Kentucky, West Virginia, and New York, opening vast tracts of territory west of the Appalachian Mountains to white exploitation and settlement. Soon after the Proclamation of 1763, which followed the end of the French and Indian War, British authorities recognized that the western boundary drawn at that time was unacceptable to land-hungry settlers and ambitious fur traders. More than 3,000 Iroquois Indians gathered in November 1768 at Fort Stanwix (now Rome), N.Y., to sign the Treaty of Fort Stanwix with British government agents; they ceded land south and east of a line running from Fort Stanwix south to the Delaware River, west and south to the Allegheny River, and downstream to the confluence of the Ohio and Tennessee rivers.
The southern portion of this cession was in fact beyond Iroquois territory, and the British negotiated additional agreements with the Cherokee verifying the new boundaries in what is now West Virginia at the Treaty of Hard Labor (October 1768) and the Treaty of Lochaber (October 1770). These three treaties launched a new period of eager land speculation, accompanied by a stream of homesteaders who quickly poured into the Ohio River region.
The Second Treaty of Fort Stanwix (also called the Treaty with the Six Nations) came after the American Revolution, during which the powerful Iroquois had been considerably weakened by the American frontier campaign. The Iroquois reluctantly agreed to redraw their eastern boundaries established in 1768. At Fort Stanwix (October 1784), they were persuaded to yield, in addition to a small section of western New York, a vast region in western Pennsylvania, representing one-fourth of the total area of the modern state. Iroquois relinquishment of claims to additional territory west of the Ohio was disputed by adjacent tribes, however, especially the Shawnee, leading to misunderstanding and bloodshed in that area for years to come.
Fort Stanwix National Monument, a reconstruction of the original fort, commemorates the two treaties and also the stand American forces took there in August 1777 against the British invading from Canada during the American Revolution.
