World Youth Alliance (WYA),  international nongovernmental organization (NGO) founded in New York City in 1999 that seeks to promote what it calls an international culture of life based on individual rights, family cohesion, and personal development. Membership is limited to persons 10 to 30 years old. In the early 21st century the organization claimed more than one million members from more than 100 countries. Headquarters are in New York City.
The WYA was founded by Anna Halpine, a 21-year-old Canadian music student who in 1999 attended a special session of the United Nations (UN) held to review the implementation of the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development. Halpine believed that the session had been dominated by activists who favoured access to abortion and contraceptives for youths and who sought to undermine the rights of parents to direct their children’s education and their moral and religious development. Accordingly, she decided to begin a different international movement.
The WYA emphasizes human dignity and the importance of families headed by a man and a woman. In keeping with its belief that human life should be protected from conception until natural death, the WYA opposes abortion. It also takes stands against contraception as a means of family planning or to prevent the spread of sexually transmitted diseases such as HIV/AIDS; the use of assisted reproductive technologies, such as in vitro fertilization (IVF) and surrogate motherhood; and sex education for youth. Other issues of concern include health care, education, good governance, and environmental stewardship. Although many of its positions reflect the moral teachings of the Roman Catholic Church, the WYA is officially a nonreligious organization.
The WYA trains young people in human rights and diplomacy and sponsors regional training events as well as the annual International Solidarity Forum, which brings together members from around the world for lectures and workshops on particular themes. It publishes a journal, Esperanza!
