World Customs Organization (WCO),  intergovernmental organization established as the Customs Co-operation Council (CCC) in 1952 to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of customs administrations worldwide. In 1948 a study group of the Committee for European Economic Cooperation, a precursor of the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation (OEEC), created a customs committee to study the possibility of creating one or more inter-European customs unions. This committee, formally established as the CCC in 1952, enjoyed decades of growth, including the addition of new members outside Europe. In recognition of its global membership, the CCC was renamed the World Customs Organization in 1994. Headquarters are in Brussels.
Historically, the WCO has led the discussion, development, and implementation of secure customs systems and procedures. The organization developed and administered the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, an international standard classification system for commodities. The WCO has also been responsible for administering the World Trade Organization’s Agreements on Customs Valuation, which provide a system for placing values on imported goods, and the Rules of Origin, which are used to determine the origin of a given commodity. Focusing on the protection of societies through secure international trade, the WCO has enforced customs and curtailed fraudulent activities. The organization’s work has thereby led to the growth of legitimate international trade.
The WCO represents more than 170 customs administrations worldwide and processes more than 98 percent of all international trade. The WCO Columbus Programme represents an integral part of the organization’s capacity-building initiatives, which assess the needs of member governments. If the assessments indicate substantial need, members are given tools, training, and support. Various WCO meetings provide a forum for dialogue and exchange of experiences in addition to technical assistance and training. The organization is led by a governing council, a secretariat, and technical and advisory committees.
