Nicholas I, byname Nicholas Mystikos,  (born 852, Constantinople—died  May 15, 925), Byzantine patriarch of Constantinople (901–907; 912–925), who contributed measurably to the attempted reunion of the Greek and Roman churches and who fomented the tetragamy controversy, or the question of a fourth marriage for the Eastern Orthodox.
A close associate of the controversial patriarch Photius of Constantinople, Nicholas began his career in the Byzantine civil service but became a monk when Photius was deposed in 886. Named a secretary counsellor (Mystikos) by the emperor Leo VI (886–912), Nicholas was appointed patriarch of Constantinople in 901. Having refused on grounds of religious legality and propriety to grant the Emperor’s request for a dispensation to contract a fourth marriage after the death of his third wife, and declining to consult Pope Sergius III in the matter, Nicholas was banished to a monastery outside Constantinople. Recalled either by Leo in the last year of his reign, or by Emperor Alexander (912–913), Nicholas was invited to act as regent for Prince Constantine VII.
Because of his harsh retaliation against patriarch Euthymius, his successor during exile, Nicholas alienated many of the clergy and people, among them Leo’s family, creating a rivalry between their respective supporters. During the rule of the emperor Romanus I Lecapenus (920–944), Nicholas was reconciled with Patriarch Euthymius, thus ending the bitter internal struggle within the Eastern Orthodox Church. Nicholas’ negotiations with Pope John X (914–928) concerning cooperative union between Eastern and Western Christendom and an agreement over the ecclesiastical law of marriage for the Eastern Church inaugurated a rare period of harmony. In a synod (920) Nicholas issued a decree of union settling the tetragamy question by ordinarily limiting Greek Christians to three marriages but validating the fourth marriage of Leo VI for the good of the state in order to settle the imperial line of succession by a legitimate heir.
Nicholas also engaged in various diplomatic affairs, as is evidenced by his letters on Byzantine–Bulgarian relations and concerning questions of Greek estates in Italy. He is revered as a saint by the Eastern Orthodox Church.
