Saint Gregory Thaumaturgus,  (born c. 213, Neocaesarea, Pontus Polemoniacus [now Niksar, Turkey]—died c. 270, Neocaesarea; feast day November 17), Greek Christian apostle of Roman Asia and champion of orthodoxy in the 3rd-century Trinitarian (nature of God) controversy. His Greek surname, meaning “wonder worker,” was derived from the phenomenal miracles, including the moving of a mountain, that he reputedly performed to assist in propagating Christianity.
A law student, Gregory was introduced to Christianity through studies with the leading Christian intellectual of his time, Origen, at Caesarea (near modern Haifa, Israel). On his return to Neocaesarea, Gregory was made a bishop and committed his life to Christianizing that largely pagan region. The Roman emperor Decius’ persecution (250–251) compelled Gregory and his community to withdraw into the mountains, and with the return of normal conditions he instituted liturgical celebrations honouring the Decian martyrs.
Manifesting an ecclesiastical role more of a practical, pastoral nature than of a speculative theologian, Gregory mostly catechized and administered the church. His Canonical Epistle (c. 256) contains valuable data on church discipline in the 3rd-century East, resolving moral questions incident to the Gothic invasion of Pontus (modern northwest Turkey), with the rape, pillage, and apostasy that attended it. With his brother, a fellow bishop, Gregory assisted at the first Synod of Antioch (c. 264), which rejected the heresy of Paul of Samosata. The Exposition of Faith, Gregory’s principal work, was a theological apology for Trinitarian belief. The Exposition incorporated his doctrinal instructions to Christian initiates, expressed his arguments against heretical groups, and was the forerunner of the Nicene Creed that was to appear in the early 4th century. An Eastern tradition records that the Exposition was given to him in a vision of St. John the Evangelist with the intercession of the Virgin Mary, the first instance noted of a Marian apparition. A letter “To Theopompus, on the Passible and Impassible in God,” which responds to the Hellenistic theory of God’s incapacity for feeling and suffering, and Panegyric to Origen, a florid eulogy, constitute the remainder of Gregory’s significant writings. Several other moral works, sermons, and letters bearing Gregory’s name are not authentic.
