Saint Zosimus,  (born, Greece—died  Dec. 26, 418, Rome; feast day December 26), pope from March 417 to December 418. He was consecrated as Pope St. Innocent I’s successor on March 18, 417. His brief but turbulent pontificate was embroiled in conflicts involving Gaul, Africa, and Pelagianism, a heretical doctrine that minimized the role of divine grace in man’s salvation.
Zosimus’ first act was to designate Bishop Patroclus of Arles papal vicar in Gaul, based on an alleged historical primacy of the see of Arles. This act provoked a crisis affecting all the churches of southern Gaul. The bishops of Narbonne, Marseille, and Vienne opposed Patroclus’ elevation. Zosimus threatened excommunication.
Concurrently, the Pelagians—whose proponent Pelagius had been excommunicated on Jan. 27, 417, by Innocent and who in general were condemned by the African bishops—appealed to Rome, being successfully represented by Celestius (Caelestius). After receiving a profession of faith from Pelagius, Zosimus sent a strongly worded letter to the African bishops on Sept. 21, 417, accusing them of having acted precipitately in their condemnation. However, the next year Zosimus, again doubting Pelagius’ orthodoxy, read his commentary on Romans; shocked by its doctrine, he commanded Celestius to appear before him for examination. Celestius fled Rome, thereby appearing self-condemned, and Zosimus issued the Epistola tractoria (“Epistolary Sermon”) that excommunicated Pelagius and Celestius and condemned their doctrine. Pelagius, horrified by his excommunication, departed, probably for Egypt.
Even though he confirmed Innocent’s judgment, Zosimus disturbed the African episcopate in a new controversy by espousing the cause of a disreputable priest called Apiarius, who had been excommunicated by Bishop Urbanus of Sicca Veneria. Defying African canon law, Zosimus dispatched legates to Africa with orders that included reorganizing the method of appeal between Africa and Rome and a threat to excommunicate Urbanus if he did not make amends with Apiarius. Against the Pope’s domination, certain Roman clergy appealed to the imperial court at Ravenna, then the capital of the Western Empire, for which act Zosimus excommunicated them. The case regarding Apiarius remained unsettled when, to the relief of both Africa and Gaul, Zosimus died. He was buried in an unknown grave in the Basilica of St. Lawrence Outside the Walls, Rome.
