St. Damasus I,  (born c. 304, Rome—died  December 11, 384, Rome; feast day December 11), pope from October 1, 366, to December 11, 384. During his rule the primacy of the Roman see was asserted.
Damasus was a deacon during the reign of his predecessor, Pope Liberius, and accompanied him when Liberius was exiled by the Roman emperor Constantius for his opposition to Arianism, a belief that denied Christ’s divinity. Later, however, Damasus returned to Rome and acknowledged Antipope Felix II, a pro-Arian placed on the papal throne by the emperor. After Felix’ death (November 22, 365), Damasus became reconciled with Liberius, but the enemies he made during this period of shifting allegiance troubled his entire pontificate. The election of Damasus as pope was immediately challenged by a minority who supported a rival claimant, Ursinus. The civil authority sided with Damasus, and Ursinus and his partisans were banished.
Damasus was active in suppressing heresy and promoting the primacy of Rome. In two synods (368 and 369) the unorthodox teachings of Bishop Macedonius of Constantinople and of Bishop Apollinaris (the Younger) of Laodicea were condemned. Among Damasus’s literary remains are 24 anathemas against various 4th-century heresies. With a view to the elimination of Arianism in the East, he entered into lengthy negotiations with St. Basil, who, as bishop of Caesarea, was head of the church throughout most of Anatolia (Turkey). Their dealings were not a success: though united against Arianism, they failed to agree on policies.
Damasus was the first pope to refer to Rome as the apostolic see, to distinguish it as that established by the apostle St. Peter, founder of the church. In 380 the emperors Gratian in the West and Theodosius in the East declared Christianity as preached by Peter to be the religion of the Roman Empire and defined orthodoxy as the doctrines proclaimed by the bishops of Rome and Alexandria. Rome’s primacy was officially pronounced by a synod called in Rome in 382 by Damasus, who was perhaps wary of the growing strength of Constantinople, which was already claiming to be the New Rome. St. Jerome (c. 342–420) attended the synod and stayed on to become Damasus’s secretary, close adviser, and friend. Damasus commissioned him to revise the Latin translations of the Bible for what subsequently became known as the Vulgate.
Latin was introduced as the language of the mass during Damasus’s long pontificate. He was notable also for his work in discovering the tombs of martyrs, for which he wrote many verse inscriptions, and was responsible for the restoration of Rome’s catacombs. Damasus was an active builder and restorer of churches.
