Saint Willibrord, also called Willibrord of Utrecht, Willibrord also spelled Wilbrord,  (born 658?, Northumbria, probably near York, England—died November 7, 739, Echternach, Austrasia; feast day November 7), Anglo-Saxon bishop and missionary, apostle of Friesland, and a patron saint of the Netherlands and Luxembourg.
The son of the hermit St. Wilgis, Willibrord was sent by him to the Benedictine monastery of Ripon, England, under Abbot St. Wilfrid of York. After Wilfrid was deposed and exiled in 677/678, Willibrord also went into exile, spending 12 years in Ireland, where he became a disciple of St. Egbert. He was ordained a priest in 688.
In 690 Egbert sent Willibrord with 11 companions to undertake the Christianization of the Frisians, whose districts had recently been conquered (689) by Pippin II of Herstal. Willibrord began the policy of mutual cooperation between the English missions and the Carolingian dynasty. He went to Rome in 690 for a commission from Pope St. Sergius I and was later sent again by Pippin for his consecration (November 21, 695) as archbishop of the Frisians, with a see to be established at Utrecht, Netherlands. On that occasion, Sergius renamed him Clement. Willibrord’s unusual respect for Roman authority had established a precedent that greatly increased papal influence in the affairs of the Frankish church.
In 698 Willibrord established his second missionary base, the important monastery of Echternach. Having extended his apostolate into Friesland, he attempted to evangelize Denmark, where he instructed and baptized 30 boys; returning with them, he made dramatic stops on the Frisian islands of Helgoland and Walcheren. In 714 he baptized Pippin III the Short, heir to the Merovingian kingdom. Upon the death of Pippin II, the pagan Frisian king Radbod launched a highly destructive campaign against the Christians and banished Willibrord.
After Radbod’s death in 719, Willibrord, with the aid of the Frankish king Charles Martel, regained his apostolate. From 719 to 722 he was assisted in his missionary work by the man who carried on his work after 739, Wynfrith (St. Boniface), apostle of Germany. While training a native clergy, he established in the Frankish kingdoms an English cultural influence that was to dominate Charlemagne’s court through the extensive labours of later missionaries. He began in the West the appointment of chōrepiscopoi (“country bishops”), or suffragan bishops (i.e., bishops of sees under an archbishop, or metropolitan), and he introduced into the Franks’ dominions the practice of dating by the Christian Era.
Willibrord was buried in the abbey church of Echternach. The “Calendar of St. Willibrord” (a calendar of saints, with some lines attributed to Willibrord) was printed in facsimile in 1918.
