Assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr.,  mortal shooting of the Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr., the most prominent leader of the American civil rights movement, on April 4, 1968, as he stood on the second floor balcony of the Lorraine Motel in Memphis, Tennessee, where he had come to lead a march by striking sanitation workers. In response to King’s death, more than 100 American inner cities exploded in rioting, looting, and violence. James Earl Ray, a career small-time criminal who became the object of a more than two-month manhunt before he was captured in England, pled guilty to the shooting and received a 99-year prison sentence. He quickly recanted his plea and spent the rest of his life claiming that he had been framed by a conspiracy that was really responsible for King’s assassination.
The assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr., was one of the earthshaking events of 1968 that made it among the most tumultuous and momentous years in American history. The civil rights movement, the Vietnam War, and the antiwar movement all were in full swing as the year began. King’s opposition to the Vietnam War had been building steadily since 1965, though initially he was reluctant to prominently criticize the conduct of the war by Pres. Lyndon B. Johnson, who had been a key ally in the effort to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. When the war effort began to rob funding from Johnson’s Great Society plan, however, King became a more vocal critic, and his opposition to the war grew to embrace a more radical critique of what he saw as U.S. militarism and imperialism. King also took American capitalism to task and began portraying inequality in economic as well as racial terms.  “Beyond Vietnam,” the address that he gave at Riverside Church in New York City on April 4, 1967, exactly one year before his death, brought all of these elements together in a speech that made manifest his opposition to the war.
A number of mainstream publications, including The New York Times and The Washington Post, thought King had gone too far with the speech. He had already begun to find himself betwixt and between. Many whites saw him as a dangerous radical. On the other hand, despite his increasingly radical message, a growing number of militant African Americans had become impatient with his nonviolent methods and what they saw as a lack of success in his civil rights efforts in northern cities. It had been several years since his southern triumphs in the Montgomery bus boycott, the Birmingham campaign, and the Selma March.
In November 1967 King’s concern with economic inequality led him and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) to mount a Poor People’s Campaign, which was to culminate in a massive march on Washington, D.C. Before that could happen, other events of early 1968 interceded. On January 30, North Vietnam launched the Tet Offensive, a widespread attack in South Vietnam that put the Americans and South Vietnamese on their heels for weeks. The pervasiveness of this shocking assault and especially the images of fighting in and around the U.S. embassy in Saigon (now Ho Chi Minh City) dramatically belied the U.S. government’s contention that the Americans and the South Vietnamese had the war well in hand. Opposition to the war led to Johnson’s defeat by antiwar candidate Sen. Eugene McCarthy in the March 12, 1968, Democratic presidential primary in New Hampshire, followed by the announcement of the candidacy of Sen. Robert F. Kennedy (March 16) and the withdrawal of Johnson’s candidacy (March 31). Meanwhile, Republican front-runner Richard Nixon’s popularity grew with the “silent majority” who opposed social change and supported the war. Against this backdrop and that of the previous year’s rioting in Detroit and Newark, King interrupted the planning of the Poor People’s March to travel to Memphis in support of a strike by sanitation workers.
Sanitation workers in Memphis—most of whom were African American and received a paltry wage of about $1.00 per hour—conducted a strike for better wages and working conditions in 1966 but failed to gain sufficient community support. The situation changed after a pair of sanitation workers who had been sheltering from the rain by crouching inside the loading hopper of their garbage truck were crushed because of a malfunctioning switch. This time the strike that resulted in response to their deaths was supported by some 150 local clergymen. The group’s leader, the Rev. James Lawson, asked King, his friend, for support, and on March 18 King addressed a crowd of between 15,000 and 25,000 people, which was said to be the largest indoor gathering in the history of the civil rights movement to that date. King returned to Memphis on March 28 to join Lawson in leading a march in support of the strike. Violence erupted early in the demonstration: looting broke out, and police shot and killed a 16-year-old boy. King was reluctantly spirited away to safety. Dozens of others were injured as police dispensed tear gas and wielded batons while pursuing demonstrators inside the Clayborn Temple. Blame for the outbreak of violence, which marred King’s reputation for nonviolent protest, was placed by many on the Black Organizing Project (better known as the Invaders), a local Black Panther Party-inspired organization. The next day, strikers returned to their daily demonstrations carrying placards that read “I Am a Man,” and reporters asked King if he would be able to keep the Poor People’s Campaign in Washington peaceful. He met with representatives of the Invaders, who claimed not to have instigated the violence and with whom King agreed to coordinate efforts as plans began for a follow-up march.
Having returned to his home base in Atlanta, King contemplated not going back to Memphis. The planning for the Poor People’s Campaign was escalating. At a meeting on March 30, however, he decided that he needed to see through his commitment to the effort in Memphis, and, after some dissent, the leadership of the SCLC agreed. King had come to see the struggle in Memphis as emblematic of the objectives of the Poor People’s Campaign.
