David Hackett Souter,  (born September 17, 1939, Melrose, Massachusetts, U.S.), associate justice of the U.S. Supreme Court from 1990 to 2009.
Souter’s father was a bank manager and his mother a store clerk. He spent his early childhood in a Boston suburb before his family moved to rural East Weare, New Hampshire, in 1950. He attended Harvard University, from which he graduated magna cum laude in 1961. He then spent two years at Magdalen College, Oxford, on a Rhodes scholarship. Upon his return to the United States in 1963, he entered Harvard Law School, receiving his law degree in 1966.
After graduation, Souter spent two years in private practice in Concord, New Hampshire, before joining the state attorney general’s office. Appointed state attorney general in 1976, he was a frequent defender of the ultraconservative policies of Governor Meldrim Thomson, Jr. Two years later, Thomson appointed Souter associate justice of New Hampshire’s Superior Court, where he served for four years. In 1983 Governor John Sununu appointed him to the state Supreme Court. As a judge, Souter was considered tough on crime, favouring prosecutors and resisting reversals of criminal convictions.
In February 1990 President George Bush nominated Souter to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in Boston. Confirmed by the U.S. Senate in May, Souter was nominated by Bush to the U.S. Supreme Court in July—before he had issued his first decision as a federal judge. In October he was easily confirmed (90–9). During the hearings, abortion-rights supporters unsuccessfully attempted to coax Souter to divulge his judicial position on abortion; indeed, his decision not to answer such questions was the central reason cited by those who voted against his confirmation.
Souter’s judicial record in New Hampshire indicated that he would be ideologically compatible with the conservative justices appointed by Bush’s predecessor, President Ronald Reagan. During his early tenure on the court, however, Souter gradually emerged as a moderate liberal, routinely aligning himself with more liberal members of the court such as Ruth Bader Ginsburg and John Paul Stevens. His gravitation to the left began with his role in Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey (1992). Although Souter was expected to support William Rehnquist and Antonin Scalia in their effort to use the case to overturn Roe v. Wade (1973), the ruling that established the legal right to abortion, instead he joined with conservative justices Anthony Kennedy and Sandra Day O’Connor in devising a new “undue burden” standard for determining the constitutionality of laws intended to limit abortion, the effect of which was to restrict abortion rights but not to eliminate them.
Souter also adopted left-of-centre positions in cases involving school desegregation and race-conscious electoral districting, arguing in a powerful dissent in 1995 that lower courts must be granted the latitude to correct problems emanating from constitutional violations created by public officials. In 1996 he opposed the court’s decision to strike down congressional districting plans in North Carolina and Texas that were aimed at ensuring African American representation in the U.S. Congress, maintaining that in each case no harm would be—or had been—done to the white voters of the state.
By the late 1990s, Souter was recognized for his intellectual leadership among the court’s moderate members and for his skill at building consensus. At the same time, he made no secret about his unhappiness with life in Washington and his desire to return to his home state of New Hampshire. On June 29, 2009, Souter retired from the Supreme Court.
