John Marshall Harlan,  (born June 1, 1833, Boyle County, Ky., U.S.—died  Oct. 14, 1911, Washington, D.C.), associate justice of the United States Supreme Court from 1877 until his death and one of the most forceful dissenters in the history of that tribunal. His best known dissents favoured the rights of blacks as guaranteed, in his view, by the post-Civil War constitutional amendments (Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth). In the 20th century the Supreme Court vindicated his positions on civil rights and on many other issues in which he was in dissent at the time.
In the 1850s Harlan, a lawyer and county judge in Kentucky, was active in the Know-Nothing Party. From 1861 to 1863 he commanded a Union infantry regiment in the American Civil War. In 1863 and again in 1865 he was elected attorney general of Kentucky. Critical of the Emancipation Proclamation and other wartime emergency measures taken by President Abraham Lincoln, Harlan opposed Lincoln’s reelection in 1864 and supported the unsuccessful Democratic Party candidate, General George B. McClellan. After the war he attacked the Thirteenth Amendment (1865), which abolished slavery, although as Kentucky attorney general he showed moderation toward the freed blacks. Later in the decade he was appalled by white-racist violence and espoused the Radical Republicans’ policy for reconstructing the South. As a Republican he was defeated for governor of Kentucky in 1871 and 1875.
On Nov. 29, 1877, Harlan was appointed to the Supreme Court by President Rutherford B. Hayes. He wrote 1,161 opinions (including 316 dissents) in nearly 34 years and was the Court’s outstanding liberal justice during that time. He issued a famous dissent in Pollock v. Farmers’ Loan and Trust Co. (1895), in which the Court ruled the federal income tax to be unconstitutional, and in various cases arising under the Sherman Anti-Trust Act of 1890, he insisted that Congress had intended to destroy monopolies entirely, not merely to keep them under control.
Harlan dissented from the Supreme Court’s ruling in the Civil Rights cases (1883) that Congress could not punish discrimination against blacks by private persons but only by those acting in an “official” or “state” capacity. In his dissents in the Insular cases involving overseas territories recently annexed by the United States, he opposed the withholding of the Bill of Rights from those unincorporated territories.
Perhaps the most famous of Harlan’s dissents was that in Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), the case in which the Supreme Court established the “separate but equal” principle of racial segregation. Asserting that “our Constitution is color-blind, and neither knows nor tolerates classes among citizens,” he expressed the justified fear that the majority of the court was consigning black citizens of the United States to a permanent “condition of legal inferiority.” From 1954, when the school segregation cases (Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka and Bolling v. Sharpe) were decided, the court repudiated the “separate but equal” doctrine and other theories of racial discrimination.
