Warren E. Burger, in full Warren Earl Burger,  (born Sept. 17, 1907, St. Paul, Minn., U.S.—died  June 25, 1995, Washington, D.C.), 15th chief justice of the United States (1969–86).
After graduating with honours from St. Paul (now William Mitchell) College of Law in 1931, Burger joined a prominent St. Paul law firm and gradually became active in Republican Party politics. In 1953 he was appointed an assistant U.S. attorney general, and in 1955 he was nominated by President Dwight D. Eisenhower to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. Burger’s generally conservative approach during his 13-year service (1956–69) on the nation’s second highest court commended him to President Richard M. Nixon, who in 1969 named Burger to succeed Earl Warren as chief justice of the Supreme Court. He was quickly confirmed and in June 1969 was sworn in as the nation’s chief justice.
Contrary to some popular expectations, Burger and his three fellow Nixon-appointed justices did not try to reverse the tide of activist decision making on civil-rights issues and criminal law that was the Warren court’s chief legacy. The court upheld the 1966 Miranda decision, which required that a criminal suspect under arrest be informed of his rights, and the court also upheld busing as a permissible means of racially desegregating public schools and the use of racial quotas in the distribution of federal grants and contracts to minorities. Under Burger’s leadership the court did dilute several minor Warren-era decisions protecting the rights of criminal defendants, but the core of the Warren court’s legal precedents in this and other fields survived almost untouched. Burger voted with the majority in the court’s landmark 1973 decision (Roe v. Wade) that established women’s constitutional right to have abortions.
Burger himself took a pragmatic and accommodating stance toward controversial legal issues, and his opinions were not particularly noted either for their intellectual consistency or for their comprehensive and systematic application of legal principles. He instead became deeply involved in the administrative functions of his office, and he worked to improve the efficiency of the entire judicial system.
Burger retired from the Supreme Court in 1986 to devote himself full-time to the chairmanship of the commission planning the bicentennial celebration of the U.S. constitution (1987). He was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1988.
