Anastasia Robinson,  (born c. 1692—died April 1755, Bath, England), English singer, who was a frequent soloist on the London operatic and concert stages between 1714 and 1724.
Robinson’s father was Thomas Robinson, a portrait artist, but the identity of her mother is unclear. Like some other members of her family, Anastasia was a Roman Catholic. Much of the biographical information concerning Robinson comes from the General History of Music, vol. 4 (1789), by the English musician and music historian Charles Burney. This source includes both Burney’s own account of Robinson’s life and one dictated to him in 1787 by Mrs. Delany (née Mary Granville), a prominent socialite and member of the English royal circle who had known Robinson personally.  Robinson showed talent at a young age, and her father had her study singing under the tutelage of William Croft, Pietro Giuseppe Sandoni, and Joanna Maria Lindelheim. At first she sang only in private settings, but, because her father became blind and was therefore unable to earn a living as an artist, she was compelled to begin her career as a professional singer. Delany calls this “a circumstance very grievous to her,” perhaps because professional singing was not an entirely respectable occupation at the time.
Robinson entered the professional operatic scene at a time when London audiences were enamored with Italian opera; she made her operatic debut at the Queen’s Theatre in the pasticcio (an opera built from pieces of other operas) Creso on January 27, 1714. Robinson was closely associated throughout her career with the German-born English composer George Frideric Handel; one of her first public performances may have been as soprano soloist in his Eternal Source of Light Divine (1713/14), an ode for Queen Anne’s birthday, in 1714. She appeared in numerous Italian operas by Handel, including the 1713–14 revival of Rinaldo (1711), in which she played Almirena, as well as the premieres of Amadigi di Gaula (1715, playing Oriana), Radamisto (1720, Zenobia), Floridante (1721, Elmira), and Giulio Cesare (1724, Cornelia). In addition, she performed in operas by other composers, including Domenico Scarlatti’s Narciso (1720), in the arrangement by Thomas Roseingrave, and Giovanni Porta’s Numitore, the premiere of which marked the opening of the Royal Academy of Music in 1720. Sometime between 1717 and 1720 Robinson’s voice dropped from soprano to alto. Burney suggests that this was due to an illness.
Reports by both Burney and Sir John Hawkins (author of the first history of music in English, A General History of the Science and Practice of Music, 1776) that Robinson’s salary at the Royal Academy was £1,000 (which would amount to more than £100,000 [about $160,000] in the early 21st century) per season—with Hawkins claiming that the figure was nearly doubled by gifts and money from benefit concerts—are not supported by known documentary evidence and may be exaggerated. Still, she was well paid. For example, in 1714—a tumultuous year for the opera—she was contracted for £500 and a benefit concert for her appearances in a shortened opera season; in the 1720–21 opening season at the Royal Academy she was again contracted for £500. Those salaries were customarily supplemented by gifts.
Such high salaries indicate that Robinson was in demand as a singer. Known to be a friend of  the 18th-century poet and satirist Alexander Pope and the composer Giovanni Bononcini (both also Roman Catholic), she traveled in high social circles both before and after her retirement from the stage. Burney wrote that both her musical skills and her good character “ensure[d] her success in whatever she should undertake.”
The early 21st-century discovery of letters from Pope’s social circle called into question Delany’s account of the circumstances surrounding Robinson’s marriage to the 3rd earl of Peterborough. Delany claims that Robinson was married to the earl in secret in 1722, the earl apparently being reluctant to openly declare his marriage to a professional singer. Whether such a ceremony actually took place is, however, unclear. Only shortly before the earl’s death in 1735 did he make the marriage known; the Gentleman’s Magazine of September 1735 indicates that the two had been married for “some Years,” but the marriage had not “till of late been publickly owned.” The earl’s will does not mention Robinson, and, although she inhabited his estate until her death in 1755, his family never acknowledged her. Delany recalled that Robinson destroyed the earl’s memoirs, since they recorded actions “as would have reflected very much upon his character.”
