Angela Gheorghiu, née Angela Burlacu,  (born September 7, 1965, Adjud, Romania), Romanian operatic lyric soprano noted for her powerful voice and commanding stage presence.
Gheorghiu early realized her love of singing, and she was supported by her family in working toward a career in opera. She left home at age 14 to study at the Academy of Music in Bucharest and in 1990 made her debut as Mimi in Giacomo Puccini’s La Bohème at the Cluj-Napoca National Romanian Opera. Her international debut came in 1992 as Zerlina in Mozart’s Don Giovanni at the Royal Opera, Covent Garden, in London. Two years later Gheorghiu, an elegant and compelling artist, was praised as one of the great Violettas when she performed the role in Sir Georg Solti’s production of Giuseppe Verdi’s La traviata at Covent Garden. Her performance (1993) in La Bohème for New York City’s Metropolitan Opera, a production that marked her U.S. debut, was highly praised by critics. She did not work with a teacher, subscribing to a philosophy of self-reliance, and was sometimes compared to the great coloratura soprano Maria Callas.
Gheorghiu met French-born tenor Roberto Alagna in 1992 while appearing with him in La Bohème at Covent Garden. Their relationship deepened during her stint in Solti’s production of La traviata, and they married in 1996 following a very public romance. After their marriage, Gheorghiu and Alagna sought joint bookings with recording studios and opera houses throughout the world. Though Gheorghiu’s penchant for speaking her mind was much remarked upon, she continued to be in demand as a performer.
Gheorghiu recorded numerous albums, including live performances of her roles and solo concerts, such as Puccini’s Il trittico (1999) and La rondine (2003) and Live from La Scala (2007). With compilations such as Arias (1996) and Diva (2004), she showcased her vocal range and versatility by singing selections from across the operatic canon. Her duet albums with Alagna, such as Duets and Arias (1996), also were popular. Gheorghiu filmed several performances, among them her turn as Violetta in Solti’s production of La traviata and her interpretation of Verdi’s Requiem Mass (2001). Films that achieved cinematic release, such as Tosca (2001), in which she took the title role, further widened her audience.
