Anne Sofie von Otter,  (born May 9, 1955, Stockholm, Swed.), Swedish mezzo-soprano known especially for her effective singing of young male operatic roles and for her performance of German lieder.
Von Otter was the daughter of a diplomat and grew up in Stockholm, Bonn (then the capital of West Germany), and London. She studied at London’s Guildhall School of Music and Drama and then trained in lied performance. Her first affiliation was with the Basel Opera (Switz.), where she quickly gained distinction in works by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and Richard Strauss, from 1983 to 1985. She made her London debut at Covent Garden in 1985 and her New York debut at the Metropolitan Opera in 1988, and she was soon singing in major opera houses and concert halls worldwide.
Von Otter’s repertoire was extraordinarily broad, ranging from the Baroque works of Claudio Monteverdi, George Frideric Handel, and Johann Sebastian Bach to the music of 19th-century Romantics and 20th-century composers. With a small, pure lyric voice that was often described as “cool,” she was particularly convincing in trouser roles (roles of young men that are played by women), including Cherubino in Mozart’s Marriage of Figaro, Hänsel in Engelbert Humperdinck’s Hänsel and Gretel, and Octavian in Strauss’s Der Rosenkavalier. At the same time, she was known for adventurous programs of lieder that included not only the mainstream repertoire by composers such as Franz Schubert, Robert Schumann, and Johannes Brahms but also songs by Alexander Zemlinsky, Alban Berg, Erich Wolfgang Korngold, Kurt Weill, and others. In addition, she recorded two acclaimed discs of songs by Nordic composers, Wings in the Night (1996) and Watercolours (2004). In 2001 she issued For the Stars, a recording with pop star Elvis Costello that included songs by the Beatles and the Beach Boys
In 2005 she enjoyed enormous success singing the role of Mélisande in Claude Debussy’s Pelléas et Mélisande at the Metropolitan Opera, and her recording of Gustav Mahler’s song cycle Kindertotenlieder, with the Vienna Philharmonic conducted by Pierre Boulez, received a warm reception from critics and listeners alike. Two years later she released Terezin/Theresienstadt, a widely acclaimed album of songs written by Jewish composers while they were imprisoned in the Theresienstadt concentration camp during World War II. Her interpretation of famous Bach arias, Bach: Cantatas, appeared in 2009.
Von Otter was named the artist or the singer of the year in the 1990s and early 21st century by multiple organizations, including Gramophone (1996) and Diapason d’Or (1997) magazines. A number of her recordings also received prizes.
