Antonio Salieri,  (born Aug. 18, 1750, Legnago, Republic of Venice [Italy]—died  May 7, 1825, Vienna, Austria), Italian composer whose operas were acclaimed throughout Europe in the late 18th century.
At the age of 16, Salieri was taken to Vienna by F.L. Gassmann, the imperial court composer and music director (Hofkapellmeister), and was introduced to Emperor Joseph II. During the same period, Salieri also fostered important friendships with both Pietro Metastasio and Christoph Gluck. Salieri’s first opera, Le donne letterate, was produced at the Burgtheater in Vienna in 1770. Four years later, the emperor made him the court composer, and in 1788 he became Hofkapellmeister, a position Salieri held for 36 years. During his official career he composed operas not only for theatres in Austria but also for companies in France and Italy. From 1783 he was an influential supporter of—and frequent collaborator with—Lorenzo Da Ponte, who also became Mozart’s most important librettist. His best-known work was the French opera Tarare (1787), translated by Da Ponte into Italian as Axur, re d’Ormus, which the Viennese public preferred to Mozart’s Don Giovanni. Salieri’s last opera was performed in 1804, and he then devoted himself to composing sacred music. He was an important teacher as well; among his students were Beethoven, Franz Schubert, and Franz Liszt.
Throughout his life Salieri remained friendly with Joseph Haydn and with Ludwig van Beethoven, to whom he had given lessons in counterpoint and who dedicated the Three Violin Sonatas, Op. 12 (1797), to him. Salieri’s relationship with Mozart has been the subject of much speculation. There is, however, little evidence for Salieri’s supposed intrigues and damaging remarks against Mozart; indeed, Mozart himself commented in a letter on Salieri’s favourable reception of The Magic Flute. There is also no foundation for the belief that Salieri tried to poison Mozart—a legend that was the basis of Nikolay Rimsky-Korsakov’s opera Mozart et Salieri (1898), itself based on the Pushkin short story of 1830. The relationship between the two composers received further speculative treatment in Peter Shaffer’s play Amadeus (1980; filmed 1984).
