Bernard Le Bovier, sieur de Fontenelle,  (born Feb. 11, 1657, Rouen, Fr.—died  Jan. 9, 1757, Paris), French scientist and man of letters, described by Voltaire as the most universal mind produced by the era of Louis XIV. Many of the characteristic ideas of the Enlightenment are found in embryonic form in his works.
Fontenelle was educated at the Jesuit college in Rouen. He did not settle in Paris until he had passed the age of 30 and had become famous as the writer of operatic librettos. His literary activity during the years 1683–88 won him a great reputation. The Lettres galantes (1683, “Gallant Letters”; expanded edition, 1685) contributed to this, but the Nouveaux Dialogues des morts (1683, “New Dialogues of the Dead”; 2nd part, 1684) enjoyed a greater success and is more interesting to a modern reader. The Dialogues, conversations modelled on the dialogues of Lucian, between such figures as Socrates and Montaigne, Seneca and Scarron, served to disseminate new philosophical ideas. The popularization of philosophy was carried further by the Histoire des oracles (1687; “History of the Oracles”), based on a Latin treatise by the Dutch writer Anton van Dale (1683). Here Fontenelle subjected pagan religions to criticisms that the reader would inevitably see as applicable to Christianity as well. The same antireligious bias is seen in his amusing satire Relation de l’île de Bornéo (1686; “Account of the Island of Borneo”), in which a civil war in Borneo is used to symbolize the dissensions between Catholics (Rome) and Calvinists (Geneva).
Fontenelle’s most famous work was the Entretiens sur la pluralité des mondes (1686; A Plurality of Worlds, 1688). These charming and sophisticated dialogues were more influential than any other work in securing acceptance of the Copernican system, still far from commanding universal support in 1686. Fontenelle’s basis of scientific documentation was meagre, and some of his figures were wildly erroneous even for his own day. He was unfortunate in the moment of his publication: the Cartesian theory of vortices, on which his work was based, was refuted the next year in Isaac Newton’s Principia. But the Entretiens were nevertheless exceedingly successful. Fontenelle was elected to the Académie Française in 1691 and was elected to the Académie des Inscriptions in 1701.
As permanent secretary of the Académie des Sciences from 1697, Fontenelle held a highly influential office. He published the memoirs presented to the academy and wrote its history. He kept abreast of new developments in science, corresponding with scientists in most European countries, and developed his talent for lucid popular exposition, notably in some of his obituary notices read to the academy (e.g., those of Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz).
Fontenelle was a close friend of Montesquieu and well known to Voltaire, who mocked him in his Micromégas (1752), a dissertation on the smallness of man in relation to the cosmos. Fontenelle’s most original contribution was in his approach to historiography, shown in his De l’origine des fables (1724; “Of the Origin of Fables”), in which he supports the theory that similar fables arise independently in several cultures and also tentatively addresses himself to comparative religion.
