Bohuslav Martinů,  (born December 8, 1890, Polička, Bohemia, Austria-Hungary [now in Czech Republic]—died August 28, 1959, Liestal, Switzerland), modern Czech composer whose works exhibit a distinctive blend of French and Czech influences.
Martinů studied violin from age six, attended and was expelled from the Prague Conservatory, and in 1913 joined the Prague Philharmonic Orchestra. After the success of his ballet Istar and symphonic poem Mizející půlnoc (Vanishing Midnight), both in 1922, he studied under Josef Suk, a leader of the movement toward nationalism in Czech music. In 1923 he went to Paris to study under the French composer Albert Roussel. In 1940 Martinů fled the German invasion of France and settled in the United States, where he taught at Princeton University and at the Berkshire Music Center at Tanglewood, Massachusetts. Although he had planned to return to Prague after the end of World War II to teach at the conservatory there, he remained mostly in the United States until 1957, when he went to Rome to serve as composer in residence at the American Academy.
His orchestral works  Half-Time (1924) and La Bagarre (1927) were inspired by contemporary events, respectively a Czech-French football (soccer) game and the crowds that met Charles Lindbergh’s plane as it ended its transatlantic flight. Of his later works, the Concerto grosso for chamber orchestra (1941) uses the alternation between soloists and full orchestra found in the Baroque concerto grosso and shows Martinů’s skill in polyphonic writing. The Double Concerto for two string orchestras (1940) is a powerful work expressing Czech suffering after the partition of Czechoslovakia (1938). His Memorial to Lidice (1943) is a short symphonic poem commemorating Czechs killed by the Nazis during their destruction of the village of Lidice in 1942. Martinů’s other works include six symphonies; violin, piano, cello, and flute concerti; six string quartets; and compositions for piano, for harpsichord, for voice, and for unaccompanied cello and violin.
Martinů was a prolific composer whose works varied greatly in quality; at its best his music shows vitality, charm, and originality. He assimilated the rhythmic and melodic traits of Czech folk music into a modern, Neoclassical idiom that shows a clarity and precision characteristic of French music.
