Bryn Terfel, original name Bryn Terfel Jones,  (born Nov. 9, 1965, near Pant Glas, Wales), Welsh opera singer known for his bass-baritone voice and his performances in operas by Mozart, Richard Strauss, and Richard Wagner.
Terfel’s parents were cattle and sheep farmers, and his family was a musical one. In school he excelled in athletics and sang in choirs. He was trained at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama in London, and by the early 1990s he was already established in a professional singing career. In 1992 Gramophone magazine named him Young Singer of the Year, and in 1993 Terfel was proclaimed Newcomer of the Year in the International Classical Music Awards.
Among Terfel’s most prominent operatic roles were the title characters in Mozart’s The Marriage of Figaro and Don Giovanni, both of which he recorded. When he sang Figaro at the Metropolitan Opera in New York City in 1994, The New York Times put him on the front page, a rare tribute in the United States for an opera singer. Terfel also became especially identified with the role of Jokanaan in Richard Strauss’s Salome, which he performed in productions with a number of companies and recorded twice. He took on roles in Strauss’s Die Frau ohne Schatten and in works by Richard Wagner, such as his role as Wotan in a 2005 Covent Garden performance of Ring.
Terfel was perhaps as well known for lieder (a variety of German songs)  and other songs and for choral works, however, as for opera. He performed and recorded lieder by Franz Schubert, in addition to Kindertotenlieder by Gustav Mahler. Terfel became especially known for recordings of songs by British compatriots such as Frederick Delius, Ralph Vaughan Williams, Gerald Finzi, and George Butterworth. He also recorded choral works by George Frideric Handel, Edward Elgar, and John Ireland, among others. 
With a rich, warm, vibrant voice that was capable of expressive pianissimos as well as roaring fortissimos, Terfel continued to stand out in the world of classical singing. His recording Something Wonderful (1997), an album of the music of Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II, won accolades from both critics and listeners. The recording featured such favourites as “There Is Nothin’ like a Dame” and “The Surrey with the Fringe on Top.” Terfel’s later albums include Simple Gifts (2005) and Scarborough Fair: Songs from the British Isles (2008).
