Carmen,  opera in four acts by French composer Georges Bizet—with a libretto in French by Henri Meilhac and Ludovic Halévy—that premiered on March 3, 1875. With a plot based on the 1845 novella of the same name by Prosper Mérimée, Bizet’s Carmen was groundbreaking in its realism, and it rapidly became one of the most popular Western operas of all time. It is the source of many memorable and widely recognized songs, notably those known by the popular names “Toréador Song” and “Habanera.” Carmen also is the best-known example of opéra-comique, a genre of French opera not necessarily comic but featuring both spoken dialogue and sung portions. Despite its current reputation, however, it was condemned by the earliest critics, who were unaccustomed to seeing the lives of the common folk, much less the world of gypsies (in Mérimée they are specifically identified with the Roma), smugglers, deserters, factory workers, and various ne’er-do-wells given centre stage.
Bizet was asked to write a new work for Paris Opéra-Comique, which for a century had specialized in presenting light moralistic pieces in which virtue is ultimately rewarded. No doubt Bizet was expected to write something in that vein. Instead, he chose to bring the underclass and unheroic to light. In doing so he blazed a new trail for the verismo composers, such as Giacomo Puccini, of the next generation.
Bizet had gone to some lengths to familiarize himself with the musical sounds and forms of the region in which Carmen is set, and several of the best-known portions use rhythms he learned from those studies. He was only 36 years old when Carmen premiered, and he was devastated by the initial rejection of his work as immoral and vulgar. According to the mores of the opera-going public, women neither smoked cigarettes in public nor engaged in physical fights, nor were they sexually free. Furthermore, opera was a refined art, not one to concern itself with lowlifes and scoundrels. Such was the immediate response to Carmen that, at the time of Bizet’s death from a heart condition exactly three months after the work’s premiere, he was convinced that he had written the greatest failure in the history of opera. He did not survive to witness the accuracy of Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky’s prediction that “[t]en years hence Carmen will be the most popular opera in the world.”
Carmen is set in and around Sevilla, Spain, about 1820.
A square in Sevilla, outside a cigarette factory.
Corporal Moralès and a group of soldiers idly watch people come and go in the square. Micaëla, a young woman from the country, attracts their interest. She is looking for a brigadier named Don José. Invited to wait for him in the guardhouse, she demurs and says she will return later. Moralès and soldiers resign themselves to watching the passersby again.
The changing of the guard is heralded by a group of street urchins imitating the soldiers. Don José and Lieutenant Zuniga join Moralès and the other men. Zuniga asks José about the young women who work in the cigarette factory, but José is not interested in them. Zuniga then teases José about his interest in Micaëla; José admits that he loves her.
The women at the factory come out for their break. They seductively smoke their cigarettes, to the delight of the men. Then Carmen, the gypsy, comes out of the factory, attracting all the attention to herself. The men beg her to tell them when she will love them; she replies, maybe never, maybe tomorrow, but certainly not today, for love is like a rebellious bird and cannot be captured so easily (“Habanera”). The men continue to plead for her favours, but her eye lights on the inattentive José. She tosses a flower at him and, as the factory bell rings, runs back to work with the others. The crowd disperses.
José, left alone, picks up the flower. He is annoyed at Carmen’s effrontery, but the flower is pretty and its perfume is sweet—the woman must be a witch, he concludes. Just then Micaëla returns, presenting him with a letter and some money and a kiss from José’s mother, the last of which she chastely bestows on him. The kiss brings back sweet memories of his mother and his village home (Duet: “Ma mère je la vois”). Although his reverie is interrupted by thoughts of Carmen, he hopes the memory of his mother will sustain him. Micaëla is confused by this, but he does not explain, instead charging her to return to his mother with a message of love from him. She leaves him alone with the letter. As he reads it, he promises to marry Micaëla and then curses Carmen.
Suddenly the factory entrance disgorges a knot of women, fighting wildly and calling for help. Some blame Carmen for starting a hair-pulling fight with one Manuelita; others blame Manuelita. Zuniga orders José to investigate. As the soldiers calm the women, José returns with Carmen in custody; she has wounded the other woman. When Zuniga tries to question her, she merely sings “tra la la” and refuses to speak. Zuniga remarks that she can keep singing in prison. This delights some of the women, but Carmen strikes one of them, and Zuniga orders José to bind her arms and conduct her to jail. Carmen, unfazed, tells José that he will do her bidding, for he loves her. When he hotly denies it, she reminds him of the flower and tells him that its charm has worked. He forbids her to talk to him, but she seductively invites him to join her at a tavern outside Sevilla, where she will dance (“Seguidilla”). José is finding it difficult to control himself, so he again orders her to stop, but when she tells him that he loves her, and that she could well love him in return, he is undone. He frees her, begging her to keep her word to love him.
Zuniga returns with the order committing Carmen to prison. Carmen whispers to José that, on the way, she will pretend to push him; he is to turn around as he falls, and she will take care of the rest. She sings the “Habanera” to Zuniga as she leaves, then suddenly pushes José, escapes, and runs off, laughing. For his dereliction of duty, José is arrested and jailed.
