Chopin Preludes, Op. 28,  short solo piano pieces written between 1834–39 by Frederic Chopin and intended as explorations of the characters of various keys. The iconic examples of such works are those of Johann Sebastian Bach appearing in his The Well-Tempered Clavier, much of which was composed in the 1720s. Early 19th-century composers like Chopin returned to the idea in more flexible form.
One of the most acclaimed pianists of his day, Chopin knew all of Bach’s preludes by heart; he used them diligently in his own practice sessions and also as instructional material for his piano students. When Chopin decided to write some preludes of his own in the 1830s, he took a more relaxed approach than had Bach. The German Baroque master had written one prelude in each of the major and minor keys, and then matched each with a complementary fugue, for a total of 48 individual pieces. Chopin wrote preludes only, without the greater intricacy of accompanying fugues, resulting in 24 individual pieces that were published together in 1839.
An additional prelude (Prelude in C-Sharp Minor, No. 25) was published in 1841. Chopin had already used this key in the tenth of his preludes, but he apparently judged that he had something more to say with these particular chords and harmonies. The earlier C-sharp minor prelude is quite brief and dominated by anxiously cascading lines; the latter one, significantly more expansive, is more gently wistful of mood, in the spirit of Chopin’s many nocturnes.
Another prelude (Presto con leggierezza in A-flat Major, No. 26) was composed around the time of the original preludes but was not published until after Chopin’s death. In contrast to the restfully song-like Prelude in A-Flat Major, No. 17, this one is sparkling and restless in mood, ostensibly better suited to his musical demeanor at the time. Certainly, Chopin gave it much more space for varied expression than the almost cursory scope of Prelude No. 26.
A 27th prelude, in the key of E-flat minor, also exists, though in incomplete form. Consisting of a single remarkably untidily scrawled page, this very short prelude sets a restless right hand melody against a turbulent left hand accompaniment dominated by frequent prolonged trills. Chopin never finished the little piece, nor even troubled himself to recopy it in fully legible form, a task that fell to Jeffrey Kallberg, professor of music history at the University of Pennsylvania. Kallberg nicknamed the new prelude “Devil’s Trill,” a sobriquet also found in the catalog of works by Italian Baroque composer Giuseppe Tartini, whose own Devil’s Trill Sonata includes similar effects. This new fragment of Chopin’s musical imagination was premiered in July 2002 by pianist Alain Jacquon at the Newport Music Festival in Newport, Rhode Island. This E-flat Minor prelude bears no relationship, other than key, to the 14th Prelude in E-flat Minor, Op. 28.
The ordering of the Op. 28 preludes was determined by perceived pairing of major and minor keys, so that the key signature of a major key prelude would be the same as that of the minor key prelude that immediately followed. So, for example, the familiar “Raindrop” Prelude no. 15 is written in the key of D-flat major, which contains five flats, as does the key of b-flat minor, which is found Prelude no. 16. The pairings amused Chopin and some music scholars, though the casual listener need only attend to the fact that there are shifts of contrast and tempo allowing for maximum musical variety, even though all this music is produced by a single pair of hands.
A list of the individual preludes follows, along with the titles and descriptors assigned to each by pianists Hans von Bulow and Alfred-Denis Cortot:
