Concerto, plural concerti or concertos,  since about 1750, a musical composition for instruments in which a solo instrument is set off against an orchestral ensemble. The soloist and ensemble are related to each other by alternation, competition, and combination. In this sense the concerto, like the symphony or the string quartet, may be seen as a special case of the musical genre embraced by the term sonata. Like the sonata and symphony, the concerto is typically a cycle of several contrasting movements integrated tonally and often thematically. The individual movements are usually based on certain recognized designs, including sonata form, A B A (the letters refer to large distinct musical sections), variations, and rondo (such as A B A C A).
But the concerto tends to differ from the sonata, too, in certain ways that set it apart. Thus, in the sonata form of the concerto’s first movement, the exposition often remains in the tonic key while played by the entire orchestra the first time through. The expected departure to a nearly related key and the introduction of the soloist are reserved to a characteristically more elaborate repetition of the exposition. Moreover, to meet a felt need for a more brilliant ending in the same movement, the concerto provides or at least invites an improvised cadenza near the end of the movement—an extended, free flourish that may go on for as long as several minutes. A shorter cadenza may also occur at a strategic point in one or more of the other movements. In addition, the concerto has followed much more consistently than the sonata the plan of three movements, in the order fast–slow–fast. The second movement leads, often without pause, into the finale, or last movement, and the finale has shown a more consistent preference for the rondo design. But, importantly, all of these distinctions of musical form are secondary to the dialogue inherent in the concerto’s interrelationship of soloist and orchestra. This dialogue influences the very nature of the solo part by almost forcing the soloist into a virtuoso’s role so that he can compete on an equal footing with his adversary, the orchestra. The dialogue, furthermore, influences not only the construction of individual musical phrases but also the musical textures chosen. In addition, it affects the ways of developing musical material (e.g., themes, rhythms) according to the logic of musical form, and even the broader blocking off of sections within forms, as in the concerto’s repeated exposition, with its sections for full orchestra (tutti) and soloist.
The literature of the concerto since 1750 is extensive in all categories, although the standard repertoire is limited to scarcely more than a few works for each main solo instrument. Being a prime ingredient of popular concert fare, the concerto is subject, much as is opera, to the exigencies of the box office. The film and recording industries have helped further to give disproportionate prominence to a few highly successful and undeniably effective examples like those for piano by the Norwegian Edvard Grieg (in A minor) and the Russians Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky (in B flat minor) and Sergey Rachmaninoff (in C minor).
Taking music’s commonly accepted eras for its framework, this examination of the concerto starts in the late Renaissance (16th century), with the origins and first uses of the term. It proceeds to the Baroque era (about 1580 to 1750), which was the first main era of the concerto, including the vocal-instrumental concerto in the late 16th and 17th centuries and, especially, the concerto grosso in the late 17th and early 18th centuries. The discussion progresses next to the Classical era (about 1730 to 1830) and the Romantic era (about 1790 to 1915), which mark successive though dissimilar heydays of the solo concerto partially discussed above. Lastly it reaches the modern era (from about 1890), which has witnessed further vitality in the solo concerto and a renaissance of the older concerto grosso principle of contrasting instrumental groups. Within each era examined, the prime considerations of the discussion are the meanings of “concerto” as then current; the concerto’s place in the social life of the time; its scoring, or particular use of musical instruments and voices; its means of achieving opposition and contrast (if any); its musical structure; and its output by chief regions and masters.
The word concerto has given trouble to music historians concerned with word origins because within a century after its first known applications to music, in the early 1500s, it had acquired two meanings that would seem to be mutually exclusive. One meaning still current in Italian is that of “agreement,” or, as in English, of being “in concert.” The other is that of “competing” or “contesting,” from the Latin concerto, -are, -atus (“to contend”). Probably derived from the same Latin word are such related terms as the Italian conserto, concertato, and concertante; the Spanish concierto; the French concert and concertant; and the English consort. Yet it is this dual meaning itself that offers the most tangible thread of unity throughout the four-century history of the concerto in its various forms. In other words, the concerto, in whatever guise it assumes, reveals a continuing need to resolve the antithetical ideas of concord and contest. The balance between contest and concord is the concerto’s particular solution to the problem of variety within unity that must be resolved in all dynamic art forms.
In the 16th century the word concerto embodied several meanings. As early as 1519 in Rome it referred simply to a vocal or instrumental group (un concerto di voci in musica). By 1551 it was used with implications of musical texture, specifically of the contrast of soprano voice with bass and alto (“soprano in concerto col basso & alto”). By 1565 the cognate word concertato was being used in reference to both voices and instruments. And by 1584 a Venetian title, Musica…per cantar e sonar in concerti, brought forth the meaning of group presentations or concerts.
Although in 1578 “concerti” was used to mean the music itself, for both voices and instruments (rather than performers or concerts), the first formal musical title of this sort appeared in 1587. This was the Concerti…a 6–16 voci (Concertos…in 6 to 16 Parts), a collection of vocal and instrumental music by the Venetian composer Andrea Gabrieli and his nephew Giovanni Gabrieli. No formal title concerto is known to be given to strictly instrumental music before 1621, and then the word means both “concerted” or “playing together” and “technically [or even ‘virtuosically’] elaborated.” This title, with significant implications of a new style—that of the virtuoso soloist—is the Sonate concertate in stilo moderno (Concerted Sonatas in the Modern Style), by an Italian, Dario Castello, a collection for a violin and for a bassoon that elaborates on the basso continuo part. (The basso continuo, a constant device of Baroque music, calls for a low, sustained-tone instrument—e.g., cello, viola da gamba, bassoon—playing the bass line, plus one or more chordal instruments—e.g., harpsichord, organ, lute—that improvise harmonies above the bass line. Small numbers, or figures, are often placed above the bass line music as a guide to the harmonies—hence the term figured bass.)
In these early, loosely titled collections by the Gabrielis and by Castello, there can be found at least five of the means of contention or opposition that later became closely identified with the stile concertato or concerto. Listed in their approximate order of evolution, they include opposition between voices and instruments; between one choir and another (whether of voices or instruments); between the essential basso continuo and its melodic elaboration; between simple, straightforward parts and more decorative, virtuoso parts; and between two or more voices or instrumental parts engaged in imitative or motivic interplay.
Within the span of a century and a half, the Baroque era saw the word concerto change from a broad general term applied on several musical levels to a fairly specific term whose meaning had two senses: that of an instrumental group and that of a musical structure or process. Thus in the Gabrielis’ early Baroque “Concerti” the title referred to a collection consisting of church motets (Latin choral compositions) and madrigals (similar Italian compositions) for six to 12 voices in one or two choruses, without and with instruments; a piece for eight voices imitating a battle; and a “Ricercar per sonar” for eight instruments (a ricercar is a piece often based on melodic imitation; sonar means to play instrumentally). By contrast, the more than 460 late-Baroque “Concerti” composed by the Italian Antonio Vivaldi from the first half of the 18th century are purely instrumental works, mostly three-movement cycles (fast–slow–fast) for one to four soloists and strings with or without other orchestral instruments.
The same century and a half saw a similar narrowing of definition in two closely allied terms: sonata and sinfonia. Before sonata, sinfonia, and concerto became clearly defined and attained a degree of mutual exclusion, they often overlapped and were sometimes even equated in meaning. The full title on one musical manuscript by the Italian Alessandro Stradella, for example, reads, Sonata di viole, cioé per concerto grosso di viole, concertino di due violino e leuto (Sonata for Viols, that is, for Full Complement [concerto grosso] of Viols, and Small Group [concertino] of Two: Violin and Lute). Another reads, Sinfonia per violini e bassi a due concertini distinti (Sinfonia for Violins and Basses in Two Distinct Groups). Many so-called trumpet sonatas of the same period, especially those by Domenico Gabrielli and Giuseppe Jacchini, simply equate the three terms without distinction. When Tommaso Antonio Vitali entitled his Opus 4 Concerto di sonate… (published 1701), he evidently meant no more than “A Collection of Sonatas,” for there was only a violin part, a basso continuo part, and the concertate cello part that so often elaborated on the basso continuo. But later, when “Concerto” was crossed off a harpsichord solo by the German composer Johann David Heinichen, copied posthumously in 1731, and “Sonata” was entered in its place, the intention was probably to choose a title more identified with the performing instrument, although the work may well have been transcribed from a concerto.
It is no wonder, then, that even the traits most basically identified with the concerto can be found in works of other titles. Giovanni Gabrieli wrote works for as many as five opposed choirs of instruments under the title of “Sonata.” The “sonatas” of the German composers Johann Joseph Fux and Georg Muffat have passages actually marked “T.” and “S.” for tutti and soli (soloists) groupings, and, indeed, the tutti–soli principle of contrast still operates strongly in the Classical symphonies of Joseph Haydn and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. These cross-influences are important reminders that any full history of the concerto idea must take into account not only the concerti in the literature but many works with other titles. Yet in a more concise, encyclopaedic summary it is necessary to stay close to the evolution of the term concerto itself, and there is a real significance in observing how the word acquired definition. The evolution of the word in effect reveals the composers’ own developing concepts of it. Concerto was the last of the three terms (sonata, sinfonia, concerto) to attain clear definition. In part this was because the word first had to grow free of its original association with music for both voices and instruments.
