Damon Albarn,  (born March 23, 1968, Whitechapel, London, England), English musician who found fame as the front man for the rock band Blur and as the main creative force behind the pop group Gorillaz but was also noted for his eclectic output as a composer, producer, and collaborator.
Albarn, whose parents were involved in London’s creative counterculture, spent his early years in the East End before moving with his family to Colchester, Essex, in 1978. As a youth he learned to play the violin and the piano, and in secondary school he befriended Graham Coxon, with whom he soon began to write and perform songs.
Following a brief stint in drama school, Albarn formed a rock band that eventually became known as Blur. With Albarn as lead vocalist and principal songwriter, the group—which also included Coxon (guitar), Alex James (bass), and Dave Rowntree (drums)—issued its debut album, Leisure, in 1991. Having established itself as clever observers of everyday British life, in the tradition of the Kinks and the Small Faces, on Modern Life Is Rubbish (1993), Blur achieved a critical and commercial breakthrough with Parklife (1994), a winning collection of pop songs in that vein. By the mid-1990s Blur was a chief exemplar, along with fellow melodic-rock revivalists Oasis, of what was called Britpop, and a frenzied media-fueled rivalry emerged between the two bands. Partially in response, Albarn and company shifted course after The Great Escape (1995) and returned with Blur (1997), a garage-rock-indebted record that expanded their American audience, and the stylistically varied 13 (1999).
In the late 1990s Albarn and comic-book artist Jamie Hewlett developed the idea for Gorillaz, a “virtual band” for which animated characters drawn by Hewlett would serve as the sole visual component (on record covers and in music videos, for instance) of music conceived by Albarn. The group’s self-titled full-length debut album (2001) was a colourful fusion of global pop styles, including hip-hop and reggae, that reflected its diverse set of collaborators and befitted its playful avatars. The electronic sounds of Gorillaz filtered into Blur’s next record, Think Tank (2003), but the considerable international sales of the Gorillaz album Demon Days (2005) demonstrated that Albarn’s newer band had become the more-popular act. Gorillaz later released Plastic Beach (2010), which promoted a message of environmental awareness, and The Fall (2010). After a six-year hiatus, Blur resumed performing in 2009, and its eighth studio album, The Magic Whip, appeared in 2015. Two years later Gorillaz issued the politically themed Humanz, and their sixth album, The Now Now, appeared in 2018. In addition, Albarn recorded Everyday Robots (2014) under his own name. Song Machine, a Web-based animated series about the fictional adventures of the characters of Gorillaz, debuted in 2020. Later that year the companion album Song Machine, Season One: Strange Timez was also released.
Much of Albarn’s other work in the early 21st century cultivated an interest in African music and culture that had sparked in him during an Oxfam-sponsored trip to Mali in 2000. On the recordings Mali Music (2002) and Kinshasa One Two (2011), he produced and collaborated with musicians from Mali and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, respectively, and in 2006 he founded the Africa Express, an initiative that fostered cross-fertilization between African and Western performers. Albarn joined with Nigerian drummer Tony Allen (formerly of Fela Kuti’s band) on the albums The Good, the Bad & the Queen (2007), recorded by an ensemble that also featured former Clash bassist Paul Simonon, and the eponymously titled Rocket Juice & the Moon (2012), which employed the Red Hot Chili Peppers’ Flea on bass.
In addition, Albarn composed the music for Monkey: Journey to the West (2007), a Mandarin-language opera based on Wu Cheng’en’s 16th-century novel Xiyouji, and he wrote, composed, and performed in Dr. Dee: An English Opera (2011), a fantasia on the life of English polymath John Dee.
Albarn was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 2016.
