David Henry Hwang,  (born August 11, 1957, Los Angeles, California, U.S.), American playwright, screenwriter, and librettist  whose work, by his own account, concerns the fluidity of identity. He is probably best known for his Tony Award-winning play M. Butterfly (1988), based on the true story of a French diplomat who had a long affair with a singer in the Beijing opera. The woman he loved later proved to be not only a man but also a spy for the Chinese government.
Hwang’s parents were both Chinese-born, though his mother was reared in the Philippines. They immigrated separately to the United States, where they met, married, and raised their family. David Henry, the only son and the oldest of three siblings, attended Stanford University (B.A., 1979), where his first play, FOB (an acronym for “fresh off the boat”), was first produced in 1979 (published 1983). The work, which examines the immigrant experience from an Asian American perspective, won an Obie Award in 1980–81 for best new American play. Between graduating from college and winning the Obie, Hwang had enrolled in the Yale School of Drama to gain a better sense of theatre history. During his year in that program, he penned two short plays—The Dance and the Railroad (produced 1981), about two Chinese immigrant railroad workers and their expectations, and The House of Sleeping Beauties (produced 1983), adapted from a short story by Japanese writer Kawabata Yasunari—first performed in an omnibus production with The Sound of a Voice as Sound and Beauty. Hwang later adapted The Sound of a Voice into a libretto for an opera collaboration (2003) with American composer Philip Glass.
In addition to further collaborations with Glass, Hwang worked with a number of composers over the years, including Chinese-born Bright Sheng on The Silver River (produced 1997), a one-act opera based on an ancient Chinese folktale; Argentine Osvaldo Golijov on Ainadamar (2003, revised 2005; “Fountain of Tears”), an opera inspired by Spanish writer Federico García Lorca; and Korean-born Unsuk Chin on the opera Alice in Wonderland (2007; based on Lewis Carroll’s Alice books).
In 1985 Hwang cowrote the screenplay for Blind Alleys, a made-for-television movie. He also penned Rich Relations (1986), his first play without an Asian or Asian American element. Although that play was a critical failure, the playwright found its reception freeing in that it drove him to embrace experimentation over positive critical response. His next drama, M. Butterfly (1988; film 1993), was a wild success and was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize. In 1988 Hwang also wrote the libretto for Glass’s “science-fiction music drama” 1000 Airplanes on the Roof (1989). The plays Bondage (1992), a short work about stereotypes that is set in a sadomasochism parlour, and Face Value (1993), a comedy that had only eight performances and never officially opened, followed. Hwang’s next play, Golden Child (produced 1996, revised 1998), had a relatively short run but ultimately was nominated for a Tony Award. Based on the stories of Hwang’s maternal grandmother, it examines the tensions between tradition and change in Chinese society.
Hwang’s next projects involved music in some way. He cowrote the book for Aida (2000), which featured music by British rocker Sir Elton John and lyrics by British lyricist Sir Tim Rice and was based loosely on the Verdi opera of the same name; wrote a new book for the revival of the musical Flower Drum Song (2002); and wrote the book for an original musical-comedy version of Tarzan (2006). His stage comedy Yellow Face was first performed in 2007. It is both a reflection on Hwang’s activism regarding the use of non-Asian actors in Asian roles (which he compared to blackface minstrelsy) and an examination of the role of “face” (a Chinese concept embodying dignity, reputation, and respect) in American society. In 2011 Chinglish appeared on Broadway. It was written in English and Mandarin (with supertitles) and examined the subject of cultural and linguistic misunderstandings.
