David Daniels,  (born March 12, 1966, Spartanburg, South Carolina, U.S.),  American opera singer who, as the preeminent countertenor of his generation, was best known for his lead roles in George Frideric Handel’s operas, including Giulio Cesare, Rinaldo, and Radamisto.
Singing was Daniels’s passion from an early age. The son of two voice teachers, he became an accomplished boy soprano. By age 17 he was studying voice as a tenor, and in his senior year of high school he won a major voice competition. He won a full scholarship to the University of Cincinnati (Ohio) College–Conservatory of Music, where he received a bachelor’s degree (1990); he completed a master’s degree (1992) at the University of Michigan, where he studied with George Shirley. Meanwhile, although he was formally a tenor, he continued to be happiest singing in his higher range. Nearly at the end of his studies, at age 25 he made the switch to the higher voice. He studied with countertenor Drew Minter and immersed himself in the performance of 17th- and 18th-century music. Within a few years he made his debut (1994) at Glimmerglass Opera in Cooperstown, New York, and was launched onto the world stage.
In addition to the Handel roles that were the mainstay of his repertoire, Daniels performed regularly in operas by Claudio Monteverdi, Christoph Willibald Gluck, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, and Benjamin Britten. On the concert stage he sang Johann Sebastian Bach, Handel, and Hector Berlioz, among others, and in recitals—often appearing with his longtime collaborator, pianist Martin Katz—he stretched the countertenor repertoire to sing, pronouns unchanged, mezzo-soprano works by Maurice Ravel, Ralph Vaughn Williams, and other 19th- and 20th-century composers.
Daniels won the 1997 Richard Tucker Award, conferred by the Richard Tucker Music Foundation to an emerging American opera singer, and was named Vocalist of the Year (1998) by Musical America magazine. Daniels was praised by music critics and fans alike for his solid acting and commanding stage presence, as well as for his “luminous,” “flexible and true,” and “impeccably controlled” voice.
In 2018, amid accusations that Daniels and his now husband, conductor William Scott Walters, had drugged and raped a graduate student eight years earlier, Daniels took a leave of absence from the University of Michigan, where he had been a music professor since 2015. In 2019 Daniels and Walters were arrested on sexual assault charges, and both claimed their innocence. Meanwhile, additional accusations of sexual assault and prostitution surfaced, with Daniels denying those allegations as well. He was dismissed by the University of Michigan in 2020.
