Dawn Upshaw,  (born July 17, 1960, Nashville, Tennessee, U.S.), American operatic soprano known for her exquisite voice and for her meticulous attention to texts in many languages.
Upshaw received a bachelor’s degree (1982) from Illinois Wesleyan University and a master’s degree (1984) from the Manhattan School of Music in New York City. In 1984 she was a winner of the Young Concert Artists International Auditions, and later that year she became an apprentice singer with the Metropolitan Opera. In 1985 Upshaw shared the first prize in the Walter M. Naumburg Competition, consequently making her recital debut at Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts. She became a frequent performer with the Metropolitan Opera and with companies throughout the United States and Europe, singing works from all periods of opera history. Upshaw also served on the faculties of the Tanglewood Music Center, Lenox, Massachusetts, and Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York.
The recital and chamber-music repertoire was of special interest to Upshaw, and she devoted a substantial part of her time to programs that included selections ranging from art songs to works of the musical theatre and American popular songs. Upshaw was a favoured partner of such notable performers as pianists Gilbert Kalish and Richard Goode, conductors Kent Nagano and Esa-Pekka Salonen, and chamber groups Kronos Quartet and eighth blackbird. Upshaw collaborated with a number of contemporary composers, often singing in the first performances of their works. Significant opera premieres included John Harbison’s The Great Gatsby (1999), Kaija Saariaho’s L’Amour de loin (2000), and Osvaldo Golijov’s Ainadamar (2003).
Upshaw’s discography is extensive. She performed in Henryk Górecki’s Symphony No. 3, and the recording sold more than a million copies, an unusual feat in the classical world. In addition, she was the recipient of several Grammy Awards, including best classical vocal performance for Knoxville: Summer of 1915 (1989) and for The Girl with Orange Lips (1991), both collections of songs by 20th- and 21st-century composers. In 2004 the Grammy for the best chamber-music recording was awarded to Berg: Lyric Suite (2003), on which Upshaw collaborated with the Kronos Quartet, and in 2006 she received a Grammy as a performer in the best opera recording, Golijov’s Ainadamar. She received the Grammy for best classical vocal solo performance for her work on composer Maria Schneider’s album Winter Morning Walks (2013). Upshaw’s other honours include a MacArthur Foundation fellowship (2007); she was cited for “stretching the boundaries of operatic and concert singing and enriching the landscape of contemporary music.” In 2008 Upshaw was named a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
