Der Rosenkavalier, (German: The Knight of the Rose)  comic opera in three acts by German composer Richard Strauss (German libretto by Austrian dramatist Hugo von Hofmannsthal) that premiered at the Dresden Royal Opera House on January 26, 1911.
Hofmannsthal had written the play upon which Strauss based Elektra, but Der Rosenkavalier was their first close collaboration. Hofmannsthal took several characters and elements of the plot from French composer Claude Terrasse’s operetta L’Ingénu libertin (1907) and French dramatist Molière’s Monsieur de Pourceaugnac (1669). The composer set to work on what he called a Komödie für Musik (“comedy for music”) before the libretto was complete. Notably, Strauss worked many waltzes into the score. The waltz, an early 19th-century creation, was unknown in 18th-century Vienna, but it was a staple in light opera at the beginning of the 20th century.
Within a year of its Dresden premiere, Der Rosenkavalier had reached the stages of Vienna, Munich, Nürnberg, Cologne, Hamburg, Milan (in Italian), and Prague (in Czech), among many other European cities. In 1913, productions would be staged both in London and at the Metropolitan Opera House in New York City. Not all observers were pleased. For example, at La Scala in Milan, purists booed the waltzes, which they viewed as suitable only for dance music. Nonetheless, Der Rosenkavalier was hugely popular and has remained the most often performed of Strauss’s operas.
Der Rosenkavalier is dominated by its female vocal parts, although the music for the men is certainly effective. The young man Octavian is played by a mezzo-soprano (thus, a woman dressed in male clothing, known as a trouser, pants, or breeches role); one precedent for that circumstance is that of Mozart’s Cherubino from The Marriage of Figaro. Because Octavian is the lover of the Marschallin and the suitor of Sophie, all of the opera’s love music is sung by women. Their glorious final trio is one of the highlights of the opera and its best-known passage. Strauss loved the trio enough to request that it be performed at his funeral.
Der Rosenkavalier is set in Vienna in the mid-1700s
In the Marschallin’s bedroom she and her young lover, Octavian, are awakening from a rapturous night. Octavian hides quickly as a servant comes in with breakfast. Soon after he returns to bed, there is a clamour in the outer room. The Marschallin recognizes the voice as that of her overbearing and crude cousin, Baron Ochs. She tells Octavian to hide behind the screen and find some clothes. Ochs storms in, demanding his cousin’s attention. Although he is a nobleman, he has little money, so he intends to marry the young rich bourgeois Sophie. According to tradition, he must find a well-born messenger to present a perfumed silver rose to the woman as a marriage proposal.
The Marschallin mischievously recommends Count Rofrano (Octavian) for the job, and Ochs agrees. Octavian has reappeared, dressed in women’s clothes as the housemaid “Mariandel.” Ochs flirts with her. Meanwhile, a number of visitors arrive in succession, demanding the Marschallin’s attention. As an Italian tenor sings an aria, Ochs attempts to bully a notary into writing out a marriage contract that will favour him greatly. “Mariandel” slips away.
After everyone has left, the Marschallin reflects on her lost youth. Octavian returns, in his own clothing, and the Marschallin tells him that sometimes she gets up in the night and stops all the clocks so as to hold time in its place. She declares that he will one day leave her for a younger woman, and he leaves in great distress. When she realizes that she has neglected to kiss him goodbye, she tries unsuccessfully to have him returned to her house.
In her father’s reception hall, Sophie von Faninal awaits the arrival of the Knight of the Rose. Handsome and elegantly dressed, Octavian arrives bearing the silver rose in advance of the bridegroom’s arrival. The two young people promptly fall for each other. Ochs comes in, accompanied by his loutish entourage, and he treats Sophie patronizingly. His excessive confidence alienates Sophie, who declares that she will not have him. When Ochs tries to force the issue, Octavian angrily draws his sword. The scene ends with chaos. Sophie’s father threatens to send her back to the convent (where she has been at school) if she does not agree to the marriage.
In a private room at a seedy inn, the scene is set for a plan meant to humble the obnoxious Ochs. “Mariandel” has agreed to meet him, and they arrive together. His plans of seduction repeatedly run awry with continual interruptions by other conspirators; the ensuing pandemonium brings in the police. Ochs’s mood is not improved by the arrival of Sophie and her father, who express shock. “Mariandel” hides and changes clothes and then returns as Count Rofrano. Next on the scene is the Marschallin. Faced with all the people he most wished to impress, Ochs grumpily rushes off. After Baron Faninal leaves, only the Marschallin, Octavian, and Sophie remain. They reflect upon their different perspectives on love. The Marschallin, with much bittersweet feeling, yields her place to the younger woman, and the trio becomes a duet for Sophie and Octavian. “We are together,” Octavian proclaims. “All else is like a dream.”
