Dietrich Buxtehude, Dietrich also spelled Dieterich,  (born 1637, probably in Oldesloe, Holstein—died  May 9, 1707, Lübeck), Danish or German organist and composer of church music, one of the most esteemed and influential composers of his time.
His exact place of birth is uncertain, and nothing is known of his early youth. It is usually assumed that he began his musical education with his father, who was organist at Helsingborg (c. 1638–41) and at Helsingør (Elsinore; c. 1642–71), both then part of Denmark. Buxtehude settled at Lübeck in 1688 as organist of St. Mary’s Church. There he gained such fame as a composer that the city became a mecca for musicians of northern Germany. The young Handel visited him in 1703, and in 1705 young Bach walked more than 200 miles to see him. Both young men hoped to succeed the master at Lübeck, but marriage to one of his daughters was a condition and each found it unacceptable.
Buxtehude’s duties as church organist included composing works for public festivals and for the marriages and funerals of the great merchant families of the city. He left a considerable amount of vocal and instrumental music, much of which was not recovered until the 20th century; much more certainly remains lost.
His most important and influential works are considered to be those for organ, which include toccatas, preludes, fugues, chaconnes, pieces based on chorales, and a passacaglia to which J.S. Bach’s Passacaglia in C Minor is indebted. The preludes are usually brief, and, with one exception, they are unlike Bach’s in having no thematic connection with the fugues that follow them. Most of the harpsichord music has been lost.
The vocal music consists chiefly of church cantatas in a variety of forms, more than 100 of which are extant. Their texts are rarely liturgical; the Bible, the hymnbook, and sacred verse of the time are their main sources. All are imbued with a devout simplicity that contrasts strongly with the elaborations of their Bachian successors. It is possible that some were written for the famous Abendmusiken, concerts of mixed vocal and instrumental music held in St. Mary’s in the late afternoons on five Sundays in the year. These performances, instituted by Buxtehude in 1673, became the pride of Lübeck, and their tradition was continued into the 19th century.
