Emma Nevada, original name Emma Wixom,  (born Feb. 7, 1859, Alpha [near Nevada City], Calif., U.S.—died June 20, 1940, Liverpool, Eng.),  American opera singer, one of the finest coloratura sopranos of the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Emma Wixom grew up in Nevada City, California, and in Austin, Nevada. She graduated from Mills Seminary (now College) in Oakland, California, in 1876. In Vienna on a European study tour in 1877, she met and was taken as a pupil by the renowned opera singer and teacher Mathilde Marchesi, with whom she remained for three years.
She made her operatic debut under the name Emma Nevada in Vincenzo Bellini’s La sonnambula in London in May 1880. She was quickly recognized as one of the great coloratura sopranos of the day. Her voice, while small, was remarkably flutelike, and her art concealed what defects it suffered. For two years she sang in Trieste, Florence, and Genoa, where Giuseppe Verdi is said to have heard her and arranged for her appearance at La Scala in Milan. In May 1883 she opened at the Opéra-Comique in Paris in Félicien David’s La Perle du Brésil. At the Opéra-Comique she vied with fellow American Marie Van Zandt for popular honours. Sir Alexander Mackenzie’s oratorio The Rose of Sharon (1884) contained a part written especially for her; she sang it at Covent Garden, London, that year.
Late in 1884 Nevada returned to the United States in the opera company of Colonel James H. Mapleson as alternate coloratura to Adelina Patti. She sang La sonnambula at the New York Academy of Music in November 1884 and then toured the country with Mapleson’s company. In 1885 she married Raymond S. Palmer, who was thereafter her manager. She continued to tour Europe for several years.
Nevada’s favourite roles were in Lakmé, Faust, Les Contes d’Hoffmann, Mireille, Il barbiere di Siviglia, Mignon, and Lucia di Lammermoor. She made tours of the United States in 1899, 1901–02, and 1907. After a final Lakmé in Berlin in 1910 she retired from the stage. For some years thereafter she taught voice in England.
