Florencia en el Amazonas, (Spanish: “Florencia in the Amazon”)  opera in two acts by Daniel Catán with a Spanish libretto by Marcela Fuentes-Berain and based on the work of Colombian author Gabriel García Márquez. It premiered October 25, 1996, at the Houston Grand Opera, which had co-commissioned the work with opera houses in Los Angeles, Seattle, and Bogotá, Colombia. It was the first Spanish-language opera to be commissioned by several major opera houses.
Florencia en el Amazonas concerns what its Mexican-born composer described as “the journey to transcendent love…with all its intricacies, subtleties, wretchedness, and glorious happiness.” It employs magic realism, a narrative technique that is characterized by the matter-of-fact inclusion of fantastic or mythical elements into seemingly realistic fiction. The opera is built around sympathetic and generally believable characters. Catán paints them in richly varied music of ravishing beauty, particularly for the protagonist, Florencia.
Florencia en el Amazonas is set on a riverboat traveling on the Amazon River in the early 20th century.
A crowd gathers on the wharf as the riverboat El Dorado prepares to sail down the Amazon to Manaus, Brazil. Many of the passengers—though journeying specifically to hear the famous diva Florencia Grimaldi perform for the first time in many years at the great Amazonas Opera House—remain unaware that she is traveling incognito on the same boat. The mystical figure Riolobo introduces the travelers, who include Rosalba—a journalist at work on a book about the singer—and the married couple Paula and Álvaro, who are hoping to revive the passion of their marriage.
Florencia laments that, while she was away pursuing her operatic career in Europe, she lost touch with herself. For her, this is a journey not merely to find herself again but also to find her long-lost lover Cristobál, who had set off into the Amazon in search of butterflies. Meanwhile, Rosalba loses her research notes overboard. They are retrieved by Arcadio, nephew of the ship’s captain, and the two are deeply attracted to one another. In contrast to the growing intimacy of Rosalba and Arcadio, Paula and Álvaro quarrel. Further, Florencia learns from the Capitán that Cristobál has disappeared without a trace.
During a game of cards, Paula and Álvaro and Rosalba and Arcadio argue and flirt, depending upon inclination. An intense storm comes up, and the ship is endangered. Álvaro, while trying to help, is swept overboard, and, when the Capitán is injured, it falls to Arcadio to attempt to rescue the ship, which he accomplishes with only limited success.
Having come to feel that pride, not lack of affection, was the root of their troubles, Paula mourns the loss of Álvaro. Because of her lament, Riolobo returns Álvaro to life and to Paula.
Talking with Florencia about her research project, Rosalba does not yet know that she is speaking to the very person she is researching. Florencia declares that the singer’s vocal and dramatic powers were the product of her love for Cristobál, and at last Rosalba realizes with whom she has been speaking. Inspired by Florencia’s example, the journalist decides to stick with Arcadio and finds, to her delight, that he reciprocates her feelings. Paula and Álvaro too have rediscovered joy in each other.
At last the El Dorado reaches Manaus, only to learn that cholera has struck the town. The passengers dare not disembark. As the opera’s closing scene develops, Florencia first laments losing Cristobál and then imagines that it is not yet too late for her and her butterfly hunter. (The libretto leaves Florencia’s future ambiguous, and so the ending is left to the director’s discretion.)
