Franco-Netherlandish school,  designation for several generations of major northern composers, who from about 1440 to 1550 dominated the European musical scene by virtue of their craftsmanship and scope. Because of the difficulty of balancing matters of ethnicity, cultural heritage, places of employment, and the political geography of the time, this group has also been designated as the Franco-Flemish, Flemish, or Netherlandish school. For composers active in the early part of the period, the term Burgundian school has been used.
The generation of Guillaume Dufay and Gilles Binchois may be included, though many music historians prefer to begin with the slightly later generation of Jean d’Ockeghem and Antoine Busnois. Led by Josquin des Prez, the succeeding generation was extraordinarily rich in its number of fine composers, including Jakob Obrecht, Heinrich Isaac, Pierre de la Rue, and Loyset Compère, among others. Jointly, these composers forged an international musical language. They were in great demand at the courts of Italy, France, and Germany, often spending much of their adult lives absent from their homelands.
With the gradual abandonment of isorhythm (that is, the repetition of a large-scale rhythmic pattern throughout a piece) as an organizing principle in the 1430s, the focus of large-scale composition shifted to the Roman Catholic mass. In this genre the previous standard of three-part writing gave way to a denser texture employing four parts, with contrasting sections for fewer voices. In the treatment of rhythm, duple metre (two main beats to a measure; see metre) gradually became more prevalent.
Particularly in the works of Ockeghem, the melodic compass expanded, especially in the lower part; with the expansion of total range, there was less voice crossing. Imitation, the use of similar material in different voice parts at short time intervals, became increasingly prominent; thus, the stylistic contrasts between voice parts in medieval music gave way to a more unified texture with greater similarity between parts. Techniques of incorporating preexistent material into new compositions became increasingly flexible. Standard medieval refrain forms rapidly lost favour among the composers who were active about 1500; they preferred freer poetic forms and fresher rhetoric. Composers such as Josquin increasingly appreciated the expressive possibilities inherent in setting motet texts, and consequently the number and variety of motets (in this era, settings of religious texts) expanded dramatically. In secular music, the polyphonic chanson was predominant.
Although all the major composers were church trained and fully cognizant of modal structures, a rapidly increasing use of chromatic tones in the 16th century lessened the influence of modal sonorities. Indeed, a number of melodic and harmonic procedures characteristic of later tonal music became common, well before the theoretical underpinning for the major-minor system came into being.
Various national styles also flourished during this general period and entered into the vocabulary of the Franco-Netherlandish composers. Isaac was particularly adept at working in the light style of Italian social music as well as in the contrasting German secular style. Josquin himself was influenced by the Italian frottola and lauda.
The generation following Josquin brought stylistic diversity to the fore—without, however, diminishing the influence of the Netherlanders. Nicolas Gombert and Jacobus Clemens continued in the imitative style of their predecessors. Textures tended to be thicker, and writing in five or more parts became common. Adriaan Willaert, Cipriano de Rore, and Jacob Arcadelt were all expert in different national idioms, and Orlando di Lasso was the most versatile of all the later masters. Among the generation born about 1525, native Italian composers became increasingly prominent without eclipsing Lasso, Philippe de Monte, and Giaches de Wert. The Italian influence steadily increased, and by 1600 the southerners were the primary composers in the newer styles of the Baroque.
