Grace Moore, in full Mary Willie Grace Moore,  (born Dec. 5, 1898, Slabtown [now Nough], Tenn., U.S.—died Jan. 26, 1947, in-flight in Copenhagen, Den.), American singer and actress who found great popular and critical success in both opera and motion pictures.
Moore was educated in Tennessee public schools and briefly at Ward-Belmont College in Nashville. She then went to the Wilson-Greens School of Music in Chevy Chase, Maryland. After making her public singing debut in a recital program at the National Theatre, Washington, D.C., in 1919, she left school and went to New York City, where she sang in a nightclub to pay for vocal lessons.
Following appearances in Suite Sixteen, Just a Minute, and Up in the Clouds, Moore made her Broadway debut in the 1920 edition of the revue Hitchy-Koo, which featured Jerome Kern’s music. She then sang in Town Gossip and went to Paris to train for a career on the operatic stage. Moore circulated easily in café society. When she had exhausted her funds, she returned to Broadway to star in Irving Berlin’s Music Box Revue of 1923. In 1925 she went back to France, where the opera singer Mary Garden, long her idol and now her friend, recommended her to operatic coach Richard Barthelemy. Auditioning for Giulio Catti-Casazza in 1927, Moore finally won a contract with the Metropolitan Opera.
Her Met and operatic debut occurred in February 1928, when she sang Mimi in La Bohème to a warm reception. Later she sang in Charles Gounod’s Roméo et Juliette and then made a European tour. After singing Juliette at Deauville, Moore made a highly successful Paris debut as Mimi at the Opéra-Comique in 1928. In the next few seasons at the Met she sang in Carmen, Tosca, Manon, Faust, Pagliacci, Gianni Schicchi, and others.
Moore went to Hollywood in 1930 and subsequently appeared in the films A Lady’s Morals (1930), a biography of Jenny Lind, and New Moon (1931). In 1932 she returned to Broadway in the operetta The Dubarry. Back in Hollywood she won the starring role in One Night of Love (1934), a film that features a pioneering attempt to record operatic works with full orchestra. The film was a great popular success and brought Moore a medal from the Society of Arts and Sciences for her contribution to “raising the standard of cinema entertainment.” Her other films include Love Me Forever (1935), The King Steps Out (1936), When You’re in Love (1937), and I’ll Take Romance (1937).
Moore continued in opera throughout her film career. She made her London debut at Covent Garden in La Bohème in June 1935 to tremendous ovations. She starred in a film version of Louise (1938) in France and then performed it at the Met the following year. In 1941 she sang L’amore dei tre re. Radio broadcasts and public appearances further increased her popularity. During World War II she made numerous appearances at bond rallies, benefits, and army camp shows, for which she was decorated by several governments. Her autobiography, You’re Only Human Once, appeared in 1944. Moore died in an airplane crash in Copenhagen following a command performance there.
