Gustavo Dudamel,  (born January 26, 1981, Barquisimeto, Venezuela), Venezuelan conductor and music director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra (2009– ) who earned acclaim for his ability to draw fresh dynamic performances from orchestras.
By the age of five, Dudamel had begun studies with the National System of Youth and Children’s Orchestras of Venezuela (popularly known as El Sistema), the country’s acclaimed training program in music. He first took up the violin and then studied composition and conducting. In 1999 José Antonio Abreu, who had founded El Sistema in the 1970s, gave Dudamel additional instruction in conducting and appointed him music director of the Simón Bolívar Youth Orchestra of Venezuela (SBYOV; later renamed the Simón Bolívar Symphony Orchestra of Venezuela), the chief performing group. The next year Dudamel and the orchestra toured Germany, and in following years they made additional trips to Europe, all to ecstatic reviews. They played their first concerts in the United States in 2007 and in Japan in 2008.
Meanwhile, Dudamel had come to the notice of major orchestras in Europe and the United States and was receiving invitations to appear as a guest conductor. In 2006 he was named principal conductor of the Gothenburg Symphony, the national orchestra of Sweden; he became music director the following year. His first appearances in an opera house took place in 2006 in two prestigious venues—the Staatsoper in Berlin and La Scala in Milan—and he returned to both houses in 2008 to conduct Giacomo Puccini’s La Bohème. In 2008 Dudamel also became music director designate of the Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra, and he officially assumed the post the following year.
In 2004 Dudamel won the first Gustav Mahler Conducting Competition, sponsored by the Bamberger (Germany) Symphony, which brought him to the attention of such leading conductors as Claudio Abbado and Simon Rattle, who served as coaches and mentors. In 2007 Dudamel received the Premio de la Latinidad, given by the Uníon Latina for contributions to culture, and in 2006 he was awarded the Pegasus Prize from the Festival of Two Worlds, in Spoleto, Italy. For his first recording, of Ludwig van Beethoven’s Fifth and Seventh symphonies with the SBYOV, released in 2006, he won the ECHO Award from the German recording industry as the new artist of the year.
Dudamel subsequently recorded Mahler’s Symphony No. 5 (2007) and Fiesta (2008), a compilation of Latin American works with the SBYOV. His 2007 performance of Béla Bartók’s Concerto for Orchestra with the Los Angeles Philharmonic became available by digital download, and a documentary film on Dudamel and the SBYOV, The Promise of Music, was released in 2008. In 2012 the Los Angeles Philharmonic’s recording of Johannes Brahms’s Symphony No. 4 won a Grammy Award for best orchestral performance.
Dudamel appeared in a number of television series throughout the 2010s, including Sesame Street, Amazon’s Mozart in the Jungle, and The Simpsons. In addition, he played the conductor in Disney’s The Nutcracker and the Four Realms (2018), for which he also recorded the score. At the 2016 Super Bowl half-time show Dudamel conducted members of Youth Orchestra Los Angeles as they performed with the band Coldplay and musicians Beyoncé and Bruno Mars. With the Los Angeles Philharmonic, Dudamel later recorded Andrew Norman’s Sustain (2019) and Charles Ives’s complete symphonies (2020), both of which won the Grammy for best orchestral performance. In 2021 Dudamel announced that he would assume the role of music director for the Paris Opera later that year.
