Helen Traubel,  (born June 20, 1899, St. Louis, Missouri, U.S.—died July 28, 1972, Santa Monica, California), American opera singer, remembered as one of the finest Wagnerian sopranos of her day, who also enjoyed success in popular-music venues.
At age 13 Traubel began taking vocal lessons. She left high school a short time later to devote herself full-time to singing, and in 1925 she made her concert debut with the St. Louis Symphony. She toured Midwestern and Southern cities with the orchestra, sang with the New York Philharmonic in 1926, and later sang a concert series with the Philadelphia Orchestra.
Thereafter Traubel’s singing was confined largely to church choirs until 1937, when the conductor-composer Walter Damrosch invited her to create the role of Mary Rutledge in his opera The Man Without a Country, which was premiered by the Metropolitan Opera (Met) in May of that year. For the next two years she continued her training in New York while singing frequently on the radio. She made her New York concert debut at Town Hall in October 1939, and she made her debut in the Met’s regular season as Sieglinde in Richard Wagner’s Die Walküre in December 1939.
With the departure of Kirsten Flagstad in 1941, Traubel became the Met’s leading Wagnerian soprano, a distinction she held for a dozen years. To a magnificent voice, controlled throughout its range and capable of fine emotional shading, she added a dignified and strong dramatic presence. She made several national and European concert tours and was a popular recording artist. She also sang frequently on radio and television and in nightclubs. In addition to singing, she privately published her first book, a mystery entitled The Ptomaine Canary, in 1950; her second novel, The Metropolitan Opera Murders, appeared in 1951.
In 1953 the Met’s general manager, Rudolf Bing, objected strenuously to Traubel’s appearances in New York nightclubs, whereupon she resigned her contract. She subsequently appeared on Broadway in the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical Pipe Dream (1955) and in several motion pictures. Her autobiography, St. Louis Woman, written with R.G. Hubler, appeared in 1959.
