Horn Concerto No. 1 in E-flat Major,  concerto for orchestra and French horn by German composer Richard Strauss, first performed in Meiningen, Germany, on March 4, 1885. The concerto is one of the most-demanding solo works for the horn, using the highest and lowest notes in the instrument’s register, often in quick succession.
Because his father, Franz, had been the principal hornist of the Munich Court Orchestra, it was natural for Strauss to spotlight the instrument. In addition to making extensive use of the horn in his sumptuous orchestrations, Strauss also composed a pair of concerti for the instrument, the first in 1883 and the second from 1942. Franz Strauss was still an active performer when Richard composed the first concerto, and he wrote the piece intending for his father to give the premiere. However, the work proved to be extraordinarily difficult. Franz practiced it for a short time but, deeming the numerous high notes too risky for him to undertake in public, allowed the honour of the premiere to be passed on to another hornist, Gustav Leinhos.
The concerto is structured in three movements, but it has the effect of two movements, as the first two are played without a pause between them, a musical technique known as attacca. Although concerti typically began with the orchestra stating the main themes and the soloist entering later on, Strauss took the opposite approach: after a single strong chord for the orchestra, the soloist begins a heroic theme based on rising and falling arpeggios. The movement proceeds with the orchestra elaborating upon the soloist’s statements.
The first movement’s bold theme fades in the final bars so as to transition into the more reflective second movement. As the strings recall the arpeggios of the first movement, the soloist offers a gentler, more flowing theme. The orchestral brass and timpani so prominent in the first movement stand aside, and the woodwinds increase in prominence.
The marchlike final movement returns the soloist to the heroic attitude of the first movement. Although the rondo includes some less emphatic passages, the final movement’s flamboyant opening melody sets an overall tone of high drama.
