Johann Christian Bach,  (born Sept. 5, 1735, Leipzig [Germany]—died  Jan. 1, 1782, London, Eng.), composer called the “English Bach,” youngest son of J.S. and Anna Magdalena Bach and prominent in the early Classical period.
J.C. Bach received his early training from his father and, probably, from his father’s cousin Johann Elias Bach. After his father’s death (1750) he worked with his half-brother, C.P.E. Bach, in Berlin.
At the age of 20 he made his way to Italy and in 1756 became a pupil of Padre Martini in Bologna. Having a grace and tactfulness of manner notably lacking in older generations of Bachs, he found a generous patron; his compositions, though immature, were in a serious style and largely liturgical. Having become a Catholic convert, he was appointed organist of Milan cathedral in 1760. His conversion was thought cynical and reprehensible by his strongly Lutheran family, from whom he became somewhat estranged. His taste next turned to opera, and he was thought to have neglected his official organist’s duties.
In 1762 he became composer to the King’s Theatre in London and wrote a number of successful Italian operas for it. He also produced much orchestral, chamber, and keyboard music, and a few cantatas. He started his fashionable series of concerts two years later with the celebrated viola da gamba player Karl Friedrich Abel. Receiving a lucrative appointment as music master to Queen Charlotte and her children, he became a social as well as a musical success. In 1772 he was invited to write an opera for the German elector at Mannheim.
J.C. Bach’s music reflects the pleasant melodiousness of the galant, or Rococo, style. Its Italianate grace influenced composers of the Classical period, particularly Mozart, who learned from and greatly respected Bach. His symphonies, contemporary with those of Haydn, were among the formative influences on the early Classical symphony; his sonatas and keyboard concerti performed a similar role. Although he never grew to be a profound composer, his music was always sensitive and imaginative.
