Jonas Kaufmann,  (born July 10, 1969, Munich, West Germany), German opera tenor renowned for his extraordinary technique, his versatility as a performer of German, French, and Italian repertoire, and his charismatic projection of a range of emotions.
Kaufmann was raised in a family of music lovers but not of professional musicians. His mother was a kindergarten teacher, and his father worked for an insurance company. From an early age Kaufmann developed an inclination toward classical music, largely through listening to his father’s records and attending special performances for children at the Bavarian State Opera. He started to take piano lessons when he was about eight years old, but he was not particularly enchanted with the activity. By contrast, he was captivated whenever his grandfather took a seat at the piano to play from opera scores by Richard Wagner while singing the various vocal parts. It was these performances that ultimately kindled Kaufmann’s desire to become an opera singer.
Throughout primary and secondary school, Kaufmann performed in school choirs. At the university level, however, he initially followed the advice of his parents and enrolled in a program in mathematics. After just two semesters, he determined that mathematics was not his calling. He auditioned for and was admitted to the Hochschule für Musik und Theater in Munich, and it was there that he received his first formal training as a concert and opera singer. While still a student, he took small roles in local opera productions, but after he graduated in 1994, he performed in various operas throughout Germany. In 1997 he received his first international engagement, in a production of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart’s Così fan tutte in Milan.
Kaufmann subsequently returned to Germany to partner with pianist Helmut Deutsch to perform a broad spectrum of German art songs, or lieder. The duo toured internationally and later recorded a number of albums together. In 2000 Kaufmann accepted a permanent position with the Zürich Opera, which not only afforded him the opportunity to master a variety of roles but also allowed him enough time to accept an array of engagements abroad. In 2001 he performed for the first time in the United States, singing Cassio in the Chicago Lyric Opera’s production of Giuseppe Verdi’s Otello, and in 2003 he played the role of Belmonte in Mozart’s Die Entführung aus dem Serail (Abduction from the Seraglio), mounted at Austria’s annual Salzburg Festival. The turning point in Kaufmann’s career came, however, with his 2006 debut with the Metropolitan Opera in New York City, where he sang Alfredo in Verdi’s La traviata. The overwhelmingly enthusiastic response to his performance triggered a spate of international offers that ultimately propelled him into the centre of the operatic mainstream.
After his breakthrough, Kaufmann performed leading roles at most of the world’s major opera houses. He also released several recordings of favourites from the operatic repertoire, including Romantic Arias (2007) and Sehnsucht (2009; “Longing”). Aside from his operatic engagements, he maintained an active solo-concert schedule, with German art songs, as heard on his recordings Strauss Lieder (2006) and Schubert’s Die schöne Müllerin (2009), remaining among his specialties.
