La Bohème,  opera in four acts by Italian composer Giacomo Puccini (Italian libretto by Luigi Illica and Giuseppe Giacosa) that premiered at the Teatro Regio in Turin, Italy, on February 1, 1896. The story, a sweetly tragic romance, was based on the episodic novel Scènes de la vie de bohème (1847–49; “Scenes of Bohemian Life”) by French writer Henri Murger. A success from the beginning, it is one of the most frequently performed of all operas.
Puccini’s fourth opera met obstacles on its way to the stage. Although the subject had come to his attention by the time he was finishing Manon Lescaut at the end of 1891, Puccini was not yet committed to writing an opera on the bohemian theme. His collaborator Luigi Illica was a strong advocate, however, and Puccini had decided by early 1893 to have him work out the scenario. In a chance meeting, Puccini learned that Ruggero Leoncavallo, one of his strongest rivals, had made great progress on his own La Bohème. The two composers took their arguments and counteraccusations to the popular press. Puccini’s resolve was strengthened, and Illica persuaded Giuseppe Giacosa (who, as a respected poet, had considered the subject unworthy) to work on the versification of the story. It took nearly three years for the librettists to satisfy Puccini and for him to compose the opera.
La Bohème’s long-awaited premiere was conducted by the young Arturo Toscanini. Critics who had adored the composer’s Manon Lescaut and were expecting something dark and dramatic were a bit put off by the sweetness of La Bohème’s story, but audiences were highly receptive. Soon La Bohème had eclipsed Manon Lescaut in popularity. Puccini described the public reaction as a “splendid reception.” In fact, the results so pleased the team of Puccini, Illica, and Giacosa that the men—who had first worked together to finish Manon Lescaut—reunited to create two equally beloved operas: Tosca (1900) and Madama Butterfly (1904).
La Bohème, which marks Puccini’s emergence as a fully mature and original composer, contains some of the most-memorable arias and musical scenes in opera. Throughout, Puccini relies on short musical motifs that represent characters, themes, and moods so that the music underscores and highlights aspects of the drama. In the case of Mimì and Rodolfo, musical phrases bring the opera full circle and let the music reveal the memories recurring in the minds of the lovers as they say farewell.
Students, young women, citizens, shopkeepers, street vendors, soldiers, waiters, children.
La Bohème is set in Paris (1837–38).
A garret on the Left Bank of the Seine on Christmas Eve, 1837.
Marcello, a painter, and Rodolfo, a writer, are finding it difficult to work in the cold garret they share with two other impoverished friends. Rodolfo gazes out the window and notes the smoke rising from seemingly every chimney but theirs. Marcello suggests burning a chair or even The Red Sea (the painting he is working on), but Rodolfo offers to burn one of his manuscripts instead.
As they enjoy the warmth from the burning papers, their roommate Colline, a philosopher, arrives, grumbling that the pawnbroker will not accept his books. He is surprised to see a fire, but the others hush him, for they are performing Rodolfo’s play as they feed the fire. As the fire goes out, Marcello and Colline cry, “Down with the author!”
At this moment the fourth bohemian roommate, Schaunard, a musician, arrives laden with firewood, cigars, wine, food, and money. The others leap upon the provisions as Schaunard recounts how he came by his good fortune. An English lord hired him to play music nonstop until his neighbour’s annoying parrot died. Schaunard played for three days but then got the bright idea of poisoning the bird by feeding it parsley. Observing that no one is paying attention to his story—and that the food is disappearing fast—Schaunard sharply calls the company to order, pointing out that the food should be saved for needy days to come. It is Christmas Eve, and they will dine in the Latin Quarter. They are about to drink a toast when their landlord, Benoit, knocks at the door to collect the rent. The four young men ply the landlord with wine, finally getting him to admit that he likes the ladies. When he speaks of his wife’s ugliness and ill temper, they feign moral outrage, boot him out the door, and prepare to go out. Rodolfo, however, stays behind to finish an important newspaper article. Urging him to hurry, the others leave, Colline tumbling down the dark stairs.
Alone, Rodolfo finds that he is not in the mood to write. A soft knock announces an unexpected visitor: a lovely but pale young woman who asks him to light her candle, which has gone out. He asks her to come in, but she declines at first. Then she shyly comes in and immediately falls in a faint, for she is ill. He sprinkles water on her face, reviving her, and offers her some wine. Thoroughly enchanted, he watches her as she takes a sip and stands up to leave. He lights her candle, and she bids him good night. But she returns immediately, for she has dropped her key. Her candle goes out again, and so does Rodolfo’s. Together they search in the dark. He finds the key, but he pretends it is still lost. He comes upon her icy cold hand, and he asks if he can warm it for her (“Che gelida manina”). He tells her that he is a poet, poor monetarily but rich in dreams. She says she is called Mimì but her real name is Lucia (“Mi chiamano Mimì”). She lives alone amid the flowers she embroiders, and she looks forward to the fragrance of the real flowers in the spring.
Their reverie is interrupted by Rodolfo’s friends, who shout insults up at the window to get him to hurry up and join them. Rodolfo sticks his head out the window and says he is just finishing up. Marcello asks what he is doing up there alone, but Rodolfo replies that he is not alone. This prompts more ribbing, and the friends go off to the Café Momus.
Rodolfo and Mimì now declare their love for each other (Duet: “O soave fanciulla”). He tries to kiss her, but she evades him and asks if she might come with him to Momus. Rodolfo replies that it will be much nicer at home, but she points out that she will be near him and that afterward—who knows? They leave the garret, singing of love.
