Luigi Dallapiccola,  (born Feb. 3, 1904, Pisino, Istria, Austrian Empire [now Pazin, Croatia]—died  Feb. 19, 1975, Florence), Italian composer, noteworthy for putting the disciplined 12-tone serial technique at the service of warm, emotional expression.
Dallapiccola spent much of his childhood in Trieste and was interned with his family in Graz, Austria, during World War I; there he became acquainted with the music of Giuseppe Verdi and Richard Wagner. In 1921 Dallapiccola entered the Conservatorio Luigi Cherubini in Florence and was named to its faculty in 1934. Known before World War II as a teacher and pianist, Dallapiccola had an early interest in the music of Ferruccio Busoni, Arnold Schoenberg, and Anton von Webern. He began experiments in the 12-tone idiom around 1939. His triptych Canti di prigionia (1938–41; Songs of Prison) marked him as a mature composer; this work, for chorus with an orchestra of percussion, harps, and pianos, was a protest against Fascist doctrine and was based in part on the chant “Dies Irae” (“Day of Wrath”) from the mass for the dead. In it he used an original version of 12-tone technique.
Dallapiccola’s vocal music is considered among his most effective. Using impassioned texts and a variety of imaginative effects of articulation, his choral writing is Latin in its warmth and at the same time technically complex. The rhythmic intricacies of the Quaderno musicale di Annalibera (1952; Musical Notebook of Annalibera), a piano book written for his daughter, serve as the basis for much of his Canti di liberazione (1955; Songs of Liberation), a triptych for chorus and orchestra, celebrating the liberation of Italy from Fascist control. An opera, Volo di notte (Night Flight), was first performed in Florence in 1940.
Dallapiccola taught composition in the United States in the 1950s and ’60s at the Berkshire Music Center at Tanglewood, in Massachusetts, and at other centres and was a great influence, particularly on the younger Italian composers. Among his students was Luciano Berio, one of the leading composers of electronic music.
