Niccolò Jommelli,  (born Sept. 10, 1714, Aversa, Kingdom of Naples [now Italy]—died  Aug. 25, 1774, Naples), composer of religious music and operas, notable as an innovator in his use of the orchestra.
Jommelli’s first two operas were comic: L’errore amoroso (Naples, 1737) and Odoardo (Florence, 1738).   He went to Rome in 1740 and produced two serious operas there, his first in the genre that would thereafter be the mainstay of his career. He went on to Bologna (1741), where he established a lifelong friendship with Padre Martini, writing operas for Bologna, Venice, Turin, and Padua over the next few years. From 1747, he was in Rome, and he became maestro coadiutore to the papal chapel in 1749. In addition to the music he wrote for the chapel, he continued to write operas that were staged in Rome and elsewhere in Italy. Beginning in 1749 he also began writing for Vienna, and through this work received high praise from Metastasio, the famed librettist. A comic opera of his was performed in Paris in 1753, helping to spark the notorious Querelle des Bouffons (“Quarrel of the Buffoons”), but about that time Jommelli himself became kapellmeister to the duke of Württemberg at Stuttgart. There he wrote his best operas, including L’olimpiade and Fetonte (first performed 1768), in which he introduced a free use of accompanied recitative and broke with the tradition of the da capo aria, thus anticipating Gluck. Indeed, he became known as “the Italian Gluck.” As the result of intrigue, Jommelli left Stuttgart for good in 1769, thereafter writing mainly for Lisbon, Naples, and Rome. His last composition (for Naples) was a Miserere for two voices, finished just before his death and for long his best-known work. Jommelli was among the first to exploit the dramatic effect of enhancing the woodwind section of the orchestra, and while in Stuttgart he established one of the finest orchestras in Europe. The style of his overtures influenced the early symphonies of Johann Stamitz in Mannheim and Carl Ditters von Dittersdorf and Georg Christoph Wagenseil in Vienna.
