Opéra-comique,  French form of opera in which spoken dialogue alternates with self-contained musical numbers. The earliest examples of opéra-comique were satiric comedies with interpolated songs, but the form later developed into serious musical drama distinguished from other opera only by its spoken dialogue.
The opéra-comique developed in the early 18th century out of the comédies de vaudeville, farcical entertainments performed at fairs. Their characters derived from those of the improvised Italian commedia dell’arte, and they included popular songs, or vaudevilles, which were given new, often satiric words. In 1715 the various performing groups were combined in Paris as the Théâtre de l’Opéra-Comique.
In the mid-18th century the writer Charles-Simon Favart brought a higher literary level to the opéra-comique texts, and newly composed songs began to be added, eventually replacing the popular vaudevilles. Plots began to centre on characters from everyday life. This emphasis was influenced by Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s theories of the noble, simple life. He himself composed an early example of opéra-comique, Le Devin du village (1752; The Village Soothsayer).
Lesser 18th-century composers such as Nicolas Dalayrac, Egidio Duni, Pierre-Alexandre Monsigny, and François Philidor specialized in opéra-comique. Christoph Willibald Gluck, writing for audiences in Vienna that favoured the French genre, was the only great composer of that era to devote himself extensively to it. The opéras-comiques of this period were characterized by social comment, light plots of romance or intrigue, and tuneful music. The tradition continued in the late 18th and early 19th centuries in the work of André Grétry, François Boieldieu, and Daniel Auber, who treated more serious and romantic subjects and made a more evocative use of the orchestra.
A subgenre of opéra-comique during this period was the “rescue opera” with its plot of political tyranny defeated. Toward 1830 the opéra-comique developed into serious music drama approximating grand opera and gradually lost its satiric character. Georges Bizet’s Carmen (1875) is a late, isolated example of opéra-comique, possessing spoken dialogue but dealing with a tragic theme.
