Otello,  opera in four acts by Italian composer Giuseppe Verdi (Italian libretto by Arrigo Boito) that premiered at La Scala opera house in Milan on February 5, 1887. Based on William Shakespeare’s play Othello, the opera was Verdi’s next-to-last and brought the composer to the peak of his dramatic power.
Verdi had a particular affection for the works of Shakespeare. He described the Bard as “the great searcher of the human heart” and wrote:
Certainly, Shakespeare’s strong characters, as well as the mixing of comic and dramatic situations, translate very well to the operatic stage. As early as 1856 or 1857, the composer was ready to work on a long-planned Re Lear (King Lear), but he could not come to terms with a theatre or find satisfactory singers (Un ballo in maschera was quickly completed instead). At the end of his life, he was still considering Re Lear, as well as an opera based on Antony and Cleopatra. As it is, the completed works—Macbeth (1847), Otello (1887), and Falstaff (1893)—are among the greatest operas ever based on Shakespearean themes. (See also Shakespeare and Opera.)
Verdi had all but retired after finishing Aida in 1871. His publisher, Giulio Ricordi, had other ideas and proposed Otello in 1879, first to Boito—himself a composer though better known as a poet—and then to Verdi. Boito and Verdi had worked together before on smaller projects, and they would do so again on Falstaff, Verdi’s last opera.
By the time he wrote Otello, Verdi was fully in control of both the musical and the dramatic components of opera. His sensitive and nuanced use of orchestration and harmony to underscore character and emotion—especially in his last operas—have prompted comparisons with German composer Richard Wagner. (Both Verdi and Wagner were born in 1813, but they occupied entirely different niches of the operatic realm, and there was no direct influence of either on the other.) Boito’s libretto provided Verdi with great flexibility in setting the text to music, and the composer used that opportunity to create a seamless musical-dramatic experience. The opera was very well received, and it remains a monument of the genre. Its great demands on singers (in stamina as well as vocal range and flexibility) and its lack of stand-alone arias, however, make Otello more difficult to produce and less well known than several other works by Verdi.
Otello is set on the island of Cyprus at the end of the 15th century.
A Cyprus port at night.
A great storm batters the coast, and a tense crowd watches Otello’s ship struggle toward port. Upon landing, Otello makes a triumphant entrance onto the quay (“Esultate”). The crowd cheers when he announces that he has defeated the Turks.
The storm abates. Roderigo expresses bitter disappointment that Otello has survived, because he is in love with Otello’s wife, Desdemona. Iago promises to help Roderigo win the lady. Iago hates Cassio for having won a promotion and Otello for having promoted Cassio. Iago and Roderigo discuss the matter privately as the islanders continue their victory celebration with a dance around the fire.
Iago invites Roderigo and Cassio to drink, but Cassio says he has already drunk enough. He relents when Iago proposes a toast to Desdemona. Cassio sings her praises, prompting Iago to insinuate to Roderigo that Cassio may be his love rival. Iago continues to ply Cassio with drink and gets him to join in a boisterous song (“Inaffia l’ugola”). By the end of it Cassio is reeling. Iago then secretly advises Roderigo to pick a fight with Cassio. Meanwhile, Montano, the former governor, arrives and is shocked to find Cassio drunk. Iago tells Montano that Cassio is like this every night, and Montano vows to tell Otello about him. Roderigo laughs at Cassio, who becomes enraged and draws his sword. Montano tries to calm Cassio down, but Cassio attacks him. Iago tells Roderigo to go raise the alarm, then pretends to try to stop the fight. Montano is wounded.
Otello appears and orders the two to drop their swords. He asks Iago how the fight started, but Iago claims not to know. Cassio begs his pardon, but Otello is infuriated to find that Cassio has wounded Montano. Desdemona, awakened by the tumult, enters the scene. Otello greets her lovingly and then, to Iago’s delight, demotes Cassio. Otello orders the crowd to disperse.
Otello and Desdemona, alone under the stars, recall how their love began; she loved him for the dangers he had endured, and he loved her for her pity (“Già nella notte densa”). They kiss as Venus rises in the night sky.
