Paul Dukas,   (born Oct. 1, 1865, Paris, Fr.—died  May 17, 1935, Paris), French composer whose fame rests on a single orchestral work, the dazzling, ingenious L’Apprenti sorcier (1897; The Sorcerer’s Apprentice).
Dukas studied at the Paris Conservatory and, after winning a second Grand Prix de Rome with his cantata Velléda (1888), established his position among the younger French composers with the overture, first performed in 1892, to Pierre Corneille’s Polyeucte and with the Symphony in C Major (1896). The rest of his output (never large, owing to his own strict censorship of his works) was mainly dramatic and program music and compositions for piano. Dukas, a master of orchestration, was from 1910 to 1912 professor of the orchestral class at the Paris Conservatory, and from 1927 until his death he was professor of composition there. He also contributed musical criticism to several Paris papers, and his collected writings, Les Écrits de Paul Dukas sur la musique (1948), include some of the best essays ever published on Jean-Philippe Rameau, Christoph Gluck, and Hector Berlioz.
Dukas’s L’Apprenti sorcier (based on J.W. von Goethe’s “Zauberlehrling”) was a piece of descriptive music written at the same time and in much the same style as Richard Strauss’s Till Eulenspiegel. Yet Dukas’s musicianship was of a considerably wider range than this brilliant period piece suggests. His Sonate (1901) is one of the last great works for piano that prolong the tradition of Ludwig van Beethoven, Robert Schumann, and Franz Liszt; his Variations, interlude et final pour piano sur un thème de Rameau (1903) represent an elegant translation into French musical idiom and style of Beethoven’s Diabelli Variations, Opus 120. The ballet La Péri (1912), on the other hand, displays mastery of Impressionist scoring; and, in his opera Ariane et Barbe-Bleue (1907), on the play of Maurice Maeterlinck, the atmosphere and musical texture make up for the lack of dramatic impact.
After 1912 Dukas ceased publishing his compositions—except for a piano piece written in memory of his admirer Claude Debussy, the evocative La Plainte au loin du faune (1920), and a song setting, the charming “Sonnet de Ronsard” (1924). A few weeks before his death, he destroyed several of his musical manuscripts. Dukas collaborated with the Paris publishing firm of Durand in preparing modern editions of some of the works of Jean-Philippe Rameau, François Couperin, and Domenico Scarlatti and of the piano works of Beethoven.
