Piano Concerto No. 3 in D Minor, Op. 30,  composition by Sergei Rachmaninoff. The work premiered on November 28, 1909, in New York City with the composer as soloist. It was the first of many American triumphs for Rachmaninoff, who would ultimately make his home in the United States.
In 1909, a few years after his stalled compositional career was revived by the successful premiere of his Piano Concerto No. 2, Rachmaninoff launched his first concert tour of the United States. The journey was undertaken much against his will. Three months of almost daily concert appearances, both as soloist and as conductor, held little appeal, for not much time would remain for composition. Moreover, he would be deprived of the quiet times on his country estate with his wife and young children. Yet then as now, in classical music as in popular music, the best way to promote one’s music is to play it before the public, and so early in October 1909, Rachmaninoff boarded ship to cross the Atlantic. Packed in his luggage was the manuscript for a new concerto, completed the previous week. During the voyage, Rachmaninoff practiced the solo part as time allowed.
The premiere took place on November 28, 1909, with Rachmaninoff as soloist with the New York Symphony Orchestra and its conductor Walter Damrosch. Some weeks later, it would be heard in New York again, this time with the New York Philharmonic as conducted by no less a figure than Gustav Mahler. Those two ensembles competed with one another for place as the city’s finest orchestra until, in 1928, they finally merged under the Philharmonic’s name.
Of the new piece, New York’s music critics had much to say, some of it favourable. The music writer for the New York Herald declared it to be one of “the most interesting piano concertos of recent years,” whereas the New York Tribune writer praised the work for its “essential dignity and beauty.” Both critics, however, decried the work’s length and suggested the Rachmaninoff should shorten it. Rachmaninoff did undertake some revisions; however, the changes were minor and caused little abbreviation of the score. Perhaps he felt, as Mozart once remarked about his own music, that it had exactly as many notes as were required.
For this newest concerto, Rachmaninoff chose the key of D Minor. It is the same key used by Brahms for his Piano Concerto No. 1 and by Beethoven for his epic Symphony No. 9. Both of those earlier works drew upon the possibilities of epic force lying within the chords and harmonies of D Minor. From time to time, Rachmaninoff draws upon those forces, but not continually, and certainly not in the opening moments. He begins the opening Allegro ma non tanto with gentle melancholy and a theme for the soloist that rises and falls in soft waves. That theme reappears as a unifying idea here and there in the first movement, juxtaposed with other contrasting melodies. Rachmaninoff was rarely at a loss for a good tune, and here he lives up to that standard, with themes ranging from reflective moods to rolling thunder.
Those sharply different moods also fill the second movement (Intermezzo), which, despite its generally languid tempo yet manages to offer shifting shades of expression. Sweetly melancholy at the beginning, with a prominent role for oboe and rich strings, several minutes pass before the soloist joins, first with intricate passagework, then with a lyrical, song-like theme. Stormier transitions appear, but most of the movement is spent in reflective mood, and Rachmaninoff often chooses to contrast busy piano passagework with more restful woodwind lines.
The Finale: Alla breve is a feast of restless energy with soloist and orchestra alike ever on the move, driving determinedly into the final pages. Here, Rachmaninoff demands of the soloist a diversity of techniques: busily intricate passagework, sweetly flowing phrases, and also powerful chordal statements. Given a soloist of Rachmaninoff’s skill—a tall and lanky man, he tended to compose piano works with his own large hands in mind—it is a concerto of dramatic impact.
